[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ffcc310)  [Next](ffcc412) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

# SECTION IV

## MODERN SCIENCE AND THE FAIRY FAITH; AND CONCLUSIONS <span id="fr_623"></span>[1](#fn_566)

## CHAPTER XI

### SCIENCE AND FAIRIES

Puzzling and weird occurrences have been vouched for among all nations
and in every age. It is possible to relegate a good many asserted
occurrences to the domain of superstition, but it is not possible thus
to eliminate all.'--SIR OLIVER LODGE.

Method of Examination: Exoteric and Esoteric Aspects--The
X-quantity--Scientific Attitudes toward the Animistic Hypothesis:
Materialistic Theory; Pathological Theory; Delusion and Imposture
Theory--Problems of Consciousness: Dreams; Supernormal Lapse of
Time--Psychical Research and Fairies: Myers's Researches--Present
Position of Psychical Research--Psychical Research and Anthropology in
relation to Fairy-Faith, according to a special contribution from Mr.
Andrew Lang--Final Testing of the X-quantity--Conclusion: the Celtic
belief in Fairies and in Fairyland is scientific.

### METHOD OF EXAMINATION

THE promise made in the Introduction to examine the Why of the belief in
fairies must now be fulfilled by calling in the aid of modern science.
To adduce parallels when studying a religion or a mythology is worth
doing, in order to show the fundamental bond which unites all systems of
belief in things called spiritual; but it is more important to try to
understand why there should be such parallels and such a unifying
principle behind them. Perhaps there has

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

been too much of a tendency among students of folk-lore, and of
anthropology as a whole, to be content to do no more than to discover
that the Eskimos in Greenland hold a belief in spirits parallel to a
belief in spirits held in Central Africa, or that the Greek Pantheon
(and possibly the Celtic one as well) consists of goddesses which are
apparently pre-Aryan and of gods which are apparently Aryan. We, too,
have drawn many parallels between the Celtic Fairy-Faith and the various
fairy-faiths throughout the world; but now we should attempt to find out
why there are animistic beliefs at all.

This chapter, then, will confine itself to a scientific examination of
the more popular or, as it may be called, the exoteric aspect of the
Fairy-Faith, which has come to us directly from the masses of the Celtic
peoples. The following chapter, which is corollary to the present one,
will deal especially with the mystical aspect or, as this may be called
by contrast, the esoteric aspect of the same belief, which, in turn, has
come to us from learned mystics and seers, who form, in proportion, but
a very small minority of the modern Celts. Each of these complementary
aspects of the Celtic religion undoubtedly has its origin in the
remotest antiquity. This is probably more readily seen with respect to
the former than to the latter. The latter has been esoteric always, and
in our opinion shows an unbroken tradition (if only a very incomplete
one) from druidic times; and it depends less upon written records,
because the Druids had none, than upon oral transmission from age to
age. Both aspects of the Fairy-Faith have in modern times absorbed many
ideas from non-Celtic systems of religion and mystical thought. As Mr.
Jenner has suggested in his Introduction for Cornwall, and as certain
details in chapter ii clearly indicate, systems of modem theosophy have
had a marked influence in this respect; but it is impossible for us
to-day to say what parts of the Fairy-Faith are purely Celtic and what
are not so, because comparative studies prove that mysticism is
fundamentally the same in all ages and among all peoples. It is
psychologically true, also, that there must

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

always exist some sort of affinity between two sets of thought in order
for them to coalesce. Hence, if modern mysticism (derived from Oriental
or other sources) has, as we believe, affected Celtic mysticism as
handed down from the dim druidic ages, it is merely because the two
occupy a common psychical territory. We must therefore be content to
examine scientifically the Fairy-Faith as it now presents itself.

The analysis of evidence in chapter iii indicates clearly that there is
in the exoteric part of the modem Celtic belief in fairies considerable
degeneration from what must have been in pagan times a widespread and
highly developed animistic creed. In the esoteric part of it there will
be observed, instead of such degeneracy, a surprisingly elaborate system
of the most subtle speculation, which parallels that of East Indian
systems of metaphysics. If the belief be looked at in this comprehensive
manner, it seems to be clear that to some extent at least, as has been
pointed out already (pp. [99](ffcc122.htm#page_99),
[257](ffcc130.htm#page_257)), the Fairy-Faith in its purest form
originated amongst the most highly educated and scientific Celts of
ancient times rather than among their unlearned fellows. The two aspects
of the belief form an harmonious whole as they will be presented in this
Section IV. Chapter xi depends mostly upon the evidence set forth in
chapter ii. Chapter xii depends mostly upon the evidence set forth in
chapter vii.

In chapter iii we examined anthropologically the modern; and (both there
and in parts of chapters following) the historical and ancient belief in
fairies in Celtic countries, and found it to be in essence animistic.
Folk-imagination, social psychology, anthropomorphism generally,
adequately explained by far the greater mass of the evidence presented;
but the animistic background of the belief in question presented
problems which the strictly anthropological sciences are unable to
solve. The point has now been reached when these problems must be
presented to physiology and to psychology for solution. If they can be
completely solved by purely rational and physical data, then the
Fairy-Faith

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

as a whole will have to be cast aside as worthless in the eyes of
science.

In our generation, however, such a casting aside is not to be the fate
of the folk-religion of the Celts: the following phenomena recorded in
chapter ii and elsewhere throughout our study, and designated as the x-
or unknown quantity of the Fairy-Faith, cannot at the present time be
satisfactorily explained by science: (1) Collective hallucinations and
veridical hallucinations; (2) objects moving without contact; (3) raps
and noises called' supernatural'; (4) telepathy; (5) seership and
visions; (6) dream and trance states manifesting supernormal knowledge;
(7) 'medium-ship' or 'spirit-possession'. Independently of our own
Celtic data in their support, the first class of phenomena are supported
by an enormous mass of good data scientifically collected; the second
and third class are less well supported; telepathy is almost generally
accepted as now being established; the last three classes are
hypothetically accepted by many authorities in pathology, psychology,
and psychical research.

### SCIENTIFIC ATTITUDES TOWARDS THE ANIMISTIC HYPOTHESIS

Assertions similar to ours, that phenomena like these are incapable of
being explained away by any known laws of orthodox science, have helped
to bring about a marked division in the ranks of scientific workers. On
one hand there are those scientists who deny the existence of anything
not capable of being mathematically tested, weighed, dissected, or
otherwise analysed in laboratories; on the other hand, there are their
colleagues who, often in spite of previous bias toward materialism, have
arrived at a personal conviction that an animistic view of man is more
in harmony with their scientific experience than any other. Both schools
include men eminent in all branches of biological sciences.

Midway between these contending schools are the psychophysicists who
maintain that man is a twofold being composed of a psychical and
physical part. Some of them are inclined to favour animism, others are
unwilling to regard

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

the psychical part of man as separable from the physical part. So the
world of science is divided.

Under such chaotic conditions of science it is our right to accept one
view or another, or to reject all views and use scientific data
independently. There can be no final court of appeal in matters where
opinion is thus divided, save the experience of coming generations. We
are therefore content to state our own position and leave it to the
future for rejection or acceptance, as the case may be. To attempt a
critical examination of the thousand and one theories occupying the
modern arena of scientific controversy about the essential nature of man
is altogether beyond the scope of this work. We must, nevertheless,
blaze a rough footpath through the jungle of scientific theories, and,
at the outset, put on record our opposition to that school of scientific
workers who deny to man a supersensuous constitution. Their theory, if
carried out to its logical conclusion, is now essentially no different
from Feuerbach's theory at a time when science was far less developed
than it is to-day. He held that 'the object of sense, or the sensuous,
alone is really true, and therefore truth, reality, and the sensible are
one'. <span id="fr_624"></span>[1](#fn_567) To say that we know reality
through sensual perception is an error, as all schools of scientists
must nowadays admit. Nature is for ever illuding the senses; she
masquerades in disguise until science tears away her mask. We must
always adjust the senses to the world itself: where there are only
vibrations in ether, man sees light; and in atmospheric vibrations he
hears sound. We only. know things through the way in which our senses
react upon them. We sum up the world-problem by saying: 'consciousness
does not exhaust its object, the world.'' Perceptibility and reality
thus not being coincident, man and the universe remain an unsolved
problem, despite the noisy shoutings of the materialist in his
hermetically sealed and light-excluding case called sensual perceptions.
Science admits that all her explanations of the universe are mere
products of human understanding and perceptions by the physical senses:
the

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

universe of science is wholly a universe of phenomena, and behind
phenomena, as no scientist would dare deny, there must be the noumena,
the ultimate causes of all things, as to which science as yet offers no
comprehensive hypothesis, much less an answer. To consider the
materialistic hypothesis as adequate to account for the residuum or
x-quantity of the Fairy-Faith would not even be reasonable, and,
incontestably, would not be scientific.

When scientists holding to the non-animistic view of life are driven
from their now for the most part abandoned fortress built by German
scientists of the last century, of whom Feuerbach was a type, they, in
opposing the animists, occupy a more modernly equipped fortress called
the Pathological Theory. This theory is that' mediumship', telepathy,
hallucinations, or the voluntary and involuntary exercise of any
so-called 'psychical' faculties on the part of men and women, with the
resulting phenomena, can be explained as due to abnormal and
hence--according to its point of view--diseased states of the human
organism, or to some derangement of bodily functions, leading to
delusions resembling those of insanity, which by a sort of hypnosis
telepathically induced may even affect researchers and lead them into
erroneous conclusions. All scientists are in agreement with the
Pathological Theory in so far as it rejects as unworthy of serious
consideration all apparitions and abnormal phenomena save those observed
by sane and healthy percipients under ordinary conditions. And,
accordingly, whenever there can be shown in our percipients a diseased
mental or psychical state, we must eliminate their testimony without
argument. But since we have endeavoured to present no testimony from
Celtic percipients who are not physically and psychically normal, the
Pathological Theory at best can affect the x-quantity merely
hypothetically.

The following admission in regard to visual and auditory hallucinations
is here worth noting as coming from so thorough an exponent of
materialistic psychology as M. Théodule Ribot:--'There must exist
anatomical and physiological causes which would solve the problem, but
unfortunately

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

they are hidden from us.' Of these hidden causes, which he thinks create
all psychical states of mind or consciousness called by him 'disease of
personality', M. Ribot says:--'Our ignorance of the causes stops us
short. The psychologist is here like the physician who has to deal with
a disease in which he can make out only the symptoms. What physiological
influences are they which thus alter the general tone of the organism,
consequently of the coenaesthesis, consequently too of the memory? Is it
some condition of the vascular system? Or some inhibitory action, some
arrest of function? We cannot say.' <span
id="fr_625"></span>[1](#fn_568) And after six years of most careful
experimentation, M. Charles Richet, Professor of Physiology in the
Faculty of Medicine in Paris, reached this conclusion:--'There exists in
certain persons at certain moments a faculty of acquiring knowledge
which has no *rapport* with our normal faculties of that kind.' <span
id="fr_626"></span>[2](#fn_569) We seem to have here the last words of
science touching the Pathological Theory.

When driven from their pathological stronghold, and they maintain that
they have not been driven from it, the non-animists always find a safe
way to cover their retreat by setting up the charge that all psychical
phenomena are fraudulent or else due to delusion on the part of
observers. In reply, psychical researchers readily admit that there is a
large percentage of mere trickery, delusion, and imposture in observed
'spirit' phenomena; some of which is deliberate on the part of the
'medium' and some of which is apparently not consciously induced.
Nevertheless, such investigators are not at all willing to say that
there is nothing more than this. The Delusion and Imposture Theory will
account for a very respectable proportion of these phenomena, but not
for all of them, and theoretically we shall admit its application to the
parallel phenomena attributed to fairies; though it must be acknowledged
that 'fairy' phenomena are for the most part spontaneously exhibited
rather than as in' Spiritualism'

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

set up through holding *séances*. Further, there are comparatively few
'charmers' or 'wise men '--the fairy 'mediums' among the Celts--who ever
make money out of their ability to deal with the 'good people', or
*Tylwyth Teg*; whence the margin of encouragement for fraudulent
production of 'fairy' phenomena is extremely limited when compared with
'Spiritualism'.

After twenty-five years of experimentation, more or less continuous,
with' mediums ',during which every conceivable test for the detection of
fraud on their part was applied, William James put his conclusions on
record in these words:--'When imposture has been checked off as far as
possible, when chance coincidence has been allowed for, when
opportunities for normal knowledge on the part of the subject have been
noted, and skill in "fishing" and following clues unwittingly furnished
by the voice or face of bystanders have been counted in, those who have
the fullest acquaintance with the phenomena admit that in good mediums
*there is a residuum of knowledge displayed* \[italics are James's own\]
that can only be called supernormal: the medium taps some source of
information not open to ordinary people.' <span
id="fr_627"></span>[1](#fn_570) Mr. Andrew Lang, one of the bravest of
psychical researchers in England, not only would agree with William
James in this, but, having carefully examined the Delusion and Imposture
Theory from the more commanding point of view of an anthropologist,
would go further and include classical spiritualistic phenomena as well
as those existing among contemporary uncultured races. He
says:--'Meanwhile, the extraordinary similarity of savage and classical
spiritualistic rites, with the corresponding similarity of alleged
modern phenomena, raises problems which it is more easy to state than to
solve. For example, such occurrences as "rappings", as the movement of
untouched objects, as the lights of the *séance* room, are all easily
feigned. But that ignorant modern knaves should feign precisely the same
raps, lights, and movements as the most remote and unsophisticated

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

barbarians, and as the educated Platonists of the fourth century after
Christ, and that many of the other phenomena should be identical in each
case, is certainly noteworthy.' <span id="fr_628"></span>[1](#fn_571)
Evidently, then, there is a large proportion of psychical and 'fairy'
phenomena which remain unexplained even after the Delusion and Imposture
Theory has been applied to such phenomena, and in all such cases we must
look further for a scientific explanation.

### PROBLEMS OF CONSCIOUSNESS

Our chief investigations will at first be directed more especially to
the problems common both to psychology and to psychical research,
namely, dream and trance states, hallucinations, and possessions, in
order to show what bearings, if any, they have in the eyes of science
upon parallel phenomena said to be due to fairies, and set forth in
chapter ii and anthropologically examined in chapter iii.

Dreams

The popular opinion that dreams are nonsense is quite overthrown by
definite psychological facts. When during sleep our sensory organs are
exposed to external irritants the impressions physically produced are
transmitted to the brain by the nervous system and react in dreams as
they would in the waking state, except that the reactions in the two
states of consciousness--the dream state and the waking state--differ in
proportion as the two states differ; but in both the Ego is the real
percipient. <span id="fr_629"></span>[2](#fn_572) Such stimuli as arise
from after-theatre dinners, wine-parties, and so forth, produce a
well-known type of dreams; and the same stimuli at the same period of
time would produce an equal effect, though an altered one, to suit the
altered psycho-physical

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

conditions, if the waking state were active rather than the dream state,
just as would all dreams which arise from pathological disturbances in
disease, or abnormal physiological functions. This is evident from
dreams of a morbid and sensual type, which directly affect the physical
organism and its functions as parallel waking-states would. In all such
dreams of the lower order, animal and purely physical tendencies, which
are directly due to the state of the body, act very freely: an
imperfectly balanced, temporarily deranged, or diseased organism must
correspondingly respond to its driving forces. And it is clear from
comparative study of phenomena that these lower kinds of dream states
express only the lower or animal consciousness, which in most
individuals is the predominant or only consciousness even in the waking
life; and not the higher consciousness of the Ego or subconsciousness
which may be expressed in somnambulism, for 'in somnambulism there
awakes an inner, second Ego', <span id="fr_630"></span>[1](#fn_573)
which is the Subliminal Self of Myers. Dr. G. F. Stout urges against
Myers's theory of the Subliminal Self that 'the usual incoherence of
dreams is an objection to regarding them as manifestations of a stream
of thought equal or superior in systematic complexity and continuity to
that of the waking self', <span id="fr_631"></span>[2](#fn_574) which
objection Myers also observed. But if we regard all dreams which are of
the lower order as being due to the imperfect response of the body to
its driving forces because of various bad physical conditions in the
body; and recognize that these driving forces depend ultimately on the
subconsciousness, the difficulty seems to be met by observing that under
such conditions there is no real mergence of the normal consciousness
into the subconsciousness. Hence ordinary dreams are within the ordinary
spectrum of consciousness; but extra-ordinary dreams pass beyond the
ordinary spectrum into the truly supernormal state of consciousness.

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

As all this indicates, dreams are of many classes: those of the lowest
type, which we have explained as due to bad physiological conditions in
the animal-man; those which are readily explainable as distorted
reflections of waking actions, often based on some stray thought or
suggestion of the day and then comparable to post-hypnotic suggestions.
Other dreams are demonstrably entirely outside the range of ordinary
mental or physical disturbances, actions, reflections, or suggestions of
the waking life, and seem thus 'to have a wider purview, and to indicate
that the record of external events which is kept within us is far fuller
than we know'. <span id="fr_632"></span>[1](#fn_575) In some dreams
there is reasoning as well as memory, and mathematicians have been known
to solve problems in sleep: an American inventor known to the writer's
mother asserted that he had dreamt out the details of a certain
ice-manufacturing process which proved successful when tested; through
self-suggestion set up in the waking state, R. L. Stevenson, upon
entering the dream state, secured details for his imaginary
romances. <span id="fr_633"></span>[2](#fn_576) Dr. Stout himself, in
criticizing Myers's 'Subliminal Self', admits that 'in some very rare
instances, a man has achieved, while dreaming, intellectual performances
equalling or perhaps surpassing the best of which he was capable in
waking life'; <span id="fr_634"></span>[3](#fn_577) and there are many
authentic cases of dream experiences which cannot possibly be explained
as revivals of facts fallen out of the range of the ordinary memory or
consciousness. We seem to be led to some hypothesis like this: in
dreaming there is mental activity which in the waking state is either
functionless or else below the psycho-physical threshold of sensibility;
because much that is subconscious in the non-dream state is in the dream
state fully conscious. And we probably do not remember one quarter of
our dreams! they belong to a mainly different order of consciousness.
Professor Freud's view of dreams coincides pretty generally

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

with this view. He holds that the subconsciousness is the storehouse out
of which dream contents are drawn and acted upon by the dream mind. Very
much distortion of the subconscious material takes place in the process,
due to what he calls the 'endopsychic censor'. In the waking state this
censor is always on the alert to keep out of consciousness all
subconscious processes or deposits, but in sleep the censor is less
alert, and allows some subconscious content to escape over into the
ordinary consciousness. The result is a dream distorted out of all
recognition of its origin. Such a dream seems to occupy a position
midway between what we have classed as the lowest or animal-mind dream
and the highest or subliminal dream. It possibly shows an harmonious
psycho-physical condition of the dream life, whereas the lowest type of
dream shows the preponderance of the physical or animal, and the highest
type of dream shows the preponderance of the psychical elements in man.
Further, it may be designated as the normal dream, and the other two
types respectively as the physically abnormal and the psychically
abnormal.

Professor Freud detects other marked processes in the dream state, all
of which help to illustrate the part of the Fairy-Faith dependent upon
dreaming experiences. (1) There is condensation of details frequently in
a proportion so great as one for ten and one for twenty; (2)
displacement of details, or 'a transvaluation of all values'; (3) much
dramatization; (4) regression, a retrograde movement of abstract mental
processes toward their primary conceptions; and (5) secondary
elaboration, an attempt to rationalize all dream-material. <span
id="fr_635"></span>[1](#fn_578) Also, Professor Freud discovered from
his analysis of thousands of dreams that the subconsciousness makes use
of a sort of symbolism:--'This symbolism in part varies with the
individual, but in part is of a typical nature, and seems to be
identical with the symbolism which we suppose to lie behind our myths
and legends. It is not impossible that these latter creations of the
people may find

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

their explanation from the study of dreams.' <span
id="fr_636"></span>[1](#fn_579) Such processes, taken as a whole, show
that man possesses a twofold consciousness, the ordinary consciousness
and the subconsciousness. And we have every reason to believe that
subconscious activities go on continually, in waking and in sleeping.

By experiments on his own perfectly healthy children, Wienholt proved
that there are natural forces existing whose stimulations are never
perceived in waking life: he made passes over the face and neck of his
son with an iron key at the distance of half an inch without touching
him, whereupon the boy began to rub those parts and manifested
uneasiness. Wienholt likewise experimented on his other children with
lead, zinc, gold, and other metals, and in most cases the children
'averted the parts so treated, rubbed them, or drew the clothes over
them'. <span id="fr_637"></span>[2](#fn_580) Therefore, in sleep the
consciousness perceives objects without physical contact; and this not
inconceivably might suggest, inversely, that in sleep the human
consciousness can affect objects without physical contact, as it is said
fairies and the dead can, and in the way psychical researchers know that
objects can be affected.

We have on record an account of a most remarkable dream quite the same
in character as dreams wherein certain Celts believe they have met the
dead or fairies. Professor Hilprecht had a broken Assyrian cylinder in
cuneiform which he could not decipher; but in a dream an Assyrian priest
in ancient garb appeared to him and deciphered the inscription. Of this
dream Myers observed:--'We seem to have reached the utmost intensity of
sleep faculty within the limits of our ordinary spectrum.' <span
id="fr_638"></span>[3](#fn_581)

We may sum up the results of our examination of dreams by saying that
scientific analysis of the dream life *in its higher ranges* proves that
our Ego is not wholly embraced in self-consciousness, that the Ego
exceeds the self-consciousness.

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Instead of a
continuity of consciousness which constitutes self-consciousness we have
parallel states of consciousness for the one subject, the Ego. Our study
of the Celtic theory of re-birth, in the following chapter, will further
explain this subtle aspect of the dream psychology.

When such a conclusion is applied to the Fairy-Faith, the various
dream-like or trance-like states during which ancient and contemporary
Celts testify to having been in Fairyland are seen to be scientifically
plausible. In this aspect then, Fairyland, stripped of all its literary
and imaginative glamour and of its social psychology, in the eyes of
science resolves itself into a reality, because it is one of the states
of consciousness co-ordinate with the ordinary consciousness. This
statement will be confirmed by a brief examination of what is called
'supernatural lapse of time', and which is invariably connected with
Fairyland.

'Supernatural' Lapse of Time

It has already been made clear that in the dream or somnambulic state
there are invariably modifications of time and space relations; and
these give rise to what has been termed the 'supernatural lapse of
time'. Two conditions are possible: either a few minutes of waking-state
time equal long periods in the non-waking state; or else, as is usually
the case in the Fairy-Faith, the reverse is true.

The first condition, which we shall examine first, occasionally appears
in the Fairy-Faith through such a statement as this:--'Sometimes one may
thus go to Faerie for an hour or two' ([p. 39](ffcc121.htm#page_39)).
Similarly, as physicians well know, patients under narcotics will
experience events extending over long periods of time within a few
minutes of normal time. De Quincey, the famous opium-eater, records
dreams of ten to sixty years' supernatural duration, and some quite
beyond all limits of the waking experience. Fechner records a case of a
woman who was nearly drowned and then resuscitated after two minutes of
unconsciousness, and who in that time lived over again all her past
life. <span id="fr_639"></span>[1](#fn_582) Another even more remarkable

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

case than this last concerns Admiral Beaufort, who, having fallen into
the water, was unconscious also for two minutes, and yet he says that
not only during that short space of time did he travel over every
incident of his life with the details of' every minute and collateral
feature', but that there crowded into his imagination' many trifling
events which had long been forgotten'. <span
id="fr_640"></span>[1](#fn_583)

We shall now present examples to illustrate the second condition. Höhne
was in an unbroken magnetic sleep from the first of January to the tenth
of May, and when he came out of it he was overcome with surprise to see
that spring had arrived, he having lain down--as he believed--only the
day before. <span id="fr_641"></span>[2](#fn_584) Had Höhne been an
Irishman, he might very reasonably have explained the situation by
saying that he had been with the fairies for what seemed only a night.
The Seeress of Prevorst, in a similar sleep, passed through a period of
six years and five months, and then awoke as from a one-night sleep with
no memory of what she did during that time; but some time afterwards
memory of the period came to her so completely that she recalled all its
details. <span id="fr_642"></span>[3](#fn_585) Old people, and some
young people too, among the Celts, who go to Fairyland for varying
periods of time, sometimes extending over weeks (as in a case I knew in
West Ireland), have just such dreams or trance-states as this. Another
example follows:--Chardel, in fleeing from the Revolution, took ship
from Brittany and was obliged to induce somnambulism on his wife in
order to overcome her horror of the sea. When the couple landed in
America and Chardel awakened his wife, she had no recollection whatever
of the Atlantic voyage, and believed herself still in Brittany. <span
id="fr_643"></span>[4](#fn_586)

Both Helmholtz and Fechner show <span id="fr_644"></span>[5](#fn_587)
that the functions of the nervous system are associated with a definite
time-measure, so it follows that consciousness in an organic body like
man's depends upon the nervous system; but, as these

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

examples and similar ones in the Fairy-Faith show, certain conscious
states exist independently of the human nerves, and they therefore set
up a strong presumption that complete consciousness can exist
independently of the physical nerve-apparatus. And in proceeding to
submit this presumption of a supersensuous consciousness to the further
test of science we shall at the same time be testing the statements made
by wholly reliable seer-witnesses, like the Irish mystic and seer ([p.
65](ffcc121.htm#page_65)), that not only can men and women enter
Fairyland during trance-states for a brief period, but that at death
they can enter it for an unlimited period. Further, what is for our
study the most important of all statements will likewise be tested,
namely, that in Fairyland there are conscious non-human entities like
the *Sidhe* races.

### PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND FAIRIES

Our present task, then, is to extend the examination beyond incarnate
consciousness into the realm of the new psychology or physical research,
where, as a working hypothesis, it is assumed that there is discarnate
consciousness, which by the Celtic peoples is believed to exist and to
exhibit itself in various individual aspects as fairies.

As to what science demands as proof of the survival of human
consciousness after death, there has been no clear consensus of opinion.
To prove merely the existence of 'ghosts' would not do; it is necessary
to show by a series of proofs (1) that discarnate intelligences exist,
(2) that they possess complete and persistent personal energy wholly
within themselves, (3) that they are the actual unit of consciousness
and memory known to have manifested itself on this plane of existence
through particular incarnate personalities now deceased. Various
psychical researchers assert that they have already reached these proofs
and are convinced, often in spite of their initial scientific attitude
of antagonism toward all psychic phenomena, of the survival of the human
consciousness after the death of the human body; and we shall proceed to
present the testimony of some of them.

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

In chapter vii, concerning *Phantasms of the Dead*, forming part of
Frederick W. H. Myers's *Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily
Death*, and in the two chapters which follow, on *Motor Automatism*, and
on *Trance, Possession, and Ecstasy*, all the necessary proofs above
noted have been adduced; and the author was thereby one of the very
first psychical researchers to have recorded before the world his
conversion from the non-animistic hypothesis to the ancient belief that
Man is immortal; for he admits his conviction that the human
consciousness does incontestably survive the decay of the physical body.
Types of some of these well-attested and proved cases offered as
evidence by Myers may be briefly summarized as follows:--Repeated
apparitions indicating intimate acquaintance with some post-mortem fact
like the place of burial; single apparitions with knowledge of the
affairs of surviving friends, or of the impending death of a survivor,
or of spirits of persons dead after the apparition's decease; cases
where professed spirits manifest knowledge of their earth-life, as of
some secret compact made with survivors; cases of apparitional
appearances near a corpse or a grave; occasional cases of the appearance
of the dead to several persons collectively. <span
id="fr_645"></span>[1](#fn_588) Under motor automatism, some of the most
striking phenomena tending toward proof are cases where automatic
writing has announced a death unknown to the persons present; knowledge
communicated in a *séance*, not known to any person present, but
afterwards proved to have been possessed by the deceased; automatic
writing by a child in language unknown to her.

In chapter ix trance or possession is defined by Myers, in the same list
of proofs, as 'a development of Motor Automatism resulting at last in a
substitution of personality'; and this harmonizes with the theory of the
control of a living organism by discarnate spirits, and is supported by
an overwhelming mass of scientific experiment. Telepathy suggests the
possibility of communication between the living and the living and
between the living and the dead, and, we

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

may add, between the dead and the dead--as in Fairyland--without the
consideration of space or time as known in the lower ranges of mental
action; and that the communication does not depend upon vibrations from
a material brain-mass. Telepathy in these first two aspects has been
likewise accepted as a scientific fact by workers in psychical research
like Sir William Crookes, Sir Oliver Lodge, William James, and by many
others. All such phenomena as these, now being so carefully investigated
and weighed by men thoroughly trained in science, are, so to speak, the
protoplasmic background of all religions, philosophies, or systems of
mystical thought yet evolved on this planet; and in all essentials they
confirm the x-quantity presented in the evidence of the Fairy-Faith.

Dr. G. F. Stout, an able representative of the school of non-converts to
the theories in psychology propounded by Myers and by psychical
research, states his position thus:--'But, at least, my doubt is not
dogmatic denial, and I agree with Mr. Myers that there is no sufficient
reason for being peculiarly sceptical concerning communications from
departed spirits. I also agree with him that the alleged cases of such
communication cannot be with any approach to probability explained away
as mere instances of telepathy.' <span id="fr_646"></span>[1](#fn_589)
In addition, Dr. Stout says:--'The conception which has been really
useful to him is that of telepathy. Given that communication takes place
between individual minds unmediated by ordinary physical conditions, we
may regard intercourse with departed spirits as a special case of the
same kind of process. And clairvoyance, precognition, &c., may perhaps
be referred to telepathic communication either with departed spirits or
with other intelligences superior to the human.' <span
id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_589) In this last phrase, 'intelligences
superior to the human', Dr. Stout assumes our own position, that
hypothetically there is good reason for thinking that discarnate
non-human intelligences--such as the Irish call the *Sidhe*--may exist
and communicate with, or influence in some unknown way, the living, as
during 'mediumship' and in 'seership'.

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

Mr. Andrew Lang points out, in his reply to Dr. Stout's criticism, that
the only legitimate scientific resource for overthrowing Myers's
position, since the evidence is 'mathematically incapable of explanation
by chance coincidence', is to say that several people are deliberate
forgers and liars. And he adds:--'To myself (but only to myself and a
small circle) the evidence is irrefragable, from our lifetime knowledge
of the percipient.' <span id="fr_648"></span>[1](#fn_590) But the
animistic position does not by any means depend upon the evidence
presented by Myers, no matter how incontestably reliable it is. We have
only to examine the voluminous publications of the *Society for
Psychical Research* (London) to realize this, and especially the *Report
on the Census of Hallucinations of Modern Spiritualism*, by Professor
Sidgwick's Committee (*P. S. P. R.*, London).

### PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND ANTHROPOLOGY IN RELATION TO THE FAIRY-FAITH

According to a special contribution from Mr. Andrew Lang.

Mr. Andrew Lang, who has done a special service to science by showing
that psychical research is inseparably related to anthropology, has
favoured us with a statement of his own position toward this
relationship and has made it directly applicable to the Fairy-Faith. In
a general way, but not in some important details (as indicated in our
annotations) we agree with Mr. Lang's position, which he states as
follows:--

Mr. Evans Wentz has asked me to define my position towards psychical
research in relation to anthropology. I have done so in my book, *The
Making of Religion*. The alleged abnormal or supernormal occurrences
which psychical research examines are, for the most part, 'universally
human,' and, whether they happen or do not happen, whether they are the
results of malobservation, or of fraud, or are merely mythical, as
*human* they cannot be wisely neglected by anthropology.

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

The fairy-folk, under many names, in many tongues, are everywhere
objects of human belief, in Central Australia, in New Zealand, in the
isles of the Pacific, as in the British Isles, Lowland or Highland,
Celtic in the main, or English in the main, I conceive the various
beings, fairies, brownies, *Iruntarinia*, *Djinns*, or what you will,
*to be purely mythical*. I am incapable of believing that they are
actual entities, who carry off men and women; steal and hide objects
(especially as the *Iruntarinia* do); love or hate, persecute or kiss
human beings; practise music, vocal and instrumental; and in short 'play
the pliskies' with which they are universally credited by the identical
workings of the human fancy. They tend to shade away, on one side, into
the denizens of the House of Hades--phantasms of the dead. The belief in
such phantasms may be partially based on experience, whether
hallucinatory or otherwise and inexplicably produced. <span
id="fr_649"></span>[1](#fn_591)

As far as psychical research studies report of these phantasms it
approaches the realm of 'the Fairy Queen Proserpine'. As far as such
research examines the historical or contemporary stories of the
*Poltergeist*, it touches on fairies:

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

because the Irish, for example, attribute to the agency of fairies the
modern *Poltergeist* phenomena, whether these, in each case, be
fraudulent or, up to now, be unexplained.

There are not more than two or three alleged visions of the traditional
fairies in the annals of psychical research; and I have met with but few
sane and educated persons who profess to have seen phantoms at all
resembling the traditional fairy; while phantasms supposed to be of the
dead, the dying, and the absent are frequently reported. On the whole,
psychical research has very little concern with the fairy-belief in its
typical forms, and if the researcher did find modern cases of fairy
visions alleged by sane and educated percipients, he would be apt to
explain them by suggestion acting on the subconscious self. <span
id="fr_650"></span>[1](#fn_592)

1 MARLOES ROAD, LONDON, W.  
      *September* 26, 1910.

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

Concerning phantasms of the dead into which, as above pointed out, the
fairy-folk tend to shade away, Mr. Lang has elsewhere said:--'On the
whole, if the evidence is worth anything, there are real objective
ghosts, and there are also telepathic hallucinations: so that the
scientific attitude is to believe in both, if in either.' <span
id="fr_651"></span>[1](#fn_593) And he shows that while anthropologists
have explained all animistic beliefs as the results of primitive men's
philosophizing 'on life, death, sleep, dreams, trances, shadows, the
phenomena of epilepsy, and the illusions of starvation', 'normal
phenomena, psychological and psychical, might suggest most of the
animistic beliefs.' <span id="fr_652"></span>[1](#fn_593) In *The Making
of Religion*, Mr. Lang has expanded this anthropological argument so as
to make it even more fully embrace psychical research.

If we apply the brilliant results of Mr. Lang's investigations to our
own, it is apparent that the background of the Fairy-Faith, like that of
all religions, is animistic, as we have argued in chapter iii; that it
must have grown up in ancient times into its traditional form out of a
pre-Celtic followed by a pre-Christian Celtic religion; these latter
due, in turn; to actual psychical experiences, such as hallucinations,
visions of different sorts, clairvoyance, 'mediumship', and magical
knowledge on the part of Druid priests and, probably, to some extent, on
the part of the common people as well; and, finally, that the living
Fairy-Faith depends not so much upon ancient traditions, oral and
recorded, as upon recent and contemporary psychical experiences, vouched
for by many 'seers' and other percipients among our witnesses, and now
placed on record by us in chapter ii and elsewhere throughout this
study.

### THE PRESENT POSITION OF PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

Sir William Crookes, the well-known English authority in physical
science, was almost the first scientist to become seriously interested
in psychics, and in Part III of *Notes of an Enquiry into the Phenomena
called Spiritual, during the Years* 1870-1873 (London), boldly
affirms:--'It will be

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

seen that the facts are of the most astounding character, and seem
utterly irreconcilable with all known theories of modern science. Having
satisfied myself of their *truth*, it would be moral cowardice to
withhold my testimony because my previous publications were ridiculed by
critics and others.' And this conclusion reached forty years ago has not
been reversed, but has been confirmed by one after another of learned
scientists on both sides of the Atlantic.

In 1908, Sir Oliver Lodge, Principal of the University of Birmingham,
and at present one of the best known of scientists concerned with the
study of spiritual phenomena, stated his position thus:--'On the whole,
I am of those who, though they would like to see further and still
stronger and more continued proofs, are of opinion that a good case has
been made out, and that as the best working hypothesis at the present
time it is legitimate to grant that lucid moments of intercourse with
deceased persons may in the best cases supervene. . . . The boundary
between the two states--the known and the unknown--is still substantial,
but it is wearing thin in places; and like excavators engaged in boring
a tunnel from opposite ends, amid the roar of water and other noises, we
are beginning to hear now and again the strokes of the pickaxes of our
comrades on the other side." In 1909, Sir Oliver Lodge published *The
Survival of Man*, in which, after a careful exposition, covering over
three hundred pages, of the definite results of much scientific
experimentation by the best scientists of Europe and America, in such
psychical phenomena as Telepathy or Thought Transference, Telepathy and
Clairvoyance, Automatism and Lucidity, the following tentative
conclusion is reached:--'The first thing we learn, perhaps the only
thing we clearly learn in the first instance, is *continuity*. There is
no such sudden break in the conditions of existence as may have been
anticipated; and no break at all in the continuous and conscious
identity of genuine character and personality.' <span
id="fr_653"></span>[1](#fn_594) And his personal conviction is that
'Intelligent

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

co-operation between other than embodied human minds than our own ...
has become possible'. <span id="fr_654"></span>[1](#fn_595)

William James, who was one of the chief psychical researchers in the
United States, published his conclusions in October 1909; and of
psychical phenomena he wrote 'As to there being such real natural types
of phenomena ignored by orthodox science, I am not baffled at all, for I
am fully convinced of it.' Of mediumship', he postulated the very
interesting theory of a universally diffused 'soul-stuff', which
elsewhere ([p. 254](ffcc130.htm#page_254)) we have referred to as the
scientific equivalent to the Polynesian *Mana*: 'My own dramatic sense
tends instinctively to picture the situation as an interaction between
slumbering faculties in the automatist's mind and a cosmic environment
of *other consciousness* of some sort which is able to work upon them.
If there were in the universe a lot of diffuse soul-stuff, unable of
itself to get into consistent personal form, or to take permanent
possession of an organism, yet always craving to do so, it might get its
head into the air, parasitically, so to speak, by profiting, by weak
spots in the armour of human minds, and slipping in and stirring up
there the sleeping tendencies to personate.' Expanding this theory into
a 'pan-psychic' view of the universe and assuming a 'mother-sea' of
consciousness, a bank upon which we all draw, James asked these
questions about it, which educated Celtic seers ask themselves about the
*Sidhe* or Fairy-World and its also collective consciousness or life:
'What is its own structure? 'What is its inner topography? . . . What
are the conditions of individuation or insulation in this mother-sea? To
what tracts, to what active systems functioning separately in it, do
personalities correspond? Are individual "spirits" constituted there?
How numerous, and of how many hierarchic orders may these then be? How
permanent? How transient? And how confluent with one another may they
become?' <span id="fr_655"></span>[2](#fn_596) We should ask the reader
to compare this scientific attitude with the almost identical attitude
taken up with respect to the

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Sidhe* Races and
the constitution of their world and life by the Irish mystic and seer
(pp. [60](ffcc121.htm#page_60) ff

.).

M. Camille Flammarion, the well-known French astronomer, is another of
the pioneer psychical researchers; and in his psychic studies, entitled,
as translated in an English edition, The Unknown, recently announced
these definite conclusions:--'(1) *The soul exists as a real entity
independent of the body*. (2) *It is endowed with faculties still
unknown to science*. (3) *It is able to act at a distance, without the
intervention of the senses*.' And in his *Mysterious Psychic Forces*
(Boston, 1907, pp. 452-3), he says:--'The conclusions of the present
work concord with those of the former (The Unknown). . . . I may sum up
the whole matter with the single statement that there exists in nature,
in myriad activity, a *psychic element* the essential nature of which is
still hidden from us.'

### THE FINAL TESTING OF THE X-QUANTITY

This chapter can now be brought to its logical conclusion by directly
applying the results so far attained to our still vigorous x-quantity or
residuum gathered out of the Fairy-Faith. We have, although hurriedly,
blazed a rough pathway through the necessary parts of the jungle of
scientific theories, and have arrived at a very considerable clearing
made by the pioneers, the psychical researchers. We seem, in fact, to
have arrived at a point in our long investigations where we can
postulate scientifically, on the showing of the data of psychical
research, the existence of such invisible intelligences as gods, genii,
daemons, all kinds of true fairies, and disembodied men. It is not
necessary to produce here, in addition to what already has been set
forth, the very voluminous detailed evidence of psychical research as to
the existence of such intelligences. The general statement may be made
that there are hundreds of carefully proven cases of phenomena or
apparitions precisely like many of those which the Celtic peoples
attribute to fairies. <span id="fr_656"></span>[1](#fn_597)

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

Various explanations or theories are offered by our men of science as to
what these invisible intelligences are, for none of our scientists would
say that the dead alone are responsible, even in a majority of cases,
for the observed phenomena and apparitions, but rather such beings as we
call daemons, fairies, and elementals. M. Camille Flammarion says:--'The
greater part of the phenomena observed--noises, movement of tables,
confusions, disturbances, raps, replies to questions asked--are really
childish, puerile, vulgar, often ridiculous, and rather resemble the
pranks of mischievous boys than serious bona-fide actions. It is
impossible not to notice this. Why should the souls of the dead amuse
themselves in this way? The supposition seems almost absurd.' <span
id="fr_657"></span>[1](#fn_598) There could be no better description of
the pranks which house-haunting fairies like brownies and Robin
Goodfellows and elementals enjoy than this; and to suppose that the dead
perform such mischievous and playful acts is, in truth, absurd. M.
Flammarion also says:--'Two inescapable hypotheses present themselves.
Either it is we who produce these phenomena' (and this is not
reasonable) 'or it is spirits. But mark this well: these spirits are not
necessarily the souls of the dead; for other kinds of spiritual beings
may exist, and space may be full of them without our ever knowing
anything about it, except under unusual circumstances. *Do we not find
in the different ancient literatures, demons, angels, gnomes, goblins,
sprites, spectres, elementals, &c.? Perhaps these legends are not
without some foundation in fact.*' <span id="fr_658"></span>[1](#fn_598)

On 'the phenomena of percussive and allied sound'--such as fairies and
the dead are said to produce--Sir William Crookes made this
report:--'The intelligence governing the phenomena is sometimes
manifestly below that of the medium. It is frequently in direct
opposition to the wishes

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

of the medium . . . . The intelligence is sometimes of such a character
as to lead to the belief that it does not emanate from any person
present.' <span id="fr_659"></span>[1](#fn_599) In the case of the
'medium' Mr. Home, Sir William Crookes used mechanical tests and proved
to his own satisfaction that physical objects moved without Mr. Home or
any other person being in contact with them, <span
id="fr_660"></span>[2](#fn_600) In the way that fairies are believed to
move objects. These phenomena parallel remarkable ancient and modern
examples of the same nature: e. g. in the affair at Cideville, France,
brought before a magistrate, there is sworn evidence by reputable
witnesses that pillows and coverlets floated away from a bed in which
two children were asleep, and that furniture in the house moved without
contact. <span id="fr_661"></span>[3](#fn_601) Mrs. Margaret Quinn,
originally of Mullingar, but now of Howth, gave this remarkable
testimony:--'When I was a little girl, I lived with my mother in West
Meath, near Mullingar. *A fort* was at the back of our house, and mother
used to hear music playing round our house all night, and she has seen
*them* (the *good people*). It often happened there at home that we
would have clothes out on the line and they would float off like a
balloon at a time when there would not be a bit of wind and in daylight.
My mother would come out and say, "God bless *them* (the *good people*).
*They* will bring them back." And then the clothes would slowly come
floating back to the line.' And in our chapter ii there is other
testimony concerning objects moved without contact with human beings,
either through the agency of fairies or of the dead. After due
investigation of such and various other phenomena, Sir William Crookes,
among other theories to explain them, gives this theory:--'*The actions
of a separate order of beings, living on this earth, but invisible and
immaterial to us. Able, however, occasionally to manifest their
presence.* 

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Known in almost
all countries and ages as demons (not necessarily bad), gnomes, fairies,
kobolds, elves, goblins, Puck, &c*.' <span
id="fr_662"></span>[1](#fn_602) Here we seem to have what ought to be,
by this stage of our study, proof of the Psychological Theory of the
nature and origin of the Fairy-Faith.

Let us now draw a few of the direct parallels thus suggested. Consider
first how a fairy is said to appear, how it is described, and how it
vanishes, and then compare the facts stated in the following case of a
phantom reported by Sir William Crookes <span
id="fr_663"></span>[2](#fn_603):--'In the dusk of the evening' (just the
time when fairies are most easily seen) during a *séance* with Mr. Home
at my house, the curtains of a window about eight feet from Mr. Home
were seen to move. A dark, shadowy, semi-transparent form, like that of
a man, was then seen by all present standing near the window, waving the
curtain with his hand. As we looked, the form faded away and the curtain
ceased to move.' The following--Mr. Home as in the former case being the
'medium '--is a still more striking instance:--'A phantom form came from
a corner of the room, took an accordion in its hand, and then glided
about the room playing the instrument. The form was visible to all
present for many minutes, Mr. Home also being seen at the same time. On
its coming rather close to a lady who was sitting apart from the rest of
the company, she gave a slight cry, upon which it vanished.' Compare the
following types of observed phenomena by the same authority with what
our Welsh witness from the Pentre Evan country said about death-candles
([p. 155](ffcc124.htm#page_155)):--'I have seen a luminous cloud
floating upwards to a picture.' Or, 'I have more than once had a solid
self-luminous body placed in my hand by a hand which did not belong to
any person in the room. In the light I have seen a luminous cloud hover
over a heliotrope on a side-table, break a sprig off, and carry the
sprig to a lady; and on some occasions I have seen a similar luminous
cloud visibly condense to the form of a hand and carry small objects
about.' Similar lights, parallel to the death lights or death tokens
observed by Celtic percipients

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

in Wales and in Brittany, and to what in Ireland are called the 'lights'
of the 'good people' or 'gentry'--all of which phenomena are traceable
to no material causes as yet discovered--are reported by Iamblichus and
others of his school. <span id="fr_664"></span>[1](#fn_604) And such
lights are among phenomena best attested by modern psychical
researchers. Supernormally produced music, said to have been produced by
daemons, which is parallel to that called by several of our own
percipients 'fairy' music, was also known to the Neo-Platonists; <span
id="fr_665"></span>[1](#fn_604) and in the scientific investigations to
which Mr. Home was subjected, musical sounds were heard which could not
be attributed to any known agency. In haunted houses, as psychical
research discovers, the rustling of dresses, movements of objects, and
sounds, often occur spontaneously without and with the occurrence of
apparitions; <span id="fr_666"></span>[1](#fn_604) and these phenomena
are parallel to certain ones which we have had cited by Celtic
percipients as due to fairies. Mr. Lang, too, has set forth clearly the
probability of real 'haunts' or spirits possessing particular
places--just as fairies are said to possess particular localities or
buildings in Celtic lands.

The Report on the Census of Hallucination by Professor Sidgwick's
Committee has furnished data sufficiently good to convince many
scientists that phantoms (comparable in a way with Irish banshees and
the Breton *Ankou*) do appear to the living directly before a death as
though announcing it. <span id="fr_667"></span>[2](#fn_605)

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

According to other equally reliable data, sometimes a phantasmal
voice--like certain 'fairy' voices--has given news of a death.' Myers
and others have studied and recorded many cases of the dead appearing,
as the Celtic dead appear when they have been *taken* to
Fairyland. <span id="fr_668"></span>[1](#fn_606)

In *Phantasms of the Living*, by Gurney, Myers, and Pod-more, the
explanation of apparitions which are coincident with a death as being
generated by a telepathic influence exerted upon the percipient by the
dying friend, suggests the most rational interpretation of certain
parallel kinds of apparitions, of the dead or of fairies, who, as in
these last examples, appear dressed in garments. It is that all such
apparitional appearances, coincident with a death or not, are equally
due to a telepathic force exerted by an agency independent of the
percipient. This outside force acts as a stimulus upon the nervous
apparatus of the person to whom it is thus transmitted, and causes him
to project out of some part of his own consciousness (which part may
have passed over into the subconsciousness) a visualized image already
impressed there. The image has natural affinity or correspondence with
the outside stimulus which arouses it.

Such an hypothesis curiously agrees in part with the one put forth by
our seer-witness, the Irish mystic ([p. 60](ffcc121.htm#page_60) ff.).
He would probably agree as to the visualization process in most types of
ordinary apparitions. In addition, he holds that Nature herself has a
memory: there is some indefinable psychic element in the earth's
atmosphere upon which all human and physical actions or phenomena are
photographed or impressed. These records in Nature's mind correspond to
mental impressions in us. Under certain inexplicable conditions, normal
persons who are not seers may observe Nature's mental records like
pictures cast upon a screen--often like moving pictures. Seers can
always see them if they wish; and uncritical seers frequently mistake
these phantom records or pictures existing on the psychical envelope of
the planet for actual events now occurring, and

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

for actual beings--fairies of various kinds and the dead. A recent book
entitled *An Adventure*, by Elizabeth Morison and Frances Lamont
(pseudonyms), adequately illustrates what we mean by such phantom
pictures. During the year 1901 these two cultured ladies saw at *le
petit Trianon* of Marie Antoinette records in the mind of Nature of past
historical events dating from about 1789. Of this there seems not to be
the slightest doubt. The fairy boat-race on Lough Gur, as described by
Count John de Salis ([p. 80](ffcc121.htm#page_80)), and the procession
seen on Tara Hill of fairies 'like soldiers of ancient Ireland in
review' ([p. 33](ffcc121.htm#page_33)), probably illustrate the same
kind of phenomena (cf. pp. [55](ffcc121.htm#page_55)-7,
[68](ffcc121.htm#page_68), [74](ffcc121.htm#page_74),
[123](ffcc123.htm#page_123), [126](ffcc123.htm#page_126), &c.).

But in visions by natural seers, following again the theory of our Irish
seer-witness, there is present not only an outside force (as seems to be
the case when ordinary apparitions are seen) but also a veridical being
with a form and life of its own in a world of its own. Such a real
entity is as distinct from a picture in the memory of Nature as a living
person is distinct from the mental picture which his friend holds and
projects as a visualized image when responding to a telepathic stimulus
sent by him. The natural seer, not being obliged to see with his normal
sense of vision, need not use the normal method (namely, visualization)
of responding to the outside telepathic stimulus, and so does not see
the ordinary apparitional ghost or fairy. He exercises 'second-sight' or
ecstatic vision, and while so doing is in the same plane of
consciousness and under the same conditions of perception as the
intelligence which projects upon him the stimulus inducing automatically
such 'second-sight' or ecstatic vision. Therefore, if the intelligence
has a form and nature of its own, the seer and not the non-seer will
perceive them in their own world while his consciousness is temporarily
functioning there and out of the normal plane of mental action. In other
words, in the normal plane the non-seer reacts normally upon the same
stimulus upon which the seer reacts abnormally. The former percipient
sees a non-real apparition, a visualized image out of his own
experience; the latter claims to see a real being. The real being exists

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

normally under conditions which are abnormal to the non-seer, but which
to the seer become normal. The visualization of the non-seer is a
makeshift, a psycho-physical reaction to a purely psychical stimulus.

It is mathematically possible to conceive fourth-dimensional beings, and
if they exist it would be impossible in a third-dimensional plane to see
them as they really are. Hence the ordinary apparition is non-real as a
form, whereas the beings, which wholly sane and reliable seers claim to
see when exercising seership of the highest kind, may be as real to
themselves and to the seers as human beings are to us here in this
third-dimensional world when we exercise normal vision.

Concerning actual demon-possession, which among spiritualists and
psychical researchers would be called spirit phenomena through
'mediums', and which, as we have elsewhere pointed out (pp.
[249](ffcc130.htm#page_249) ff.), offers the most rational explanation
for the changeling belief and related Celtic beliefs about fairies, Dr.
J. L. Nevius, in his *Demon Possession*, offers very important
scientific data relating to China. Dr. F. F. Elmwood, who like that
authority studied strange psychical phenomena in the interior districts
of the Shantung Province (China) for many years, says in an introductory
note to that work:--'Antecedently to any knowledge of the New Testament'
(so full of cases of demon-possession) 'the people of North China
believed fully in the possession of the minds and bodies of men by evil
spirits . . . It has always been understood that the personality of the
evil spirit usurped, or for the time being supplanted, that of the
unwilling, victim, and acted through his organs and faculties. Physical
suffering and sometimes violent paroxysms attended the presence and
active influence of the spirit.' In the face of so many cases of such
phenomena observed in China by the same authorities, Dr. Ellinwood adds,
as Dr. Nevius's conclusion, that 'no theory has been advanced which so
well accords with the facts as the simple and unquestioning conclusion
so universally held by the Christians of Shantung, viz. that evil
spirits do in many instances possess or control the mind

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

and will of human beings'. Hypnotism shows how one strong and magnetic
human will can control the mind and will of its subject; the scientific
results attained by the Society for Psychical Research in its study of
spiritualism show a disembodied will or intelligence controlling and
using the body of a living human being; and Dr. Nevius writes:--'Now may
not demon-possession be only a different, a more advanced form of
hypnotism?' Criminal records of Europe and America show many examples of
condemned criminals who confessed in all sincerity that some invisible
or outside influence led them against their better judgement to commit
crime; and very often in such examples the past lives of the condemned
are so good as to set up a strong probability in favour of their belief
in possession. And altogether in accord with the evidence of modern
medium-ship, as well as that of mediumship among the ancients, Dr.
Nevius says of Chinese demon-possession:--'When normal consciousness is
restored after one of these attacks, the subject is entirely ignorant of
everything which has passed during that state. The most striking
characteristic of those cases is that the subject evidences another
personality, and the normal personality for the time being is partially
or wholly dormant. The new personality presents traits of character
utterly different from those which really belong to the subject in his
normal state, and this change of character is, with rare exceptions, in
the direction of moral obliquity and impurity. Many persons while
"demon-possessed" give evidence of knowledge which cannot be accounted
for in ordinary ways. . . . They sometimes converse in foreign languages
of which in their normal states they are entirely ignorant. There are
often heard, in connexion with "demon possessions", rappings and noises
in places where no physical cause for them can be found; and tables,
chairs, crockery, and the like are moved about without, so far as can be
discerned, any application of physical force, exactly as we are told is
the case among spiritualists.' <span id="fr_669"></span>[1](#fn_607)

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

### CONCLUSION

Our investigations (and far more exhaustive ones than ours touching
similar psychical phenomena) show, when applied to the residuum or
x-quantity, these chief results: (1) The Materialistic and the Delusion
and Imposture Theories can be dismissed as not affecting it. (2)
Authorities do not agree in their opinions as to the pathological and
psychological processes with which we are directly concerned; they are
quite uncertain how to explain the human brain in all its more subtle
functions, or the sympathetic nervous system and nervous states
generally, in relation especially to human consciousness under various
abnormal but not diseased conditions of the organism; and they do not
propose any conclusions as final, but only as very weakly tentative,
though some of these are in favour of a psycho-physical view of man in
which there is a close approach to the present more advanced position of
psychical research. (3) Psychical research has furnished proof
sufficient to convince such first-class scientists as Sir William
Crookes, Sir Oliver Lodge, William James, M. Camille Flammarion, and
others, that states of consciousness exist in nature outside of, though
probably connected with, the consciousness of incarnate

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

human beings, and that these intelligences can produce effects on matter
and on the psychical constitution of man; and some of these scientists
consider certain of such intelligences to be discarnate men and women.
(4) Scientific proof has been adduced that there are genuine
hallucinations--like those relating to fairies--of human-like forms,
seen by single percipients, or collectively; and such collective
hallucinations are incapable of being explained away, which is equally
true of apparitions seen by a single percipient to move physical
objects. (5) Many of the foremost psychical researchers, including those
named above, accept 'mediumship' or spirit-possession as the best
working hypothesis to explain automatism. (6) In the accepted theory of
telepathy we have support for assuming that, like hypnosis, it is a
psychical process, and can be carried on either by two embodied spirits
or human beings; Or by a disembodied spirit and one still incarnate.
Myers's theories, including that of the Subliminal Self, embody all the
preceding ones and agree in details with them. (7) The results taken
together harmonize with those attained in our study of psychical
phenomena attributed by the Celtic peoples to fairies; and, if they be
accepted, older psychological and pathological theories must be
thoroughly revised in many cases, or else cast aside as worthless.
Finally, since we have demonstrated that the background of the
Fairy-Faith, and hence the residuum or x-quantity of it, is like the
background of all religious and mystical beliefs, being animistic, and
like them has grown up in ancient times out of definite psychical
phenomena identical in character with those now studied by science, and
is kept alive by an unbroken succession of 'seers' and percipients, we
have a clear right to set up under scientific authority these tentative
conclusions: (1) Fairyland exists as a supernormal state of
consciousness into which men and women may enter temporarily in dreams,
trances, or in various ecstatic conditions; or for an indefinite period
at death. (2) Fairies exist, because in all essentials they appear to be
the same as the intelligent forces now recognized by psychical
researchers, be they thus collective units of consciousness

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

like what William James has called 'soul-stuff', or more individual
units, like veridical apparitions. (3) Our examination of living
children said to have been changed by fairies shows (see pp.
[250](ffcc130.htm#page_250)-1) (*a*) that many changelings are so called
merely because of some bodily deformity or because of some abnormal
mental or pathological characteristics capable of an ordinary rational
explanation, (*b*) but that other changelings who exhibit a change of
personality, such as is recognized by psychologists, are in many cases
best explained on the Demon-Possession Theory, which is a
well-established scientific hypothesis.

Therefore, since the residuum or x-quantity of the Fairy-Faith, the
folk-religion of the Celtic peoples, cannot be explained away by any
known scientific laws, it must for the present stand, and the
Psychological Theory of the Nature and Origin of the Belief in Fairies
in Celtic Countries is to be considered as hypothetically established in
the eyes of Science. Hence we must cease to look upon the term *fairy*
as being always a synonym for something fanciful, non-real, absurd. We
must also cease to think of the Fairy-Faith as being no more than a
fabric of groundless beliefs. In short, the ordinary non-Celtic mind
must readjust itself to a new set of phenomena which through ignorance
on its part it has been content to disregard, and to treat with ridicule
and contempt as so much outworn 'superstition'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_566"></span>[456:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_623) I am indebted to
Mr. William McDougall, M.A., Wilde Reader in Mental Philosophy in the
University of Oxford, for having read through and criticized the first
draft of this section; and while he is in no way responsible for the
views set forth herein, nevertheless his suggestions for the improvement
of their scientific framework have been of very great value. I must also
express my obligation to him for having suggested through his Oxford
lectures a good share of the important material interwoven into chapter
xii touching the vitalistic view of evolution.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[460:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_624) Cf. C. Du Prel,
*Philosophy of Mysticism* (London, 1889), i. 7, II.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[462:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_625) T. Ribot, *The
Diseases of Personality*; Cf. J. L. Nevius, *Demon Possession* (London,
1897), pp. 234-5.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[462:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_626) *Proc. S. P. R.*
(London), v. 167; cf. A. Lang, *Making of Religion*, p*.* 64.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[463:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_627) W. James,
*Confidences of a 'Psychical Researcher'*, in *American Magazine*
(October 1909)

<span id="fn_571"></span>[464:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_628) A. Lang, *Cock Lane
and Common Sense* (London, 1896) p. 35.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[464:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_629) According to
Professor Freud, the well-known neurologist of Vienna, external stimuli
are not admitted to the dream-consciousness in the same manner that they
would be admitted to the waking-consciousness, but they are disguised
and altered in particular ways (cf. S. Freud, *Die Traumdeutung*, 2nd
ed., Vienna, 1909; and S. Ferenczi, *The Psychological Analysis of
Dreams*, in *Amer. Journ. Psych.*, April 1910, No. 2, xxi. 318, &c.).

<span id="fn_573"></span>[465:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_630) Du Prel, op. cit.,
i. 135.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[465:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_631) G. F. Stout, *Mr.
F. W. Myers on 'Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death'*, in
*Hibbert Journal*, ii, No. I (London, October 1903), p. 56.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[466:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_632) F. W. H. Myers,
*Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death* (London, 1903), i.
131.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[466:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_633) R. L. Stevenson,
*Across the Plains*, chapter on Dreams.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[466:3](ffcc411.htm#fr_634) Stout, op. cit., p.
54.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[467:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_635) Freud, op. cit.;
Ferenczi, op. cit.; E. Jones, *Freud's Theory of Dreams*, in *Amer.
Journ. Psych.*, April 1910, No. 2, xxi. 283-308.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[468:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_636) 'Freud, *The Origin
and Development of Psychoanalysis*, in *Amer. Journ. Psych.*, April
1950, No. *2,* xxi. 203.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[468:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_637) Du Prel, op. cit.,
i. 33.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[468:3](ffcc411.htm#fr_638) Myers, op. cit., i.
134.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[469:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_639) Fechner,
*Zentralblatt für Anthropologie*, p. 774; cf. Du Prel, op. cit., i. 92.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[470:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_640) Haddock, *Somnolism
and Psychism*, p. 253*;* cf. Du Prel, op. cit., i. 93.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[470:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_641) Perty, *Mystische
Erscheinungen*, i. 305 cf. Du Prel, op. cit., ii. 63.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[470:3](ffcc411.htm#fr_642) Kerner, *Seherin v.
Prevovst*, p. 196; *cf.* Du Prel, op. cit., ii. 65.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[470:4](ffcc411.htm#fr_643) Chardel, *Essai de
Psychologie*, p. 344; cf. Du Prel, op. cit., ii. 64.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[470:5](ffcc411.htm#fr_644) Cf. Du Prel, op.
cit., i. 88-9.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[472:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_645) Myers, op. cit.,
chapter vi.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[473:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_647) Stout, op. cit.,
pp. 64, 61-2.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[474:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_648) Lang, *Mr. Myers's
Theory of' The Subliminal Self'*, in *Hibbert Journal*, ii, No. 3 (April
1904), p. 530.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[475:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_649) The peculiar and
often unique characteristics of the fairy-folk of any given fairy-faith,
as we have pointed out in chapter iii (pp. [233](ffcc130.htm#page_233),
[282](ffcc130.htm#page_282)), are to be regarded as being merely
anthropomorphically coloured reflections of the social life or
environment of the particular ethnic group who hold the particular
fairy-faith; and, as Mr. Lang here suggests, when they are stripped of
these superficial characteristics, which are due to such social
psychology, they become ghosts of the dead or other spiritual beings.

Our own researches lead us to the conviction that behind the purely
mythical aspect of these fairy-faiths there exists a substantial
substratum of real phenomena not yet satisfactorily explained by
science; that such phenomena have been in the past and are at the
present time the chief source of the belief in fairies, that they are
the foundation underlying all fairy mythologies. We need only refer to
the following phenomena observed among Celtic and other peoples, and
attributed by them to 'fairy' or 'spirit' agency: (1) music which
competent percipients believe to be of non-human origin, and hence by
the Celts called 'fairy' music, whether this be vocal or instrumental in
sound; (2) the movement of objects without known cause; (3) rappings and
other noises called 'supernatural' (cf. pp. [81](ffcc121.htm#page_81)
n., [481](#page_481), [484](#page_484), [488](#page_488); also pp.
[47](ffcc121.htm#page_47), [57](ffcc121.htm#page_57),
[61](ffcc121.htm#page_61), [67](ffcc121.htm#page_67),
[71](ffcc121.htm#page_71), [72](ffcc121.htm#page_72),
[74](ffcc121.htm#page_74), [88](ffcc122.htm#page_88),
[94](ffcc122.htm#page_94), [98](ffcc122.htm#page_98),
[101](ffcc122.htm#page_101), [120](ffcc123.htm#page_120),
[124](ffcc123.htm#page_124), [125](ffcc123.htm#page_125),
[131](ffcc123.htm#page_131), [132](ffcc123.htm#page_132),
[134](ffcc123.htm#page_134), [139](ffcc124.htm#page_139),
[148](ffcc124.htm#page_148), [156](ffcc124.htm#page_156),
[172](ffcc125.htm#page_172), [181](ffcc125.htm#page_181),
[187](ffcc126.htm#page_187), [213](ffcc126.htm#page_213),
[218](ffcc126.htm#page_218), [220](ffcc126.htm#page_220), &c.).

<span id="fn_592"></span>[476:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_650) It is our hope that
this book will help to lessen the marked deficiency of recorded
testimony concerning 'fairy' beings and 'fairy' phenomena observed by
reliable percipients. We have endeavoured to demonstrate that genuine
'fairy' phenomena and genuine 'spirit' phenomena are in most cases
identical. Hence we believe that if 'spirit' phenomena are worthy of the
attention of science, equally so are 'fairy' phenomena. The fairy-belief
*in its typical* or *conventional aspects* (apart from the animism which
we discovered at the base of the belief) is, as was pointed out in our
anthropological examination of the evidence (pp.
[281](ffcc130.htm#page_281)-2), due to a very complex social psychology.
In this chapter we have eliminated all social psychology, as not being
the essential factor in the Fairy-Faith. Therefore, from our point of
view, Mr. Lang's implied explanation of the typical fairy-visions, that
they are due to 'suggestion acting on the subconscious self', does not
apply to the rarer kind of fairy visions which form part of our
x-quantity (see pp. [60](ffcc121.htm#page_60)-6,
[83](ffcc121.htm#page_83)-4, &c.). If it does, then it also applies to
all non-Celtic visions of spirits, in ancient and in modern times; and
the animistic hypothesis now accepted by most psychical researchers,
namely, that discarnate intelligences exist independent of the
percipient, must be set aside in favour of the non-animistic hypothesis.
If, on the other hand, it be admitted that 'fairy' phenomena are, as we
maintain, essentially the same as 'spirit' phenomena, then the belief in
fairies ceases to be purely mythical, and 'fairy' visions by a Celtic
seer who is physically and psychically sound do not seem to arise from
that seer's suggestion acting on his own subconsciousness; but certain
types of 'fairy' visions undoubtedly do arise from suggestion, *coming
from a 'fairy' or other intelligence*, acting on the conscious or
subconscious content of the percipient's mind (cf. pp.
[484](#page_484)-7).

<span id="fn_593"></span>[477:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_652) Lang, *Cock Lane
And Common Sense*, pp. 208, 35.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[478:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_653) Sir Oliver Lodge,
*Psychical Research*, in *Harper's Mag.*, August 1908 (New York and
London).

<span id="fn_595"></span>[479:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_654) Sir Oliver Lodge,
The Survival of Man (London, 1909), p. 339.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[479:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_655) James, op. cit.,
pp. 587-9.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[480:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_656) Readers are
referred to such authoritative works as the *Phantasms of the Living*
(London, 1886), by Gurney, Myers, and Podmore; to the <span
id="page_481">p. 481</span> *Report on the Census of Hallucinations of
Modern Spiritualism*, by Professor Sidgwick's Committee; to the
*Naturalisation of the Supernatural* (New York and London, 1908), by F.
Podmore; to the *Survival of the Human Personality*, by F. W. H. Myers;
and other like works, all of which originate from the *Proceedings of
the Society for Psychical Research* (London).

<span id="fn_598"></span>[481:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_658) C. Flammarion,
*Mysterious Psychic Forces*. pp. 441, 431.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[482:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_659) Sir Wm. Crookes,
*Notes of an Enquiry into Phenomena called Spiritual, during the years*
1870-73 (London), Part III, p. 87.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[482:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_660) See *Quart. Journ.
Science* (July 1871).

<span id="fn_601"></span>[482:3](ffcc411.htm#fr_661) Cf. Lang, *Cock
Lane and Common Sense*, p. 281; and for other cases of objects moved
without contact see ib., pp. 50, 52, 53, 58, 122 ff*.* See also F.
Podmore's article on *Poltergeists,* in *Proceedings S.P.R.*, xii.
45-115; and his *Naturalisation of the Supernatural*, chapter vii.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[483:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_662) Sir Wm. Crookes,
op. cit., Part III, p. 100.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[483:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_663) Ib., p. 94.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[484:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_666) Lang, *Cock Lane
and Common Sense*, pp. 60, 81, 139, &c.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[484:2](ffcc411.htm#fr_667) Using as a basis
the data of Professor Sidgwick's Committee and the results earlier
obtained by Gurney, Myers, and Podmore (see *Phantasms of the Living*),
Mr*.* William McDougall shows concisely the probability of an apparition
appearing within twelve hours of the death of the individual whom it
represents. He says:--'. . . of all recognized apparitions of living
persons, only one in 19,000 may be expected to be a death-coincidence of
this sort. But the census shows that of 1,300 recognized apparitions of
living persons 30 are death-coincidences, and that is equivalent to 440
in 19,000. Hence, of recognized hallucinations, those coincident with
death are 440 times more numerous than we should expect, if no causal
relation obtained.' And Mr. McDougall concludes: '. . . since good
evidence of telepathic communication has been experimentally obtained,
the least improbable explanation of these death-apparitions is that the
dying person exerts upon his distant friend some telepathic influence
which generates an hallucinatory perception of himself'
(*Hallucinations,* in *Ency. Brit.*, 11th ed., xii. 863).

<span id="fn_606"></span>[485:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_668) Myers, op. cit.,
ii. 65, 45 ff., 49 ff., &c.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[488:1](ffcc411.htm#fr_669) Nevius, *Demon
Possession*, Introduction, pp. iv, vii; pp. 240-2, 144-5. In accordance
with all such phenomena, psychical researchers have logically called
spirits manifesting themselves through the body of a living person
possessing spirits. And as in the case of Chinese demon-possession, the
phenomena of mediumship often result in the moral derangement, insanity,
or even suicide on the part of 'mediums' who so unwisely exhibit it
without special preparation or no preparation at all, and too often in
complete ignorance of a possible gradual undermining of their psychic
life, will-power, and even physical health. All of this seems to offer
direct and certain evidence to sustain Christians and non-Christians in
their condemnation of all forms of necromancy or calling up of spirits.
The following statement will make our position towards mediumship of the
most common kind clear:

In Druidism, for one example, disciples for training in magical sciences
are said to have spent twenty years in severe study and special
psychical training before deemed fit to be called Druids and thus to
control daemons, ghosts, or all invisible entities capable of possessing
living men and women. And even now in India and elsewhere there is
reported to be still the same ancient course of severe disciplinary
training for candidates seeking magical powers. But in modern
Spiritualism conditions are altogether different in most cases, and
'mediums' instead of controlling with an iron will, as a magician does,
spirits which become manifest in *séances*, surrender entirely their
will-power and whole personality to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. The Celtic Doctrine of Re-Birth and Otherworld
Scientifically Examined](ffcc412)
