[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ffcc124)  [Next](ffcc126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI. IN CORNWALL

Introduction by HENRY JENNER, Member of the Gorsedd of the Bards of
Brittany; Fellow and Local Secretary for Cornwall of the Society of
Antiquaries; author of *A Handbook of the Cornish Language*, &c.

In Cornwall the legends of giants, of saints, or of Arthur and his
knights, the observances and superstitions connected with the
prehistoric stone monuments, holy wells, mines, and the like, the
stories of submerged or buried cities, and the fragments of what would
seem to be pre-Christian faiths, have no doubt occasional points of
contact with Cornish fairy legends, but they do not help to explain the
fairies very much. Yet certain it is that not only in Cornwall and other
Celtic lands, but throughout most of the world, a belief in fairies
exists or has existed, and so widespread a belief must have a reason for
it, though not necessarily a good one. That which with unconscious
humour men generally call 'education' has in these days caused those
lower classes, to whom the deposit of this faith was entrusted, to be
ashamed of it, and to despise and endeavour to forget it. And so now in
Cornwall, as elsewhere at that earlier outbreak of Philistinism, the
Reformation,

From haunted spring and grassy ring  
Troop goblin, elf and fairy,  
And the kelpie must flit from the black bog-pit,  
And the brownie must not tarry.

 

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

But, in spite of Protestantism, school-boards, and education committees,
'pisky-pows' are still placed on the ridge-tiles of West Cornish
cottages, to propitiate the piskies and give them a dancing-place, lest
they should turn the milk sour, and St. Just and Morvah folk are still
'pisky-led' on the Gump (*an Ûn Gumpas,* the Level Down, between Chûn
Castle and Cam Kenidjack), and more rarely St. Columb and Roche folk on
Goss Moor. It will not do to say that it is only another form of
'whisky-led'. That is an evidently modern explanation, invented since
the substitution of strange Scottish and Irish drinks for the good
'Nantes' and wholesome 'Plymouth' of old time, and it does not fit in
with the phenomena. It was only last winter, in a cottage not a hundred
yards from where I am writing, that milk was set at night for piskies,
who had been knocking on walls and generally making nuisances of
themselves. Apparently the piskies only drank the 'astral 'part of the
milk (whatever that may be) and then the neighbouring cats drank what
was left, and it disagreed with them. I cannot vouch for the truth of
the part about the piskies and the 'astral' milk--I give it as it was
told to me by the occupant of the cottage, who was not unacquainted with
'occult' terminology--but I do know that the milk was consumed, and that
the cats, one of which was my own, were with one accord unwell all over
the place. But for the present purpose it does not matter whether these
things really happened or not. The point is that people thought they
happened.

Robert Hunt, in his *Popular Romances* of *the West of England*, divided
the fairies of Cornish folk-lore into five classes: (1) the Small
People; (2) the Spriggans; (3) the Piskies; (4) the Buccas, Bockles, or
Knockers; (5) the Brownies. This is an incorrect classification. The
*Pobel Vean* or Small People, the Spriggans, and the Piskies are not
really distinguishable from one another. Bucca, who properly is but one,
is a deity not a fairy, and it is said that Newlyn, the great seat of
his worship, offerings of fish still left on the beach for him. His name
is the Welsh *pwca*, which is probably 'Puck' though Shakespeare's Puck
was

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

just a pisky, and it may be connected with the general Slavonic word
*Bog*, God; so that if, as some say, *buccaboo* is really meant for
*Bucca-du*, Black Bucca, this may be an equivalent of *Czernobog*, the
Black God, who was the Ahriman of Slavonic dualism, and *Bucca-widn*
(White Bucca), which is rarer, though the expression does come into a
St. Levan story, may be the corresponding *Bielobog*. *Bockle*, which
personally I have never heard used, suggests the Scottish *bogle*, and
both may be diminutives of *bucca*, *bog*, *bogie*, or *bug*, the last
in the sense in which one English version translates the *timor
nocturnus* of Psalm xc. 5*,* not in that of *cimex lectularius*. But
*bockle* and *brownie* are probably both foreign importations borrowed
from books, though a 'brownie' *eo nomine* has been reported from Sennen
within the last twenty years.

The Knockers or Knackers are mine-spirits, quite unconnected with Bucca
or bogies. The story, as I have always heard it, is that they are the
spirits of Jews who were sent by the Romans to work in the tin mines,
some say for being concerned in the Crucifixion of our Lord, which
sounds improbable. They are benevolent spirits, and warn miners of
danger.

But the only true Cornish fairy is the Pisky, of the race which is the
*Pobel Vean* or Little People, and the Spriggan is only one of his
aspects. The Pisky would seem to be the 'Brownie' of the Lowland Scot,
the *Duine Sith* of the Highlander, and, if we may judge from an
interesting note in Scott's *The Pirate*, the 'Peght' of the Orkneys. If
*Daoine Sith* really means 'The Folk of the Mounds' (barrows), not 'The
People of Peace', it is possible that there is something in the theory
that Brownie, *Duine Sith*, and 'Peght', which is Pict, are only in
their origin ways of expressing the little dark-complexioned aboriginal
folk who were supposed to inhabit the barrows, cromlechs, and *allées
couvertes*, and whose cunning, their only effective weapon against the
strength of the Aryan invader, earned them a reputation for magical
powers. Now *Pisky* or *Pisgy* is really *Pixy*. Though as a patriotic
Cornishman I ought not to admit it,

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I cannot deny,
especially as it suits my argument better, that the Devon form is the
correct one. But after all there has been always a strong Cornish
element in Devon, even since the time when Athelstan drove the Britons
out of Exeter and set the Tamar for their boundary, and I think the
original word is really Cornish. The transposition of consonants,
especially when *s* is one of them, is not uncommon in modern Cornish
English. *Hosged* for *hogshead*, and *haps* for *hasp* are well-known
instances. If we take the root of *Pixy, Pix,* and divide the double
letter *x* into its component parts, we get *Piks* or *Pics*, and if we
remember that a final *s* or *z* in Cornish almost always represents a
*t* or *d* of Welsh and Breton (cf. *tas* for *tad*, *nans* for *nant*,
*bos* for *bod*), we may not unreasonably, though without absolute
certainty, conjecture that *Pixy* is *Picty* in a Cornish form. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_62)

Without begging any question concerning the origin, ethnology, or
homogeneity of those who are called 'Picts' in history, from the times
of Ammianus, Marcellinus and Claudian until Kenneth MacAlpine united the
Pictish kingdom with the Scottish, we can nevertheless accept the fact
that the name 'Pict' has been popularly applied to some pre-Celtic race
or races, to whom certain ancient structures, such as 'vitrified forts'
and 'Picts' houses' have been attributed. In Cornwall there are
instances of prehistoric structures being called 'Piskies' Halls' (there
is an *allée couverte* so called at Bosahan in Constantine), and'
Piskies' Crows' (*Crow* or *Craw*, Breton *Krao*, is a shed or hovel;
'pegs' craw' is still used for 'pig-sty'); and there are three genuine
examples of what would in Scotland be called 'Picts' Houses' just
outside St. Ives in the direction of Zennor, though only modern
antiquaries have applied that name to them. In the district in which
they are, the fringe of coast from St. Ives round by Zennor, Morvah,
Pendeen, and St. Just nearly to Sennen, are found to this day a strange

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

and separate people of Mongol type, like the Bigaudens of Pont l'Abbé
and Penmarc'h in the Breton Cornouailles, one of those 'fragments of
forgotten peoples' of the 'sunset bound of Lyonesse' of whom Tennyson
tells. They are a little 'stuggy' dark folk, and until comparatively
modern times were recognized as different from their Celtic neighbours,
and were commonly believed to be largely wizards and witches. One of Mr.
Wentz's informants seems to attribute to Zennor a particularly virulent
brand of pisky, and Zennor is the most primitive part of that district.
Possibly the more completely unmixed ancestors of this race were' more
so' than the present representatives; but, be this as it may, if *Pixy*
is really *Picty*, it would seem that, like the inhabitants of the
extreme north of the British Isles, the south-western Britons eventually
applied the fairly general popular name of the mysterious, half dreaded,
half despised aboriginal to a race of preternatural beings in whose
existence they believed, and, with the name, transferred some of the
qualities, attributes, and legends, thus producing a mixed mental
conception, now known as' pisky' or 'pixy'.

There seems to have been always and everywhere (or nearly so) a belief
in a race, neither divine nor human, but very like to human beings, who
existed on a 'plane' different from that of humans, though occupying the
same space. This has been called the 'astral' or the
'fourth-dimensional' plane. Why 'astral'? why 'fourth-dimensional'? why
'plane'? are questions the answers to which do not matter, and I do not
attempt to defend the terms, but you must call it something. This is the
belief to which Scott refers in the introduction to *The Monastery*, as
the 'beautiful but almost forgotten theory of astral spirits or
creatures of the elements, surpassing human beings in knowledge and
power, but inferior to them as being subject, after a certain space of
years, to a death which is to them annihilation'. The subdivisions and
elaborations of the subject by Paracelsus, the Rosicrucians, and the
modern theosophists are no doubt amplifications of that popular belief,
which, though rather

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

undefined, resembles the theory of these mystics in its main outlines,
and was probably what suggested it to them.

These beings are held to be normally imperceptible to human senses, but
conditions may arise in which the' astral' plane' of the elementals and
that part of the 'physical plane' in which, if one may so express it,
some human being happens to be, may be in such a relation to one another
that these and other spirits may be seen and heard. Some such condition
is perhaps described in the story of Balaam the soothsayer, in that
incident when 'the Lord opened the eyes of the young man and he saw, and
behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about
Elisha', and possibly also in the mysterious 'sound of a going in the
tops of the mulberry trees' which David heard; but no doubt in these
cases it was angels and not elementals. It may also be allowable to
suggest, without irreverence, that the Gospel stories of the
Transfiguration and Ascension are connected with the same idea, though
the latter is expressed in the form of the geocentric theory of the
universe.

The Cornish pisky stories are largely made up of instances of contact
between the two 'planes', sometimes accidental, sometimes deliberately
induced by incantations or magic eye-salve, yet with these stories are
often mingled incidents that are not preternatural at all. How, when,
and why this belief arose, I do not pretend even to conjecture; but
there it is, and though of course the holders of it do not talk about
'planes', that is very much the notion which they appear to have.

I do not think that the piskies were ever definitely held to be the
spirits of the dead, and while a certain confusion has arisen, as some
of Mr. Wentz's informants show, I think it belongs to the confused
eschatology of modern Protestants. To a pre-Reformation Cornishman, or
indeed to any other Catholic, the idea was unthinkable. 'Justorum animae
in manu Dei sunt, et non tanget illos tormentum malitiae: visi sunt
oculis insipientium mori: illi autem sunt in pace,' and the
transmigration of the souls of the faithful departed into another order
of beings, not disembodied because never

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

embodied, was to them impossible. Such a notion is on a par with the
quaint but very usual hope of the modern 'Evangelical' Christian, so
beautifully expressed in one of Hans Andersen's stories, that his
departed friends are promoted to be 'angels'. There may be, perhaps, an
idea, as there certainly is in the Breton Death-Faith, that the spirits
of the faithful dead are all round us, and are not rapt away into a
*distant* Paradise or Purgatory. This may be of pre-Christian origin,
but does not contradict any article of the Christian faith. The
warnings, apparitions, and hauntings, the 'calling of the dead' at sea,
and other details of Cornish Death-Legends, seem to point to a
conception of a 'plane' of the dead, similar to but not necessarily
identical with that of the elementals. Under some quite undefined
conditions contact may occur with the 'physical plane', whence the
alleged incidents; but this Cornish Death-Faith, though sometimes, as
commonly in Brittany, presenting similar phenomena, has in itself
nothing to do with piskies, and as for the unfaithful departed, their
destination was also well understood, and it was not Fairyland. There
are possible connecting links in the not very common idea that piskies
are the souls of unbaptized children, and in the more common notion that
the *Pobel Vean* are, not the disembodied spirits, but the living souls
and bodies of the old Pagans, who, refusing Christianity, are
miraculously preserved alive, but are condemned to decrease in size
until they vanish altogether. Some authorities hold that it is the race
and not the individual which dwindles from generation to generation.

This last idea, as well as the name 'pixy', gives some probability to
the conclusion that, as applied to Cornwall, Mr. MacRitchie's theory
represents a part of the truth, and that on to an already existing
belief in elementals have been grafted exaggerated traditions of a dark
pre-Celtic people. These were not necessarily pygmies, but smaller than
Celts, and may have survived for a long time in forests and hill
countries, sometimes friendly to the taller race, whence come the
stories of piskies working for farmers, sometimes hostile,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

which may account for the legends of changelings and other mischievous
tricks. This is how it appears to one who knows his Cornwall in all its
aspects fairly well, but does not profess to be an expert in folk-lore.

BOSPOWES, HAYLE, CORNWALL,  
*July* 1910.

Our investigation of the Fairy-Faith in Cornwall covers the region
between Falmouth and the Land's End, which is now the most Celtic; and
the Tintagel country on the north coast. It is generally believed that
ancient Cornish legends, like the Cornish language, are things of the
past only, but I am now no longer of that opinion. Undoubtedly Cornwall
is the most anglicized of all Celtic lands we are studying, and its
folk-lore is therefore far from being as virile as the Irish folk-lore;
nevertheless, through its people, racially mixed though they are, there
still flows the blood and the inspiration of a prehistoric native
ancestry, and among the oldest Cornish men and women of many an isolated
village, or farm, there yet remains some belief in fairies and pixies.
Moreover, throughout all of Old Cornwall there is a very living faith in
the Legend of the Dead; and that this Cornish Legend of the Dead, with
its peculiar Brythonic character, should be parallel as it is to the
Breton Legend of the Dead, has heretofore, so far as I am aware, not
been pointed out. I am giving, however, only a very few of the Cornish
death-legends collected, because in essence most of them are alike.

### A CORNISH HISTORIAN'S TESTIMONY

I was privileged to make my first call in rural Cornwall at the pretty
country home of Miss Susan E. Gay, of Crill, about three miles from
Falmouth; and Miss Gay, who has written a well-known history of Falmouth
(*Old Falmouth*, London, 1903), very willingly accorded me an interview
on the subject of my inquiry, and finally dictated for my use the
following matter

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

Pixies as 'Astral Plane' Beings.--'The pixies and fairies are little
beings in the human form existing on the 'astral plane', who may be in
the process of evolution; and, as such, I believe people have seen them.
The 'astral plane' is not known to us now because our psychic faculty of
perception has faded out by non-use, and this condition has been brought
about by an almost exclusive development of the physical brain; but it
is likely that the psychic faculty will develop again in its turn.'

Psychical Interpretation of Folk-Lore.--'It is my point of view that
there is a basis of truth in the folk-lore. With its remnants of occult
learning, magic, charms, and the like, folk-lore seems to be the remains
of forgotten psychical facts, rather than history, as it is often
called.'

### PEASANT EVIDENCE FROM THE CRILL COUNTRY

Miss Gay kindly gave me the names of certain peasants in the Crill
region, and from one of them, Mrs. Harriett Christopher, I gleaned the
following material:--

A Pisky Changeling.--'A woman who lived near Breage Church had a fine
girl baby, and she thought the piskies came and took it and put a
withered child in its place. The withered child lived to be twenty years
old, and was no larger when it died than when the piskies brought it. It
was fretful and peevish and frightfully shrivelled. The parents believed
that the piskies often used to come and look over a certain wall by the
house to see the child. And I heard my grandmother say that the family
once put the child out of doors at night to see if the piskies would
take it back again.'

Nature of Piskies.--'The piskies are said to be very small. You could
never see them by day. I used to hear my grandmother, who has been dead
fifty years, say that the piskies used to hold a fair in the fields near
Breage, and that people saw them there dancing. I also remember her
saying that it was customary to set out food for the piskies at night.
My grandmother's great belief was in piskies and in spirits; and she
considered piskies spirits. She used to tell so many

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

stories about spirits \[of the dead\] coming back and such things that I
would be afraid to go to bed.'

### EVIDENCE FROM CONSTANTINE

Our witnesses from the ancient and picturesque village of Constantine
are John Wilmet, seventy-eight years old, and his good wife, two most
excellent and well-preserved types of the passing generation of true
Cornish stock. John began by telling me the following tale about an
*allée couverte*--a tale which in one version or another is apt to be
told of most Cornish megaliths:--

A Pisky-House.--'William Murphy, who married my sister, once went to the
pisky-house at Bosahan with a surveyor, and the two of them beard such
unearthly noises in it that they came running home in great excitement,
saying they had heard the piskies.'

The Pisky Thrasher.--'On a farm near here, a pisky used to come at night
to thrash the farmer's corn. The farmer in payment once put down a new
suit for him. When the pisky came and saw it, he put it on, and said:--

Pisky fine and pisky gay,  
Pisky now will fly away.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And they say he
never returned.'

Nature of Piskies.--'I always understood the piskies to be little
people. A great deal was said about ghosts in this place. Whether or not
piskies are the same as ghosts I cannot tell, but I fancy the old folks
thought they were.'

Exorcism.--'A farmer who lived two miles from here, near the Gweek
River, called Parson Jago to his house to have him quiet the ghosts or
spirits regularly haunting it, for Parson Jago could always put such
things to rest. The clergyman went to the farmer's house, and with his
whip formed a circle on the floor and then commanded the spirit, which
made its appearance on the table, to come down into the circle. While on
the table the spirit had been visible to all the family, but as soon as
it got into the ring it disappeared; and the house was never haunted
afterwards.'

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

### AT ST. MICHAEL'S MOUNT, MARAZION

Our next place for an investigation of the surviving Cornish Fairy-Faith
is Marazion, the very ancient British town opposite the isle called St.
Michael's Mount. (From Constantine I walked through the country to this
point, talking with as many old people as possible, but none of them
knew very much about ancient Cornish beliefs.) It is believed, though
the matter is very doubtful, that Marazion was the chief mart for the
tin trade of Celtic Britain, and that the Mount--sacred to the Sun and
to the Pagan Mysteries long before Caesar crossed the Channel from
Gaul--sheltered the brilliantly-coloured sailing-ships of the
Phoenicians. <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_63) In such a romantic
town, where Oriental merchants and Celtic pilgrims probably once mingled
together, one might expect some survival of olden beliefs and customs.

Piskies.--To Mr. Thomas G. Jago, of Marazion, with a memory extending
backwards more than seventy years, he being eighty years old, I am
indebted for this statement about the pisky creed in that locality:--'I
imagine that one hundred and fifty years ago the belief in piskies and
spirits was general. In my boyhood days, piskies were often called "the
mites" (little people): they were regarded as little spirits. The word
*piskies* is the old Cornish brogue for pixies. In certain grass fields,
mushrooms growing in a circle might be seen of a morning, and the old
folks pointing to the mushrooms would say to the children, "Oh, the
piskies have been dancing there last night."'

Two more of the oldest natives of Marazion, among others with whom I
talked, are William Rowe, eighty-two years old, and his married sister
seventy-eight years old. About the piskies Mr. Rowe said this:--'People
would go out at night and lose their way and then declare that they had
been pisky-led. I think they meant by this that they fell under some
spiritual influence--that some spirit led them astray. The piskies were
said to be small, and they were

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

thought of as spirits.' <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_64) Mr. Rowe's
sister added:--'If we as children did anything wrong, the old folks
would say to us, "The piskies will carry you away if you do that
again."'

Witch-Doctors.--I heard the following witch-story from a lawyer, a
native of the district, who lives in the country just beyond
Marazion:--'Jimmy Thomas, of Wendron parish, who died within the last
twenty-five years, was the last witch-doctor I know about in West
Cornwall. He was supposed to have great power over evil spirits. His
immediate predecessor was a woman, called the "Witch of Wendron", and
she did a big business. My father once visited her in company with a
friend whose father had lost some horses. This was about seventy to
eighty years ago. The witch when consulted on this occasion turned her
back to my father's companion, and began talking to herself in Cornish.
Then she gave him some herbs. His father used the herbs, and no more
horses died: the herbs were supposed to have driven all evil spirits out
of the stable.'

### IN PENZANCE: AN ARCHITECT'S TESTIMONY

Penzance from earliest times has undoubtedly been, as it is now, the
capital of the Land's End district, the Sacred Land of Britain. And in
Penzance I had the good fortune to meet those among its leading citizens
who still cherish and keep alive the poetry and the mystic lore of Old
Cornwall; and to no one of them am I more indebted than to Mr. Henry
Maddern, F.I.A.S. Mr. Maddern tells me that he was initiated into the
mysteries of the Cornish folk-lore of this region when a boy in Newlyn,
where he was born, by his old nurse Betty Grancan, a native Zennor
woman, of stock probably the most primitive and pure in the British
Islands. At his home in Penzance, Mr. Maddern dictated to me the very
valuable evidence which follows:--

Two Kinds of Pixies.--'In this region there are two kinds of pixies, one
purely a land-dwelling pixy and the other a pixy which dwells on the
sea-strand between high and low

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

water mark. <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_65) The land-dwelling pixy
was usually thought to be full of mischievous fun, but it did no harm.
There was a very prevalent belief, when I was a boy, that this
sea-strand pixy, called *Bucca*, <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_66) had
to be propitiated by a *cast* (three) of fish, to ensure the fishermen
having a good *shot* (catch) of fish. The land pixy was supposed to be
able to render its devotees invisible, if they only anointed their eyes
with a certain green salve made of secret herbs gathered from
Kerris-moor. <span id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_67) In the invisible
condition thus induced, people were able to join the pixy revels, during
which, according to the old tradition, time slipped away very, very
rapidly, though people returned from the pixies no older than when they
went with them.'

The Nurse and the Ointment.--'I used to hear about a Zennor girl who
came to Newlyn as nurse to the child of a gentleman living at
Zimmerman-Cot. The gentleman warned her never to touch a box of ointment
which he guarded in a special room, nor even to enter that room; but one
day in his absence she entered the room and took some of the ointment.
Suspecting the qualities of the ointment, she put it on her eyes with
the wish that she might see where her master was. She immediately found
herself in the higher part of the orchard amongst the pixies, where they
were having much *junketing* (festivity and dancing); and there saw the
gentleman whose child she had nursed. For a time she managed to evade
him, but before the *junketing* was at an end he discovered her and
requested her to go

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

home; and then, to her intense astonishment, she learned that she had
been away twenty years, though she was unchanged. The gentleman scolded
her for having touched the ointment, paid her wages in full, and sent
her back to her people. She always had the one regret, that she had not
gone into the forbidden room at first.'

The Tolcarne Troll.--'The fairy of the Newlyn Tolcarne <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68) was in some ways like the Puck of the
English Midlands. But this fairy, or troll, was supposed to date back to
the time of the Phoenicians. He was described as a little old
pleasant-faced man dressed in a tight-fitting leathern jerkin, with a
hood on his head, who lived invisible in the rock. Whenever he chose to
do so he could make himself visible. When I was a boy it was said that
he spent his time voyaging from here to Tyre on the galleys which
carried the tin; and, also, that he assisted in the building of
Solomon's Temple. Sometimes be was called "the Wandering One", or "Odin
the Wanderer". My old nurse, Betty Grancan, used to say that you could
call up the troll at the Tolcarne if while there you held in your hand
three dried leaves, one of the ash, one of the oak, and one of the
thorn, and pronounced an incantation or charm. Betty would never tell me
the words of the charm, because she said I was too much of a sceptic.
The words of such a Cornish charm had to pass from one believer to
another, through a woman to a man, and from a man to a woman, and thus
alternately.' <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_69)

Nature of Pixies.--'Pixies were often supposed to be the souls of the
prehistoric dwellers of this country. As such, pixies were supposed to
be getting smaller and smaller, until finally they are to vanish
entirely. The country pixies inhabiting the highlands from above Newlyn
on to St. Just were considered a wicked sort. Their great ambition was
to

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

change their own offspring for human children; and the true child could
only be got back by laying a four-leaf clover on the changeling. A
*winickey* child--one which was weak, frail, and peevish--was of the
nature of a changeling. Miner pixies, called "knockers", would accept a
portion of a miner's *croust* (lunch) on good faith, and by knocking
lead him to a rich mother-lode, or warn him by knocking if there was
danger ahead or a cavern full of water; but if the miner begrudged them
the *croust*, he would be left to his own resources to find the lode,
and, moreover, the "knockers" would do all they could to lead him away
from a good lode. These mine pixies, too, were supposed to be spirits,
sometimes spirits of the miners of ancient times.' <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_70)

Fairies and Pixies.--'In general appearance the fairies were much the
same as pixies. They were small men and women, much smaller than dwarfs.
The men were swarthy in complexion and the women had a clear complexion
of a peach-like bloom. None ever appeared to be more than
five-and-twenty to thirty years old. I have heard my nurse say that she
could see scores of them whenever she picked a four-leaf clover and put
it in the wisp of straw which she carried on her head as a Cushion for
the bucket of milk. Her theory was that the richness of the milk was
what attracted them. Pixies, like fairies, very much enjoyed milk, and
people of miserly nature used to put salt around a cow to keep the
pixies away; and then the pixies would lead such mean people astray the
very first opportunity that came. According to some country-people, the
pixies have been seen in the day-time, but usually they are only seen at
night.'

### A CORNISH EDITOR'S OPINION

Mr. Herbert Thomas, editor of four Cornish papers, *The Cornishman*,
*The Cornish Telegraph*, *Post*, and *Evening* 

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

Times, and a true Celt himself, has been deeply interested in the
folk-lore of Cornwall, and has made excellent use of it in his poetry
and other literary productions; so that his personal opinions, which
follow, as to the probable origin of the fairy-belief, are for our study
a very important contribution:--

Animistic Origin of Belief in Pixies.--'I should say that the modern
belief in pixies, or in fairies, arose from a very ancient Celtic or
pre-Celtic belief in spirits. Just as among some savage tribes there is
belief in gods and totems, here there was belief in little spirits good
and bad, who were able to help or to hinder man. Belief in the
supernatural, in my opinion, is the root of it all.'

### A CORNISH FOLK-LORIST'S TESTIMONY

In Penzance I had the privilege of also meeting Miss M. A. Courtney, the
well-known folk-lorist, who quite agrees with me in believing that there
is in Cornwall a widespread Legend of the Dead; and she cited a few
special instances in illustration, as follows:--

Cornish Legend of the Dead.--'Here amongst the fishermen and sailors
there is a belief that the dead in the sea will be heard calling if a
drowning is about to occur. I know of a woman who went to a clergyman to
have him exorcize her of the spirit of her dead sister, which she said
appeared in the form of a bee. And I have heard of miners believing that
white moths are spirits.'' <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_71)

### EVIDENCE FROM NEWLYN

In Newlyn, Mrs. Jane Tregurtha gave the following important testimony:--

The 'Little Folk'.--'The old people thoroughly believed in the *little
folk*, and that they gambolled all over the moors on moonlight nights.
Some pixies would rain down blessings and others curses; and to remove
the curses people

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

would go to the wells blessed by the saints. Whenever anything went
wrong in the kitchen at night the pixies were blamed. After the 31st of
October \[or after Halloween\] the blackberries are not fit to eat, for
the pixies have then been over them' (cf. the parallel Irish belief, [p.
38](ffcc121.htm#page_38)).

Fairy Guardian of the Men-an-Tol. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_72)--'At the Men-an-Tol there is supposed to
be a guardian fairy or pixy who can make miraculous cures. And my mother
knew of an actual case in which a changeling was put through the stone
in order to get the real child back. It seems that evil pixies changed
children, and that the pixy at the Men-an-Tol being good, could, in
opposition, undo their work.'

Exorcism.--'A spirit was put to rest on the Green here in Newlyn. The
parson prayed and fasted, and then commanded the spirit to *teeme* (dip
dry) the sea with a limpet shell containing no bottom; and the spirit is
supposed to be still busy at this task.'

Piskies as Apparitions.--When I talked with her in her neat cottage at
Newlyn, Miss Mary Ann Chirgwin (who was born on St. Michael's Mount in
1825) told me this:--'The old people used to say the piskies were
apparitions of the dead come back in the form of little people, but I
can't remember anything more than this about them.'

### AN ARTIST'S TESTIMONY

One of the members of the Newlyn Art School was able to offer a few of
his own impressions concerning the pixies of Devonshire, where he has
frequently made sketches of pixies from descriptions given to him by
peasants:--

Devonshire Pixies.--'Throughout all the west of Devonshire, anywhere
near the moorlands, the country people are

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

much given to belief in pixies and ghosts. I think they expect to see
them about the twilight hour; though I have not found anybody who has
actually seen a pixy--the belief now is largely based on hearsay.'

### TESTIMONY FROM THE HISTORIAN OF MOUSEHOLE

To Mr. Richard Harry, the historian of Mousehole, I am indebted for
these remarks about the nature and present state of the belief in pixies
as he observes it in that region:--

The Pixy Belief.--'The piskies, thought of as little people who appear
on moonlight nights, are still somewhat believed in here. If interfered
with too much they are said to exhibit almost fiendish powers. In a
certain sense they are considered spiritual, but in another sense they
are much materialized in the conceptions of the people. Generally
speaking, the belief in them has almost died out within the last fifty
years.'

### A SEAMAN'S TESTIMONY

'Uncle Billy Pender,' as our present witness is familiarly called, is
one of the oldest natives of Mousehole, being eighty-five years old; and
most of his life has been passed on the ocean, as a fisherman, seaman,
and pilot. After having told me the usual things about piskies, fairies,
spirits, ghosts, and the devil, Uncle Billy Pender was very soon talking
about the dead:--

Cornish Legend of the Dead.--'I was up in bed, and I suppose asleep, and
I dreamt that the boy James came to my bedside and woke me up by saying,
"How many lights does Death put up?" And in the dream there appeared
such light as I never saw in my life; and when I woke up another light
like it was in the room. Within three months afterwards we buried two
grand-daughters out of this house. This was four years ago.' When this
strange tale was finished, Uncle Billy Pender's daughter, who had been
listening, added:--'For three mornings, one after another, there was a
robin at our cellar door before the deaths, and my husband said he
didn't like that.'

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

Then Uncle Billy told this weird Breton-like tale:--'"Granny" told about
a boat named *Blücher*, going from Newlyn to Bristol with six thousand
mackerel, which put in at Arbor Cove, close to Padstow, on account of
bad weather. The boat dragged her anchors and was lost. "Granny"
afterwards declared that he saw the crew going up over the Newlyn Slip;
and the whole of Newlyn and Mousehole believed him.'

### TESTIMONY BY TWO LAND'S END FARMERS

In the Sennen country, within a mile of the end of Britain, I talked
with two farmers who knew something about piskies. The first one,
Charles Hutchen, of Trevescan, told me this legend:--

A St. Just Pisky.--'Near St. Just, on Christmas Day, a pisky carried
away in his cloak a boy, but the boy got home. Then the pisky took him a
second time, and again the boy got home. Each time the boy was away for
only an hour' (probably in a dream or trance state).

Seeing the Pisky-Dance.--Frank Ellis, seventy-eight years old, of the
same village of Trevescan, then gave the following evidence:--'Up on
Sea-View Green there are two rings where the piskies used to dance and
play music on a moonlight night. I've heard that they would come there
from the moors. *Little people* they are called. If you keep quiet when
they are dancing you'll see them, but if you make any noise they'll
disappear.' Frank Ellis's wife, who is a very aged woman, was in the
house listening to the conversation, and added at this point:--'My
grandmother, Nancy Maddern, was down on Sea-View Green by moonlight and
saw the piskies dancing, and passed near them. She said they were like
little children, and had red cloaks.'

### TESTIMONY FROM A SENNEN COVE FISHERMAN

John Gilbert Guy, seventy-eight years old, a retired fisherman of Sennen
Cove, offers very valuable testimony, as follows:--

'Small People'.--'Many say they have seen the *small* 

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

people here by the hundreds. In Ireland they call the *small people* the
fairies. My mother believes there were such things, and so did the old
folks in these parts. My grandmother used to put down a good furze fire
for *them* on stormy nights, because, as she said, "*They* are a sort of
people wandering about the world with no home or habitation, and ought
to be given a little comfort." The most fear of *them* was that they
might come at night and change a baby for one that was no good. My
mother said that Joan Nicholas believed the fairies had changed her
baby, because it was very small and cross-tempered. Up on the hill
you'll see a round ring with grass greener than anywhere else, and that
is where the *small people* used to dance.'

Danger of Seeing the 'Little People'.--'I heard that a woman set out
water to wash her baby in, and that before she had used the water the
*small people* came and washed their babies in it. She didn't know about
this, and so in washing her baby got some of the water in her eyes, and
then all at once she could see crowds of *little people* about her. One
of them came to her and asked if she was able to see their crowd, and
when she said "Yes," the *little people* wanted to take her eyes out,
and she had to clear away from them as fast as she could.'

### TESTIMONY FROM A CORNISH MINER

William Shepherd, a retired miner of Pendeen, near St. Just, where he
has passed all his life, offers us from his own experiences under the
earth the evidence which follows:--

Mine Piskies.--'There are mine-piskies which are not the "knockers".
I've heard old men in the mines say that they have seen them, and they
call them the *small people*. It appears that they don't like company,
for they are always seen singly. The "knockers" are spirits, too, as one
might say. They are said to bring bad luck, while the *small people* may
bring good luck.'

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

### TESTIMONY FROM KING ARTHUR'S COUNTRY

Leaving the Land's End district and South Cornwall, we now pass
northward to King Arthur's country. Our chief researches there are to be
made outside the beaten track of tourists as far as possible, in the
country between Camelford and Tintagel. At Delabole, the centre of this
district, we find our first witness, Henry Spragg, a retired
slate-quarry-man, seventy years old. Mr. Spragg has had excellent
opportunities of hearing any folk-lore that might have been living
during his lifetime; and what he offers first is about King Arthur:--

King Arthur.--'We always thought of King Arthur as a great warrior. And
many a time I've heard old people say that he used to appear in this
country in the form of a nath.' <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_73) This
was all that could be told of King Arthur; and the conversation finally
was directed toward piskies, with the following results:--

Piskies.--'A man named Bottrell, who lived near St. Teath, was pisky-led
at West Down, and when he turned his pockets inside out he heard the
piskies going away laughing. <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_74) Often
my grandmother used to say when I got home after dark, "You had better
mind, or the piskies will carry you away." And I can remember hearing
the old people say that the piskies are the spirits of dead-born
children.' From pixies the conversation drifted to the spirit-hounds
'often heard at night near certain haunted downs in St. Teath parish',
and then, finally, to ordinary Cornish legends about the dead.

Our next witnesses from Delabole are John Male, eighty-two

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

years old, one of the very oldest men in King Arthur's country, and his
wife; and all of Mr. Male's ancestors as far back as he can trace them
have lived in the same parish.

Piskies in General.--Mr. Male remarked:--'I have heard a good deal about
the piskies, but I can't remember any of the old women's tales. I have
heard, too, of people saying that they had seen the piskies. It was
thought that when the piskies have misled you they show themselves
jumping about in front of you; they are a race of little people who live
out in the fields.' Mrs. Male had now joined us at the open fire, and
added:--'Piskies always come at night, and in marshy ground there are
round places called pisky beds where they play. When I was little, my
mother and grandmother would be sitting round the fire of an evening
telling fireside stories, and I can remember hearing about a pisky of
this part who stole a new coat, and how the family heard him talking to
himself about it, and then finally say:--

Pisky fine and pisky gay,  
Pisky 's got a bright new coat,  
Pisky now will run away.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And I can just
remember one bit of another story: A pisky looked into a house and
said:--

All alone, fair maid?  
No, here am I with a dog and cat,  
And apples to eat and nuts to crack.'

Tintagel Folk-Beliefs.--A retired rural policeman of the Tintagel
country, where he was born and reared, and now keeper of the Passmore
Edwards Art Gallery at Newlyn, offered this testimony from
Tintagel:--'In Tintagel I used to sit round the fire at night and hear
old women tell so much about piskies and ghosts that I was then afraid
to go out of doors after darkness had fallen. They religiously believed
in such things, and when I expressed my doubts I was driven away as a
rude boy. They thought if you went to a certain place at a certain hour
of the night that you could there see the piskies as little spirits. It
was held that the piskies could lead you astray and play tricks on you,

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

but that they never did you any serious injury.' Of the Arthurian
folk-legend at Tintagel he said:--'The spirit of King Arthur is supposed
to be in the Cornish chough--a beautiful black bird with red legs and
red beak.'

We now leave Great Britain and cross the English Channel to Little
Britain, the third of the Brythonic countries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[166:1](ffcc125.htm#fr_63) *The New English
Dictionary*, s.v. *Pixy*, gives rather vaguely a Swedish dialect word,
*pysg*, a small fairy. It also mentions *pix* as a Devon Imprecation, 'a
pix take him.' I suspect the last is only an *umlaut* form of a common
Shakespearean imprecation. If not, it is interesting, and reminds one of
the fate of Margery Dawe, 'Piskies came and carr'd her away.'

<span id="fn_63"></span>[173:1](ffcc125.htm#fr_64) 'Some say that the
Phoenicians never came to Cornwall at all, and that their Ictis was
Vectis (the Isle of Wight) or even Thanet.'--HENRY JENNER.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[174:1](ffcc125.htm#fr_65) This is, I think, the
usual Cornish belief.'--HENRY JENNER.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[175:1](ffcc125.htm#fr_66) 'About Porth Curnow
and the Logan Rock there are little spots of earth in the face of the
granite cliffs where sea-daisies (thrift) and other wild flowers grow.
These are referred to the sea pisky, and are known as "piskies'
gardens."' --HENRY JENNER.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[175:2](ffcc125.htm#fr_67) I was told by another
Cornishman that, in a spirit of municipal rivalry and fun, the Penzance
people like to taunt the people of Newlyn (now almost a suburb of
Penzance) by calling them *Buccas*, and that the Newlyn townsmen very
much resent being so designated. Thus what no doubt was originally an
ancient cult to some local sea-divinity called *Bucca*, has survived as
folk-humour. (See Mr. Jenner's Introduction, p. 164.)

<span id="fn_67"></span>[175:3](ffcc125.htm#fr_68) 'Another version,
which is more usual, is that the pisky anointed the person's eyes and so
rendered itself visible.'--HENRY JENNER.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[176:1](ffcc125.htm#fr_69) This is a natural
outcropping of greenstone on a commanding bill just above the vicarage
in Newlyn, and concerning it many weird legends survive. In
pre-Christian times it was probably one of the Cornish sacred spots for
the celebration of ancient rites--probably in honour of the Sun--and for
divination.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[176:2](ffcc125.htm#fr_70) For more about the
Tolcarne Troll see chapter on Celtic Re-birth [p.
391](ffcc270.htm#page_391).

<span id="fn_70"></span>[177:1](ffcc125.htm#fr_71) Mr. John B. Cornish,
solicitor, of Penzance, told me that when he once suggested to an old
miner who fully believed in the 'knockers', that the noises they were
supposed to make were due to material causes, the old miner became quite
annoyed, and said, 'Well, I guess I have ears to hear.'

<span id="fn_71"></span>[178:1](ffcc125.htm#fr_72) For the Cornish
folk-lore already published by Miss M. A. Courtney, the reader is
referred to her work, *Cornish Feasts and Folk-Lore* (Penzance, 1890).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[179:1](ffcc125.htm#fr_73) A curious holed stone
standing between two low menhirs on the moors beyond the Lanyon Dolmen,
near Madron; but in Borlase's time (Cf. his *Antiquities of Cornwall*,
ed. 1769, p. 577) the three stones were not as now in a direct line. The
Men-an-Tol has aroused much speculation among archaeologists as to its
probable use or meaning. No doubt it was astronomical and religious in
its significance; and it may have been a calendar stone with which
ancient priests took sun observations (cf. Sir Norman Lockyer,
*Stonehenge and Other Stone Monuments*); or it may have been otherwise
related to a sun cult, or to some pagan initiatory rites.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[183:1](ffcc125.htm#fr_74) I asked what a nath
is, and Mr. Spragg explained:--'A nath is a bird with a beak like that
of a parrot, and with black and grey feathers. The naths live on
sea-islands in holes like rabbits, and before they start to fly they
first run.' The nath, as Mr. Henry Jenner informs me, is the same as the
puffin (*Fratercula arctica*), called also in Cornwall a 'sea parrot'.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[183:2](ffcc125.htm#fr_75) Sometimes it is
necessary to turn your coat inside out. A Zennor man said that to do the
same thing with your socks or stockings is as good. In Ireland this
strange psychological state of going astray comes from walking over a
fairy domain, over a confusing-sod, or getting into a fairy pass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Taking of Evidence: VII: In Brittany](ffcc126)
