[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ffcc270)  [Next](ffcc309) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

# SECTION III

## THE CULT OF GODS, SPIRITS FAIRIES, AND THE DEAD

### CHAPTER VIII

### THE TESTIMONY OF ARCHAEOLOGY  <span id="fr_467"></span>[1](#fn_428)

'As he spoke, he paused before a great mound grown over with trees, and
around it silver clear in the moonlight were immense stones piled, the
remains of an original circle, and there was a dark, low, narrow
entrance leading therein. "This was my palace. In days past many a one
plucked ere the purple flower of magic and the fruit of the tree of
life. . ." And even as he spoke, a light began to glow and to pervade
the cave*,* and to obliterate the stone walls and the antique
hieroglyphics engraven thereon, and to melt the earthen floor into
itself like a fiery sun suddenly uprisen within the world, and there was
everywhere a wandering ecstasy of sound: light and sound were one; light
had a voice, and the music hung glittering in the air . . . "I am
Aengus; men call me the Young. I am the sunlight in the heart, the
moonlight in the mind; I am the light at the end of every dream, the
voice for ever calling to come away; I am desire beyond joy or tears.
Come with me, come with me: I will make you immortal; for my palace
opens into the Gardens of the Sun, and there are the fire-fountains
which quench the heart's desire in rapture."'--A. E.

Inadequacy of Pygmy Theory--According to the theories concerning divine
images and fetishes, gods, daemons, and ancestral spirits haunt
megaliths--Megaliths are religious and funereal, as shown chiefly by
*Cenn* *Cruaich*, Stonehenge, Guernsey menhirs, monuments in Brittany,
by the circular fairy dance as an ancient initiatory sun-dance, by
Breton earthworks, archaeological excavations generally, and by
present-day worship at Indian dolmens--New Grange and Celtic Mysteries:
evidence of manuscripts; evidence of tradition--The Aengus Cult--New
Grange compared with Great Pyramid: both have astronomical arrangement
and same internal plan--Why they open to the sunrise--Initiations in
both--Great Pyramid as model for Celtic tumuli--Gavrinis and New Grange
as spirit-temples.

IN this chapter we propose to deal with the popular belief among Celtic
peoples that tumuli, dolmens, menhirs, and in fact most megalithic
monuments, prehistoric or historic,

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

are either the abodes or else the favourite haunts of various orders of
fairies--of pixies in Cornwall, of *corrigans* in Brittany, of little
spirits like pygmies, of spirits like mortals in stature, of goblins, of
demons, and of ghosts. Interesting attempts have been made to explain
this folk-belief by means of the Pygmy Theory of Fairies; and this
folk-belief appears to be almost the chief one upon which the theory
depends. <span id="fr_468"></span>[1](#fn_429) As was pointed out in the
Introduction ([p. xxiii](ffcc002.htm#page_xxiii)), possibly one of the
many threads interwoven into the complex fabric of the Fairy-Faith round
an original psychical pattern may have been bequeathed by a folk-memory
of some unknown, perhaps pygmy, races, who may have inhabited
underground places like those in certain tumuli. But even though the
Pygmy Theory were altogether accepted by us the problem we are to
consider would still be an unsolved one; for how explain by the Pygmy
Theory why the folk-memory should always run in psychical channels, and
not alone in Celtic lands, but throughout Europe, and even in Australia,
America, Africa, and India.

Archaeological researches have now made it clear that many of the great
tumuli covering dolmens or subterranean chambers, like that of Mont St.
Michel (at Carnac) for example, were religious and funereal in their
purposes from the first; and therefore the Pygmy Theory is far from a
satisfactory or adequate explanation. To us the inquiry is similar to an
investigation into the reasons why ghosts should haunt a house, whereas
the supporters of the Pygmy Theory forget the ghosts and tell all about
the people who may or who may never have lived in the haunted house, and
who built it. The megaliths, in the plain language of the folk-belief,
are haunted by fairies, pixies, *'corrigans,* ghosts, and various sorts
of invisible beings. Like the Psychical Research Society, we believe
there may be, or actually are, invisible beings like ghosts, and so
propose to conduct our investigations from that point of view.  <span
id="fr_469"></span>[2](#fn_430)

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

### MENHIRS, DOLMENS, CROMLECHS, AND TUMULI

To begin with, we shall concern ourselves with menhirs, dolmens,
cromlechs, and certain kinds of tumuli--such as are found at Carnac,
round which *corrigans* hold their nightly revels, and where ghost-like
forms are sometimes seen in the moonlight, or even when there is no
moon. M. Paul Sébillot in *Le Folk-lore tie France* <span
id="fr_470"></span>[1](#fn_431) has very adequately described the
numerous folk-traditions and customs connected with all such monuments,
and it remains for us to deal especially with the psychical aspects of
these traditions and customs.

The learned Canon Mahé in his *Essai sur les antiquités du département
du Morbihan* (p. 258), a work of rare merit, published at Vannes in
1825, holds that not only were the majestic Alignements of Carnac used
as temples for religious rites, but that the stones themselves of which
the Alignements are formed were venerated as the abodes of gods. <span
id="fr_471"></span>[2](#fn_432)

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And quoting
Porphyry, Iamblichus, Proclus, Hermes, and others, he shows that the
ancients believed that gods and daemons, attracted by sacrifice and
worship to stone images and other inanimate objects, overshadowed them
or even took up their abode in them. This position of Canon Mahé is
confirmed by a comparative study of Celtic and non-Celtic traditions
respecting the theory of what has been erroneously called
'idol-worship'. All evidence goes to show that idols so called, are
simply images used as media for the manifestation of ghosts, spirits,
and gods: the ancients, like contemporary primitive races, do not seem
ever to have actually worshipped such images, but simply to have
supplicated by prayer and sacrifice the indwelling deity. <span
id="fr_472"></span>[1](#fn_433) The ancient Egyptians, for example,
conceived the *Ka* or personality as a thing separable from the person
or body, and hence 'the statue of a human being represented and embodied
a human *Ka'.* Likewise a statue of a god was the dwelling-place of a
divine *Ka*, attracted to it by certain mystical formulae at the time of
dedication. <span id="fr_473"></span>[2](#fn_434) Though there might be
many statues of the same god no two were alike; each was animated by an
independent 'double' which the rites of consecration had elicited from
the god. These statues, being thus animated by a 'double', manifested
their will--as Greek and Roman statues are reported to have done--either
by speaking, or by rhythmic movements. The divine virtue residing in the
images of the gods was thought to be a sort of fluid, analogous to what
we call the magnetic fluid, the aura, &c. It could be transmitted

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

by the imposition of hands and by magic passes, on the nape of the neck
or along the dorsal spine of a patient; <span
id="fr_474"></span>[1](#fn_435) and no doubt extraordinary curative
properties were attributed to it.

Dr. Tylor has brought together examples from all parts of the globe of
so-called fetishism, which is veneration paid to natural living objects
such as trees, fish, animals, as well as to inanimate objects of almost
every conceivable description, including stones, because of the spirit
believed to be inherent or resident in the particular object; and he
shows that idols originally were fetishes, which in time came to be
shaped according to the form of the spirit or god supposed to possess
them. <span id="fr_475"></span>[2](#fn_436) Mr. R. R. Marett, the
originator of the pre-animistic theory, believes that originally
fetishes were regarded as gods themselves, and that gradually they came
to be regarded as the dwellings of gods. <span
id="fr_476"></span>[3](#fn_437) Certain well-defined Celtic traditions
entirely fit in with this theory:--e.g. Canon Mahé writes, 'In
accordance with this strange theory they (the Celts) could believe that
rocks, set in motion by spirits which animated them, sometimes went to
drink at rivers, as is said of the Peulvan at Noyal-Pontivy'
(Morbihan); <span id="fr_477"></span>[4](#fn_438) and I have found a
parallel belief at Rollright, Oxfordshire, England, where it is said of
the King Stone, an ancient menhir, and, according to some
folk-traditions, a human being transformed, that it goes down the bill
on Christmas Eve to drink at the river. In the famous menhir or
pillar-stone on Tara to this day, we have another curious example like
the moving statues in Egypt and the Celtic stones which move; for in the
*Book of Lismore* the wonderful properties of the *Lia Fáil*, the 'Stone
of Destiny', are enumerated, and it is said that ever when Ireland's
monarch stepped upon it the stone would cry out under him, but that if
any other person stepped upon it, there was only silence. <span
id="fr_478"></span>[5](#fn_439)

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

In the *Tripartite Life of St. Patrick* it is said that Ireland's chief
idol was at Mag Slecht, and by name 'Cenn Cruaich, covered with gold and
silver, and twelve other idols <span id="fr_479"></span>[1](#fn_440)
\[were\] about it, covered with brass'. When Patrick tried to place his
crosier on the top of Cenn Cruaich, the idol 'bowed westward to turn on
its right side, for its face was from the South, to wit, Tara ... And
the earth swallowed the twelve other images as far as their heads, and
they are thus in sign of the miracle, and he cursed the demon, and
banished him to hell'. <span id="fr_480"></span>[2](#fn_441) Sir John
Rhy^s points out that *Cenn Cruaich* means 'Head or Chief of the Mound',
and that the story of its inclined position suggests to us an ancient
and gradually falling menhir planted on the summit of a tumulus or hill
surrounded by twelve lesser pillar stones, all thirteen--itself a sacred
number--regarded as the abodes of gods or else as gods themselves; and
these gods are referred to as the demon exorcized from the place by
Patrick. The central menhir or Cenn Cruaich probably represents the
Solar God, and the twelve menhirs surrounding this probably represent
the twelve months of the year. <span id="fr_481"></span>[3](#fn_442) In
the *Colloquy* it is said that Patrick went his way 'to sow faith and
piety, to banish devils and wizards out of Ireland; to raise up saints
and righteous, to erect crosses, station-stones, and altars; also to
overthrow idols and goblin images, and the whole art of sorcery'. <span
id="fr_482"></span>[4](#fn_443) Welsh tradition says that St. David
split the capstone of the Maen Ketti Cromlech (dolmen) <span
id="fr_483"></span>[5](#fn_444) in Gower,

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

in order to prove to the people that there was nothing divine in
it. <span id="fr_484"></span>[1](#fn_445)

According to Geoffrey of Monmouth, Merlin constructed Stonehenge by
magically transporting from Ireland the 'Choir of the Giants',
apparently an ancient Irish circle of stones. <span
id="fr_485"></span>[2](#fn_446) The rational explanation of this myth
seems to be that the stones of Stonehenge, not belonging to the native
rocks of South England, as geologists well know, were probably
transported from some distant part of Britain and set up on Salisbury
Plain, because of some magical properties supposed to have been
possessed by them; and most likely 'the stones were regarded as divine
or as seats of divine power'. <span id="fr_486"></span>[3](#fn_447) And
further (thereby admitting the sacred purpose of the group), Sir John
Rhy^s sees no objection to identifying Stonehenge with the famous temple
of Apollo in the island of the Hyperboreans, referred to in the journal
of Pytheas' travels. <span id="fr_487"></span>[4](#fn_448) According to
Sir John Rhy^s's interpretation of this journal, 'the kings of the city
containing the temple and the overseers of the latter were the Boreads,
who took up the government in succession, according to their tribes. The
citizens gave themselves up to music, harping and chanting in honour of
the Sun-god, who was every nineteenth year wont himself to appear about
the time of the vernal equinox, and to go on harping and dancing in the
sky until the rising of the Pleiades.' <span
id="fr_488"></span>[4](#fn_448)

Two menhirs, roughly hewn to simulate the human form, are yet to be
found in Guernsey, Channel Islands, and formerly there was a similar
menhir in the Breton village of Baud, Morbihan. One of the Guernsey
figures was dug up in 1878 under the chancel of the Câtel Church, and
then placed in the churchyard, so that in this instance it seems

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

highly probable that the Christian Church was built on the site of a
sacred pagan shrine where a cult of stones once existed. The second
stone figure (a female), now standing as a gate-post in the churchyard
of St. Martin's parish, seems also to mark a spot where a pre-Christian
sanctuary was christianized. The country-people of the district, up to
the middle of the last century, considered it lucky to make floral and
even food offerings to this stone; but in 1860 the churchwarden to
destroy its sanctity had it broken in two, though now it has been
restored. <span id="fr_489"></span>[1](#fn_449) A like stone image was
the famous 'Vénus de Quinipilly', near Baud, Morbihan. At its base was a
stone trough, wherein until late into the seventeenth century the sick
were cured by contact with the image, and young men and maidens were
wont to bathe to secure love and long life. <span
id="fr_490"></span>[1](#fn_449)

Canon Mahé recorded: in 1825 that the folk-belief located ghosts and
spirits of the dead round megalithic monuments, more especially those
known to have been used for tombs, because the Celts thought them
haunted by ancestral spirits; <span id="fr_491"></span>[2](#fn_450) and
what was true in 1825 is true now, for there is still in Brittany the
association of ancestral spirits, *corrigans*, and other spirit-like
tribes with tumuli, dolmens, menhirs, and cromlechs, and, as we have
shown in chapter ii, a very living faith in the *Légende de la Mort*. In
describing some curious dolmens and cromlechs (stone circles) on the
summit of a mountain called the *Clech* or *Mané er kloch*, 'Mountain of
the bell,' at Mendon, Arrondissement de Lorient, Morbihan, the same
author gives it as his opinion, based on folk-traditions, that the
cromlechs, like others in Brittany, were places in which the ancient
Bretons practised necromancy and invoked the spirits of their ancestors,
to whom they attributed great power. He then records a very valuable and
interesting tradition concerning these monuments, which seems to
indicate clearly a close relationship between the *Poulpiquets* (another
name for *corrigans*), thought of as spirits by the peasants, and the
magical rites

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

conducted in the circles to invoke spirits or daemons:--'The people call
the stones which are found there the rocks of the *Hoséguéannets* or
*Guerrionets* (who are the same as the *Poulpiquets*); and they declare
that at fixed seasons they are in the habit of coming there to celebrate
their mysteries, which would prove that the race of these dwarfs is not
yet extinct, as I believed.' <span id="fr_492"></span>[1](#fn_451)

When we hear how *corrigans* dance the national Breton *ronde* or
*ridée*, at or in such cromlechs (themselves, like the dance, circular
in form), which with other ancient stone monuments and earthworks are
still believed to be the favourite haunts of these and kindred
spirit-tribes, we seem to see, in the light of what Canon Mahé records,
a psychical folk-memory about a goblin race who are now thought of as
frequenting the very places where anciently such spirits are said to
have been invoked by pagan priests for the purposes of divination.
Further, it appears that at these sacred centres, as the quoted
tradition indicates, in prehistoric times Brythonic initiations took
place, like those still flourishing among a few surviving American
Indian tribes (who also dance the circular initiation dance), and among
other primitive peoples, as we shall more adequately show in the chapter
on St. Patrick's Purgatory. The Breton dance is, therefore, most likely
the memorial of an ancient initiation dance, religious in character,
and, probably, in honour of the sun, being circular in the same way that
cromlechs dedicated to a sun-cult are circular. Stonehenge, the most
highly developed type of the cromlech, was undoubtedly a sun-temple; and
the dance anciently held in it, as described by Pytheas, in honour of
the god Apollo, was no doubt circular like the Breton national dance,
and, presumably, initiatory. <span id="fr_493"></span>[2](#fn_452)
Through a natural anthropomorphic

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

process, this circular initiation dance has come to be attributed to
*corrigans* in Brittany, to pixies in Cornwall and in England, and to
fairies in these and other Celtic countries. The idea of fairy tribes in
such a special relation may result from a folk-memory of the actual
initiators who, as masked men, represented spirits; and, if this be a
plausible view, then fairies may be compared to the initiators of
contemporary initiation ceremonies among primitive peoples and,
following Dr. Gilbert Murray's theory, to the Greek satyrs also. <span
id="fr_494"></span>[1](#fn_453)

A circular dance like the Breton one still survives among the peasantry
in the Channel Islands, at least in Guernsey, Alderney, and Sark, being
celebrated at weddings, but the revolution is now around a person
instead of a stone, and to this person obeisance is paid. This tends to
confirm our opinion that the dance is the survival of an ancient
sun-dance, the central figure being typical of the sun deity himself, or
Apollo; and if we design this dance thus ☉, we have the astronomical
emblem still used in all our calendars to represent the sun, one which
in itself preserves a vast mass of forgotten lore. Formerly in Guernsey,
the sites of principal dolmens (or cromlechs) and pillar-stones were
visited in sacred procession, and round certain of them the whole body
of pilgrims 'solemnly revolved three times from east to west'--as the
sun moves. <span id="fr_495"></span>[2](#fn_454)

Again, according to Canon Mahé,  <span id="fr_496"></span>[3](#fn_455)
the bases and lower parts of the sides of four singular barrows at
Coët-bihan blend in such a way as to form an enclosed court, and one of
the barrows has been pierced as though for a passageway into this court.
And he holds that it is more than probable that these ancient earthworks
when first they were raised, and others like them in various Celtic
lands, witnessed many mystic and religious rites and sacred tribal
assemblies. The supposition that the Coët-bihan earthworks

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

were originally dedicated to pagan religious usages is very much
strengthened by the fact that in very early times a Christian chapel was
erected near them. <span id="fr_497"></span>[1](#fn_456) Mont St. Michel
at Carnac is another example of a pagan tumulus dedicated to a Christian
saint; and, as Sir John Rhy^s says, the Archangel Michael appears in
more places than one in Celtic lands as the supplanter of the dark
powers. <span id="fr_498"></span>[2](#fn_457) Not only were tumuli thus
transferred by re-dedication from pagan gods to Christian saints, but
dolmens and menhirs as well.

Thus, for example, at Plouharnel-Carnac (Morbihan) there is a menhir
surmounted by a Christian cross, just as at Dol (Ille-et-Vilaine) a
wooden crucifix surmounts the great menhir, and at Carnac there is a
dolmen likewise christianized by a stone cross-mounted on the
table-stone. Again, M. J. Déchelette in his *Manuel d'Archéologie
Préhistorique, Celtique et* *Gallo-Romaine* (p. 380) describes a dolmen
at Plouaret (Cotes-du-Nord) converted into a chapel dedicated to the
Seven Saints, and another dolmen at Saint-Germain-de-Confolens
(Charente) likewise transformed into a place of worship. Miss Edith F.
Carey thus explains the dolmens in the Channel Islands:--'All our old
traditions prove our dolmens to have been the general rendezvous of our
insular sorcerers. In sixteenth and seventeenth century manuscripts I
have found these dolmens described as "altars of the gods of the sea ".
. . . One of our ancient dolmens retains its ancient name of De Hus, and
a fifteenth-century "Perchage" of Fief de Léree tells us that a now
destroyed dolmen on our western coast was dedicated to the same god, for
Heus or Hesus was the War-God of ancient Gaul.' <span
id="fr_499"></span>[3](#fn_458) The same writer describes excavations
made at De Hus by Mr. Lukis, and that he found in a side chamber there
two kneeling skeletons, one facing the north, the other the south. He
considered them to have been of young persons probably interred alive as
a funeral or propitiatory sacrifice to some tribal chief, or else to a
presiding deity of the dolmen. Beside a tomb of the early bronze age at
the bottom of a large

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

tumulus near Mammarlöf, in Skåne, Dr. Oscar Montelius, the famous
archaeologist of Sweden, discovered a circular stone altar on which
reposed charcoal and the remains of a burnt animal offering, which
undoubtedly was made to the dead. <span id="fr_500"></span>[1](#fn_459)
Schliemann made a parallel discovery in an ancient tomb at Mycenae,
Greece. <span id="fr_501"></span>[2](#fn_460) Curiously, in India to-day
the Dravidian tribes, a pygmy-like aboriginal race, worship at the
ancient dolmens in their forests and mountains, whether as at tombs and
hence to ancestral spirits or to gods is not always clear; but the
latter form of worship is probably more common, since Mr. Walhouse once
observed one of their medicine-men performing a propitiatory service to
the agricultural or earth deities. The medicine-man passed the night in
solitude sitting 'on the capstone of a dolmen with heels and hams drawn
together and chin on knee'--evidently thus to await the advent of the
Sun-god. <span id="fr_502"></span>[3](#fn_461)

All the above illustrations, mostly Celtic ones, tend to prove that
menhirs, certain tumuli and earthworks, cromlechs, and dolmens were
originally connected with religious usages, chiefly with a cult of gods
and fairy-like beings, and, though less commonly, with the dead. We pass
now to a special consideration of chambered tumuli, to show that the
same apparently holds true of them.

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

### NEW GRANGE AND CELTIC MYSTERIES

Though, as Professor J. Loth and other eminent archaeologists hold, all
tumuli containing chambers, and all *allées couvertes* of dolmens,
should be considered as designedly funereal in their purposes,
nevertheless certain of the greater ones, like New Grange and Gavrinis
may also properly be considered as places for rendering worship or even
sacrifice to the dead, and, perhaps, as places for religious pilgrimages
and sacred rites. This, too, seems to be the opinion of M. J. Déchelette
in his work on Celtic and Gallo-Roman archaeology, as he traces from the
earliest prehistoric times in Europe the evolution of the cult of the
dead according to the evidence furnished by the ancient megalithic
monuments. <span id="fr_503"></span>[1](#fn_462)

To begin with, let us take as a type for our study the most famous of
all so-called Celtic tumuli, that of New Grange, on the River Boyne in
Ireland. <span id="fr_504"></span>[2](#fn_463) In Irish literature New
Grange is constantly associated with the Tuatha De Danann as one of
their palaces, as our fourth chapter points out. Throughout our second
section generally, the testimony indicates that the essential nature of
these fairy-folk is subjective or spiritual. These two facts at the
outset are very important and fundamental, because we expect to show
even more dearly than we have just done in the case of menhirs, dolmens,
cromlechs, and smaller tumuli, that the folk-belief under consideration
is at bottom a psychical one, which has grown up out of a folk-memory of
the time when, as has just been said, Celtic or pre-Celtic tumuli were
used for interments, and probably certain ones among them as places for
the celebration of pagan mysteries.

Mr. George Coffey, the eminent archaeologist in charge of the
archaeological collections of the Royal Irish Academy, quotes from
ancient Irish records in the *Leabhar na h-Uidhre* and other manuscripts
to show that the early traditions

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

refer to the Boyne country as the burial-place of the kings of Tara, and
that sometimes they seem to associate *Brugh-na-Boyne* with the tumuli
on the Boyne, <span id="fr_505"></span>[1](#fn_464) but, no exact
identification being possible, it cannot be said with certainty whether
any one of the three great Boyne tumuli is meant. Even though it could
be shown conclusively that some mighty hero or king had actually been
entombed in New Grange, as is likely, in the earth behind the chamber,
under the chamber's floor, or even within the chamber, still, as we have
already pointed out, most of the great Irish heroes and kings were in
popular belief literally gods incarnate, and, therefore (as commonly
among all ancient peoples, civilized and non-civilized, who held the
same doctrine), the tomb of such a divine personage came to be regarded
as the actual dwelling of the once incarnate god, even though his bones
were long turned to dust. The *Book of Ballymote* strengthens this
suggestion: in one of its ancient Irish poems, by MacNia, son of Oenna,
preceded by this mystical dedication, 'Ye Poets of Bregia, of truth, not
false,' the wonders of the Palace of the Boyne, the Hall of the great
god Daghda, supreme king and oracle of the Tuatha de Danann, are thus
celebrated:--

Behold the *Sidh* before your eyes,  
It is manifest to you that it is a king's mansion,  
Which was built by the firm Daghda;  
It was a wonder, a court, an admirable hill. <span
id="fr_506"></span>[2](#fn_465)

It seems clear enough, from the old Irish manuscripts referred to by Mr.
Coffey, <span id="fr_507"></span>[3](#fn_466) that the Boyne country
near Tara was the sacred and religious centre of ancient Ireland, and
was used by the Irish in very much the same way as Memphis

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

and other places on the sacred Nile were used by the ancient Egyptians,
both as a royal cemetery and as a place for the celebration of pagan
mysteries. It is known that most of the Mysteries of Antiquity were
psychic in their nature, having to do with the neophyte's entrance into
Hades or the invisible world while out of the physical body, or else
with direct communication with gods, spirits, and shades of the dead,
while in the physical body; and such mysteries I were performed in
darkened chambers from which all light was excluded. These chambers were
often carved out of solid rock, as can be seen in the Rock Temples of
India; and when mountain caves or natural caverns were not available,
artificial ones were used (see chapter x).

The places, like Tara and Memphis, where the great men and kings of the
nations of antiquity were entombed, being the most sacred, were very
often, on that account, also the places dedicated to the most
magnificent temples and to the Mysteries, or among less advanced nations
to the worship of the dead. On every side of sacred Stonehenge,
Salisbury Plain is dotted with the burial mounds of unknown heroes and
chieftains of ancient Britain; while in modern times, even though the
Mysteries are long forgotten, Westminster Abbey, at the centre of the
planet's capital, has, in turn, become the hallowed Hall of the Mighty
Dead for the vast British Empire. In view of all these facts, after a
careful examination of the famous New Grange tumulus itself, and a study
of the references to it in old Irish literature, we are firmly of the
opinion that one cannot be far wrong in describing it as a spirit-temple
in which were celebrated ancient Celtic or pre-Celtic Mysteries at the
time when neophytes, including those of royal blood, were initiated; and
as such it is directly related to a cult of the Tuatha De Danann or
Fairy-Folk, of spirits, and of the dead. Nor are we alone in this
opinion. Mr. Coffey himself, we believe, is inclined to favour it; and
Mr. W. C. Borlase, author of *The Dolmens of Ireland*, who is quite
committed to it, says that it is not necessary, as some do, to consider
New Grange as an ancient abode of mortal men, for 'the spirits of the
dead, the fairies,

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

the *Sidhe*, might have had their *brugh*, or palace, as well'. <span
id="fr_508"></span>[1](#fn_467) And he points out that in the old Irish
manuscripts we have proof that it was supposed to be thus used. This
proof is found in the *Agallamh na Senórach* or 'Colloquy with the
Ancients' by St. Patrick, from the *Book of Lismore*, a
fifteenth-century manuscript copied from older manuscripts and now
translated by Standish H. O'Grady:--The three sons of the King of
Ireland, by name Ruidhe, Fiacha, and Eochaid, leaving their nurse's and
guardian's house, went to *fert na ndruadh*, i. e. 'grave of the
wizards', north-west of Tara, to ask of their father a country, a
domain; but he refused their request, and then they formed a project to
gain lands and riches by fasting on the *tuatha dé Danann* at the
*brugh* upon the Boyne: '"Lands therefore I will not bestow on you, but
win lands for yourself." Thereupon they with the ready rising of one man
rose and took their way to the green of the *brugh* upon the Boyne
where, none other being in their company, they sat them down. Ruidhe
said: "What is your plan to-night?" His brothers rejoined: "Our project
is to fast on the *tuatha dé Danann*, aiming thus to win from them good
fortune in the shape of a country, of a domain, of lands, and to have
vast riches." Nor had they been long there when they marked a
cheery-looking young man of a pacific demeanour that came towards them.
He salutes the king of Ireland's sons; they answer him after the same
manner. "Young man, whence art thou? whence comest thou?" "Out of yonder
*brugh* chequered with the many lights hard by you here." "What name
wearest thou?" "I am the Daghda's son Bodhb Derg; and to the *tuatha dé
Danann* it was revealed that ye would come to fast here to-night, for
lands and for great fortune."' Then with Bodhb Derg, the three sons of
Ireland's king entered into the *brugh,* and the *tuatha dé Danann* went
into council, and Midhir Yellow-mane son of the Daghda who presided
said: 'Those yonder accommodate now with three wives, since from wives
it is that either fortune or misfortune is derived.' And from their
marriages with

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

the three daughters of Midhir they derived all their wishes--territories
and wealth in the greatest abundance. 'For three days with their nights
they abode in the *sídh*.' 'Angus told them to carry away out of *fidh
omna*, i. e. "Oakwood," three apple-trees: one in full bloom, another
shedding the blossom, and another covered with ripe fruit. Then they
repaired to the *dún*, where they abode for three times fifty years, and
until those kings disappeared; for in virtue of marriage alliance they
returned again to the *tuatha dé Danann*, and from that time forth have
remained there.' <span id="fr_509"></span>[1](#fn_468)

Mr. Borlase, commenting on this passage, suggests its importance in
proving to us that during the Middle Ages there existed a tradition,
thus committed to writing from older manuscripts or from oral sources,
regarding 'the nature of the rites performed in pagan times at those
places, which were held sacred to the heathen mysteries'. <span
id="fr_510"></span>[2](#fn_469) The passage evidently describes a cult
of royal or famous ancestral spirits identified with the god-race of
Tuatha De Danann, who, as we know, being reborn as mortals, ruled
Ireland. These ancestral spirits were to be approached by a pilgrimage
made to their abode, the spirit-haunted tumulus, and a residence in it
of three days and three nights during which period there was to be an
unbroken fast. Sacrifices were doubtless offered to the gods, or
spirit-ancestors; and while they were 'fasted upon', they were expected
to appear and grant the pilgrim's prayer and to speak with him. All this
indicates that the existence of invisible beings was taken for granted,
probably through the knowledge gained by initiation.

The *Echtra Nerai* or the 'Adventures of Nera' (see this study, [p.
287](ffcc240.htm#page_287)), contains a description like the one above,
of how a mortal named Nera went into the Sidhe-palace at Cruachan; and
it is said that he went not only into the cave (*uamh*) but into the
*síd* of the cave. The term *uamh* or cave according to Mr. Borlase,
indicates the whole of the interior vaulted chamber, while the *síd* of
that vaulted chamber or *uamh* is intended to refer to 'the *sanctum
sanctorum*, or

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

penetralia of the spirit-temple, upon entering into which the mortal
came face to face with the royal occupants, and there doubtless he lay
fasting, or offering his sacrifices, at the periods prescribed'. <span
id="fr_511"></span>[1](#fn_470) The word *brugh* refers simply to the
appearance of a tumulus, or souterrain beneath a fort or rath, and
means, therefore, mansion or dwelling-place. <span
id="fr_512"></span>[2](#fn_471) And Mr. Borlase adds:--'I feel but
little doubt that in the inner chamber at New Grange, with its three
recesses and its basin, we have this *síd of the cave*, and the place
where the pilgrims fasted--a situation and a practice precisely similar
to those which, under Christian auspices, were continued at such places
as the Leaba Mologa in Cork, the original Patrick's Purgatory in Lough
Derg, and elsewhere. The practice of lying in stone troughs was a
feature of the Christian pilgrimages in Ireland. Sometimes such troughs
had served the previous purpose of stone coffins. It is just possible
that the shallow basins in the cells at Lough Crew, New Grange, and
Dowth may, like the stone beds or troughs of the saints, <span
id="fr_513"></span>[3](#fn_472) have been occupied by the pilgrims
engaged in their devotions. If so, however, they must have sat in them
in Eastern fashion.' <span id="fr_514"></span>[2](#fn_471)

Again, in the popular tale called *The Pursuit of Diarmuid and
Grainnè*, <span id="fr_515"></span>[4](#fn_473) Aengus, the son of the
Dagda, one of the Tuatha De Danann, is called Aengus-an-Bhrogha, and
connected with the *Brugh-na-Boinne*. In the tale Finn says, 'Let us
leave this tulach, for fear that Aengus-an-Bhrogha and the
Tuatha-De-Danann might catch us; and though we have no part in the
slaying of Diarmuid, he would none the more readily believe us.' Aengus
is evidently an invisible being with great power over mortals. This is
clear in what follows: he transports Diarmuid's body to the
*Brugh-na-Boinne*, saying, 'Since I cannot restore him to life, I will
send a soul into him, so that he may talk to me each day.' Thus, as the
presiding deity of the *brugh*, Aengus the Tuatha

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> De Danann could
reanimate dead bodies 'and cause them to speak to devotees, we may
suppose oracularly.' <span id="fr_516"></span>[1](#fn_474) In the
*Bruighion Chaorihainn* or 'Fort of the Rowan Tree', a Fenian tale, a
poet put Finn under taboo to understand these verses:--

I saw a house in the country  
Out of which no hostages are given to a king,  
Fire burns it not, harrying spoils it not.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Finn made
reply:--'I understand that verse, for that is the Brugh of the Boyne
that you have seen (perhaps, as we suggest, during an initiation),
namely, the house of Aengus Og of the Brugh, and it cannot be burned or
harried as long as Aengus (a god) shall live.' As Mr. Borlase observes,
to say that 'no hostages are given to a king' out of the *Brugh* is
probably another way of saying that the dead pay no taxes, or that being
a holy place, the *Brugh* was exempt. <span
id="fr_517"></span>[2](#fn_475) This last evidence is from oral
tradition, and rather late in being placed on record; but it is not on
that account less trustworthy, and may be much more so than the older
manuscripts. Until quite modern times the folk-lore of the Boyne country
still echoed similar traditions about unknown mystic rites, following
what O'Donovan has recorded; for he has said that Aenghus-an-Bhrogha was
considered the presiding fairy of the Boyne till quite within recent
times, and that his name was still familiar to the old inhabitants of
Meath who were then fast forgetting their traditions with the Irish
language. <span id="fr_518"></span>[3](#fn_476) And this tradition
brings us to consider what was apparently an Aengus Cult among the
ancient Celtic peoples.

### THE AENGUS CULT

Euhemeristic tradition came to represent the Great God Dagda and his
sons as buried in a tumulus, probably New Grange, and then called it, as
I found it called to-day, a fairy mound, a name given also to Gavrinis,
its Breton parallel. The older and clearer tradition relates how Aengus

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

gained possession of the *Brugh* of the Boyne, and says nothing about it
as a cemetery, but rather describes it as 'an admirable place, more
accurately speaking, as an admirable land, a term which betrays the
usual identification of the fairy mound with the nether world to which
it formed the entrance'. <span id="fr_519"></span>[1](#fn_477) The myth
placing Dagda at the head of the departed makes him 'a Goidelic Cronus
ruling over an Elysium with which a sepulchral mound was
associated'. <span id="fr_520"></span>[1](#fn_477) The displacement of
Dagda by his son makes 'Mac Oc (Aengus), who should have been the
youthful Zeus of the Goidelic world, rejoicing in the translucent
expanse of the heavens as his crystal bower', a king of the dead. <span
id="fr_521"></span>[1](#fn_477)

In Dun Aengus, the strange cyclopean circular structure, and hence most
likely sun-temple, on Aranmore, we have another example of the
localization of the Aengus myth. This fact leads us to believe, after
due archaeological examination, that amid the stronghold of Dun Aengus,
with its tiers of amphitheatre-like seats and the native rock at its
centre, apparently squared to form a platform or stage, were anciently
celebrated pagan mysteries comparable to those of the Greeks and less
cultured peoples, and initiations into an Aengus Cult such as seems to
have once flourished at New Grange. At Dun Aengus, however, the mystic
assemblies and rites, conducted in such a sun-temple, so secure and so
strongly fortified against intrusion, no doubt represented a somewhat
different mystical school, and probably one very much older than at New
Grange. In the same manner, each of the other circular but less
important cyclopean structures on Aranmore and elsewhere in west Ireland
may have been structures for closely related sun-cults. To our mind, and
we have carefully and at leisure examined most of these cyclopean
structures on Aranmore, it seems altogether fanciful to consider them as
having been *originally* and *primarily* intended as places of
refuge--*dúns* or forts. Yet, because the ancient Celts never separated
civil and religious functions, such probable sun-temples could have been
as frequently used for non-religious tribal assemblies

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

as for initiation ceremonies; and nothing makes it impossible or them to
have been in times of need also places for refuge against enemies. We
are led to this view with respect to Dun Aengus in particular, because
the Aengus of Aranmore is known as Aengus, son of Umór, and is
associated with the mystic people called the Fir Bolg; and, yet, as Sir
John Rhy^s thinks, this Aengus, son of Umór, and Aengus, son of Dagda,
are two aspects of a single god, a Celtic Zeus.  <span
id="fr_522"></span>[1](#fn_478) O'Curry's statements about Dun Aengus
seem to confirm all this; and there seems to have been a tale, now lost,
about the 'Destruction of *Dún Oengusa*' (in modern Irish *Dún
Aonghuis*), the Fortress of Aengus. <span
id="fr_523"></span>[1](#fn_478)

This sun-cult, represented in Ireland by the Aengus Cult, can be traced
further: Sir John Rhy^s regards Stonehenge--a sun-temple also circular
like the Irish *dúns* and Breton cromlechs--as a temple to the Celtic
Zeus, in Irish mythology typified by Aengus, and in Welsh by
Merlin:--'What sort of a temple could have been more appropriate for the
primary god of light and of the luminous heavens than a spacious,
open-air enclosure of a circular form like Stonehenge?' <span
id="fr_524"></span>[2](#fn_479) In Welsh myth, Math ab Mathonwy, called
also 'Math the Ancient', was the greatest magician of ancient Wales, and
his relation as teacher to Gwydion ab Don, the great Welsh Culture Hero,
leads Sir John Rhy^s to consider him the Brythonic Zeus, though Merlin
shares with him in I this distinction; <span
id="fr_525"></span>[3](#fn_480) and since the Gaelic counterpart of Math
is Aengus, a close study of Math might finally show a cult in his honour
in Wales as we have found in Ireland an Aengus Cult. <span
id="fr_526"></span>[4](#fn_481) We may, therefore, with more or less
exactness,

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

equate the Aengus Cult as we see it in Irish myth connected chiefly with
Dun Aengus and New Grange, with the unknown cult practised at
Stonehenge, and this in turn with other Brythonic or pre-Brythonic
sun-cults and initiations practised at Carnac, the great Celtic
Jerusalem in Brittany, and at Gavrinis. All this will be more clearly
seen after we have set forth what seems a definite and most striking
parallel to New Grange, both as a monument erected by man and, as we
maintain, as a place for religious mysteries--the greatest structure
ever raised by human effort, the Great Pyramid.

### NEW GRANGE AND THE GREAT PYRAMID COMPARED

Caliph Al Mamoun in A. D. 820, by a forced passage, was the first in
modern times to enter the Great Pyramid, and he found nowhere a mummy or
any indications that the structure had ever been used as a tomb for the
dead. The King's Chamber, so named by us moderns, proved to be a keen
disappointment for its first violator, for in it there was neither gold
nor silver nor anything at all worth carrying away. The magnificent
chamber contained nothing save an empty stone chest without a lid.
Archaeologists in Egypt and archaeologists in Ireland face the same
unsolved problem, namely, the purpose of the empty stone chest without
inscriptions and quite unlike a mummy tomb, and of the stone basin in
New Grange. <span id="fr_527"></span>[1](#fn_482) Certain Egyptologists
have supposed that some royal personage must have been buried in the
curious granite coffer, though there can be only their supposition to
support them, for they have absolutely no proof that such is true, while
there is strong circumstantial evidence to show that such is not true.
Sir Gardner Wilkinson in his well-known publications has already
suggested that the stone chest as well as the Great Pyramid itself were
never intended to hold a corpse; and

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

it is generally admitted by Egyptologists that no sarcophagus intended
for a mummy has ever been found so high up in the body of a pyramid as
this empty stone chest, except in the Second Pyramid. Incontestable
evidence in support of the highly probable theory that the Great Pyramid
was not intended for an actual tomb can be drawn from two important
facts:--(1) 'the coffer-has certain remarkable cubic proportions which
show a care and design beyond what could be expected in any
burial-coffer'--according to the high authority of Dr. Flinders Petrie;
(2) the chamber containing the coffer and the upper passage-ways have
ventilating channels not known in any other Pyramid, so that apparently
there must have been need of frequent entrance into the chamber by
living men, as would be the case if used, as we hold, for initiation
ceremonies. <span id="fr_528"></span>[1](#fn_483)

It is well known that very many of the megalithic monuments of the New
Grange type scattered over Europe, especially from the Carnac centre of
Brittany to the Tara-Boyne centre of Ireland, have one thing in common,
an astronomical arrangement like the Great Pyramid, and an entrance
facing one of the points of the solstices, usually either the winter
solstice, which is common, or the summer solstice. <span
id="fr_529"></span>[2](#fn_484) The puzzle has always been to discover
the exact arrangement of the Great Pyramid by locating its main
entrance. A Californian, Mr. Louis P. McCarty, in his recent (1907) work
entitled *The Great Pyramid Jeezeh*, suggests with the most logical and
reasonable arguments that the builders of the Pyramid have placed its
main entrance in an undiscovered passage-way beneath the Great Sphinx,
now half-buried in the shifting desert sands. If it can be shown that
the Sphinx is the real portal, and many things tend to

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

indicate that it is, the Great Pyramid is built on the same plan as New
Grange, that is to say, it opens to the south-east, and like New Grange
contains a narrow passageway leading to a central chamber.
South-easterly from the centre of the Pyramid lies the Sphinx, 5,380
feet away, a distance equal to 'just five times the distance of the
"diagonal socket length" of the Great Pyramid from the centre of the
Subterranean Chamber, under the Pyramid, to the supposed entrance under
the Sphinx' <span id="fr_530"></span>[1](#fn_485)--a distance quite in
keeping with the mighty proportions of the wonderful structure. And what
is important, several eminent archaeologists have worked out the same
conclusion, and have been seeking to connect the two monuments by making
excavations in the Queen's Chamber, where it is supposed there exists a
tunnel to the Sphinx. In all this we should bear in mind that the
present entrance to the Pyramid is the forced one made by the
treasure-seeking Caliph.

This very probable astronomical parallelism between the great Egyptian
monument and the Irish one would establish their common religious, or,
in a mystic sense, their funereal significance. In the preceding chapter
we have set forth what symbolical relation the sun, its rising and
setting, and its death at the winter equinox, were anciently supposed to
hold to the doctrines of human death and re-birth. Jubainville,
regarding the sun among the Celts in its symbolical relation to death,
wrote, 'In Celtic belief, the dead go to live beyond the Ocean, to the
south-west, there where the sun sets during the greater part of the
year.' <span id="fr_531"></span>[2](#fn_486) This, too, as M. Maspero
shows, was an Egyptian belief; <span id="fr_532"></span>[3](#fn_487)
while, as equally among the Celts, the east, especially the south-east,
where, after the winter solstice, the sun seems to be re-born or to rise
out of the underworld of Hades into which it goes when it dies, is
symbolical of the reverse--Life, Resurrection, and Re-birth. In this
last Celtic-Egyptian belief, we maintain, may be found the reason why
the chief megalithic monuments

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (dolmens, tumuli,
and alignements), in Celtic countries and elsewhere, have their
directions east and west, and why those like New Grange and Gavrinis
open to the sunrise, and on the Greek temples also opened to the
sunrise, and on the divine image within fell the first rays of the
beautiful god Apollo. <span id="fr_533"></span>[1](#fn_488) In the great
Peruvian sun-temple at Cuzco, a splendid disk of pure gold faced the
east, and, reflecting the first rays of the rising sun, illuminated the
whole sanctuary.' <span id="fr_534"></span>[2](#fn_489) The cave-temple
of the Florida Red Men opened eastward, and within its entrance on
festival days stood the priest at dawn watching for the first ray of the
sun, as a sign to begin the chant and offering. <span
id="fr_535"></span>[3](#fn_490) The East Indian performs the ablution at
dawn in the sacred Ganges, and stands facing the east meditating, as
Brahma appears in all the wondrous glory of a tropical sunrise. <span
id="fr_536"></span>[4](#fn_491) And in the same Aryan land there is an
opposite worship: the dreaded Thugs, worshippers of devils and of Kali
the death-goddess, in their most diabolical rites face the west and the
sunset, symbols of death.  <span id="fr_537"></span>[5](#fn_492) How
Christianity was shaped by paganism is nowhere clearer than in the
orientation of great cathedral churches (almost without exception in
England), for all of the more famous ones have their altars eastward;
and Roman Catholics in prayer in their church services, and Anglicans in
repeating the Creed, turn to the east, as the Hindu does. St. Augustine
says:--'When we stand at prayer, we turn to the east, where the heaven
arises, not as though God were only there, and had forsaken all other
parts of the world, but to admonish our mind to turn to a more excellent
nature, that is, to the Lord.' <span id="fr_538"></span>[6](#fn_493)
Though the Jews came to be utterly opposed to sun-worship in their later
history, they were sun-worshippers at first, as their temples opening
eastward testify. This was the vision of

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ezekiel:--'And,
behold, at the door of the temple of Jehovah, between the porch and the
Altar, were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the
temple of Jehovah, and their faces toward the east, and they worshipped
the sun toward the east.' <span id="fr_539"></span>[1](#fn_494)

All this illustrates the once world-wide religion of our race; and shows
that sun-cults and sun-symbols are derived from a universal doctrine
regarding the two states of existence--the one in Hades or the invisible
lower world where the Sun-god goes at night, and the other in what we
call the visible realm which the Sun-god visits daily. <span
id="fr_540"></span>[2](#fn_495) The relation between life and
death--symbolically figured in this fundamental conception forming the
background of every sun-cult--is the foundation of all ancient
mysteries. Thus we should expect the correspondences which we believe do
exist between New Grange and the Great Pyramid. Both alike, in our
opinion, were the greatest places in the respective countries for the
celebration of the Mysteries. High up in the body of the Great Pyramid,
after he had performed the long underground journey, typical of the
journey of Osiris or the Sun to the Otherworld or the World of the Dead,
we may suppose (knowing what we do of the Ancient Mysteries and their
shadows in modern Masonic initiations <span
id="fr_541"></span>[3](#fn_496)) that the royal or priestly neophyte
laid himself in that strange stone coffin without a lid, for a certain
period of time--probably for three days and three nights. Then, the
initiation being complete, he arose from the mystic death to a real
resurrection, a true child of Osiris. In New Grange we may suppose that
the royal or priestly neophyte, while he 'fasted on the Tuatha De Danann
for three days with their nights ',sat in that strange stone basin after
the manner of the Orient. <span id="fr_542"></span>[4](#fn_497)

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

The Great Pyramid seems to be the most ancient of the Egyptian pyramids,
and undoubtedly was the model for all the smaller ones, which 'always
betray profound ignorance of their noble model's chiefest internal
features, as well as of all its niceties of angle and cosmic harmonies
of linear measurement'. <span id="fr_543"></span>[1](#fn_498) Dr.
Flinders Petrie says:--'The Great Pyramid at Gizeh (of Khufu, fourth
dynasty) unquestionably takes the lead, in accuracy and in beauty of
work, as well as in size. Not only is the fine work of it in the
pavement, casing, King's and Queen's chambers quite unexcelled; but the
general character of the core masonry is better than that of any other
pyramid in its solidity and regularity.' <span
id="fr_544"></span>[2](#fn_499) And of the stone coffers he
says:--'Taking most of its dimensions at their maximum, they agree
closely with the same theory as that which is applicable to the
chambers; for when squared they are all even multiples of a square fifth
of a cubit. . . . There is no other theory applicable to every lineal
dimension of the coffer; but having found their proportion in the form
of the Pyramid, and in the King's Chamber, there is some ground for
supposing that it was intended also in the coffer, on just one-fifth the
scale of the chamber.' <span id="fr_545"></span>[2](#fn_499) And here is
apparent the important fact we wish to emphasize; the Great Pyramid does
not seem to have been intended primarily, if at all, for the entombment
of dead bodies or mummies while 'the numerous quasi-copies' were 'for
sepulchral purposes ' <span id="fr_546"></span>[3](#fn_500) without
doubt. There appears to have been at first a clear understanding of the
esoteric usage of the Great Pyramid as a place for the mystic burial of
Initiates, and then in the course of national decadence the exoteric
interpretation of this usage, the interpretation now popular with
Egyptologists. led to the erection of smaller pyramids for purposes of
actual burial. And may we not see in such pyramid-like tumuli as those
of Mont St. Michel, Gavrinis, and New Grange copies of these

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

smaller funeral pyramids; <span id="fr_547"></span>[1](#fn_501) or, if
not, direct copies, at least the result of a similar religious decadence
from the unknown centuries since the Great Pyramid was erected by the
Divine Kings of prehistoric Egypt as a silent witness for all ages that
Great Men, Initiates, have understood Universal Law, and have solved the
greatest of all human problems, the problem of Life and Death?

### GAVRINIS AND NEW GRANGE COMPARED

In conclusion, and in support of the arguments already advanced, I offer
a few observations of my own, made at Gavrinis itself, the most famous
tumulus in Continental Europe. After a very careful examination of the
interior and exterior of the tumulus, an examination extending over more
than twelve hours, I am convinced that its curious rock-carvings and
those in New Grange are by the same race of people, whoever that race
may have been; and that there is sufficient evidence in its construction
to show that, like New Grange, it was quite as religious as funereal in
its nature and use. The facts which bear out this view are the
following. First, there are three strange cavities cut into the body of
the stone on the south side of the inner chamber, communicating
interiorly with one another, and large enough to admit human hands; if
used as places in which to offer sacrifice to the dead or fairies, small
objects could have been placed in them. In the oldest extant authentic
records of them which I have found it is said of their probable
purpose:--

'Some people look on them as a double noose intended to strangle the
\[animal\] victims which the priest sacrificed; for others they are two
rings behind which the hands of the betrothed met each other to be
married.' <span id="fr_548"></span>[2](#fn_502) Their purpose is
certainly difficult enough to decipher, perhaps is undecipherable; but
one thing about them is certain, namely, that a close examination round
their exterior edges and

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

within them also shows the rock-surface worn smooth as though by ages of
handling and touching; and it is incontestable that this wearing of the
rock-surface by human hands could not have taken place had the inner
chamber been sealed up and used solely as a tomb. We suggest here, as
Sir James Fergusson in his *Rude Stone Monuments* (p. 366) has
suggested, that the inner chamber of Gavrinis was probably a place for
the celebration of religious rites: he advances the opinion that the
strange cavities were used to contain holy oil or holy water. There is
this second curious fact connected with the tumulus of Gavrinis. On
entering it--and it opens like New Grange to the sunrise, being oriented
43° 60" to the south-east <span id="fr_549"></span>[1](#fn_503)--one
finds placed across the floor of the narrow passage-way as slightly
inclined steps rising to the inner chamber three or four stones. Two of
them, now very prominent, form veritable stumbling-blocks, and the one
at the threshold of the inner chamber is carved quite like the lintel
stone above the entrance at New Grange. <span
id="fr_550"></span>[2](#fn_504) From what we know of ancient mystic
cults, there was a darkened chamber approached by a narrow passage-way
so low that the neophyte must stoop in traversing it to show
symbolically his humility; and as symbolic of his progress to the
Chamber of Death, the *Sanctum Sanctorum* of the spirit-temple, there
were steps, often purposely placed as stumbling-blocks. The Great
Pyramid, evidently, conforms to this mystical plan; and strikes one,
therefore, all the more forcibly as the most remarkable structure for
initiatory ceremonies ever constructed on our planet. Thus, Dr. Flinders
Petrie says:--'But we are met then by an extraordinary idea, that all
access to the King's chamber after its completion

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

must have been by climbing over the plug-blocks, as they lay in the
gallery, or by walking up the ramps on either side of them. Yet, as the
blocks cannot physically have been lying in any other place before they
were let down we are shut up to this view.' <span
id="fr_551"></span>[1](#fn_505) And as Egyptian tombs represented the
mansions of the dead, <span id="fr_552"></span>[2](#fn_506) just so
Celtic or pre-Celtic spirit-temples and place for initiations were
always connected with the Underworld of the Dead; and save for such
symbolical arrangements as we see in Gavrinis, and New Grange also, they
were undistinguishable from tombs used for interments only.

It seems to us most reasonable to suppose that if, as the old Irish
manuscripts show, there were spirit-temples or places for pagan funeral
rites, or rites of initiation, in Ireland, constructed like other tumuli
which were used only as tombs for the dead (because the ancient cult was
one of ancestor worship and worship of gods like the Tuatha De Danann,
and spirits), then there must have been others in Brittany also, where
we find the same system of rock-inscriptions. Further, in view of all
the definite provable relations between Gavrinis and New Grange, we are
strongly inclined to regard them both as having the same origin and
purpose, Gavrinis being for Armorica what New Grange was for Ireland,
the royal or principal spirit-temple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_428"></span>[397:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_467) In this chapter,
largely the result of my own special research and observations in Celtic
archaeology, I wish to acknowledge the very valuable suggestions offered
to me by Professor J. Lath, both in his lectures and personally.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[398:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_468) See David
MacRitchie, *Fians, Fairies, and Picts*; also his *Testimony of
Tradition*.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[398:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_469) Myers, in the
*Survival of the Human Personality* (ii. 55-6), shows that 'the <span
id="page_399">p. 399</span> departed spirit, long after death, seems
pre-occupied with the spot where his bones are laid'. Among contemporary
uncultured races there exists a theory parallel to this one arrived at
through careful scientific research, namely, that ghosts haunt graves
and monuments connected with the dead: according to the Australian
Arunta the 'double' hovers near its body until the body is reduced to
dust, the spirit or soul of the deceased having separated from this
'double' or ghost at the time of death or soon afterwards (Spenser and
Gillen, *Nat. Tribes of Cent. Aust.*).

<span id="fn_431"></span>[399:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_470) See *Les Grottes*,
t. i; *Les Menhirs, Les Dolmens, Les Tumulus*, and *Cultes et
observances mégalithiques,* t. iv.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[399:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_471) On April 17, 1909,
at Carnac, in a natural fissure in the body of the finest menhir at the
head of the Alignement of Kermario, I found quite by chance, while
making a very careful examination of the geological Structure of the
menhir, a Roman Catholic coin (or medal) of St. Peter. The place in the
menhir where this coin was discovered is on the south side about fifteen
inches above the surface of the ground. The menhir is very tall and
smoothly rounded, and there is no possible way for the coin to have
fallen into the fissure by accident. Nor is there any probability that
the coin was placed there without a serious purpose; and it is an object
such as only an adult would possess. An examination of the link
remaining on the coin, which no doubt formerly connected it with a
necklace or string of prayer-beads, shows that it has been purposely
opened so as to free it at the time it was deposited in the stone. Had
the coin been accidentally torn away from a chain or string of
prayer-beads the link would have presented a different sort of opening.
But it would be altogether unreasonable to suppose that by any sort of
chance the coin could have reached the <span id="page_400">p. 400</span>
place where I found it. I showed the coin to M. Z. Le Rouzic, of the
Carnac Museum, and he considers it, as I do, as evidence or proof of a
cult rendered to stones here in Brittany. The coin must have been
secretly placed in the menhir by some pious peasant as a direct *ex
voto* for some favour received or demanded. The coin is somewhat
discoloured, and has probably been some years in the stone, though it
cannot be very old. And the offering of a coin to the spirit residing in
a menhir is parallel to throwing coins, pins, or other objects into
sacred fountains, which, as we know, is an undisputed practice.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[400:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_472) Cf. A. C. Kruijt,
*Het Animisme in den Indischen Archipel*; quoted in Crawley's *Idea of
the Soul*, p. 133.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[400:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_473) Cf. Weidemann,
*Ancient Egyptian Doct. Immortality*, p. 21.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[401:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_474) Cf. Mahé, *Essai*.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[401:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_475) Tylor, *Prim.
Cult.*, <sup>4</sup> ii. 143 ff., 169, 172.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[401:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_476) Marett, *The
Threshold of Religion*, c. i.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[401:4](ffcc308.htm#fr_477) Mahé, *Essai,* p.
230.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[401:5](ffcc308.htm#fr_478) A famous
controversy exists as to whether the Coronation Stone now in Westminster
Abbey is the *Lia Fáil*, or whether the pillar-stone still at Tara is
the

Lia Fáil<u>.</u> See article by E. S. Hartland in *Folk-Lore*, xiv.
28-60.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[402:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_479) These 'idols'
probably were not true images, but simply unshaped stone pillars planted
on end in the earth; and ought, therefore, more properly to be
designated fetishes.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[402:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_480) Stokes, in *Rev.
Cell.*, i. 260; Rhy^s, *Hib. Lect.,* pp. 200-1.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[402:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_481) Very much
first-class evidence suggests that the menhir was regarded by the
primitive Celts both as an abode of a god or as a seat of divine power,
and as a phallic symbol (cf. Jubainville, *Le culte des menhirs dans le
monde celtique*, in *Rev. Celt.*, xxvii. 313). As a phallic symbol, the
menhir must have been inseparably related to a Celtic sun-cult; because
among all ancient peoples where phallic worship has prevailed, the sun
has been venerated as the supreme masculine force in external nature
from which all life proceeds, while the phallus has been venerated as
the corresponding force in human nature.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[402:4](ffcc308.htm#fr_482) *Silva Gadelica*,
ii. 137.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[402:5](ffcc308.htm#fr_483) Professor J. Loth
says:--'*Etymologiquement, le mot est composé de* CROM, *courbe, arque,
formant creux, convexe, et de* LLECH, *pierre plate*' (*Rev. Celt.*,
<span id="page_403">p. 403</span> xv. 223, *Dolmen*, *Leach-Derch*,
*Peulvan*, *Menhir*, *Cromlech*). In Cornwall, Wales, and Ireland,
instead of the peculiarly Breton word *dolmen* (composed of *dol* (for
*tol* = *tavl*\], meaning *table*, and of *men* \[Middle Breton
*maen*\], meaning *stone*) the word *cromlech* is used. *Cromlech* is
the Welsh equivalent for the Breton *dolmen*, but Breton archaeologists
use *cromlech* to describe a circle formed by menhirs.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[403:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_484) Rhy^s, *Hib.
Lect.*, pp. 193-4.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[403:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_485) Ib., p. 192; from
Sans-Marte's edition, pp. 108-9, 361.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[403:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_486) Ib., p. 193.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[403:4](ffcc308.htm#fr_488) Ib., pp. 194-5; cf.
*Bibliotheca* of Diodorus Siculus, ii. c. 47.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[404:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_490) Edith F. Carey,
*Channel Island Folklore* (Guernsey, 1909).

<span id="fn_450"></span>[404:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_491) Mahé, *Essai*, p.
198.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[405:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_492) Mahe, *Essai*, pp.
287-9.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[405:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_493) The place for
holding a *gorsedd* for modern Welsh initiations, under the authority of
which the Eisteddfod is conducted, must also be within a circle of
stones, 'face to face with the sun and the eye of light, as there is no
power to hold a *gorsedd* under cover or at night, but only where and as
long as the sun is visible in the heavens' (Rhy^s, *Hib. Lect.*, pp.
208-9; from *Iolo* MSS., p. 50).

<span id="fn_453"></span>[406:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_494) Recently before the
Oxford Anthropological Society, Dr. Murray argued that the satyrs of
Greek drama may originally have been masked initiators in Greek
initiations. (Cf. *The Oxford Magazine*, February 3, 1910, p. 173.)

<span id="fn_454"></span>[406:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_495) Edith F. Carey, op.
cit.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[406:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_496) Mahé, *Essai*, pp.
126-9.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[407:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_497) Mahé, *Essai*, pp.
126-9

<span id="fn_457"></span>[407:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_498) Rhy^s, *Arth.
Leg*., p. 339.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[407:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_499) Edith F. Carey, op.
cit.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[408:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_500) Montelius' *Les
Temps préhistoriques en Suède*, par S. Reinach, p. 126. (Paris, 1895).

<span id="fn_460"></span>[408:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_501) H. Schliemann,
*Mycenae* (London, 1878), p. 213.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[408:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_502) Walhouse, in
*Journ. Anthrop. Inst.*, vii. 21. These Dravidians are slightly taller
than the pure Negritos, their probable ancestors; and Indian tradition
considers them to be the builders of the Indian dolmens, just as Celtic
tradition considers fairies and *corrigans* (often described as dark or
even black-skinned dwarfs) to be the builders of dolmens and megaliths
among the Celts. Apparently, in such folk-traditions, which correctly or
incorrectly regard fairies, *corrigans,* or Dravidians as the builders
of ancient stone monuments, there has been preserved a folk-memory of
early races of men who may have been Negritos (pygmy blacks). These
races, through a natural anthropomorphic process, came to be identified
with the spirits of the dead and with other spiritual beings to whom the
monuments were dedicated and at which they were worshipped. Here, again,
the Pygmy Theory is seen at its true relative value: it is subordinate
to the fundamental animism of the Fairy-Faith.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[409:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_503) J. Déchelette,
*Manuel d'Archéologie préhistorique* (Paris, 1908), i. 468*,* 302, 308,
311, 576*,* 610, &c.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[409:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_504) This famous
chambered tumulus 'measures nearly 700 feet in circumference, or about
225 feet in diameter, and between 40 and 50 feet in height' (G. Coffey,
in *Rl. Ir. Acad. Trans.* \[Dublin, 1892\], xxx. 68).

<span id="fn_464"></span>[410:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_505) G. Coffey, in *RI.
Ir. Acad. Trans.*, xxx. 73-92.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[410:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_506) Fol. 190 b; trans.
O'Curry, *Lectures*, p. 505.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[410:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_507) Mr. Coffey quotes
from the *Senchus-na-Relec*, in *L. U.*, this significant passage:--'The
nobles of the Tuatha De Danann were used to bury at Brugh (i. e. the
Dagda with his three sons; also Lugaidh, and Oe, and Ollam, and Ogma,
and Etan the Poetess, and Corpre, the son of Etan)' (G. Coffey, op.
cit., xxx. 77). The manuscript, however, being late and directly under
Christian influence, echoes but imperfectly very ancient Celtic
tradition: the immortal god-race are therein rationalized by the
transcribers, and made subject to death.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[412:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_508) W. C. Borlase,
*Dolmens of Ireland* (London, 1897), ii. 346 n.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[413:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_509) As translated in
the *Silva Gadelica*, ii. 109-11.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[413:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_510) Borlase, op. cit.,
ii. 346-7 n.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[414:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_511) Borlase, op. cit.,
Ib. 346-7 n.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[414:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_514) Ib., ii. 347 n.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[414:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_513) A good example of a
saint's stone bed can be seen now at Glendalough, the stone bed of St.
Kevin, high above a rocky shore of the lake.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[414:4](ffcc308.htm#fr_515) Coffey, op. cit.,
xxx. 73-4, from R. I. A. MS., by Michael O'Longan, dated 1810, p. 10,
and translated by Douglas Hyde.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[415:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_516) Coffey, op. cit.,
xxv. 73-4, from R. I. A. MS. by Michael O'Longan, dated 1810, p. 10, and
trans. by Douglas Hyde.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[415:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_517) Borlase, op. cit.,
ii. 347 n.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[415:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_518) O'Donovan, *Four
Masters,* i*. 22* n.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[416:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_521) Rhy^s, *Hib.
Lect.*, pp. 148-50.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[417:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_523) Cf. O'Curry,
*Manners and Customs*, ii. 122; iii. 5, 74, 122; Rhy^s, *Hib. Lect.,*
pp. 150, 150 n.; Jubainville, *Essai d'un Catalogue*, p. 244.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[417:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_524) Rhy^s, *Hib.
Lect.*, p. 194.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[417:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_525) Math ab Mathonwy's
Irish counterpart is Math mac Umóir, the magician (*Book of Leinster*,
f. 9b; cf. Rhy^s, *Trans. Third Inter. Cong. Hist. Religions*, Oxford,
1908, ii, 211).

<span id="fn_481"></span>[417:4](ffcc308.htm#fr_526) Rhy^s, ib., pp.
225-6; cf. R. B. *Mabinogion*, p*.* 60; *Triads*, i. 32, ii. 20, iii.
90. A fortified hill-top now known as Pen y Gaer, or 'Hill of the
Fortress', on the western side of the Conway, on a mountain within sight
of the railway station of Tal y Cafn, Carnarvonshire, is regarded by Sir
John Rhy^s as the site of a long-forgotten cult of Math the Ancient.
(Rhy^s, ib., p. 225).

<span id="fn_482"></span>[418:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_527) This stone basin,
now in the centre of the inner chamber, seems originally to have stood
in the east recess, the largest and most richly inscribed. It is 4 feet
long, 3 feet 6 inches across, and 1 foot thick. (Coffey, op. cit., XXX.
14, 21).

<span id="fn_483"></span>[419:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_528) Cf. W. M. Flinders
Petrie, *The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh* (London, 1883), p. 201.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[419:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_529) All of the chief
megaliths of this type, together with the chief alignements, which I
have personally inspected--with the aid of a compass--in Ireland,
Scotland, Isle of Man, Wales, Cornwall, and Brittany, are definitely
aligned east and west. It cannot be said, however, that *all* megalithic
monuments throughout Celtic countries show definite orientation (see
Déchelette's *Manuel d'Archéologie*).

<span id="fn_485"></span>[420:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_530) L. P. McCarty, *The
Great Pyramid Jeezeh* (San Francisco, 1907), p. 402.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[420:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_531) Jubainville, *Le
Cycle Myth. Irl.*, p. 28.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[420:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_532) Maspero*, Les
Contes populaires de l'Égypte Ancienne*, <sup>3</sup> p. 74 n.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[421:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_533) Tylor, *Prim.
Cult.*, <sup>4</sup> ii. 426.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[421:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_534) W. H. Prescott,
*Conquest of Peru*, i, c. 3.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[421:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_535) Rochefort, *Iles
Antilles*, p. 365; cf. Tylor, *P.C.*, <sup>4</sup> ii. 424.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[421:4](ffcc308.htm#fr_536) Colebrooke,
*Essays*, vols. i, iv, v; cf. Tylor, *P.C.*, <sup>4</sup> 425.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[421:5](ffcc308.htm#fr_537) *Ilus. Hist. and
Pract. of Thugs* (London, 1837), p. 4; cf. Tylor, *P.C.*, <sup>4</sup>
ii. 425.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[421:6](ffcc308.htm#fr_538) Augustin. *de Serm.
Dom. in Monte*, ii. 5; cf. Tylor, *P.C.*, <sup>4</sup> ii. 427-8.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[422:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_539) Ezek. viii. 16. The
popular opinion that Christians face the east in prayer, or have altars
eastward because Jerusalem is eastward, does not fit in with facts.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[422:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_540) Cf. Lenormant,
*Chaldean Magic*, p. 88; also Tylor, Prim. Cult.,<sup>4</sup> ii. 48-9.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[422:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_541) Though not a Mason,
the writer draws his knowledge from Masons of the highest rank, and from
published works by Masons like Mr. Carty's *The Great Pyramid Jeezeh*.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[422:4](ffcc308.htm#fr_542) Cf. Borlase,
*Dolmens of Ireland*, ii. 347 n.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[423:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_543) C. Piazzi Smyth,
*Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid* (London, 1890).

<span id="fn_499"></span>[423:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_545) Flinders Petrie,
*The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh*, pp. 169, 222.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[423:3](ffcc308.htm#fr_546) C. Piazzi Smyth,
op. cit.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[424:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_547) In 1770, when New
Grange apparently was not covered with a growth of trees as now,
Governor Pownall visited it and described it as like a pyramid in
general outline: 'The pyramid in its present state' is 'but a ruin of
what it was' (Coffey, op. cit., xxx. 13).

<span id="fn_502"></span>[424:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_548) Le Dr. G. de C.,
*Locmariaquer et Gavr'inis* (Vannes, 1876), p. 18.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[425:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_549) According to Le Dr.
G. de C., op. cit., p. 18.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[425:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_550) Mr. Coffey says of
similar details in Irish tumuli:--'In the construction of such chambers
it is usual to find a sort of sill or low stone placed across the
entrance into the main chamber, and at the openings into the smaller
chambers or recesses; such stones also occur laid at intervals across
the bottom of the passages. This forms a marked feature in the
construction at Dowth, and in the cairns on the Loughcrew Hills, but is
wholly absent at New Grange' (op. cit., xxx. 15). New Grange, however,
has suffered more or less from vandalism, and originally may have
contained similar stone sills.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[426:1](ffcc308.htm#fr_551) Flinders Petrie,
*The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh*, p. 216.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[426:2](ffcc308.htm#fr_552) Maspero, op. cit.,
p. 69 n., &c. The world-wide anthropomorphic tendency to construct tombs
for the gods and for the dead after the plan of earthly dwellings is as
evident in the excavations at Mycenae as in ancient Egypt and in Celtic
lands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Testimony of Paganism](ffcc309)
