[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ffcc123)  [Next](ffcc125.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V. IN WALES

Introduction by The Right Hon. SIR JOHN RHY^S, M.A.; D.Litt., F.B.A.,
Hon. LL.D. of the University of Edinburgh; Professor of Celtic in the
University of Oxford; Principal of Jesus College; author of *Celtic
Folklore, Welsh and Manx*, &c.

The folk-lore of Wales in as far as it concerns the Fairies consists of
a very few typical tales, such as:--

\(1\) The Fairy Dance and the usual entrapping of a youth, who dances
with the Little People for a long time, while he supposes it only a few
minutes, and who if not rescued is taken by them.

\(2\) There are other ways in which recruits may be led into Fairyland
and induced to marry fairy maidens, and any one so led away is
practically lost to his kith and kin, for even if he be allowed to visit
them, the visit is mostly cut short in one way or another.

\(3\) A man catches a fairy woman and marries her. She proves to be an
excellent housewife, but usually she has had put into the
marriage-contract certain conditions which, if broken, inevitably
release her from the union, and when so released she hurries away
instantly, never to return, unless it be now and then to visit her
children. One of the conditions, especially in North Wales, is that the
husband should never touch her with iron. But in the story of the Lady
of Llyn y Fan Fach, in Carmarthenshire, the condition is that he must
not strike the wife without a cause three times, the striking being
interpreted to include any slight tapping, say, on the shoulder. This
story is one of the most remarkable on record in Wales, and it recalls
the famous tale of Undine, published in German many years ago by

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> De La Motte
Fouqué. It is not known where he found it, or whether the people among
whom it was current were pure Germans or of Celtic extraction.

\(4\) The Fairies were fond of stealing nice healthy babies and of
leaving in their place their own sallow offspring. The stories of bow
the right child might be recovered take numerous forms; and some of
these stories suggest how weak and sickly children became the objects of
systematic cruelty at the hands of even their own parents. The
changeling was usually an old man, and many were the efforts made to get
him to betray his identity.

\(5\) There is a widespread story of the fairy husband procuring for his
wife the attendance of a human midwife. The latter was given a certain
ointment to apply to the baby's eyes when she dressed it. She was not to
touch either of her own eyes with it, but owing to an unfailing accident
she does, and with the eye so touched she is enabled to see the fairies
in their proper shape and form. This has consequences: The fairy husband
pays the midwife well, and discharges her. She goes to a fair or market
one day and observes her old master stealing goods from a stall, and
makes herself known to him. He asks her with which eye she sees him. She
tells him, and the eye to which he objects he instantly blinds.

\(6\) Many are the stories about the fairies coming into houses at night
to wash and dress their children after everybody is gone to bed. A
servant-maid who knows her business leaves a vessel full of water for
them, and takes care that the house is neat and tidy, and she then
probably finds in the morning some fairy gift left her, whereas if the
house be untidy and the water dirty, they will pinch her in her sleep,
and leave her black and blue.

\(7\) The fairies were not strong in their household arrangements, so it
was not at all unusual for them to come to the farm-houses to borrow
what was wanting to them.

In the neighbourhood of Snowdon the fairies were believed to live
beneath the lakes, from which they sometimes came forth, especially on
misty days, and children used to be warned not to stray away from their
homes in that sort of

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

weather, lest they should be kidnapped by them. These fairies were not
Christians, and they were great thieves. They were fond of bright
colours. They were sharp of hearing, and no word that reached the wind
would escape them. If a fairy's proper name was discovered, the fairy to
whom it belonged felt baffled. <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_46.md)

Some characteristics of the fairies seem to argue an ancient race, while
other characteristics betray their origin in the workshop of the
imagination; but generally speaking, the fairies are heterogeneous,
consisting partly of the divinities of glens and forests and mountains,
and partly of an early race of men more or less caricatured and equipped
by fable with impossible attributes. <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_47.md)

JESUS COLLEGE, OXFORD,  
*October* 1910.

Our field of research in the Land of Arthur includes all the coast
counties save Cardiganshire, from Anglesey on the north to
Glamorganshire on the south. At the very beginning of our investigation
of the belief in the *Tylwyth Teg*,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

or 'Fair Folk' in the Isle of Anglesey or Mona, the ancient stronghold
of the Druids, we shall see dearly that the testimony offered by
thoroughly reliable and prominent native witnesses is surprisingly
uniform, and essentially animistic in its nature; and in passing
southward to the end of Wales we shall find the Welsh Fairy-Faith with
this same uniformity and exhibiting the same animistic background
everywhere we go.

### TESTIMONY OF AN ANGLESEY BARD

Mr. John Louis Jones, of Gaerwen, Anglesey, a native bard who has taken
prizes in various Eisteddfods, testifies as follows:--

Tylwyth Teg's Visits.--'When I was a boy here on the island, the
*Tylwyth Teg* were described as a race of little beings no larger than
children six or seven years old, who visited farm-houses at night after
all the family were abed. No matter how securely dosed a house might be,
the *Tylwyth Teg* had no trouble to get in. I remember how the old folk
used to make the house comfortable and put fresh coals on the fire,
saying, "Perhaps the *Tylwyth Teg* will come tonight." Then the *Tylwyth
Teg*, when they did come, would look round the room and say, "What a
clean beautiful place this is!" And all the while the old folk in bed
were listening. Before departing from such a clean house the *Tylwyth
Teg* always left a valuable present for the family.'

Fairy Wife and Iron Taboo.--'A young man once caught one of the *Tylwyth
Teg* women, and she agreed to live with him on condition that he should
never touch her with iron.

One day she went to a field with him to catch a horse, but in catching
the horse he threw the bridle in such a way that the bit touched the
*Tylwyth Teg* woman, and all at once she was gone. As this story
indicates, the *Tylwyth Teg* could make themselves invisible. I think
they could be seen by some people and not by other people. The old folk
thought them a kind of spirit race from a spirit world.'

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

### EVIDENCE FROM CENTRAL ANGLESEY

Owing to the very kindly assistance of Mr. E. H. Thomas, of Llangefni,
who introduced me to the oldest inhabitants of his town, in their own
homes and elsewhere, and then acted as interpreter whenever Welsh alone
was spoken, I gleaned very clear evidence from that part of Central
Anglesey. Seven witnesses, two of whom were women, ranging in age from
seventy-two to eighty-nine years, were thus interviewed, and each of
them stated that in their childhood the belief in the *Tylwyth Teg* as a
non-human race of good little people--by one witness compared to singing
angels--was general. Mr. John Jones, the oldest of the seven, among much
else, said in Welsh:--'I believe personally that the *Tylwyth Teg* are
still existing; but people can't see them. I have heard of two or three
persons being together and one only having been able to see the *Tylwyth
Teg*.'

### TESTIMONY FROM TWO ANGLESEY CENTENARIANS

Perhaps nowhere else in Celtic lands could there be found as witnesses
two sisters equal in age to Miss Mary Owen and Mrs. Betsy Thomas, in
their hundred and third and hundredth year respectively (in 1909). They
live a quiet life on their mountain-side farm overlooking the sea, in
the beautiful country near Pentraeth, quite away from the rush and noise
of the great world of commercial activity; and they speak only the
tongue which their prehistoric Kimric ancestors spoke before Roman, or
Saxon, or Norman came to Britain. Mr. W. Jones, of Plas Tinon, their
neighbour, who knows English and Welsh well, acted as interpreter. The
elder sister testified first:--

'Tylwyth Teg's' Nature.--'There were many of the *Tylwyth Teg* on the
Llwydiarth Mountain above here, and round the Llwydiarth Lake where they
used to dance; and whenever the prices at the Llangefni market were to
be high they would chatter very much at night. They appeared only after
dark; and all the good they ever did was singing

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

and dancing. Ann Jones, whom I knew very well, used often to see the
*Tylwyth Teg* dancing and singing, but if she then went up to them they
would disappear. She told me they are an invisible people, and very
small. Many others besides Ann Jones have seen the *Tylwyth Teg* in
these mountains, and have heard their music and song. The ordinary
opinion was that the *Tylwyth Teg* are a race of spirits. I believe in
them as an invisible race of good little people.'

Fairy Midwife and Magic Oil.--'The *Tylwyth Teg* had a kind of magic
oil, and I remember this story about it. A farmer went to Llangefni to
fetch a woman to nurse his wife about to become a mother, and he found
one of the *Tylwyth Teg*, who came with him on the back of his horse.
Arrived at the farm-house, the fairy woman looked at the wife, and
giving the farmer some oil told him to wash the baby in it as soon as it
was born. Then the fairy woman disappeared. The farmer followed the
advice, and what did he do in washing the baby but get some oil on one
of his own eyes. Suddenly he could see the *Tylwyth Teg*, for the oil
had given him the second-sight. Some time later the farmer was in
Llangefni again, and saw the same fairy woman who had given him the oil.
"How is your wife getting on?" she asked him. "She is getting on very
well," he replied. Then the fairy woman added, "Tell me with which eye
you see me best." "With this one," he said, pointing to the eye he had
rubbed with the oil. And the fairy woman put her stick in that eye, and
the farmer never saw with it again.' <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_48.md)

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

Seeing 'Tylwyth Teg'.--The younger sister's testimony is as follows:--'I
saw one of the *Tylwyth Teg* about sixty years ago, near the Tynymyndd
Farm, as I was passing by at night. He was like a little man. When I
approached him he disappeared suddenly. I have heard about the dancing
and singing of the *Tylwyth Teg*, but never have heard the music myself.
The old people said the *Tylwyth Teg* could appear and disappear when
they liked; and I think as the old people did, that they are some sort
of spirits.'

### TESTIMONY FROM AN ANGLESEY SEERESS

At Pentraeth, Mr. Gwilyn Jones said to me:--'It always was and still is
the opinion that the *Tylwyth Teg* are a race of spirits. Some people
think them small in size, but the one my mother saw was ordinary human
size.' At this, I immediately asked Mr. Jones if his mother was still
living, and he replying that she was, gave me her address in Llanfair.
So I went directly to interview Mr. Jones's mother, Mrs. Catherine
Jones, and this is the story about the one of the *Tylwyth Teg* she
saw:--

'Tylwyth Teg' Apparition.--'I was coming home at about half-past ten at
night from Cemaes, on the path to Simdda Wen, where I was in service,
when there appeared just before me a very pretty young lady of ordinary
size. I had no fear, and when I came up to her put out my hand to touch
her, but my hand and arm went right through her form. I could not
understand this, and so tried to touch her repeatedly with the same
result; there was no solid substance in the body, yet it remained beside
me, and was as beautiful a young lady as I ever saw. When I reached the
door of the house where I was to stop, she was still with me. Then I
said "Good night" to her. No response being made, I asked, "Why do you
not speak?"

And at this she disappeared. Nothing happened afterwards, and I always
put this beautiful young lady down as one of the *Tylwyth Teg*. There
was much talk about my experience when I reported it, and the
neighbours, like myself,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

thought I had seen one of the *Tylwyth Teg*. I was about twenty-four
years old at the time of this incident.' <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_49.md)

### TESTIMONY FROM A PROFESSOR OF WELSH

Just before crossing the Menai Straits I had the good fortune to meet,
at his home in Llanfair, Mr. J. Morris Jones, M.A. (Oxon.), Professor of
Welsh in the University College at Bangor, and he, speaking of the
fairy-belief in Anglesey as he remembers it from boyhood days, said:--

'Tylwyth Teg.'--'In most of the tales I heard repeated when I was a boy,
I am quite certain the implication was that the *Tylwyth Teg* were a
kind of spirit race having human characteristics, who could at will
suddenly appear and suddenly disappear. They were generally supposed to
live underground, and to come forth on moonlight nights, dressed in
gaudy colours (chiefly in red), to dance in circles in grassy fields. I
cannot remember having heard changeling stories here in the Island: I
think the *Tylwyth Teg* were generally looked upon as kind and
good-natured, though revengeful if not well treated. And they were
believed to have plenty of money at their command, which they could
bestow on people whom they liked.'

### EVIDENCE FROM NORTH CARNARVONSHIRE

Upon leaving Anglesey I undertook some investigation of the Welsh
fairy-belief in the country between Bangor and Carnarvon. From the
oldest Welsh people of Treborth

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I heard the same
sort of folk-lore as we have recorded from Anglesey, except that
prominence was given to a flourishing belief in *Bwganod*, goblins or
bogies. But from Mr. T. T. Davis Evans, of Port Dinorwic, I heard the
following very unusual story based on facts, as he recalled it first
hand:--

Jones's Vision.--William Jones, who some sixty years ago declared be had
seen the *Tylwyth Teg* in the Aberglaslyn Pass near Beddgelert, was
publicly questioned about them in Bethel Chapel by Mr. Griffiths, the
minister; and he explained before the congregation that the Lord had
given him a special vision which enabled him to see the *Tylwyth Teg*,
and that, therefore, he had seen them time after time as little men
playing along the river in the Pass. The minister induced Jones to
repeat the story many times, because it seemed to please the
congregation very much; and the folks present looked upon Jones's vision
as a most wonderful thing.'

### EVIDENCE FROM SOUTH CARNARVONSHIRE

To Mr. E. D. Rowlands, head master of the schools at Afonwen, I am
indebted for a summary of the fairy-belief in South Carnarvonshire:--

'Tylwyth Teg.'--'According to the belief in South Carnarvonshire, the
*Tylwyth Teg* were a small, very pretty people always dressed in white,
and much given to dancing and singing in rings where grass grew. As a
rule, they were visible only at night; though in the day-time, if a
mother while hay-making was so unwise as to leave her babe alone in the
field, the *Tylwyth Teg* might take it and leave in its place a
hunchback, or some deformed object like a child. At night, the *Tylwyth
Teg* would entice travellers to join their dance and then play all sorts
of tricks on them.' <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_50.md)

Fairy Cows and Fairy Lake-Women.--'Some of the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Tylwyth Teg*
lived in caves; others of them lived in lake-bottoms. There is a lake
called Llyn y Morwynion, or "Lake of the Maidens ", near Festiniog,
where, as the story goes, a farmer one morning found in his field a
number of very fine cows such as he had never seen before. Not knowing
where they came from, he kept them a long time, when, as it happened, he
committed some dishonest act and, as a result, women of the *Tylwyth
Teg* made their appearance in the pasture and, calling the cows by name,
led the whole herd into the lake, and with them disappeared beneath its
waters. The old people never could explain the nature of the *Tylwyth
Teg*, but they always regarded them as a very mysterious race, and,
according to this story of the cattle, as a supernatural race.'

### EVIDENCE FROM MERIONETHSHIRE

Mr. Louis Foster Edwards, of Harlech, recalling the memories of many
years ago, offers the following evidence:--

Scythe-Blades and Fairies.--'In an old inn on the other side of Harlech
there was to be an entertainment, and, as usual on such occasions, the
dancing would not cease until morning. I noticed, before the guests had
all arrived, that the landlady was putting scythe-blades edge upwards up
into the large chimney, and, wondering why it was, asked her. She told
me that the fairies might come before the entertainment was over, and
that lithe blades were turned edge upwards it would prevent the fairies
from troubling the party, for they would be unable to pass the blades
without being cut.'

'Tylwyth Teg' and their World.--'There was an idea that the *Tylwyth
Teg* lived by plundering at night. It was thought, too, that if anything
went wrong with cows or horses the *Tylwyth Teg* were to blame. As a
race, the *Tylwyth Teg* were described as having the power of
invisibility; and it was believed they could disappear like a spirit
while one happened to be observing them. The world in which they lived
was a world quite unlike ours, and mortals taken to it by them were
changed in nature.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The way a mortal
might be taken by the *Tylwyth Teg* was by being attracted into their
dance. If they thus took you away, it would be according to our time for
twelve months, though to you the time would seem no more than a night.'

### FAIRY TRIBES IN MONTGOMERYSHIRE

From Mr. D. Davies-Williams, who outlined for me the Montgomeryshire
belief in the *Tylwyth Teg* as he has known it intimately, I learned
that this is essentially the same as elsewhere in North and Central
Wales. He summed up the matter by saying:--

Belief in Tylwyth Teg.--'It was the opinion that the *Tylwyth Teg* were
a real race of invisible or spiritual beings living in an invisible
world of their own. The belief in the *Tylwyth Teg* was quite general
fifty or sixty years ago, and as sincere as any religious belief is
now.'

Our next witness is the Rev. Josiah Jones, minister of the
Congregational Church of Machynlleth; and, after a lifetime's experience
in Montgomeryshire, he gives this testimony:--

A Deacon's Vision.--'A deacon in my church, John Evans, declared that he
had seen the *Tylwyth Teg* dancing in the day-time, within two miles
from here, and he pointed out the very spot where they appeared. This
was some twenty years ago. I think, however, that he saw only certain
reflections and shadows, because it was a hot and brilliant day.'

Folk-Beliefs in General.--'As I recall the belief, the old people
considered the *Tylwyth Teg* as living beings halfway between something
material and spiritual, who were rarely seen. When I was a boy there was
very much said, too, about corpse-candles and phantom funerals, and
especially about the *Bwganod*, plural of *Bwgan*, meaning a sprite,
ghost, hobgoblin, or spectre. The *Bwganod* were supposed to appear at
dusk, in various forms, animal and human; and grown-up people as well as
children had great fear of them.'

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

A Minister's Opinion.--'Ultimately there is a substance of truth in the
fairy-belief, but it is wrongly accounted for in the folk-lore: I once
asked Samuel Roberts, of Llanbrynmair, who was quite a noted Welsh
scholar, what he thought of the *Tylwyth Teg*, of hobgoblins, spirits,
and so forth; and he said that he believed such things existed, and that
God allowed them to appear in times of great ignorance to convince
people of the existence of an invisible world.'

### IN CARDIGANSHIRE; AND A FOLK-LORIST'S TESTIMONY

No one of our witnesses from Central Wales is more intimately acquainted
with the living folk-beliefs than Mr. J. Ceredig Davies, of Llanilar, a
village about six miles from Aberystwyth; for Mr. Davies has spent many
years in collecting folk-lore in Central and South Wales. He has
interviewed the oldest and most intelligent of the old people, and while
I write this be has in the press a work entitled *The Folk-Lore of Mid
and West Wales*. Mr. Davies very kindly gave me the following outline of
the most prominent traits in the Welsh fairy-belief according to his own
investigations:--

'Tylwyth Teg'.--'The *Tylwyth Teg* were considered a very small people,
fond of dancing, especially on moonlight nights. They often came to
houses after the family were abed; and if milk was left for them, they
would leave money in return; but if not treated kindly they were
revengeful. The changeling idea was common: the mother coming home would
find an ugly changeling in the cradle. Sometimes the mother would
consult the *Dynion Hysbys*, or "Wise Men" as to how to get her babe
back. As a rule, treating the fairy babe roughly and then throwing it
into a river would cause the fairy who made the change to appear and
restore the real child in return for the changeling.'

'Tylwyth Teg' Marriage Contracts.--'Occasionally a young man would see
the *Tylwyth Teg* dancing, and, being drawn into the dance, would be
taken by them and married to one of their women. There is usually some
condition in the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

marriage contract which becomes broken, and, as a result, the fairy wife
disappears--usually into a lake. The marriage contract specifies either
that the husband must never touch his fairy wife with iron, or else
never beat or strike her three times. Sometimes when fairy wives thus
disappear, they take with them into the lake their fairy cattle and all
their household property.'

'Tylwyth Teg' Habitations.--'The *Tylwyth Teg* were generally looked
upon as an immortal race. In Cardigan-shire they lived underground; in
Carmarthenshire in lakes; and in Pembrokeshire along the sea-coast on
enchanted islands amid the Irish Sea. I have heard of sailors upon
seeing such islands trying to reach them; but when approached, the
islands always disappeared. From a certain spot in Pembrokeshire, it is
said that by standing on a turf taken from the yard of St. David's
Cathedral, one may see the enchanted islands.' <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

'Tylwyth Teg' as Spirits of Druids.--'By many of the old people the
*Tylwyth Teg* were classed with spirits. They were not looked upon as
mortal at all. Many of the Welsh looked upon the *Tylwyth Teg* or
fairies as the spirits of Druids dead before the time of Christ, who
being too good to be cast into Hell were allowed to wander freely about
on earth.'

### TESTIMONY FROM A WELSHMAN NINETY-FOUR YEARS OLD

At Pontrhydfendigaid, a village about two miles from the railway-station
called Strata Florida, I had the good fortune to meet Mr. John Jones,
ninety-four years old, yet of strong physique, and able to write his
name without eye-glasses. Both Mr. J. H. Davies, Registrar of the
University College of Aberystwyth, and Mr. J. Ceredig Davies, the
eminent folk-lorist of Llanilar, referred me to Mr. John Jones as one of
the most remarkable of living Welshmen who could tell about the olden
times from first-hand knowledge.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mr. John Jones
speaks very little English, and Mr. John Rees, of the Council School,
acted as our interpreter. This is the testimony:--

Pygmy-sized 'Tylwyth Teg'.--'I was born and bred where there was
tradition that the *Tylwyth Teg* lived in holes in the hills, and that
none of these *Tylwyth Teg* was taller than three to four feet. It was a
common idea that many of the *Tylwyth Teg*, forming in a ring, would
dance and sing out on the mountain-sides, or on the plain, and that if
children should meet with them at such a time they would lose their way
and never get out of the ring. If the *Tylwyth Teg* fancied any
particular child they would always keep that child, taking off its
clothes and putting them on one of their own children, which was then
left in its place. They took only boys, never girls.'

Human-sized 'Tylwyth Teg'.--'A special sort of *Tylwyth Teg* used to
come out of lakes and dance, and their line looks enticed young men to
follow them back into the lakes, and there marry one of them. If the
husband wished to leave the lake he had to go without his fairy wife.
This sort of *Tylwyth Teg* were as big as ordinary people; and they were
often seen riding out of the lakes and back again on horses.'

'Tylwyth Teg' as Spirits of Prehistoric Race.--'My grandfather told me
that he was once in a certain field and heard singing in the air, and
thought it spirits singing. Soon afterwards he and his brother in
digging dikes in that field dug into a big hole, which they entered and
followed to the end. There they found a place full of human bones and
urns, and naturally decided on account of the singing that the bones and
urns were of the *Tylwyth Teg*.' <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_52.md)

A Boy's Visit to the 'Tylwyth Teg's' King.--'About

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

eighty years ago, at Tynylone, my grandfather told me this story: "A boy
ten years old was often whipped and cruelly treated by his schoolmaster
because he could not say his lessons very well. So one day he ran away
from school and went to a river-side, where some little folk came to him
and asked why he was crying. He told them the master had punished him;
and on heating this they said, 'Oh! if you will stay with us it will not
be necessary for you to go to school. We will keep you as long as you
like.' Then they took him under the water and over the water into a cave
underground, which opened into a great palace where the *Tylwyth Teg*
were playing games with golden balls, in rings like those in which they
dance and sing. The boy had been taken to the king's family, and he
began to play with the king's sons. After he had been there in the
palace in the full enjoyment of all its pleasures he wished very much to
return to his mother and show her the golden ball which the *Tylwyth
Teg* gave him. And so he took the ball in his pocket and hurried through
the cave the way he had come; but at the end of it and by the river two
of the *Tylwyth Teg* met him, and taking the ball away from him they
pushed him into the water, and through the water he found his way home.
He told his mother how he had been away for a fortnight, as he thought,
but she told him it had been for two years. Though the boy often tried
to find the way back to the *Tylwyth Teg* he never could. Finally, he
went back to school, and became a most wonderful scholar and
parson."' <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_53.md)

### IN MERLIN'S COUNTRY; AND A VICAR'S TESTIMONY

The Rev. T. M. Morgan, vicar of Newchurch parish, two miles from
Carmarthen, has made a very careful study of the folk-traditions in his
own parish and in other regions

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

of Carmarthenshire, and is able to offer us evidence of the highest
value, as follows:-- <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_54.md)

'Tylwyth Teg' Power over Children.--'The *Tylwyth Teg* were thought to
be able to take children. "You mind, or the *Tylwyth Teg* will take you
away," parents would say to keep their children in the house after dark.
It was an opinion, too, that the *Tylwyth Teg* could transform good
children into kings and queens, and bad children into wicked spirits,
after such children bad been taken--perhaps in death. The *Tylwyth Teg*
were believed to live in some invisible world to which children on dying
might go to be rewarded or punished, according to their behaviour on
this earth. Even in this life the *Tylwyth Teg* had power over children
for good or evil. The belief, as these ideas show, was that the *Tylwyth
Teg* were spirits.'

'Tylwyth Teg' as Evil Spirits.--A few days after my return to Oxford,
the Rev. T M. Morgan, through his son, Mr. Basil I. Morgan, of Jesus
College, placed in my hands additional folk-lore evidence from his own
parish, as follows:--'After Mr. Wentz visited me on Thursday, September
30, 1909, I went to see Mr. Shem Morgan, the occupier of Cwmcastellfach
farm, an old man about seventy years old. He told me that in his
childhood days a great dread of the fairies occupied the heart of every
child. They were considered to be evil spirits who visited our world at
night, and dangerous to come in contact with; there were no good spirits
among them. He related to me three narratives touching the fairies':--

'Tylwyth Teg's' Path.--The first narrative illustrates that the *Tylwyth
Teg* have paths (precisely like those reserved for the Irish *good
people* or for the Breton dead), and that it is death to a mortal while
walking in one of these paths to meet the *Tylwyth Teg*.

'Tylwyth Teg' Divination.--The second narrative I quote:--'A farmer of
this neighbourhood having lost his cattle,

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

went to consult *y dyn hysbys* (a diviner), in Cardiganshire, who was
friendly with the fairies. Whenever the fairies visited the diviner they
foretold future events, secrets, and the whereabouts of lost property.
After the farmer reached the diviner's house the diviner showed him the
fairies, and then when the diviner had consulted them he told the farmer
to go home as soon as he could and that he would find the cattle in such
and such a place. The farmer did as he was directed, and found the
cattle in the very place where the *dyn hysbys* told him they would be.'
And the third narrative asserts that a man in the parish of Trelech who
was fraudulently excluded by means of a false will from inheriting the
estate of his deceased father, discovered the defrauder and recovered
the estate, solely through having followed the advice given by the
*Tylwyth Teg*, when (again as in the above account) they were called up
as spirits by a *dyn hysbys*, a Mr. Harries, of Cwrt y Cadno, a place
near Aberystwyth. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_55.md)

### TESTIMONY FROM A JUSTICE OF THE PEACE

Mr. David Williams, J.P., who is a member of the Cymmrodorion Society of
Carmarthen, and who has sat on the judicial bench for ten years, offers
us the very valuable evidence which follows:--

'Tylwyth Teg' and their King and Queen.--'The general idea, as I
remember it, was that the *Tylwyth Teg* were only visitors to this
world, and had no terrestrial habitations. They were as small in stature
as dwarfs, and always appeared in white. Often at night they danced in
rings amid green fields. Most of them were females, though they had a
king; and, as their name suggests, they were very beautiful in
appearance. The king of the *Tylwyth Teg* was called *Gwydion* 

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

ab Don, *Gwyd* referring to a temperament in man's nature. His residence
was among the stars, and called *Caer Gwydion*. His queen was
*Gwenhidw*. I have heard my mother call the small fleece-like clouds
which appear in fine weather the *Sheep of Gwenhidw*.' <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_56.md)

'Tylwyth Teg' as Aerial Beings.--Mr. Williams's testimony continues, and
leads us directly to the Psychological or Psychical Theory:--'As aerial
beings the *Tylwyth Teg* could fly and move about in the air at will.
They were a special order of creation. I never heard that they grew old;
and whether they multiplied or not I cannot tell. In character they were
almost always good.'

Ghosts and Apparitions.--Our conversation finally drifted towards ghosts
and apparitions, as usual, and to Druids. In the chapter dealing with
Re-birth (pp. [390](ffcc270.htm#page_390)-1.md) we shall record what Mr.
Williams said about Druids, and here what he said about ghosts and
apparitions:--'Sixty years ago there was hardly an individual who did
not believe in apparitions; and in olden times Welsh families would
collect round the fire at night and each in turn give a story about the
*Tylwyth Teg* and ghosts.'

Conferring Vision of a Phantom Funeral.--'There used to be an old man at
Newchurch named David Davis (who lived about 1780--1840), of Abernant,
noted for seeing

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

phantom funerals. One appeared to him once when he was with a friend.
"Do you see it? Do you see it?" the old man excitedly asked. "No," said
his friend. Then the old man placed his foot on his friend's foot, and
said, "Do you see it now?" And the friend replied that he did.' <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_57.md)

Magic and Witchcraft.--Finally*,* we shall hear from Mr. Williams about
Welsh magic and witchcraft, which cannot scientifically be divorced from
the belief in fairies and apparitions:--'There used to be much
witchcraft in this country; and it was fully believed that some men, if
advanced scholars, had the power to injure or to bewitch their
neighbours by magic. The more advanced the scholar the better he could
carry on his craft.'

### ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE FROM CARMARTHENSHIRE

My friend, and fellow student at Jesus College, Mr. Percival V. Davies,
of Carmarthen, contributes, as supplementary to what has been recorded
above, the following evidence, from his great-aunt, Mrs. Spurrell, also
of Carmarthen, a native Welshwoman who has seen a *canwyll gorff*
(corpse-candle):--

Bendith y Mamau.--.'In the Carmarthenshire country, fairies (*Tylwyth
Teg*) are often called *Bendith y Mamau*, the "Mothers' Blessing."'

How Ten Children Became Fairies.--'Our Lord, in the days when He walked
the earth, chanced one day to approach a cottage in which lived a woman
with twenty children. Feeling ashamed of the size of her family, she hid
half of them from the sight of her divine visitor. On His departure she
sought for the hidden children in vain; they had become fairies and had
disappeared.'

### IN PEMBROKESHIRE; AT THE PENTRE EVAN CROMLECH

Our Pembrokeshire witness is a maiden Welshwoman, sixty years old, who
speaks no English, but a university graduate, her nephew, will act as
our interpreter. She was

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

born and has lived all her life within sight of the famous Pentre Evan
Cromlech, in the home of her ancestors, which is so ancient that after
six centuries of its known existence further record of it is lost. In
spite of her sixty years, our witness is as active as many a city woman
of forty or forty-five. Since her girlhood she has heard curious legends
and stories, and, with a more than ordinary interest in the lore of her
native country, has treasured them all in her clear and well-trained
memory. The first night, while this well-stored memory of hers gave
forth some of its treasures, we sat in her own home, I and my friend,
her nephew, on one side in a chimney-seat, and she and her niece on the
other side in another, exposed to the cheerful glow and warmth of the
fire. When we had finished that first night it was two o'clock, and
there had been no interruption to the even flow of marvels and pretty
legends. A second night we spent likewise. What follows now is the
result, so far as we are concerned with it:--

Fairies and Spirits.--'Spirits and fairies exist all round us,
invisible. Fairies have no solid bodily substance. Their forms are of
matter like ghostly bodies, and on this account they cannot be caught.
In the twilight they are often seen, and on moonlight nights in summer.
Only certain people can see fairies, and such people hold communication
with them and have dealings with them, but it is difficult to get them
to talk about fairies. I think the spirits about us are the fallen
angels, for when old Doctor Harris died his books on witchcraft had to
be burned in order to free the place where he lived from evil spirits.
The fairies, too, are sometimes called the fallen angels. They will do
good to those who befriend them, and harm to others. I think there must
be an intermediate state between life on earth and heavenly life, and it
may be in this that spirits and fairies live. There are two distinct
types of spirits: one is good and the other is bad. I have heard of
people going to the fairies and finding that years passed as days, but I
do not believe in changelings, though there are stories enough about
them. That there are fairies and other spirits like them, both good

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

and bad, I firmly believe. My mother used to tell about seeing the
"fair-folk" dancing in the fields near Cardigan; and other people have
seen them round the cromlech up there on the hill (the Pentre Evan
Cromlech). They appeared as little children in clothes like soldiers'
clothes, and with red caps, according to some accounts.

Death-Candles Described.--'I have seen more than one death-candle. I saw
one death-candle right here in this room where we are sitting and
talking.' I was told by the nephew and niece of our present witness that
this particular death-candle took an untrodden course from the house
across the fields to the grave-yard, and that when the death of one of
the family occurred soon afterwards, their aunt insisted that the corpse
should be carried by exactly the same route; so the road was abandoned
and the funeral went through the ploughed fields. Here is the
description of the death-candle as the aunt gave it in response to our
request:--'The death-candle appears like a patch of bright light; and no
matter how dark the room or place is, everything in it is as clear as
day. The candle is not a flame, but a luminous mass, lightish blue in
colour, which dances as though borne by an invisible agency, and
sometimes it rolls over and over. If you go up to the light it is
nothing, for it is a spirit. Near here a light as big as a pot was seen,
and rays shot out from it in all directions. The man you saw here in the
house to-day, one night as he was going along the road near Nevern, saw
the death-light of old Dr. Harris, and says it was lightish green.'

Gors Goch Fairies.--Now we began to hear more about fairies:--'One night
there came a strange rapping at the door of the ancient manor on the
Gors Goch farm over in Cardiganshire, and the father of the family asked
what was wanted. Thin, silvery voices said they wanted a warm place in
which to dress their children and to tidy them up. The door opened then,
and in came a dozen or more little beings, who at once set themselves to
hunting for a basin and water, and to cleaning themselves. At daybreak
they departed, leaving a pretty gift in return for the kindness.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In this same house
at another time, whether by the same party of little beings or by
another could not be told, a healthy child of the family was *changed*
because he was unbaptized, and a frightful-looking child left in his
place. The mother finally died of grief, and the other children died
because of the loss of their mother, and the father was left alone. Then
some time after this, the same little folks who came the first time
returned to clean up, and when they departed, in place of their former
gifts of silver, left a gift of gold. It was not long before the father
became heir to a rich farm in North Wales, and going to live on it
became a magician, for the little people, still befriending him,
revealed themselves in their true nature and taught him all their
secrets.'

Levi Salmon's Control of Spirits.--'Levi Salmon, who lived about thirty
years ago, between here and Newport, was a magician, and could call up
good and bad spirits; but was afraid to call up the bad ones unless
another person was with him, for it was a dangerous and terrible ordeal.
After consulting certain books which he had, he would draw a circle on
the floor, and in a little while spirits like bulls and serpents and
other animals would appear in it, and all sorts of spirits would speak.
It was not safe to go near them; and to control them Levi held a whip in
his hand. He would never let them cross the circle. And when he wanted
them to go away he always had to throw something to the chief spirit.'

The Haunted Manor and the Golden Image.--I offer now, in my own
language, the following remarkable story:--The ancient manor-house on
the Trewern Farm (less than a mile from the Pentre Evan Cromlech) bad
been haunted as long as anybody could remember. Strange noises were
often heard in it, dishes would dance about of their own accord, and
sometimes a lady dressed in silk appeared. Many attempts were made to
lay the ghosts, but none succeeded. Finally things got so bad that
nobody wanted to live there. About eighty years ago the sole occupants
of the haunted house were Mr.------ and his two servants. At the time,
it was well known in the neighbourhood that all

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

at once Mr.------ became very wealthy, and his servants seemed able to
buy whatever they wanted. Everybody wondered, but no one could tell
where the money came from; for at first he was a poor man, and be
couldn't have made much off the farm. The secret only leaked out through
one of the servants after Mr.--was dead. The servant declared to certain
friends that one of the ghosts, or, as he thought, the Devil, appeared
to Mr.------- and told him there was an image of great value walled up
in the room over the main entrance to the manor. A search was made, and,
sure enough, a large image of solid gold was found in the very place
indicated, built into a recess in the wall. Mr.------ bound the servants
to secrecy, and began to turn the image into money. He would cut off
small pieces of the image, one at a time, and take them to London and
sell them. In this way he sold the whole image, and nobody was the
wiser. After the image was found and disposed of, ghosts were no longer
seen in the house, nor were unusual noises heard in it at night. The one
thing which beyond all doubt is true is that when Mr.------ died he left
his son an estate worth about £50,000 (an amount probably greatly in
excess of the true one); and people have always wondered ever since
where it came from, if not in part from the golden image. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_58.md)

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

Hundreds of parallel stories in which, instead of ghosts, fairies and
demons are said to have revealed hidden treasure could be cited.

### IN THE GOWER PENINSULA, GLAMORGANSHIRE

Our investigations in Glamorganshire cover the most interesting part,
the peninsula' of Gower, where there are peculiar folk-lore conditions,
due to its present population being by ancestry English and Flemish as
well as Cornish and Welsh. Despite this race admixture, Brythonic
beliefs have generally survived in Gower even among the non-Cults; and
because of the Cornish element there are pixies, as shown by the
following story related to me in Swansea by Mr. ------, a well-known
mining engineer:--

Pixies.--'At Newton, near the Mumbles (in Gower), an old woman, some
twenty years ago, assured me that she had seen the pixies. Her father's
grey mare was standing in the trap before the house ready to take some
produce to the Swansea market, and when the time for departure arrived
the pixies had come, but no one save the old woman could see them. She
described them to me as like tiny men dancing on the mare's back and
climbing up along the mare's mane. She thought the pixies some kind of
spirits who made their appearance in early morning; and all mishaps to
cows she attributed to them.'

### TESTIMONY FROM AN ARCHAEOLOGIST

The Rev. John David Davis, rector of Llanmadoc and Cheriton parishes,
and a member of the Cambrian Archaeological Society, has passed many
years in studying the antiquities and folk-lore of Gower, being the
author of various antiquarian works; and he is without doubt the oldest
and best living authority to aid us. The Rector very willingly offers
this testimony:--

Pixies and 'Verry Volk'.--'In this part of Gower, the name *Tylwyth Teg*
is never used to describe fairies; *Verry Volk* is used instead. Some
sixty years ago, as I can remember, there was belief in such fairies
here in Gower, but now there

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

is almost none. Belief in apparitions still exists to some extent. One
may also hear of a person being pixy-led; the pixies may cause a
traveller to lose his way at night if he crosses a field where they
happen to be. To take your coat off and turn it inside out will break
the pixy spell. <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_59.md) The *Verry Volk*
were always little people dressed in scarlet and green; and they
generally showed themselves dancing on moonlight nights. I never heard
of their making changelings, though they had the power of doing good or
evil acts, and it was a very risky thing to offend them. By nature they
were benevolent.'

A 'Verry Volk' Feast.--'I heard the following story many years ago:--The
tenant on the Eynonsford Farm here in Gower had a dream one night, and
in it thought he heard soft sweet music and the patter of dancing feet.
Waking up, he beheld his cow-shed, which opened off his bedroom, filled
with a multitude of little beings, about one foot high, swarming all
over his fat ox, and they were preparing to slaughter the ox. He was so
surprised that he could not move. In a short time the *Verry Volk* had
killed, dressed, and eaten the animal. The feast being over, they
collected the hide and bones, except one very small leg-bone which they
could not find, placed them in position, then stretched the hide over
them; and, as the farmer looked, the ox appeared as sound and fat as
ever, but when he let it out to pasture in the morning he observed that
it had a slight lameness in the leg lacking the missing bone.' <span
id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_60.md)

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

### FAIRIES AMONG GOWER ENGLISH FOLK

The population of the Llanmadoc region of Gower are generally English by
ancestry and speech; and not until reaching Llanmorlais, beyond
Llanridian, did I find anything like an original Celtic and
Welsh-speaking people, and these may have come into that part within
comparatively recent times; and yet, as the above place-names tend to
prove, in early days all these regions must have been Welsh. It may be
argued, however, that this English-speaking population may be more
Celtic than Saxon, even though emigrants from England. In any case, we
can see with interest how this so-called English population now echo
Brythonic beliefs which they appear to have adopted in Gower, possibly
sympathetically through race kinship; and the following testimony
offered by Miss Sarah Jenkins, postmistress of Llanmadoc, will enable us
to do so:--

Dancing with Fairies.--'A man, whose Christian name was William, was
enticed by the fairy folk to enter their dance, as he was on his way to
the Swansea market in the early morning. They kept him dancing some
time, and then said to him before they let him go, "Will dance well; the
last going to market and the first that shall sell." And though he
arrived at the market very late, be was the first to sell anything.'

Fairy Money.--'An old woman, whom I knew, used to find money left by the
fairies every time they visited her house. For a long time she observed
their request, and told no one about the money; but at last she told,
and so never found money afterwards.

Nature of Fairies.--'The fairies (*verry volk*) were believed to have
plenty of music and dancing. Sometimes they appeared dressed in bright
red. They could appear and disappear suddenly, and no one could tell how
or where.'

### CONCLUSION

Much more might easily be said about Welsh goblins, about Welsh fairies
who live in caves, or about Welsh fairy women who come out of lakes and
rivers, or who are the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

presiding spirits of sacred wells and fountains, <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_61.md) but these will have some consideration
later, in Section III. For the purposes of the present inquiry enough
evidence has been offered to show the fundamental character of Brythonic
fairy-folk as we have found them. And we can very appropriately close
this inquiry by allowing our Welsh-speaking witness from the Pentre Evan
country, Pembrokeshire, to tell us one of the prettiest and most
interesting fairy-tales in all Wales. The name of Taliessin appearing in
it leads us to suspect that it may be the remnant of an ancient bardic
tale which has been handed down orally for centuries. It will serve to
illustrate the marked difference between the short conversational
stories of the living Fairy-Faith and the longer, more polished ones of
the traditional Fairy-Faith; and we shall see in it how a literary
effect is gained at the expense of the real character of the fairies
themselves, for it transforms them into mortals:--

Einion and Olwen.--'My mother told the story as she used to sit by the
fire in the twilight knitting stockings:--"One day when it was cloudy
and misty, a shepherd boy going to the mountains lost his way and walked
about for hours. At last he came to a hollow place surrounded by rushes
where he saw a number of round rings. He recognized the place as one he
had often heard of as dangerous for shepherds, because of the rings. He
tried to get away from there, but he could not. Then an old, merry,
blue-eyed man appeared. The boy, thinking to find his way home, followed
the old man, and the old man said to him, 'Do not speak a word till I
tell you.' In a little while they came to a *menhir* (long stone). The
old man tapped it three times, and then lifted it up. A narrow path with
steps descending was revealed, and from it emerged a bluish-white light.
'Follow me,' said the old man, 'no harm will come to you.' The boy did
so, and it was not long before he saw a fine, wooded, fertile country
with a beautiful palace, and rivers and mountains. He reached the palace
and was enchanted by the

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

singing of birds. Music of all sorts was. in the palace, but he saw no
people. At meals dishes came and disappeared of their own accord. He
could hear voices all about him, but saw no person except the, old
man--who said that now he could speak. When he tried to speak he found
that he could not move his tongue. Soon an old lady with smiles came to
him leading three beautiful maidens, and when the maidens saw the
shepherd boy they smiled and spoke, but he could not reply. Then one of
the girls kissed him; and all at once he began to converse freely and
most wittily. In the full enjoyment of the marvellous country he lived
with the maidens in the palace a day and a year, not thinking it more
than a day, for there was no reckoning of time in that land. When the
day and the year were up, a longing to see his old acquaintances came on
him; and thanking the old man for his kindness, he asked if he could
return home. The old man said to him, 'Wait a little while'; and so he
waited. The maiden who bad kissed him was unwilling to have him go; but
when he promised her to return, she sent him off loaded with riches.

'"At home not one of his people or old friends knew him. Everybody
believed that he had been killed by another shepherd. And this shepherd
had been accused of the murder and had fled to America.

'"On the first day of the new moon the boy remembered his promise, and
returned to the other country; and there was great rejoicing in the
beautiful palace when he arrived. Einion, for that was the boy's name,
and Olwen, for that was the girl's name, now wanted to marry; but they
had to go about it quietly and half secretly, for the *fair-folk*
dislike ceremony and noise. When the marriage was over, Einion wished to
go back with Olwen to the upper world. So two snow-white ponies were
given them, and they were allowed to depart.

'"They reached the upper world safely; and, being possessed of unlimited
wealth, lived most handsomely on a great estate which came into their
possession. A son was born to them, and he was called Taliessin. People
soon

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

began to ask for Olwen's pedigree, and as none was given it was taken
for granted that she was one of the *fair-folk*. 'Yes, indeed,' said
Einion, 'there is no doubt that she is one of the *fair-folk*, there is
no doubt that she is one of the very *fair-folk*, for she has two
sisters as pretty as she is, and if you saw them all together you would
admit that the name is a suitable one.' And this is the origin of the
term *fair-folk* (*Tylwyth Teg*)."'

From Wales we go to the nearest Brythonic country, Cornwall, to study
the fairy-folk there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[137:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_47.md) Sir John Rhy^s tells
me that this Snowdon fairy-lore was contributed by the late Lady Rhy^s,
who as a girl lived in the neighbourhood of Snowdon and heard very much
from the old people there, most of whom believed in the fairies; and she
herself then used to be warned, in the manner mentioned, against being
carried away into the under-lake Fairyland.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[137:2](ffcc124.htm#fr_48.md) Cf. *Celtic Folklore,
Welsh* and *Manx*, pp. 683-4 n., where Sir John Rhy^s says of his
friend, Professor A. C. Haddon:--'I find also that he, among others, has
anticipated me in my theory as to the origins of the fairies; witness
the following extract from the syllabus of a lecture delivered by him at
Cardiff in 1894 on *Fairy Tales*:--"What are the fairies?--Legendary
origin of the fairies. It is evident from fairy literature that there is
a mixture of the possible and the impossible, of fact and fancy. Part of
fairydom refers to (1) spirits that never were embodied: other fairies
are (2) spirits of environment, nature or local spirits, and household
or domestic spirits; (3) spirits of the organic world, spirits of
plants, and spirits of animals (4) spirits of men, or ghosts; and (5)
witches and wizards, or men possessed with other spirits. All these, and
possibly other elements, enter into the fanciful aspects of Fairyland,
but there is a large residuum of real occurrences; these point to a
clash of races, and we may regard many of these fairy sagas as stories
told by men of the Iron Age of events which happened to men of the
Bronze Age in their conflicts with men of the Neolithic Age, and
possibly these, too, handed on traditions of the Palaeolithic Age.''

<span id="fn_48"></span>[140:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_49.md) This is the one tale
I have found in North Wales about a midwife and fairies--a type of tale
common to West Ireland, Isle of Man, Cornwall, and Brittany, but in a
reverse version, the midwife there being (as she is sometimes in Welsh
versions) one of the human race called in by fairies. if evidence of the
oneness of the Celtic mind were needed we should find it here (Cf. pp.
[50](ffcc121.htm#page_50), [54](ffcc121.htm#page_54.md),
[127](ffcc123.htm#page_127), [175](ffcc125.htm#page_175.md),
[182](ffcc125.htm#page_182), [205](ffcc126.htm#page_205).md). There are in
this type of fairy tale, as the advocates of the Pygmy Theory may well
hold, certain elements most likely traceable to a folk-memory of some
early race, or special class of some early race, who knew the secrets of
midwifery and the use of medicines when such knowledge was considered
magical. But in each example of this midwife story there is the germ
idea--no matter what other ideas cluster round it--that fairies, like
spirits, are only to be seen by an extra-human vision, or, as psychical
researchers might say, by clairvoyance.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[142:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_50.md) After this remarkable
story, Mrs. Jones told me about another very rare psychical experience
of her own, which is here recorded because it Illustrates the working of
the psychological law of the association of ideas:--'My husband, Price
Jones, was drowned some forty years ago, within four miles of Arms Head,
near Bangor, on Friday at midday; and that night at about one o'clock he
appeared to me in our bedroom and laid his head on my breast. I tried to
ask him where he came from, but before I could get my breath he was
gone. I believed at the time that he was out at sea perfectly safe and
well. But next day, Saturday, at about noon, a message came announcing
his death. I was as fully awake as one can be when I thus saw the spirit
of my husband. He returned to me a second time about six months later.'
Had this happened in West Ireland, it is almost certain that public
opinion would have declared that Price Jones had been *taken* by the
'gentry' or 'good people'.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[143:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_51.md) Here we find the
*Tylwyth Teg* showing quite the same characteristics as Welsh elves in
general, as Cornish pixies, and as Breton *corrigans* or *lutins*; that
is, given to dancing at night, to stealing children, and to deceiving
traveller.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[147:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_52.md) This folk-belief
partially sustains the view put forth in our chapter on Environment,
that St. David's during pagan times was already a sacred spot and
perhaps then the seat of a druidic oracle.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[148:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_53.md) Here we have an
example of the *Tylwyth Teg* being identified with a prehistoric race,
quite in accordance with the argument of the Pygmy Theory. We have,
however, as the essential idea, that the *Tylwyth Teg* heard singing
were the spirits of this prehistoric race. Thus our contention that
ancestral spirits play a leading part in the fairy-belief is sustained,
and the Pygmy Theory appears quite at its true relative value--as able
to explain one subordinate ethnological strand in the complex fabric of
the belief.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[149:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_54.md) This story is much
like the one recorded by Giraldus Cambrensis about a boy going to
Fairyland and returning to his mother (see this study, [p.
324](ffcc250.htm#page_324).md). The possibility that it may be an
independent version of the folk-tale told to Cambrensis which has
continued to live on among the people makes it highly interesting.

Mr. Jones gives further evidence on the re-birth doctrine in Wales (pp.
[388](ffcc270.htm#page_388)-9.md), and concerning Merlin and sacrifice to
appease place-spirits (pp. [436](ffcc309.htm#page_436)-7.md).

<span id="fn_54"></span>[150:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_55.md) As a result of his
researches, the Rev. T. M. Morgan has just published a new work,
entitled *The History and Antiquities of the Parish of Newchurch*
(Carmarthen, 1910).

<span id="fn_55"></span>[151:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_56.md) In these last two
anecdotes, as in modern 'Spiritualism', we observe a popular practice of
necromancy or the calling up of spirits, so-called 'materialization' of
spirits, and spirit communication through a human 'medium', who is the
*dyn hysbys*, as well as divination, the revealing of things hidden and
the foretelling of future events. This is direct evidence that Welsh
fairies or the *Tylwyth Teg* were formerly the same to Welshmen as
spirits are to Spiritualists now. We seem, therefore, to have proof of
our Psychological Theory (see chap. xi).

<span id="fn_56"></span>[152:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_57.md) Here we have a
combination of many distinct elements and influences. As among mortals,
so among the *Tylwyth Teg* there is a king; and this conception may have
arisen directly from anthropomorphic influences on the ancient Brythonic
religion, or it may have come directly from druidic teachings. The
locating of *Gwydion* *ab Don*, like a god, in a heaven-world, rather
than like his counterpart, *Gwynn ab Nudd*, in a hades-world, is
probably due to a peculiar admixture of Druidism and Christianity: at
first, both gods were probably druidic or pagan, and the same, but
*Gwynn ab Nudd* became a demon or evil god under Christian influences,
while *Gwydion ab Don* seems to have curiously retained his original
good reputation in spite of Christianity (cf. [p.
320](ffcc250.htm#page_320).md). The name *Gwenhidw* reminds us at once of
Arthur's queen *Gwenhwyvar* or 'White Apparition'; and the sheep of
*Gwenhidw* can properly be explained by the Naturalistic Theory. It
seems, however, that analogy was imaginatively suggested between the
Queen *Gwenhidw* as resembling the Welsh White Lady or a ghost-like
being, and her sheep, the clouds, also of a necessarily ghost-like
character. All this is an admirable illustration of the great complexity
of the Fairy-Faith.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[153:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_58.md) The parallel between
this Welsh method of conferring vision and the Breton method is very
striking (cf. [p. 215](ffcc126.htm#page_215).md)

<span id="fn_58"></span>[157:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_59.md) This is the substance
of the story as it was told to me by a gentleman who lives within sight
of the farm where the image is said to have been found. And one day he
took me to the house and showed me the room and the place in the wall
where the find was made. The old manor is one of the solidest and most
picturesque of its kind in Wales, and, in spite of its extreme age, well
preserved. He, being as a native Welshman of the locality well
acquainted with its archaeology, thinks it safe to place an age of six
to eight hundred years on the manor. What is interesting about this
matter of age arises from the query, Was the image one of the Virgin or
of some Christian saint, or was it a Druid idol? Both opinions are
current in the neighbourhood, but there is a good deal in favour of the
second. The region, the little valley on whose side stands the Pentre
Evan Cromlech, the finest in Britain, is believed to have been a
favourite place with the ancient Druids; and in the oak groves which
still exist there tradition says there was once a flourishing pagan
school for neophytes, and that the cromlech instead of being a place for
interments or f or sacrifices was in those days completely enclosed,
forming like other cromlechs a darkened chamber in which novices when
initiated were placed for a certain number of days--the interior being
called the 'Womb or Court of Ceridwen'.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[159:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_60.md) The same remedy is
prescribed in Brittany when mischievous *lutins* or *corrigans* lead a
traveller astray, in Ireland when the *good people* lead a traveller
astray; and at Rollright, Oxfordshire, England, an old woman told me
that it is efficacious against being led astray through witchcraft.
Obviously the fairy and witch spell are alike.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[159:2](ffcc124.htm#fr_61.md) The same sort of a
story as this is told in Lower Brittany, where the *corrigans* or
*lutins* slaughter a farmer's fat cow or ox and invite the farmer to
partake of the feast it provides. If he does so with good grace and
humour, he finds his cow or ox perfectly whole in the morning, but if he
refuses to join the feast or joins it unwillingly, in the morning he is
likely to find his cow or ox actually dead and eaten.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[161:1](ffcc124.htm#fr_62.md) See Sir John Rhy^s,
*Celtic Folk-Lore: Welsh and Manx* (Oxford, 1901), *passim*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Taking of Evidence: VI. In Cornwall](ffcc125.md)
