[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ffcc130)  [Next](ffcc250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

# SECTION II

## THE RECORDED FAIRY FAITH

## CHAPTER IV

### PEOPLE OF THE GODDESS DANA (*TUATHA DÉ DANANN*) OR THE SIDHE (PRONOUNCED *SHEE*)  <span id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_219)

'So firm was the hold which the ethnic gods of Ireland had taken upon
the imagination and spiritual sensibilities of our ancestors that even
the monks and christianized bards never thought of denying them. They
doubtless forbade the people to worship them, but to root out the belief
in their existence was so impossible that they could not even dispossess
their own minds of the conviction that the gods were real supernatural
beings.'--STANDISH O'GRADY.

The Goddess Dana and the modern cult of St. Brigit--The Tuatha De Danann
or *Sidhe* conquered by the Sons of Mil--But Irish seers still see the
*Sidhe*--Old Irish MSS. Faithfully represent the Tuatha De Danann--The
*Sidhe* as a spirit race--*Sidhe* palaces--The 'Taking' of mortals--Hill
visions of *Sidhe* women--*Sidhe* ministrels and musicians--Social
organization and warfare among the *Sidhe*--The *Sidhe* war-goddesses,
the *Badb*--The *Sidhe* at the Battle of Clontarf, A.D.
1014--Conclusion.

THE People of the Goddess Dana, or according to D'Arbois de Jubainville,
the People of the god whose mother was

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

called Dana, <span id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_220) are the Tuatha De
Danann of the ancient mythology of Ireland. The Goddess Dana, called in
the genitive Danand, in middle Irish times was named Brigit. <span
id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_220) And this goddess Brigit of the pagan
Celts has been supplanted by the Christian St. Brigit <span
id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_220); and, in exactly the same way as the
pagan cult once bestowed on the spirits in wells and fountains has been
transferred to Christian saints, to whom the wells and fountains have
been re-dedicated, so to St. Brigit as a national saint has been
transferred the pagan cult rendered to her predecessor. Thus even yet,
as in the case of the minor divinities of their sacred fountains, the
Irish people through their veneration for the good St. Brigit, render
homage to the divine mother of the People who bear her name Dana,--who
are the ever-living invisible Fairy-People of modern Ireland. For when
the Sons of Mil, the ancestors of the Irish people, came to Ireland they
found the Tuatha De Danann in full possession of the country. The Tuatha
De Danann then retired before the invaders, without, however, giving up
their sacred Island. Assuming invisibility, with the power of at any
time reappearing in a human-like form before the children of the Sons of
Mil, the People of the Goddess Dana became and are the Fairy-Folk, the
*Sidhe* of Irish mythology and romance. <span
id="fr_245"></span>[2](#fn_221) Therefore it is that to-day Ireland
contains two races,---a race visible which we call Celts, and a race
invisible which we call Fairies. Between these two races there is
constant intercourse even now; for Irish seers say that they can behold
the majestic, beautiful *Sidhe*, and according to them the *Sidhe* are a
race quite distinct from our own, just as living and possibly more
powerful. These *Sidhe* (who are the 'gentry' of the Ben Bulbin country
and have kindred elsewhere in Ireland, Scotland,

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

and probably in most other countries as well, such as the invisible
races of the Yosemite Valley) have been described more or less
accurately by our peasant seer-witnesses from County Sligo and from
North and East Ireland. But there are other and probably more reliable
seers in Ireland, men of greater education and greater psychical
experience, who know and describe the *Sidhe* races as they really are,
and who even sketch their likenesses. And to such seer Celts as these,
Death is a passport to the world of the *Sidhe,* a world where there is
eternal youth and never-ending joy, as we shall learn when we study it
as the Celtic Otherworld.

The recorded mythology and literature of ancient Ireland have, very
faithfully for the most part, preserved to us clear pictures of the
Tuatha De Danann; so that disregarding some Christian influence in the
texts of certain manuscripts, much rationalization, and a good deal of
poetical colouring and romantic imagination in the pictures, we can
easily describe the People of the Goddess Dana as they appeared in pagan
days, when they were more frequently seen by mortals than now. Perhaps
the Irish folk of the olden times were even more clairvoyant and
spiritual-minded than the Irish folk of to-day. So by drawing upon these
written records let us try to understand what sort of beings the *Sidhe*
were and are.

NATURE OF THE

SIDHE

In the *Book of Leinster* <span id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_222) the poem
of *Eochaid* records that the Tuatha De Danann, the conquerors of the
Fir-Bolgs, were hosts of *siabra*; and *siabra* is an Old Irish word
meaning fairies, sprites, or ghosts. The word fairies is appropriate if
restricted to mean fairies like the modern 'gentry'; but the word
*ghosts* is inappropriate, because our evidence shows that the only
relation the *Sidhe* or real Fairies hold to ghosts is a superficial
one, the *Sidhe* and ghosts being alike only in respect to invisibility.
In the two chief Irish MSS., the *Book of the Dun Cow* and the *Book of
Leinster*, the Tuatha De Danann are described as 'gods

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

and not-gods'; and Sir John Rhy^s considers this an ancient formula
comparable with the Sanskrit *deva* and *adeva*, but not with 'poets
(*dée*) and husbandmen (*an dée*)' as the author of *Cóir Anmann*
learnedly guessed. <span id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_223) It is also
said, in the *Book of the Dun Cow*, that wise men do not know the origin
of the Tuatha De Danann, but that it seems likely to them that they came
from heaven, on account of their intelligence and for the excellence of
their knowledge'. <span id="fr_248"></span>[2](#fn_224) The hold of the
Tuatha De Danann on the Irish mind and spirit was so strong that even
Christian transcribers of texts could not deny their existence as a
non-human race of intelligent beings inhabiting Ireland, even though
they frequently misrepresented them by placing them on the level of evil
demons, <span id="fr_249"></span>[3](#fn_225) as the ending of the story
of the *Sick-Bed of Cuchulainn* illustrates:--'So that this was a vision
to Cuchulainn of being stricken by the people of the *Sid*: for the
demoniac power was great before the faith; and such was its greatness
that the demons used to fight bodily against mortals, and they used to
show them delights and secrets of how they would be in immortality. It
was thus they used to be believed in. So it is to such phantoms the
ignorant apply the names of *Side* and *Aes Side*.' <span
id="fr_250"></span>[4](#fn_226) A passage in the *Silva Gadelica* (ii.
202--3) not only tends to confirm this last statement, but it also shows
that the Irish people made a clear distinction between the god-race and
our own:--In *The Colloquy with the Ancients*, as St. Patrick and
Caeilte are talking with one another, 'a lone woman robed in mantle of
green, a smock of soft silk being next her skin, and on her forehead a
glittering plate of yellow gold,' came to them; and when Patrick asked
from whence she came, she replied: 'Out of *uaimh Chruachna*, or "the
cave of Cruachan".' Caeilte then asked: 'Woman, my soul, who art thou?'
'I am *Scothniamh* or "Flower-lustre", daughter of the Daghda's son
Bodhb derg.' Caeilte proceeded: 'And what started thee hither?' 'To

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

require of thee my marriage-gift, because once upon a time thou
promisedst me such.' And as they parleyed Patrick broke in with: 'It is
a wonder to us how we see you two: the girl young and invested with all
comeliness; but thou Caeilte, a withered ancient, bent in the back and
dingily grown grey.' 'Which is no wonder at all,' said Caeilte, 'for no
people of one generation or of one time are we: *she is of the Tuatha Dé
Danann, who are unfading and whose duration is perennial I am of the
sons of Milesius, that are perishable and fade away*.' The exact
distinction is between Caeilte, a withered old ancient--in most ways to
be regarded as a ghost called up that Patrick may question him about the
past history of Ireland--and a fairy-woman who is one of the *Sidhe* or
Tuatha De Danann. <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_227)

In two of the more ancient Irish texts, the *Echtra Nerai* <span
id="fr_252"></span>[2](#fn_228) or 'Expedition of Nera', a preliminary
tale in the introduction to the *Táin bó Cuailnge* or 'Theft of the
Cattle of Cuailnge'; and a passage from the *Togail Bruidne dâ Derga*,
or 'Destruction of Da Derga's Hostel', <span
id="fr_253"></span>[3](#fn_229) there seems

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

no reasonable doubt whatever about the Tuatha De Danann or *Sidhe* being
a race like what we call spirits. The first text describes how Ailill
and Medb in their palace of Cruachan celebrated the feast of *Samain*
(November Eve, a feast of the dead even in pre-Christian times). Two
culprits had been executed on the day before, and their bodies,
according to the ancient Irish custom, were left hanging from a tree
until the night of *Samain* should have passed; for on that night it was
dangerous to touch the bodies of the dead while demons and the people of
the *Sidhe* were at large throughout all Ireland, and mortals found near
dead bodies at such a time were in great danger of being *taken* by
these spirit hosts of the Tuatha De Danann. And so on this very night,
when thick darkness had settled down, Ailill desired to test the courage
of his warriors, and offered his own gold-hilted sword to any young man
who would go out and tie a coil of twisted twigs around the leg of one
of the bodies suspended from the tree. After many had made the attempt
and failed, because unable to brave the legions of demons and fairies,
Nera alone succeeded; but his success cost him dear, for he finally fell
under the power both of the dead man, round whose legs he had tied the
coil, and of an elfin host: with the dead man's body on his back, Nera
was obliged to go to a strange house that the thirst of the dead man
might be assuaged therein; and the dead man in drinking scattered 'the
last sip from his lips at the faces of the people that were in the
house, so that they all died'. Nera carried back the body; and on
returning to Cruachan he saw the fairy hosts going into the cave, 'for
the fairy-mounds of Erinn are always opened about Halloween.' Nera
followed after them until he came to their king in a palace of the
Tuatha De Danann, seemingly in the cavern or elsewhere underground;
where he remained and was married to one of the fairy women. She it was
who revealed to Nera the secret hiding-place, in a mysterious well, of
the king's golden crown, and then betrayed her

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

whole people by reporting to Nera the plan they had for attacking
Ailill's court on the Halloween to come. Moreover, Nera was permitted by
his fairy wife to depart from the *síd*; and he in taking leave of her
asked: 'How will it be believed of me that I have gone into the *síd*?'
'Take fruits of summer with thee,' said the woman. 'Then he took wild
garlic with him and primrose and golden fern.' And on the following
November Eve when the *síd* of Cruachan was again open, 'the men of
Connaught and the black hosts of exile' under Ailill and Medb plundered
it, taking away from it the crown of Briun out of the well. But 'Nera
was left with his people in the *síd*, and has not come out until now,
nor will he come till Doom.'

All of this matter is definitely enough in line with the living
Fairy-Faith: there is the same belief expressed as now about November
Eve being the time of all times when ghosts, demons, spirits, and
fairies are free, and when fairies *take* mortals and marry them to
fairy women; also the beliefs that fairies are living in secret places
in hills, in caverns, or under ground--palaces full of treasure and open
only on November Eve. In so far as the real fairies, the *Sidhe*, are
concerned, they appear as the rulers of the Feast of the Dead or
*Samain*, as the controllers of all spirits who are then at large; and,
allowing for some poetical imagination and much social psychology and
anthropomorphism, elements as common in this as in most literary
descriptions concerning the Tuatha De Danann, they are faithfully enough
presented.

The second text describes how King Conaire, in riding along a road
toward Tara, saw in front of him three strange horsemen, three men of
the *Sidhe*:--'Three red frocks had they, and three red mantles: three
red steeds they bestrode, and three red heads of hair were on them. Red
were they all, both body and hair and raiment, both steeds and men.'
'Who is it that fares before us?' asked Conaire. 'It was a taboo of mine
for those Three to go before me--the three Reds to the house of Red. Who
will follow them and tell them to come towards me in my track?' 'I will
follow

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

them,' says Lé fri flaith, Conaire's son. 'He goes after them, lashing
his horse, and overtook them not. There was the length of a spearcast
between them: but they did not gain upon him and he did not gain upon
them.' All attempts to come up with the red horsemen failed. But at
last, before they disappeared, one of the Three said to the king's son
riding so furiously behind them, 'Lo, my son, great the news. Weary are
the steeds we ride. We ride the steeds of Donn Tetscorach (?) from the
elfmounds. Though we are alive we are dead. Great are the signs:
destruction of life: sating of ravens: feeding of crows, strife of
slaughter: wetting of sword-edge, shields with broken bosses in hours
after sundown. Lo, my son!' Then they disappear. When Conaire and his
followers heard the message, fear fell upon them, and the king said:
'All my taboos have seized me to-night, since those Three \[Reds\] \[are
the\] banished folks (?).' In this passage we behold three horsemen of
the *Sidhe* banished from their elfmound because guilty of falsehood.
Visible for a time, they precede the king and so violate one of his
taboos; and then delivering their fearful prophecy they vanish. These
three of the Tuatha De Danann, majestic and powerful and weird in their
mystic red, are like the warriors of the 'gentry' seen by contemporary
seers in West Ireland. Though dead, that is in an invisible world like
the dead, yet they are living. It seems that in all three of the textual
examples already cited, the scribe has emphasized a different element in
the unique nature of the Tuatha De Danann. In the *Colloquy* it is their
eternal youth and beauty, in the *Echtra Nerai* it is their supremacy
over ghosts and demons on *Samain* and their power to steal mortals away
at such a time, and in this last their respect for honesty. And in each
case their portrayal corresponds to that of the 'gentry' and *Sidhe* by
modern Irishmen; so that the old Fairy-Faith and the new combine to
prove the People of the God whose mother was Dana to have been and to be
a race of beings who are like mortals, but not mortals, who to the
objective world are as though dead, yet to the subjective world are
fully living and conscious.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

O'Curry says:--'The term (*sídh*, pron. *shee*), as far as we know it,
is always applied in old writings to the palaces, courts, halls, or
residences of those beings which in ancient Gaedhelic mythology held the
place which ghosts, phantoms, and fairies hold in the superstitions of
the present day.' <span id="fr_254"></span>[1](#fn_230) In modern Irish
tradition, 'the People of the *Sidhe*,' or simply the *Sidhe*, refer to
the beings themselves rather than to their places of habitation. Partly
perhaps on account of this popular opinion that the *Sidhe* are a
subterranean race, they are sometimes described as gods of the earth or
*dei terreni*, as in the *Book of Armagh*; and since it was believed
that they, like the modern fairies, control the ripening of crops and
the milk-giving of cows, the ancient Irish rendered to them regular
worship and sacrifice, just as the Irish of to-day do by setting out
food at night for the fairy-folk to eat.

Thus after their conquest, these *Sidhe* or Tuatha De Danann in
retaliation, and perhaps to show their power as agricultural gods,
destroyed the wheat and milk of their conquerors, the Sons of Mil, as
fairies to-day can do; and the Sons of Mil were constrained to make a
treaty with their supreme king, Dagda, who, in *Cóir Anmann* (§ 150), is
himself called an earth-god. Then when the treaty was made the Sons of
Mil were once more able to gather wheat in their fields and to drink the
milk of their cows; <span id="fr_255"></span>[2](#fn_231) and we can
suppose that ever since that time their descendants, who are the people
of Ireland, remembering that treaty, have continued to reverence the
People of the Goddess Dana by pouring libations of milk to them and by
making them offerings of the fruits of the earth.

THE PALACES OF THE

SIDHE

The marvellous palaces to which the Tuatha De Danann retired when
conquered by the race of Mil were hidden in

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

the depths of the earth, in hills, or under ridges more or less
elevated. <span id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_232) At the time of their
conquest, Dagda their high king made a distribution of all such palaces
in his kingdom. He gave one *síd* to Lug, son of Ethne, another to Ogme;
and for himself retained two--one called *Brug na Boinne*, or Castle of
the Boyne, because it was situated on or near the River Boyne near Tara,
and the other called *Síd* or *Brug Maic ind Oc*, which means Enchanted
Palace or Castle of the Son of the Young. And this Mac ind Oc was
Dagda's own son by the queen Boann, according to some accounts, so that
as the name (Son of the Young) signifies, Dagda and Boann, both
immortals, both Tuatha De Danann, were necessarily always young, never
knowing the touch of disease, or decay, or old age. Not until
Christianity gained its psychic triumph at Tara, through the magic of
Patrick prevailing against the magic of the Druids--who seem to have
stood at that time as mediators between the People of the Goddess Dana
and the pagan Irish--did the Tuatha De Danann lose their immortal
youthfulness in the eyes of mortals and become subject to death. In the
most ancient manuscripts of Ireland the pre-Christian doctrine of the
immortality of the divine race 'persisted intact and without
restraint'; <span id="fr_257"></span>[2](#fn_233) but in the *Senchus na
relec* or 'History of the Cemeteries', from the *Leabhar na h-Uidhre*,
and in the *Lebar gabala* or 'Book of the Conquests', from the *Book of
Leinster*, it was completely changed by the Christian scribes. <span
id="fr_258"></span>[2](#fn_233)

When Dagda thus distributed the underground palaces, Mac ind Oc, or as
he was otherwise called Oengus, was absent and hence forgotten. So when
he returned, naturally he complained to his father, and the *Brug na
Boinne*, the king's own residence, was ceded to him for a night and a
day, but Oengus maintained that it was for ever. This palace was a most
marvellous one: it contained three trees which always bore fruit, a
vessel full of excellent drink, and two pigs--one alive and the other
nicely cooked ready to eat

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

at any time; and in this palace no one ever died. <span
id="fr_259"></span>[1](#fn_234) In the *Colloquy*, Caeilte tells of a
mountain containing a fairy palace which no man save Finn and six
companions, Caeilte being one of these, ever entered. The Fenians, while
hunting, were led thither by a fairy woman who had changed her shape to
that of a fawn in order to allure them; and the night being wild and
snowy they were glad to take shelter therein. Beautiful damsels and
their lovers were the inhabitants of the palace; in it there was music
and abundance of food and drink; and on its floor stood a chair of
crystal. <span id="fr_260"></span>[2](#fn_235) In another fairy palace,
the enchanted cave of Keshcorran, Conaran, son of Imidel, a chief of the
Tuatha De Danann, had sway; 'and so soon as he perceived that the
hounds' cry now sounded deviously, he bade his three daughters (that
were full of sorcery) to go and take vengeance on Finn for his hunting
' <span id="fr_261"></span>[3](#fn_236)--just as nowadays the 'good
people' take vengeance on one of our race if a fairy domain is violated.
Frequently the fairy palace is under a lake, as in the christianized
story of the *Disappearance of Caenchomrac*:--Once when 'the cleric
chanted his psalms, he saw \[come\] towards him a tall man that emerged
out of the loch: from the bottom of 'the water that is to say.' This
tall man informed the cleric that he came from an underwater monastery,
and explained 'that there should be subaqueous inhabiting by men is with
God no harder than that they should dwell in any other place'. <span
id="fr_262"></span>[4](#fn_237) In all these ancient literary accounts
of the Sidhe-palaces we easily recognize the same sort of palaces as
those described to-day by Gaelic peasants as the habitations of the'
gentry', or 'good people', or 'people of peace.' Such habitations are in
mountain caverns like those of Ben Bulbin or Knock Ma, or in fairy hills
or knolls like the Fairy-Hill at Aberfoyle on which Robert Kirk is
believed to have been *taken*, or beneath lakes. This brings us directly
to the way in which the *Sidhe* or Tuatha De Danann of the olden times
*took* fine-looking young men and maidens.

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

### HOW THE *SIDHE* 'TOOK' MORTALS

Perhaps one of the earliest and most famous literary accounts of such a
*taking* is that concerning Aedh, son of Eochaid Lethderg son of 'the
King of Leinster, who is represented as contemporary with Patrick. <span
id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_238) While Aedh was enjoying a game of hurley
with his boy companions near the *sídh* of Liamhain Softsmock, two of
the *sídh*-women, who loved the young prince, very suddenly appeared,
and as suddenly took him away with them into a fairy palace and kept him
there three years. It happened, however, that he escaped at the end of
that time, and, knowing the magical powers of Patrick, went to where the
holy man was, and thus explained himself:--'Against the youths my
opponents I (i. e. my side) took seven goals; but at the last one that I
took, here come up to me two women clad in green mantles: two daughters
of *Bodhb derg mac an Daghda*, and their names *Slad* and *Mumain*.
Either of them took me by a hand, and they led me off to a garish
*brugh*; whereby for now three years my people mourn after me, the
*sídh-*folk caring for me ever since, and until last night I got a
chance opening to escape from the *brugh*, when to the number of fifty
lads we emerged out of the *sídh* and forth upon the green. Then it was
that I considered the magnitude of that strait in which they of the
*sídh* had had me, and away from the *brugh* I came running to seek
thee, holy Patrick.' 'That,' said the saint, 'shall be to thee a
safeguard, so that neither their power nor their dominion shall any more
prevail against thee.' And so when Patrick had thus made Aedh proof
against the power of the fairy-folk, he kept him with him under the
disguise of a travelling minstrel until, arriving in Leinster, he
restored him to his father the king and to his inheritance: Aedh enters
the palace in his minstrel disguise; and in the presence of the royal
assembly Patrick commands him: 'Doff now once for all thy dark capacious
hood, and well mayest thou wear thy father's spear!' When the lad
removed his hood, and none there but recognized him, great

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

was the surprise. He seemed like one come back from the dead, for long
had his heirless father and people mourned for him. 'By our word,'
exclaimed the assembly in their joyous excitement, 'it is a good
cleric's gift!' And the king said: 'Holy Patrick, seeing that till this
day thou hast nourished him and nurtured, let not the Tuatha De Danann's
power any more prevail against the lad.' And Patrick answered: 'That
death which the King of Heaven and Earth hath ordained is the one that
he will have.' This ancient legend shows clearly that the Tuatha De
Danann, or *Sidhe*, in the time when the scribe wrote the *Colloquy*
were thought of in the same way as now, as able to *take* beautiful
mortals whom they loved, and able to confer upon them fairy immortality
which prevented 'that death which the King of Heaven and Earth hath
ordained'.

Mortals, did they will it, could live in the world of the *Sidhe* for
ever, and we shall see this more fully in our study of the Otherworld.
But here it will be interesting to learn that, unlike Aedh, whom some
perhaps would call a foolish youth, Laeghaire, also a prince, for he was
the son of the king of Connaught, entered a *dun* of the *Sidhe*, taking
fifty other warriors with him; and he and his followers found life in
Fairyland so pleasant that they all decided to enjoy it eternally.
Accordingly, when they had been there a year, they planned to return to
Connaught in order to bid the king and his people a final farewell. They
announced their plan, and Fiachna of the *Sidhe* told them how to
accomplish it safely:--'If ye would come back take with you horses, but
by no means dismount from off them'; 'So it was done: they went their
way and came upon a general assembly in which Connaught, as at the year
expired, mourned for the aforesaid warrior-band, whom now all at once
they perceived above them (i. e. on higher ground). Connaught sprang to
meet them, but Laeghaire cried: "Approach us not \[to touch us\]: 'tis
to bid you farewell that we are here!" "Leave me not!" Crimthann, his
father, said: "Connaught's royal power be thine; their silver and their
gold, their horses with their bridles, and their

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

noble women be at thy discretion, only leave me not!" But Laeghaire
turned from them and so entered again into the *sídh*, where with
Fiachna he exercises joint kingly rule; nor is he as yet come out of
it.' <span id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_239)

### HILL VISIONS OF *SIDHE* WOMEN

There are many recorded traditions which represent certain hills as
mystical places whereon men are favoured with visions of fairy women.
Thus, one day King Muirchertach

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

came forth to hunt on the border of the Brugh (near Stackallan Bridge,
County Meath), and his companions left him alone on his hunting-mound.
'He had not been there long when he saw a solitary damsel beautifully
formed, fair-haired, bright-skinned, with a green mantle about her
sitting near him on the turfen mound; and it seemed to him that of
womankind he had never beheld her equal in beauty and refinement.' <span
id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_240) In the Mabinogion of *Pwyll, Prince of
Dyvet*, which seems to be only a Brythonic treatment of an original
Gaelic tale, Pwyll seating himself on a mound where any mortal sitting
might see a prodigy, saw a fairy woman ride past on a white horse, and
she clad in a garment of shining gold. Though he tried to have his
servitor on the swiftest horse capture her, 'There was some magic about
the lady that kept her always the same distance ahead, though she
appeared to be riding slowly.' When on the second day Pwyll returned to
the mound the fairy woman came riding by as before, and the servitor
again gave unsuccessful chase. Pwyll saw her in the same manner on the
third day. He thereupon gave chase himself, and when he exclaimed to
her, 'For the sake of the man whom you love, wait for me!' she stopped;
and by mutual arrangement the two agreed to meet and to marry at the end
of a year. <span id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_241)

THE MINSTRELS OR MUSICIANS OF THE

SIDHE

Not only did the fairy-folk of more ancient tunes enjoy wonderful
palaces full of beauty and riches, and a life of eternal youth, but they
also had, even as now, minstrelsy and rare music--music to which that of
our own world could not be compared at all; for even Patrick himself
said that it would equal the very music of heaven if it were not for 'a
twang of the fairy spell that infests it'. <span
id="fr_267"></span>[3](#fn_242) And this is how it was that Patrick
heard the fairy music:--As he was travelling through Ireland he once sat
down on a grassy

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

knoll, as he often did in the good old Irish way, with Ulidia's king and
nobles and Caeilte also: 'Nor were they long there before they saw draw
near them a *scológ* or "non-warrior" that wore a fair green mantle
having in it a fibula of silver; a shirt of yellow silk next his skin,
over and outside that again a tunic of soft satin, and with a *timpán*
(a sort of harp) of the best slung on his back. "Whence comest thou,
*scológ*?"--asked the king. "Out of the *sídh* of the Daghda's son Bodhb
Derg, out of Ireland's southern part." "What moved thee out of the
south, and who art thou thyself?" "I am Cascorach, son of Cainchinn that
is *ollave* to the Tuatha De Danann, and am myself the makings of an
*ollave* (i.e. an aspirant to the grade). What started me was the design
to acquire knowledge, and information, and lore for recital, and the
Fianna's mighty deeds of valour, from Caeilte son of Ronan." Then he
took his *timpán* and made for them music and minstrelsy, so that he
sent them slumbering off to sleep.' And Cascorach's music was pleasing
to Patrick, who said of it: 'Good indeed it were, but for a twang of the
fairy spell that infests it; barring which nothing could more nearly
than it resemble Heaven's harmony.' <span
id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_243) And that very night which followed the
day on which the *ollave* to the Tuatha De Danann came to them was the
Eve of *Samain*. There was also another of these fairy *timpán*-players
called 'the wondrous elfin man', 'Aillén mac Midhna of the Tuatha De
Danann, that out of *sídh* Finnachaidh to the northward used to come to
Tara: the manner of his coming being with a musical *timpán* in his
hand, the which whenever any heard he would at once sleep. Then, all
being lulled thus, out of his mouth Aillén would emit a blast of fire.
It was on the solemn *Samain-*Day (November Day) he came in every year,
played his *timpán*, and to the fairy music that he made all hands would
fall asleep. With his breath he used to blow up the flame and so, during
a three-and-twenty years' spell, yearly burnt up Tara with all her
gear.' And it is said that Finn, finally overcoming the magic of Aillén,
slew him. <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_243)

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

Perhaps in the first musician, Cascorach, though he is described as the
son of a Tuatha De Danann minstrel, we behold a mortal like one of the
many Irish pipers and musicians who used to go, or even go yet, to the
fairy-folk to be educated in the musical profession, and then come back
as the most marvellous players that ever were in Ireland; though if
Cascorach were once a mortal it seems that he has been quite transformed
in bodily nature so as to be really one of the Tuatha De Danann himself.
But Allen mac Midhna is undoubtedly one of the mighty 'gentry' who
could--as we heard from County Sligo--destroy half the human race if
they wished. Aillén visits Tara, the old psychic centre both for
Ireland's high-kings and its Druids. He comes as it were against the
conquerors of his race, who in their neglectfulness no longer render due
worship and sacrifice on the Feast of *Samain* to the Tuatha De Danann,
the gods of 'the dead, at that time supreme; and then it is that he
works his magic against the royal palaces of the kings and Druids on the
ancient Hill. And to overcome the magic of Aillén and slay him, that is,
make it impossible for him to repeat his annual visits to Tara, it
required the might of the great hero Finn, who himself was related to
the same *Sidhe* race, for by a woman of the Tuatha De Danann he had his
famous son Ossian (Oisin). <span id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_244)

In *Gilla dé*, who is Manannan mac Lir, the greatest magician of the
Tuatha De Danann, disguised as a being who can disappear in the
twinkling of an eye whenever he wishes, and reappear unexpectedly as a
'kern that wore garb of yellow stripes', we meet with another fairy
musician. And to him O'Donnell says:--'By Heaven's grace again, since
first I heard the fame of them that within the hills and under the earth
beneath us make the fairy music,. . . music sweeter than thy strains I
have never heard; thou art in sooth a most melodious rogue!' <span
id="fr_271"></span>[2](#fn_245) And again it is said of

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

him:--'Then the *gilla decair* taking a harp played music so sweet. . .
and the king after a momentary glance at his own musicians never knew
which way he went from him.' <span id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_246)

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION AND WARFARE AMONG THE

SIDHE

So far, we have seen only the happy side of the life of the
Sidhe-folk--their palaces and pleasures and music; but there was a more
human (or anthropomorphic) side to their nature in which they wage war
on one another, and have their matrimonial troubles even as we moderns.
And we turn now to examine this other side of their life, to behold the
*Sidhe* as a warlike race; and as we do so let us remember that the
'gentry' in the Ben Bulbin country and in all Ireland, and the people of
Finvara in Knock Ma, and also the invisible races of California, are
likewise described as given to war and mighty feats of arms.

The invisible Irish races have always had a very distinct social
organization, so distinct in fact that Ireland can be divided according
to its fairy kings and fairy queens and their territories even
now; <span id="fr_273"></span>[2](#fn_247) and no doubt we see in this
how the ancient Irish anthropomorphically projected into an animistic
belief their own social conditions and racial characteristics. And this
social organization and territorial division ought to be understood
before we discuss the social troubles and consequent wars of the
*Sidhe*-folk. For example in Munster Bodb was king and his enchanted
palace was called the *Síd* of the Men of Femen; <span
id="fr_274"></span>[3](#fn_248) and we already know about the over-king
Dagda and his Boyne palace near Tara. In more modern times, especially
in popular fairy-traditions, Eevil or Eevinn (*Aoibhill* or *Aolbhinn*)
of the *Craig Liath* or Grey Rock is a queen of the Munster
fairies; <span id="fr_275"></span>[4](#fn_249) and Finvara is king of
the Connaught fairies (see [p. 42](ffcc121.htm#page_42)). There are also
the Irish fairy-queens

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cleeona
(*Cliodhna*, or in an earlier form *Clidna* \[cf. [p.
356](ffcc260.htm#page_356)\]) and Aine (see [p. 79](ffcc121.htm#page_79)
above).

We are now prepared to see the Tuatha De Danann in their domestic
troubles and wars; and the following story is as interesting as any, for
in it Dagda himself is the chief actor. Once when his own son Oengus
fell sick of a love malady, King Dagda, who ruled all the *Sidhe*-folk
in Ireland, joined forces with Ailill and Medb in order to compel Ethal
Anbual to deliver up his beautiful daughter Caer whom Oengus loved. When
Ethal Anbual's palace had been stormed and Ethal Anbual reduced to
submission, he declared he had no power over his daughter Caer, for on
the first of November each year, he said, she changed to a swan, or from
a swan to a maiden again. 'The first of November next,' he added, 'my
daughter will be under the form of a swan, near the Loch bel Draccon.
Marvellous birds will be seen there: my daughter will be surrounded by a
hundred and fifty other swans.' When the November Day arrived, Oengus
went to the lake, and, seeing the swans and recognizing Caer, plunged
into the water and instantly became a swan with her. While under the
form of swans, Oengus and Caer went together to the Boyne palace of the
king Dagda, his father, and remained there; and their singing was so
sweet that all who heard it slept three days and three nights. <span
id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_250) In this story, new elements in the
nature of the *Sidhe* appear, though like modern ones: the *Sidhe* are
able to assume other forms than their own, are subject to enchantments
like mortals; and when under the form of swans are in some perhaps
superficial aspects like the swan-maidens in stories which are
world-wide, and their swan-song has the same sweetness and magical
effect as in other countries. <span id="fr_277"></span>[2](#fn_251)

In the Rennes *Dinnshenchas* there is a tale about a war among the 'men
of the Elfmounds' over 'two lovable maidens who dwelt in the elfmound',
and when they delivered the battle 'they all shaped themselves into the

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

shapes of deer'. <span id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_252) Midir's Sons
under Donn mac Midir, in rebellion against the Daghda's son Bodh Derg,
fled away to an obscure *sídh*, where in yearly battle they met the
hosts of the other Tuatha De Danann under Bodh Derg; and it was into
this *sídh* or fairy palace on the very eve before the annual contest
that Finn and his six companions were enticed by the fairy woman in the
form of a fawn, to secure their aid. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_253) And in another tale, Laeghaire, son of
the king of Connaught, with fifty warriors, plunged into a lake to the
fairy world beneath it, in order to assist the fairy man, who came
thence to them, to recover his wife stolen by a rival. <span
id="fr_280"></span>[2](#fn_253)

THE *SIDHE* AS WAR-GODDESSES OR THE

BADB

It is in the form of birds that certain of the Tuatha De Danann appear
as war-goddesses and directors of battle, <span
id="fr_281"></span>[3](#fn_254)--and we learn from one of our witnesses
([p. 46](ffcc121.htm#page_46)) that the 'gentry' or modern *Sidhe*-folk
take sides even now in a great war, like that between Japan and Russia.
It is in their relation to the hero Cuchulainn that one can best study
the People of the Goddess Dana in their role as controllers of human
war. In the greatest of the Irish epics, the *Tam Bó Cuailnge*, where
Cuchulainn is under their influence, these war-goddesses are called
*Badb* <span id="fr_282"></span>[4](#fn_255) (or *Bodb*) which here
seems to be a collective term for *Neman*, *Macha*, and *Morrigu* (or
*Morrigan*) <span id="fr_283"></span>[5](#fn_256) --each of whom
exercises a particular supernatural power. *Neman* appears as the
confounder of armies, so that friendly bands, bereft of their senses by
her, slaughter one another; *Macha* is a fury that riots and revels
among

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

the slain; while *Morrigu*, the greatest of the three, by her presence
infuses superhuman valour into Cuchulainn, nerves him for the cast, and
guides the course of his unerring spear. And the Tuatha De Danann in
infusing this valour into the great hero show themselves--as we already
know them to be on *Samain* Eve--the rulers of all sorts of demons of
the air and awful spirits:--In the *Book of Leinster* (fol. 57, B 2) it
is recorded that 'the satyrs, and sprites, and maniacs of the valleys,
and demons of the air, shouted about him, for the Tuatha De Danann were
wont to impart their valour to him, in order that he might be more
feared, more dreaded, more terrible, in every battle and battle-field,
in every combat and conflict, into which he went.'

The Battles of Moytura seem in most ways to be nothing more than the
traditional record of a long warfare to determine the future spiritual
control of Ireland, carried on between two diametrically opposed orders
of invisible beings, the Tuatha De Danann representing the gods of light
and good and the Fomorians representing the gods of darkness and evil.
It is said that after the second of these battles 'The *Morrigu*,
daughter of Ermnas (the Irish war-goddess), proceeded to proclaim that
battle and the mighty victory which had taken place, to the royal
heights of Ireland and to its fairy host and its chief waters and its
river-mouths '. <span id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_257) For good had
prevailed over evil, and it was settled that all Ireland should for ever
afterwards be a sacred country ruled over by the People of the Goddess
Dana and the Sons of Mil jointly. So that here we see the Tuatha De
Danann with their war-goddess fighting their own battles in which human
beings play no part.

It is interesting to observe that this Irish war-goddess, the *bodb* or
*badb*, considered of old to be one of the Tuatha De Danann, has
survived to our own day in the fairy-lore of the chief Celtic countries.
In Ireland the survival is best seen in the popular and still almost
general belief among the peasantry that the fairies often exercise their
magical powers under the form of royston-crows; and for this

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

reason these birds are always greatly dreaded and avoided. The resting
of one of them on a peasant's cottage may signify many things, but often
it means the death of one of the family or some great misfortune, the
bird in such a case playing the part of a *bean-sidhe* (banshee). And
this folk-belief finds its echo in the recorded tales of Wales,
Scotland, and Brittany. In the *Mabinogi*, 'Dream of Rhonabwy,' Owain,
prince of Rheged and a contemporary of Arthur, has a wonderful crow
which always secures him victory in battle by the aid of three hundred
other crows under its leadership. In Campbell's *Popular Tales of the
West Highlands* the fairies very often exercise their power in the form
of the common hoody crow; and in Brittany there is a folk-tale entitled
'*Les Compagnons*' <span id="fr_285"></span>[1](#fn_258) in which the
chief actor is a fairy under the form of a magpie who lives in a royal
forest just outside Rennes. <span id="fr_286"></span>[2](#fn_259)

W. M. Hennessy has shown that the word *bodb* or *badb*, aspirated
*bodhbh* or *badhbh* (pronounced *bov* or *bav*), originally signified
rage, fury, or violence, and ultimately implied a witch, fairy, or
goddess; and that as the memory of this Irish goddess of war survives in
folk-lore, her emblem is the well-known scald-crow, or
royston-crow. <span id="fr_287"></span>[3](#fn_260) By referring to
Peter O'Connell's *Irish Dictionary* we are able to confirm this popular
belief which identifies the battle-fairies with

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

the royston-crow, and to discover that there is a definite relationship
or even identification between the *Badb* and the *Bean-sidhe* or
banshee, as there is in modern Irish folklore between the royston-crow
and the fairy who announces a death. *Badb-catha* is made to equal
'Fionog, a royston-crow, a squall crow'; *Badb* is defined as a
'*bean-sidhe*, a female fairy, phantom, or spectre, supposed to be
attached to certain families, and to appear sometimes in the form of
squall-crows, or royston-crows'; and the *Badb* in the threefold aspect
is thus explained: '*Macha,* i. e. a royston-crow; *Morrighain*, i. e.
the great fairy; *Neamhan*, i. e. *Badb catha nó feannóg*; *a badb
catha*, or royston-crow.' Similar explanations are given by other
glossarists, and thus the evidence of etymological scholarship as well
as that of folk-lore support the Psychological Theory.

### THE *SIDHE* IN THE BATTLE OF CLONTARF, A. D. 1014

The People of the Goddess Dana played an important part in human warfare
even so late as the Battle of Clontarf, fought near Dublin, April 23,
1014; and at that time fairy women and phantom-hosts were to the Irish
unquestionable existences, as real as ordinary men and women. It is
recorded in the manuscript story of the battle, of which numerous copies
exist, that the fairy woman Aoibheall <span
id="fr_288"></span>[1](#fn_261) came to Dunlang O'Hartigan before the
battle and begged him not to fight, promising him life and happiness for
two hundred years if he would put off fighting for a single day; but the
patriotic Irishman expressed his decision to fight for Ireland, and then
the fairy woman foretold how he and his friend Murrough, and Brian and
Conaing and all the nobles of Erin and even his own son Turlough, were
fated to fall in the conflict.

On the eve of the battle, Dunlang comes to his friend Murrough directly
from the fairy woman; and Murrough

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

upon seeing him reproaches him for his absence in these -words:--'Great
must be the love and attachment of some woman for thee which has induced
thee to abandon me.' 'Alas O King,' answered Dunlang, 'the delight which
I have abandoned for thee is greater, if thou didst but know it, namely,
life without death, without cold, without thirst, without hunger,
without decay, beyond any delight of the delights of the earth to me,
until the judgement, and heaven after the judgement; and if I had not
pledged my word to thee I would not have come here; and, moreover, it is
fated for me to die on the day that thou shalt die.' When Murrough has
heard this terrible message, the prophecy of his own death in the
battle, despondency seizes him; and then it is that he declares that he
for Ireland like Dunlang for honour has also sacrificed the opportunity
of entering and living in that wonderful Land of Eternal Youth:--'Often
was I offered in hills, and in fairy mansions, this world (the fairy
world) and these gifts, but I never abandoned for one night my country
nor mine inheritance for them.' <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_262)

And thus is described the meeting of the two armies at Clontarf, and the
demons of the air and the phantoms, and all the hosts of the invisible
world who were assembled to scatter confusion and to revel in the
bloodshed, and how above them in supremacy rose the *Badb*:--'It will be
one of the wonders of the day of judgement to relate the description of
this tremendous onset. There arose a wild, impetuous, precipitate, mad,
inexorable, furious, dark, lacerating, merciless, combative, contentious
*badb*, which was shrieking and fluttering over their heads. And there
arose also the satyrs, and sprites, and the maniacs of the valleys, and
the witches, and goblins, and owls, and destroying demons of the air and
firmament, and the demoniac phantom host; and they were inciting and
sustaining valour and battle with them.' <span
id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_263) It is said of Murrough (*Murchadh*) as
he entered the thick of the fight and prepared to assail the

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

foreign invaders, the Danes, when they had repulsed the Dal-Cais, that
'he was seized with a boiling terrible anger, an excessive elevation and
greatness of spirit and mind. A bird of valour and championship rose in
him, and fluttered over his head and on his breath'. <span
id="fr_291"></span>[1](#fn_264)

### CONCLUSION

The recorded or manuscript Fairy-Faith of the Gaels corresponds in all
essentials with the living Gaelic Fairy-Faith: the Tuatha De Danann or
*Sidhe*, the 'Gentry', the 'Good People', and the 'People of Peace' are
described as a race of invisible divine beings eternally young and
unfading. They inhabit fairy palaces, enjoy rare feasts and love-making,
and have their own music and minstrelsy. They are essentially majestic
in their nature; they wage war in their own invisible realm against
other of its inhabitants like the ancient Fomorians; they frequently
direct human warfare or nerve the arm of a great hero like Cuchulainn;
and demons of the air, spirit hosts, and awful unseen creatures obey
them. Mythologically they are gods of light and good, able to control
natural phenomena so as to make harvests come forth abundantly or not at
all. But they are not such mythological beings as we read about in
scholarly dissertations on mythology, dissertations so learned in their
curious and unreasonable and often unintelligible hypotheses about the
workings of the mind among primitive men. The way in which social
psychology has deeply affected all such animistic beliefs was pointed
out above in chapter iii. In chapter xi, entitled *Science and Fairies*,
our position with respect to the essential nature of the fairy races
will be made clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[283:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_241) Chief general
references: *Le Cycle Mythologique Irlandais* (Paris, 1884) and
*L'Epopée celtique en Irlande* (Paris, 1892)--both by H. D'Arbois de
Jubainville. Chief sources: The *Book of Armagh*, a collection of
ecclesiastical MSS. Probably written at Armagh, and finished in A.D. 807
by the learned scribe Ferdomnach of Armagh; the *Leabhar na h-Uidre* or
'Book of the Dun Cow', the most ancient of the great collections of MSS.
containing the old Irish romances, compiled about A.D. 1100 in the
monastery of Clonmacnoise; the *Book of Leinster*, a twelfth-century MS
compiled by Finn Mac Gorman, Bishop of Kildare; the *Yellow Book of
Lecan* (fifteenth century); and the *Book of Lismore*, an old Irish MS
found in 1814 by workmen while making repairs in the castle of Lismore,
and thought to be of the fifteenth century. The *Book of Lismore*
contains the *Agallamh na senórach* or 'Colloquy of the Ancients' which
has been edited by S. H. O'Grady in his *Silva Gadelica* (London, 1892),
and by Whitley Stokes, *Ir. Texte*, iv. I. For additional texts and
editions of texts see Notes by R. I. Best to his translation of *Le
Cycle Mythologique Irlandais* (Dublin, 1903).

<span id="fn_220"></span>[284:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_244) Cf. *Le Cycle Myth.
Irl.*, pp. 144-5

<span id="fn_221"></span>[284:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_245) *Cf. Le Cycle Myth.
Irl.*, pp. 266-7. From the way they are described in many of the old
Irish manuscripts, we may possibly regard the Tuatha De Danann as
reflecting to some extent the characteristics of an early human
population in Ireland. In other words, on an already flourishing belief
in spiritual beings, known as the *Sidhe*, was superimposed, through
anthropomorphism, an Irish folk-memory about a conquered pre-Celtic race
of men who claimed descent from a mother goddess called Dana.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[285:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_246) Page 10, col. 2,
II. 6-8; cf. *Le Cycle Myth. Irl.*, p. 143.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[286:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_247) Rhy^s, *Hib.
Lect.*, p. 581 n.; and *Cóir Anmann*, in *Ir. Texte*, III, ii. 355.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[286:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_248) Kuno Meyer's trans.
in *Voy. of Bran*, ii. 300.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[286:3](ffcc240.htm#fr_249) Cf. Standish
O'Grady, *Early Bardic Literature* (London, 1879), pp. 65-6

<span id="fn_226"></span>[286:4](ffcc240.htm#fr_250) L. U.; cf. A. Nutt,
*Voy. of Bran*, i. 157-8.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[287:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_251) Before Caeilte
appears, Patrick is chanting Mass and pronouncing benediction 'on the
rath in which Finn Mac Cumall (the slain leader of the Fianna) has been:
the rath of Drumderg'. This chanting and benediction act magically as a
means of calling up the ghosts of the other Fianna, for, as the text
continues, thereupon 'the clerics saw Caeilte and his band draw near
them; and fear fell on them before the tall men with their huge
wolf-dogs that accompanied them, *for they were not people of one epoch
or of one time with the clergy*. Then Heaven's distinguished one, that
pillar of dignity and angel on earth, Calpurn's son Patrick, apostle of
the Gael, rose and took the aspergillum to sprinkle holy water on the
great men; floating over whom until that day there had been \[and were
now\] a thousand legions of demons. Into the hills and "skalps", into
the outer borders of the region and of the country, the demons forthwith
departed in all directions; after which the enormous men sat down'
(*Silva Gadelica*, ii. 103). Here, undoubtedly, we observe a literary
method of rationalizing the ghosts of the Fianna; and their sudden and
mysterious coming and personal aspects can be compared with the sudden
and mysterious coming and personal aspects of the Tuatha De Danann as
recorded in certain Irish manuscripts.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[287:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_252) Kuno Meyer's trans.
in *Rev. Celt.*, x. 214-27. This tale is probably as old as the ninth or
tenth century, so far as its present form is concerned, though
representing very ancient traditions (Nutt, *Voy. of Bran*, i. 209).

<span id="fn_229"></span>[287:3](ffcc240.htm#fr_253) Stokes's trans. in
*Rev. Celt*. xxii. 36-40. This text is one of the earliest with
references to fairy beings, and may go back to the eighth <span
id="page_288">p. 288</span> or ninth century as a literary composition,
though it too represents much older traditions.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[291:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_254) E. O'Curry,
*Lectures on Manuscript Materials* (Dublin, 1861), p. 504.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[291:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_255) In the *Book of
Leinster*, pp. 245-6; cf. *Le Cycle Myth. Irl*., p. 269.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[292:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_256) Cf. *Mesca Ulad*,
Hennessy's ed., in *Todd Lectures*, Ser. I (Dublin, 1889), p 2.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[292:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_258) Cf. *Le Cycle Myth.
Irl.*, pp. 273-6.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[293:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_259) Cf. *Le Cycle Myth.
Irl.*; pp. 273-6.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[293:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_260) Cf. *Silva
Gadelica*, ii. 222-3.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[293:3](ffcc240.htm#fr_261) Ib., ii. 343-7.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[293:4](ffcc240.htm#fr_262) Ib., ii. 94-6.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[294:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_263) *Silva Gadelica*,
ii. 204-20.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[296:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_264) *Silva Gadelica*,
ii. 290-1. In many old texts mortals are not forcibly *taken*; but go to
the fairy world through love for a fairy woman; or else to accomplish
there some mission.

No doubt the most curious elements in this text are those which
represent the prince and his warrior companions, fresh come from
Fairyland, as in some mysterious way so changed that they must neither
dismount from their horses and thus come in contact with the earth, nor
allow any mortal to touch them; for to his father the king who came
forward in joy to embrace him after having mourned him as dead,
Laeghaire cried, 'Approach us not to touch us!' Some unknown magical
bodily transmutation seems to have come about from their sojourn among
the Tuatha De Danann, who are eternally young and unfading--a
transmutation apparently quite the same as that which the 'gentry' are
said to bring about now when one of our race is taken to live with them.
And in all fairy stories no mortal ever returns from Fairyland a day
older than on entering it, no matter how many years may have elapsed.
The idea reminds us of the dreams of mediaeval alchemists who thought
there exists, if one could only discover it, some magic potion which
will so transmute every atom of the human body that death can never
affect it. Probably the Christian scribe in writing down these strange
words had in mind what Jesus said to Mary Magdalene when she beheld him
after the Resurrection:--'Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended unto
the Father.' The parallel would be a striking and exact one in any case,
for it is recorded that Jesus after he had arisen from the dead--had
come out of Hades or the invisible realm of subjectivity which, too, is
Fairyland--appeared to some and not to others--some being able to
recognize him and others not; and concerning the nature of Jesus's body
at the Ascension not all theologians are agreed. Some believe it to have
been a physical body so purified and transmuted as to be like, or the
same as, a spiritual body, and thus capable of invisibility and of
entrance into the Realm of Spirit. The Scotch minister and seer used
this same parallel in describing the nature and power of fairies and
spirits ([p. 91](ffcc122.htm#page_91)); hence it would seem to follow,
if we admit the influence in the Irish text to be Christian, that early,
like modern Christians, have, in accordance with Christianity, described
the nature of the *Sidhe* so as to correspond with what we know it to be
in the Fairy-Faith itself, both anciently and at the present day.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[297:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_265) *Death of
Muirchertach*, Stokes's trans., in *Rev. Celt.*, xxiii. 397.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[297:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_266) Cf. J. Loth, *Les
Mabinogion* (Paris, 1889), i. 38-52.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[297:3](ffcc240.htm#fr_267) *Silva Gadelica*,
ii. 187-92.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[298:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_269) *Silva Gadelica*,
ii. 142-4.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[299:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_270) Campbell, *The
Fians*, pp. 79-80. In *Silva Gadelica*, ii. 522*,* it is stated that the
mother of Ossian bore him whilst in the shape of a doe. The mother of
Ossian in animal shape may be an example of an ancient Celtic totemistic
survival.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[299:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_271) *Silva Gadelica*.
ii. 311--24.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[300:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_272) *Silva Gadelica*,
ii. 311-24.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[300:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_273) For an enumeration
of the Tuatha De Danann chieftains and their respective territories see
*Silva Gadelica*, ii. 225.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[300:3](ffcc240.htm#fr_274) Cf. Le *Cycle Myth.
Irl.*, p. 285.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[300:4](ffcc240.htm#fr_275) I am personally
indebted for these names to Dr. Douglas Hyde.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[301:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_276) Cf. *Le Cycle Myth.
Irl.*, pp. 284-9; cf. *Rev. Celt.*, iii. 347.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[301:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_277) *Cf.* E. S.
Hartland, *Science of Fairy Tales* (London, 1891), cc. x-.xi.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[302:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_278) Stokes's trans. in
*Rev. Celt.*, xvi. 274-5.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[302:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_280) *Silva Gadelica*,
ii. 222 ff.; ii. 290. In another version of the second tale, referred to
above (on page 295), Laeghaire and his fifty companions enter the fairy
world through a *dún*.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[302:3](ffcc240.htm#fr_281) Sometimes, as in
*Da Choca's Hostel* (*Rev. Celt.*, xxi. 157, 315), the *Badb* appears as
a weird woman uttering prophecies. In this case the *Badb* watches over
Cormac as his doom comes. She is described as standing on one foot, and
with one eye closed (apparently in a bird's posture), as she chanted to
Cormac this prophecy:--'I wash the harness of a king who will perish.'

<span id="fn_255"></span>[302:4](ffcc240.htm#fr_282) Synonymous names
are *Badb-catha*, *Fea*, *Ana*. Cf. *Rev. Celt.*, i. 35--7.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[302:5](ffcc240.htm#fr_283) Cf. Hennessy,
*Ancient Irish Goddess of War*, in *Rev. Celt.*, i. 32--55.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[303:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_284) Stokes, *Second
Battle of Moytura*, in Rev. Celt., xii. 109-11.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[304:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_285) Luzel, *Contes
populaires de Basse Bretagne*, iii. 296--311.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[304:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_286) The Celtic examples
recall non-Celtic ones: the raven was sacred among the ancient
Scandinavians and Germans, being looked upon as the emblem of Odin; in
ancient Egypt and Rome commonly, and to a less extent in ancient Greece,
gods often declared their will through birds or even took the form of
birds; in Christian scriptures the Spirit of God or the Holy Ghost
descended upon Jesus at his baptism in the semblance of a dove; and it
is almost a world-wide custom to symbolize the human soul under the form
of a bird or butterfly. Possibly such beliefs as these are relics of a
totemistic creed which in times long previous to history was as
definitely held by the ancestors of the nations of antiquity, including
the ancient Celts, as any totemistic creed to be found now among native
Australians or North American Red Men. At all events, in the story of a
bird ancestry of Conaire we seem to have a perfectly clear example of a
Celtic totemistic survival--even though Dr. Frazer may not admit it as
such (cf. *Rev. Celt.*, xxii. 20, 24; xii. 242-3).

<span id="fn_260"></span>[304:3](ffcc240.htm#fr_287) Hennessy, *The
Ancient Irish Goddess of War*, in *Rev. Celt.*, i. 32-57.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[305:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_288) *Aoibheall*, who
came to tell Brian Borumba of his death at Clontarf, the family banshee
of the royal house of Munster. Cf. J. H. Todd, *War of the Gaedhil with
the Gaill* (London, 1867), p. 201.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[306:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_289) Hyde, *Literary
History of Ireland*, p. 440.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[306:2](ffcc240.htm#fr_290) *Cf.* Hennessy, in
*Rev. Celt.*, i. 39-40. In place of *badb*, Dr. Hyde (*Lit. Hist. Irl.*,
p. 440) uses the word *vulture*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[307:1](ffcc240.htm#fr_291) Hennessy, in *Rev.
Celt*., i. 52.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Brythonic Divinities](ffcc250)
