[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft76)  [Next](sfft78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LOTHIAN TOM. <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153)

#### I.

TOM being grown up to years and age of man, thought himself wiser and
slyer than his father; and there were several things about the house
which he liked better than to work; so he turned to be a dealer amongst
brutes, a cowper of horses and cows, etc., and even wet ware, amongst
the brewers and brandy shops, until he cowped himself to the toom
halter, and then his parents would supply him no more. He knew his
grandmother had plenty of money, but she would give him none; but the
old woman had a good black cow of her own, which Tom went to the fields
one evening and catches, and takes her to an old waste <span
id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_154) house which stood at a distance from any
other, and there he kept her two or three days, giving her meat and
drink at night when it was dark, and made the old woman believe somebody
had stolen the cow for their winter's mart, which was grief enough to
the

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

old woman, for the loss of her cow. However, she employs Tom to go to a
fair that was near by, and buy her another; she gives him three pounds,
which Tom accepts of very thankfully, and promises to buy her one as
like the other as possibly he could get; then he takes a piece of chalk,
and brays it as small as meal, and steeps it in a little water, and
therewith rubs over the cow's face and back, which made her baith
brucket and rigget. <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155) So Tom in the
morning takes the cow to a public-house within a little of the fair, and
left her till the fair was over, and then drives her home before him;
and as soon as they came home, the cow began to rout as it used to do,
which made the old woman to rejoice, thinking it was her own cow; but
when she saw her white, sighed and said, "Alas! thou'll never be like
the kindly brute my Black Lady, and ye rout as like her as ony ever I
did hear." But says Tom to himself, "'Tis a mercy you know not what she
says, or all would be wrong yet." So in two or three days the old woman
put forth her bra' rigget cow in the morning with the rest of her
neighbours' cattle, but it came on a sore day of heavy rain, which
washed away all the white from her face and back; so the old woman's
Black Lady came home at night, and her rigget cow went away with the
shower, and was never heard of. But Tom's father having some suspicion,
and looking narrowly into the cow's face, found some of the chalk not
washed away, and then he gave poor Tom

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

a hearty beating, and sent him away to seek his fortune with a skin full
of sore bones.

### II.

Tom being now turned to his own shifts, considered with himself how to
raise a little more money; and so gets a string as near as he could
guess to be the length of his mother, and to Edinburgh he goes, to a
wright who was acquainted with his father and mother. The wright asked
him how he did; he answered him, very soberly, he had lost a good
dutiful mother last night, and there's a measure for the coffin. Tom
went out and stayed for some time, and then comes in again, and tells
the wright. he did not know what to do, for his father had ordered him
to get money from such a man, whom he--named, and he that day was gone
out of town. . . . The wright asked him how much he wanted. To which he
answered, a guinea and a half. Then Tom gave him strict orders to be out
next day against eleven o'clock with the coffin, and he should get his
money altogether. So Tom set off to an ale-house with the money, and
lived well while it lasted. Next morning the wright and his two lads
went out with the coffin; and as they were going into the house they met
Tom's mother, who asked the master how he did, and where he was going
with that fine coffin? Not knowing well what to say, being surprised to
see her alive, at last he told her that her son brought in the measure
the day before, and had got a guinea and a half from him, with which he

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

said he was to buy some necessaries for the funeral. "Oh, the rogue!"
said she, "has he play'd me that?" So the wright got his lent money, and
so much for his trouble, and had to take back his coffin with him again.

### III.

Tom being short of money, began to think how he could raise a fresh
supply; so he went to the port among the shearers, <span
id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156) and there he hired about thirty of them,
and agreed to give them a whole week's shearing at tenpence a-day, which
was twopence higher than any had got that year; this made the poor
shearers think he was a very honest, generous, and genteel master, as
ever they met with; for he took them all into an ale-house, and gave
them a hearty breakfast. "Now," says Tom, "when there is so many of you
together, and perhaps from very different parts, and being unacquainted
with one another, I do not know but there may be some of you honest men
and some of you rogues; and as you are all to lie in one barn together,
any of you who has got money, you will be surest to give it to me, and
I'll mark it down in my book with your names, and what I receive from
each of you, and you shall have it all again on Saturday night, when you
receive your wages." "Oh, very well, goodman, there's mine; take mine,"
said every one faster than another. Some gave him five, six, seven, and
eight shillings--even all that they

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

had earn'd thro' the harvest, which amounted to near seven pounds
sterling. So Tom, having got all their money, he goes on with them till
about three miles out of town, and coming to a field of standing corn,
though somewhat green, yet convenient for his purpose, as it lay at some
distance from any house--so he made them begin work there, telling them
he was going to order dinner for them, and send his own servants to join
them. Then he sets off with all the speed he could, but takes another
road into the town lest they should follow and catch him. Now when the
people to whom, the corn belonged saw such a band in their field, they
could not understand the meaning of it; so the farmer whose corn it was
went off, crying always as he ran to them to stop; but they would not,
until he began to strike at them, and they at him, he being in a great
passion, as the corn was not fully ripe. At last, by force of argument,
and other people coming up to them, the poor shearers were convinced
they had got the bite, which caused them to go away sore lamenting their
misfortune.

Two or three days thereafter, as Tom was going down Canongate in
Edinburgh, he meets one of his shearers, who knew and kept fast by him,
demanding back his money, and also satisfaction for the rest. "Whisht,
whisht," says Tom, "and you'll get yours and something else beside." So
Tom takes him into the gaol, and calls for a bottle of ale and a dram,
then takes the gaoler aside, as if he had been going to borrow some
money from him, and says to the gaoler, "This man is a great thief. I
and other two have been

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

in search for him these three days, and the other two men have the
warrant with them; so if you keep this rogue here till I run and bring
them, you shall have a guinea in reward." "Yes," says the gaoler, "go,
and I'll secure the rogue for you." So Tom gets off, leaving the poor
innocent fellow and the gaoler struggling together, and then sets out
for England directly.

### IV.

Tom having now left his own native country, went into the county of
Northumberland, where he hired himself to an old miser of a farmer,
where he continued for several years, performing his duty in his service
very well, though sometimes playing tricks on those about him. But his
master had a naughty custom, he would allow them no candle at night, to
see with when at supper. So Tom one night sets himself next to his
master, and as they were all about to fall on, Tom puts his spoon into
the heart of the dish, where the crowdy was hottest, and claps a
spoonful into his master's mouth. "A pox on you for a rogue," cried his
master, "for my mouth is all burnt." "A pox on you for a master," says
Tom, "for you keep a house as dark as Purgatory, for I was going to my
mouth with the soup and missed the way, it being so dark. Don't think,
master, that I am such a big fool as to feed you while I have a mouth of
my own." So from that night that Tom burnt his master's mouth with the
hot crowdy, they always got a candle to show them light at supper, for
his master

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

would feed no more in the dark while Tom was present.

There was a servant girl in the house, who always when she made the beds
neglected to make Tom's and would have him do it himself. "Well, then,"
says Tom, "I have harder work to do, and I shall do that too." So next
day when Tom was at the plough, he saw his master coming from the house
towards him. He left the horses and the plough standing in the field.
and goes away towards his master, who cried, "What is wrong? or is there
anything broke with you?" "No, no," said Tom; "but I am going home to
make my bed; it has not been made these two weeks, and now it is about
the time the maid makes all the rest, so I'll go and make mine too."
"No, no," says his master, "go to your plough, and I'll cause it to be
made every night." "Then," says Tom, "I'll plough two or three furrows
more in the time." So Tom gained his end.

### V.

One day a butcher came and brought a fine fat calf from Tom's master,
and Tom laid it on the horse's neck, before the butcher. When he was
gone, "Now," says Tom, "what will you hold, master, but I'll steal the
calf from the butcher before he goes two miles off?" Says his master,
"I'll hold a guinea you don't." "Done," says Tom. Into the house he
goes, and takes a good shoe of his master's, and runs another way across
a field, till he got before the butcher,

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

near the corner of a hedge, where there was an open and turning of the
way: here Tom places himself behind the hedge, and throws the shoe into
the middle of the highway; so, when the butcher came up riding, with his
calf before him, "Hey," said he to himself, "there's a good shoe! If I
knew how to get on my calf again, I would light for it; but what
signifies one shoe without its neighbour?" So on he rides and lets it
lie. Tom then slips out and takes up the shoe, and runs across the
fields until he got before the butcher, at another open of a hedge,
about half-a-mile distant, and throws out the shoe again on the middle
of the road; then up comes the butcher, and seeing it, says to himself:
"Now I shall have a pair of good shoes for the lifting;" and down he
comes, lays the calf on the ground, and tying his horse to the hedge,
runs back, thinking to get the other shoe, in which time Tom whips up
the calf and shoe, and home he comes, demanding his wager, which his
master could not refuse, being so fairly won. The poor butcher not
finding the shoe, came back to his horse, and missing the calf, knew not
what to do; but thinking it had broke the rope from about its feet, and
had run into the fields, the butcher spent the day in search of it
amongst the hedges and ditches, and returned to Tom's master at night,
intending to go in search again for it next day, and gave them a tedious
relation how he came to lose it by a cursed pair of shoes, which he
believed the devil had dropped in his way and taken the calf and shoes
along with him, but he was thankful he had left his old horse to carry,

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

him home. Next morning Tom set to work, and makes a fine white face on
the calf with chalk and water; then brings it out and sells it to the
butcher, which was good diversion to his master and other servants, to
see the butcher buy his own calf again. No sooner was he gone with it,
but Tom says, "Now, master, what will you hold but I'll steal it from
him again ere he goes two miles off?" "No, no," says his master, "I'll
hold no more bets with you; but I'll give you a shilling if you do it."
"Done," says Tom, "it shall cost you no more;" and away he runs through
the fields, until he came before the butcher, hard by the place where he
stole the calf from him the day before; and there he lies down behind
the hedge, and as the butcher came past, he put his hand on his mouth
and cries baw, baw, like a calf. The butcher hearing this, swears to
himself that there was the calf he had lost the day before: down he
comes, and throws the calf on the ground, gets through the hedge in all
haste, thinking he had no more to do but to take it up; but as he came
in at one part of the hedge, Tom jumped out at another, and gets the
calf on his back; then goes over the hedge on the other side, and
through the fields he came safely home, with the calf on his back, while
the poor butcher spent his time and labour in vain, running from hedge
to hedge, and hole to hole, seeking the calf. So the butcher returning
to his horse again, and finding his other calf gone, he concluded that
it was done by some invisible spirit about that spot of ground, and so
went home lamenting the loss of his calf. When Tom

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

got home he washed the white face off the stolen calf, and his master
sent the butcher word to come and buy another calf, which he accordingly
did in a few days after, and Tom sold him the same calf a third time,
and then told him the whole affair as it was acted, giving him his money
again. So the butcher got fun for his trouble.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[293:1](sfft77.htm#fr_153) Dougal Graham, *The
Comical Tricks of Lothian Tom*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[293:2](sfft77.htm#fr_154) Empty.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[294:1](sfft77.htm#fr_155) Spotted on body and
face.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[296:1](sfft77.htm#fr_156) Reapers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ploughman's Glory; Or, Tom's Song.](sfft78)
