[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft57)  [Next](sfft59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SEAL-CATCHER'S ADVENTURE. <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90)

THERE was once upon a time a man who lived upon the northern coasts, not
far from "Taigh Jan Crot Callow" (John-o'-Groat's House), and he gained
his livelihood by catching and killing fish, of all sizes and
denominations. He had a particular liking for the killing of those
wonderful beasts, half dog and half-fish, called "Roane," or seals, no
doubt because he got a long price for their skins, which are not less
curious than they are valuable. The truth is, that the most of these
animals are neither dogs nor cods, but downright fairies, as this
narration will show. It happened one day, as this notable fisher had
returned from the prosecution of his calling, that he was called upon by
a man who seemed a great stranger, and who said he had been despatched
for him by a person who wished to contract for a quantity

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

of seal-skins, and that the fisher must accompany him (the stranger)
immediately to see the person who wished to contract for the skins, as
it was necessary that he should be served that evening. Happy in the
prospect of making a good bargain, and never suspecting any duplicity,
he instantly complied. They both mounted a steed belonging to the
stranger, and took the road with such velocity that,, although the
direction of the wind was towards their backs, yet the fleetness of
their movement made it appear as if it had been in their faces. On
reaching a stupendous precipice which overhung the sea, his guide told
him they had now reached their destination.

"Where is the person you spoke of?" inquired the astonished seal-killer.

"You shall see that presently," replied the guide.

With that they immediately alighted, and, without allowing the
seal-killer much time to indulge the frightful suspicions that began to
pervade his mind, the stranger seized him with irresistible force, and
plunged headlong with him into the sea. After sinking down, down, nobody
knows how far, they at length reached a door, which, being open, led
them into a range of apartments, filled with inhabitants--not people,
but seals, who could nevertheless speak and feel like human folk; and
how much was the seal-killer surprised to find that he himself had been
unconsciously transformed into the like image. If it were not so, he
would probably have died from the want of breath. The nature of the poor
fisher's thoughts may be more easily conceived than described.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Looking at the
nature of the quarters into which he had landed, all hopes of escape
from them appeared wholly chimerical, whilst the degree of comfort and
length of life which the barren scene promised him were far from being
flattering. The "Roane," who all seemed in very low spirits, appeared to
feel for him, and endeavoured to soothe the distress which he evinced by
the amplest assurances of personal safety. Involved in sad meditation on
his evil f ate, he was quickly roused from his stupor by his guide's
producing a huge gully or joctaleg, <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91)
the object of which he supposed was to put an end to all his earthly
cares. Forlorn as was his situation, however, he did not wish to be
killed; and, apprehending instant destruction, he fell down, and
earnestly implored for mercy. The poor generous animals did not mean him
any harm, however much his former conduct deserved it, and he was
accordingly desired to pacify himself, and. cease his cries.

"Did you ever see that knife before?" said the stranger to the fisher.

The latter instantly recognised his own knife, which he had that day
stuck into a seal, and with which it had escaped, and acknowledged it
was formerly his own, for what would be the use of denying it?

"Well," rejoined the guide, "the apparent seal which made away with it
is my father, who has lain dangerously ill ever since, and no means can
stay his fleeting breath without your aid. I have been obliged

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

to resort to the artifice I have practised to bring you hither, and I
trust that my filial duty to my father will readily excuse me."

Having said this, he led into another apartment the trembling
seal-killer, who expected every minute to be punished for his own
ill-treatment of the father. There he found the identical seal with
which he had had the encounter in the morning, suffering most grievously
from a tremendous cut in its hind-quarter. The seal-killer was then
desired, with his hand, to cicatrise the wound, upon doing which it
immediately healed, and the seal arose from its bed in perfect health.
Upon this the scene changed from mourning to rejoicing--all was mirth
and glee. Very different, however, were the feelings of the unfortunate
seal-catcher, who expected no doubt to be metamorphosed into a seal for
the remainder of his life. However, his late guide accosting him, said--

"Now, sir, you are at liberty to return to your wife and family, to whom
I am about to conduct you; but it. is on this express condition, to
which you must bind yourself by a solemn oath--that you will never maim
or kill a seal in all your life-time hereafter."

To this condition, hard as it was, he joyfully acceded; and- the oath
being administered in all due form, he bade his new acquaintance most
heartily and sincerely a long farewell. Taking hold of his guide, they
issued from the place, and swam up till they regained the surface of the
sea, and, landing at the said stupendous pinnacle, they found their
former

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

steed ready for a second canter. The guide breathed upon the fisher, and
they became like men. They mounted their horse, and fleet as had been
their course towards the precipice, their return from it was doubly
swift; and the honest seal-killer was laid down at his own door-cheek,
where his guide made him such a present as would have almost reconciled
him to another similar expedition--such as rendered his loss of
profession, in so far as regarded the seals, a far less intolerable
hardship than he had at first considered it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[191:1](sfft58.htm#fr_90) W. Grant Stewart,
*Highland Superstitions and Amusements*. (*The popular superstitions and
festive amusements of the Highlanders of Scotland*, by William Grant
Stewart; Edinburgh : Printed for A. Constable, 1823--*redactor*).

<span id="fn_91"></span>[193:1](sfft58.htm#fr_91) A clasp-knife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mermaid Of Knockdolion](sfft59)
