[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft38)  [Next](sfft40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FAIRY BOY OF LEITH. <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58)

THE worthy Captain George Burton communicated to Richard Bovet,
gentleman, author of the interesting work entitled *Pandæmonium, or the
Devil's Cloister Opened*, <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) the
following singular account of a lad called the Fairy Boy of Leith, who,
it seems, acted as a drummer to the elves, who weekly held rendezvous in
the Calton Hill, near Edinburgh.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

"About fifteen years since, having business that detained me for some
time at Leith, which is near Edinburgh, in the kingdom of Scotland, I
often met some of my acquaintance at a certain house there, where we
used to drink a glass of wine for our refection; the woman which kept
the house was of honest reputation among the neighbours, which made me
give the more attention to what she told me one day about a fairy boy
(as they called him), who lived about that town. She had given me so
strange an account of him that I desired her I might see him the first
opportunity, which she promised; and not long after, passing that way,
she told me there was the fairy boy but a little before I came by; and,
casting her eye into the street, said, Look you, sir, yonder he is at
play with those other boys; and, designing him to me, I went, and, by
smooth words, and a piece of money, got him to come into the house with
me; where, in the presence of divers people, I demanded of him several
astrological questions, which he answered with great subtilty; and,
through all his discourse, carried it with a cunning much above his
years, which seemed not to exceed ten or eleven.

"He seemed to make a motion like drumming upon the table with his
fingers, upon which I asked him whether he could beat a drum? To which
he replied, Yes, sir, as well as any man in Scotland; for every Thursday
night I beat all points to a sort of people that used to meet under
yonder hill (pointing to the great hill between Edenborough and Leith.)
How, boy? quoth I, what company have you there?

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There are, sir,
said he, a great company both of men and women, and they are entertained
with many sorts of musick, besides my drum; they have, besides, plenty
of variety of meats and wine, and many times we are carried into France
or Holland in a night, and return again, and whilst we are there we
enjoy all the pleasures the country doth afford. I demanded of him how
they got under that hill? To which he replied that there was a great
pair of gates that opened to them, though they were invisible to others;
and that within there were brave large rooms, as well accommodated as
most in Scotland. I then asked him how I should know what he said to be
true? Upon which he told me he would read my fortune, saying I should
have two wives, and that he saw the forms of them sitting on my
shoulders; that both would be very handsome women. As he was thus
speaking, a woman of the neighbourhood, coming into the room, demanded
of him what her fortune should be? He told her that she had two bastards
before she was married, which put her in such a rage that she desired
not to hear the rest.

"The woman of the house told me that all the people in Scotland could
not keep him from the rendezvous on Thursday night; upon which, by
promising him some more money, I got a promise of him to meet me at the
same place, in the afternoon, the Thursday following, and so dismist him
at that time. The boy came again, at the place and time appointed, and I
had prevailed with some friends to continue with me, if possible, to
prevent his moving that night.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He was placed
between us, and answered many questions, until, about eleven of the
clock, he was got away unperceived by the company; but I, suddenly
missing him, hasted to the door, and took hold of him, and so returned
him into the same room; we all watched him, and, of a sudden, he was
again got out of doors; I followed him close, and he made a noise in the
street as if he had been set upon; but from that time I could never see
him.

"GEORGE BURTON."               

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[128:1](sfft39.htm#fr_58) Sir Walter Scott,
*Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border*.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[128:2](sfft39.htm#fr_59) London, 1684.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mind the Crooked Finger](sfft40)
