[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft79)  [Next](sfft81) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

# LITERARY TALES. <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158)

### THE HAUNTED SHIPS. <span id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_159)

"ALEXANDER MACHARG, besides being the laird of three acres of peatmoss,
two kale gardens, and the owner of seven good milch cows, a pair of
horses, and six pet sheep, was the husband of one of the handsomest
women in seven parishes. Many a lad sighed the day he was brided; and a
Nithsdale laird and two Annandale moorland farmers drank themselves to
their last linen, as well as their last shilling, through sorrow for her
loss. But married was the dame; and home she was carried, to bear rule
over her home and her husband, as an honest woman should. Now ye maun
ken that, though the flesh-and-blood lovers of Alexander's bonnie wife
all ceased to love and to sue her after she became another's, there were
certain admirers who did not consider their claim at all abated, or
their hopes lessened by the kirk's famous obstacle

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

of matrimony. Ye have heard how the devout minister of Tinwald had a
fair son carried away, and bedded against his liking to an unchristened
bride, whom the elves and the fairies provided; ye have heard how the
bonnie bride of the drunken laird of Soukitup was stolen by the fairies
out at the back window of the bridal chamber, the time the bridegroom
was groping his way to the chamber door; and ye have heard--but why need
I multiply cases? such things in the ancient days were as common as
candlelight. So ye'll no hinder certain water elves and sea fairies, who
sometimes keep festival and summer mirth in these old haunted hulks,
from falling in love with the weel-faured wife of Laird Macharg; and to
their plots and contrivances they went, how they might accomplish to
sunder man and wife; and sundering such a man and such a wife was like
sundering the green leaf from the summer, or the fragrance from the
flower.

"So it fell on a time that Laird Macharg took his half-net on his back,
and his steel spear in his hand, and down to Blawhooly Bay gade he, and
into the water he went right between the two haunted hulks, <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160) and, placing his net, awaited the coming
of the tide. The night, ye maun ken, was mirk, and the wind lowne, <span
id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_161) and the singing of the increasing waters
among the shells and the peebles was heard for sundry miles. All at once
lights began to glance and

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

twinkle on board the two Haunted Ships from every hole and seam, and
presently the sound as of a hatchet employed in squaring timber echoed
far and wide. But if the toil of these unearthly workmen amazed the
laird, how much more was his amazement increased when a sharp shrill
voice called out, 'Ho! brother, what are you doing now?' A voice still
shriller responded from the other haunted ship, 'I'm making a wife to
Sandie Macharg!' and a loud quavering laugh, running from ship to ship,
and from bank to bank, told the joy they expected from their labour.

"Now the laird, besides being a devout and a God-fearing man, was shrewd
and bold; and in plot, and contrivance, and skill in conducting his
designs, was fairly an overmatch for any dozen land elves. But the water
elves are far more subtle; besides, their haunts and their dwellings
being in the great deep, pursuit and detection is hopeless if they
succeed in carrying their prey to the waves. But ye shall hear. Home
flew the laird,--collected his family around the hearth,--spoke of the
signs and the sins of the times, and talked of mortification and prayer
for averting calamity; and finally, taking his father's Bible, brass
clasps, black print, and covered with calfskin, from the shelf, he
proceeded without let or stint to perform domestic worship. I should
have told ye that he bolted and locked the door, shut up all inlet to
the house, threw salt into the fire, and proceeded in every way like a
man skilful in guarding against the plots of fairies and fiends. His
wife

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

looked on all this with wonder; but she saw something in her husband's
looks that hindered her from intruding either question or advice, and a
wise woman was she.

"Near the mid hour of the night the rush of a horse's feet was heard,
and the sound of a rider leaping from its back, and a heavy knock came
to the door, accompanied by a voice, saying, 'The cummer drink's <span
id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162) hot, and the knave bairn is expected at
Laird Laurie's to-night; sae mount, gudewife, and come.'

"'Preserve me!' said the wife of Sandie Macharg; 'that's news indeed;
who could have thought it? the laird has been heirless for seventeen
years! Now, Sandie, my man, fetch me my skirt and hood.'

"But he laid his arm round his wife's neck, and said, 'If all the lairds
in Galloway go heirless, over this door threshold shall you not stir
to-night; and I have said, and I have sworn it: seek not to know why or
wherefore--but, Lord, send us thy blessed mornlight.' The wife looked
for a moment in her husband's eyes, and desisted from further entreaty.

"'But let us send a civil message to the gossips, Sandie; and had nae ye
better say I am sair laid with a sudden sickness? though its sinful-like
to send the poor messenger a mile agate with a lie in his mouth without
a glass of brandy.'

"'To such a messenger, and to those who sent him, no apology is needed,'
said the austere laird, 'so let him depart.' And the clatter of a
horse's hoofs was

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

heard, and the muttered imprecations of its rider on the churlish
treatment he had experienced.

"'Now, Sandie, my lad,' said his wife, laying an arm particularly white
and round about his neck as she spoke, 'are you not a queer man and a
stern? I have been your wedded wife now these three years; and, beside
my dower, have brought you three as bonnie bairns as ever smiled aneath
a summer sun. O man, you a douce man, and fitter to be an elder than
even Willie Greer himself,--I have the minister's ain word for't,--to
put on these hard-hearted looks, and gang waving your arms that way, as
if ye said, "I winna take the counsel of sic a hempie <span
id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163) as you." I'm your ain leal wife, and
will and maun have an explanation.'

"To all this Sandie Macharg replied, 'It is written--"Wives, obey your
husbands;" but we have been stayed in our devotion, so let us pray;' and
down he knelt. His wife knelt also, for she was as devout as bonnie; and
beside them knelt their household, and all lights were extinguished.

"'Now this beats a',' muttered his wife to herself; 'however, I shall be
obedient for a time; but if I dinna ken what all this is for before the
morn by sunket-time, <span id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_164) my tongue is
nae langer a tongue, nor my hands worth wearing.'

"The voice of her husband in prayer interrupted this mental soliloquy;
and ardently did he beseech to be preserved from the wiles of the
fiends, and the snares of Satan;' from witches, ghosts, goblins, elves,

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

fairies, spunkies, and water-kelpies; from the spectre shallop of
Solway; from spirits visible and invisible; from the Haunted Ships and
their unearthly tenants; from maritime spirits that plotted against
godly men, and fell in love with their wives'--

"'Nay, but His presence be near us!' said his wife in a low tone of
dismay. 'God guide my gudeman's wits; I never heard such a prayer from
human lips before. But, Sandie, my man, Lord's sake, rise: what fearful
light is this?--barn, and byre, and stable, maun be in a blaze; and
Hawkie and Hurley,--Doddie, and Cherrie, and Damson Plum will be smoored
with reek, and scorched with flame.'

"And a flood of light, but not so gross as a common fire, which ascended
to heaven and filled all the court before the house, amply justified the
good wife's suspicions. But, to the terrors of fire, Sandie was as
immovable as he was to the imaginary groans of the barren wife of Laird
Laurie; and he held his wife, and threatened the weight of his right
hand--and it was a heavy one--to all who ventured abroad, or even
unbolted the door. The neighing and prancing of horses, and the
bellowing of cows, augmented the horrors of the night; and to any one
who only heard the din, it seemed that the whole onstead was in a blaze,
and horses and cattle perishing in the flame. All wiles, common or
extraordinary, were put in practice to entice or force the honest farmer
and his wife to open the door; and when the like success attended every
new stratagem, silence for a little while ensued, and a long, loud, and
shrilling laugh wound up the

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

dramatic efforts of the night. In the morning, when Laird Macharg went
to the door, he found standing against one of the pilasters a piece of
black ship oak, rudely fashioned into something like human form, and
which skilful people declared would have been clothed with seeming flesh
and blood, and palmed upon him by elfin adroitness for his wife, had he
admitted his visitants. A synod of wise men and women sat upon the woman
of timber, and she was finally ordered to be devoured by fire, and that
in the open air. A fire was soon made, and into it the elfin sculpture
was tossed from the prongs of two pairs of pitchforks. The blaze that
arose was awful to behold; and hissings, and burstings, and loud
cracklings, and strange noises, were heard in the midst of the flame;
and when the whole sank into ashes, a drinking cup of some precious
metal was found; and this cup, fashioned no doubt by elfin skill, but
rendered harmless by the purification with fire, the sons and daughters
of Sandie Macharg and his wife drink out of to this very day. Bless all
bold men, say I, and obedient wives!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[312:1](sfft80.htm#fr_158) The Editor has
adopted this term to denote popular tales, or tales founded upon popular
superstition, which have received a literary clothing.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[312:2](sfft80.htm#fr_159) Allan Cunningham,
*Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry*.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[313:1](sfft80.htm#fr_160) Two ancient wrecked
vessels, to which the peasantry of the Solway shore ascribe a sinister
character.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[313:2](sfft80.htm#fr_161) Still.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[315:1](sfft80.htm#fr_162) Gossips' drink.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[316:1](sfft80.htm#fr_163) Hussy.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[316:2](sfft80.htm#fr_164) Breakfast-time; any
meal-time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elphin Irving](sfft81)
