[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft65)  [Next](sfft67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE WITCH OF LAGGAN. <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99)

THE same day, another hero, celebrated for his hatred of witchcraft, was
warming himself in his hunting hut, in the forest of Gaick, in Badenoch.

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His faithful
hounds, fatigued with the morning chase, lay stretched on the turf by
his side,--his gun, that would not miss, reclined in the neuk of the
bothy,--the *skian dhu* of the sharp edge hung by his side, and these
alone constituted his company. As the hunter sat listening to the
howling storm as it whistled by, there entered at the door an apparently
poor weather-beaten cat, shivering with cold, and drenched to the skin.
On observing her, the hairs of the dogs became erected bristles, and
they immediately rose to attack the pitiable cat, which stood trembling
at the door. "Great hunter of the hills," exclaims the poor-looking
trembling cat, "I claim your protection. I know your hatred to my craft,
and perhaps it is just. Still spare, oh spare a poor jaded wretch, who
thus flies to you for protection from the cruelty and oppression of her
sisterhood." Moved to compassion by her eloquent address, and disdaining
to take advantage of his greatest enemy in such a seemingly forlorn
situation, he pacified his infuriated dogs, and desired her to come
forward to the fire and warm herself. "Nay," says she, "in the first
place, you will please bind with this long hair those two furious hounds
of yours, for I am afraid they will tear my poor hams to pieces. I pray
you, therefore, my dear sir, that you would have the goodness to bind
them together by the necks with this long hair." But the curious nature
of the hair induced the hunter to dissemble a little. Instead of having
bound his dogs with it, as he pretended, he threw it across a beam of
wood which connected the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

couple of the bothy. The witch then, supposing the dogs securely bound,
approached the fire, and squatted herself down as if to dry herself. She
had not sitten many minutes, when the hunter could easily discover a
striking increase in her size, which he could not forbear remarking in a
jocular manner to herself. "A bad death to you, you nasty beast," says
the hunter; "you are getting very large." "Ay, ay," replied the cat
equally jocosely, "as my hairs imbibe the heat, they naturally expand."
These jokes, however, were but a prelude to a more serious conversation.
The cat, still continuing her growth, had at length attained a most
extraordinary size,--when, in the twinkling of an eye, she transformed
herself into her proper likeness of the Goodwife of Laggan, and thus
addressed him:--"Hunter of the Hills, your hour of reckoning is arrived.
Behold me before you, the avowed champion of my devoted sisterhood, of
whom Macgillichallum of Razay and you were always the most relentless
enemies. But Razay is no more. His last breath is fled. He lies a
lifeless corpse on the bottom of the main; and now, Hunter of the Hills,
it is your turn." With these words, assuming a most hideous and terrific
appearance, she made a spring at the hunter. The two dogs, which she
supposed securely bound by the infernal hair, sprung at her in her turn,
and a most furious conflict ensued. The witch, thus unexpectedly
attacked by the dogs, now began to repent of her temerity. "*Fasten,
hair, fasten*," she perpetually exclaimed, supposing the dogs to have
been bound by the hair; and

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

so effectually did the hair *fasten*, according to her order, that it at
last snapt the beam in twain. At length, finding herself completely
overpowered, she attempted a retreat, but so closely were the hounds
fastened in her breasts, that it was with no small difficulty she could
get herself disengaged from them. Screaming and shrieking, the Wife of
Laggan dragged herself out of the house, trailing after the dogs, which
were fastened in her so closely that they never loosed their hold until
she demolished every tooth in their beads. Then metamorphosing herself
into the likeness of a raven, she fled over the mountains in the
direction of her home. The two faithful dogs, bleeding and exhausted,
returned to their master, and, in the act of caressing his hand, both
fell down and expired at his feet. Regretting their loss with a sorrow
only known to the parent who weeps over the remains of departed
children, he buried his devoted dogs, and returned home to his family.
His wife was not in the house when he arrived, but she soon made her
appearance. "Where have you been, my love?" inquired the husband.
"Indeed," replies she, "I have been seeing the Goodwife of Laggan, who
has been just seized with so severe an illness that she is not expected
to live for any time." "Ay! ay!" says he, "what is the matter with the
worthy woman?" "She was all day absent in the moss at her peats,"
replies the wife, "and was seized with a sudden colic, in consequence of
getting wet feet; and now all her friends and neighbours are expecting
her desmission." "Poor woman," says the husband; "I am

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

sorry for her. Get me some dinner; it will be right that I should go and
see her also." Dinner being provided and despatched, the hunter
immediately proceeded to the house of Laggan, where he found a great
assemblage of neighbours mourning, with great sincerity, the approaching
decease of a woman whom. they all had hitherto esteemed virtuous. The
hunter, walking up to the sick woman's bed in a rage, proportioned to
the greatness of its cause, stripped the sick woman of all her
coverings. A shriek from the now exposed witch brought all the company
around her. "Behold," says he, "the object of your solicitude, who is
nothing less than an infernal witch. To-day, she informs me, she was
present at the death of the Laird of Razay, and only a few hours have
elapsed since she attempted to make me share his fate. This night,
however, she shall expiate her crime by the forfeiture of her horrid
life." Relating to the company the whole circumstances of her attack
upon him, which were too well corroborated by the conclusive marks she
bore on her person, the whole company were perfectly convinced of her
criminality; and the customary punishment was about to be inflicted on
her, when the miserable wretch addressed them as follows:--"My
ill-requited friends, spare an old acquaintance, already in the agonies
of death, from any further mortal degradation. My crimes and my folly
now stare me in the face, in their true colours; while my vile and
perfidious seducer, the enemy of your temporal and spiritual interests,
only laughs at me in my distress; and, as a reward for my fidelity

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

to his interest, in seducing everything that was amiable, and in
destroying everything that was good, he is now about to consign my soul
to eternal misery. Let my example be a warning to all the people of the
earth to shun the fatal rock on which I have split; and as a strong
inducement for them to do so I shall atone for my iniquity to the utmost
of my ability by detailing to you the awful history of my life." Here
the Wife of Laggan detailed at full length the way she was seduced into
the service of the Evil One,--all the criminal adventures in which she
had been engaged, and ended with a particular account of the death of
Macgillichallum of Razay, and her attack upon the hunter, and then
expired.

Meanwhile a neighbour of the Wife of Laggan was returning home late at
night from Strathdearn, where he had been upon some business, and had
just entered the dreary forest of Monalea, in Badenoch, when he met a
woman dressed in black, who ran with great speed, and inquired of the
traveller, with great agitation, how far she was distant from the
churchyard of Dalarossie, and if she could be there by twelve o'clock.
The traveller told her she might, if she continued to go at the same
pace that she did then. She then fled alongst the road, uttering the
most desponding lamentations, and the traveller continued his road to
Badenoch. He had not, however, walked many miles when he met a large
black dog, which travelled past him with much velocity, as if upon the
scent of a track or footsteps; and soon after he met another large black
dog sweeping along in the same manner. The last dog,

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

however, was scarcely past, when he met a stout black man on a fine
fleet black courser, prancing along in the same direction after the
dogs. "Pray," says the rider to the traveller, did you meet a woman as
you came along the hill? The traveller replied in the affirmative. "And
did you meet a dog soon after?" rejoined the rider. The traveller
replied he did. "And," added the rider, "do you think the dog will
overtake her ere she can reach the church of Dalarossie?" "He will, at
any rate, be very close upon her heels," answered the traveller. Each
then took his own way. But before the traveller had got the length of
Glenbanchar, the rider overtook him on his return, with the foresaid
woman before him across the bow of his saddle, and one of the dogs fixed
in her breast, and another in her thigh. "Where did you overtake the
woman?" inquired the traveller. "Just as she was entering the churchyard
of Dalarossie," was his reply. On the traveller's return home, he heard
of the fate of the unfortunate Wife of Laggan, which soon explained the
nature of the company he had met on the road. It was, no doubt, the
spirit of the Wife of Laggan flying for protection from the infernal
spirits (to whom she had sold herself), to the churchyard of Dalarossie,
which is so sacred a place that a witch is immediately dissolved from
all her ties with Satan on making a pilgrimage to it, either dead or
alive. But it seems the unhappy Wife of Laggan was a stage too late.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[221:1](sfft66.htm#fr_99) W. Grant Stewart,
*Highland Superstitions*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Blacksmith's Wife of Yarrowfoot](sfft67)
