[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft60)  [Next](sfft62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NUCKELAVEE. <span id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95)

NUCKELAVEE, was a monster of unmixed malignity, never willingly resting
from doing evil to mankind. He was a spirit in flesh. His home was the
sea; and whatever his means of transit were in that element, when he
moved on land he rode a horse as terrible in aspect as himself. Some
thought that rider and horse were really one, and that this was the
shape of the monster. Nuckelavee's head was like a man's, only ten times
larger, and his mouth projected like that of a pig, and was enormously
wide. There was not a hair on the monster's body, for the very good
reason that he had no skin.

If crops were blighted by sea-gust or mildew, if live stock fell over
high rocks that skirt the shores, or if an epidemic raged among men, or
among the

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

lower animals, Nuckelayee was the cause of all. His breath was venom,
falling like blight on vegetable, and with deadly disease on animal
life. He was also blamed for long-continued droughts; for some unknown
reason he had serious objections to fresh water, and was never known to
visit the land during rain.

I knew an old man who was credited with having once encountered
Nuckelavee, and with having made a narrow escape from the monster's
clutches. This man was very reticent on the subject. However, after much
higgling and persuasion, the following narrative was extracted:--

Tammas, like his namesake Tam o' Shanter, was out late one night. It
was, though moonless, a fine starlit night. Tammas's road lay close by
the seashore, and as he entered a part of the road that was hemmed in on
one side by the sea, and on the other by a deep fresh-water loch, he saw
some huge object in front of, and moving towards him. What was he to do?
He was sure it was no earthly thing that was steadily coming towards
him. He could not go to either side, and to turn his back to an evil
thing he had heard was the most dangerous position of all; so Tammie
said to himself, "The Lord be aboot me, any tak' care o' me, as I am oot
on no evil intent this night!" Tammie was always regarded as rough and
foolhardy. Anyway, he determined, as the best of two evils, to face the
foe, and so walked resolutely yet slowly forward. He soon discovered to
his horror that the gruesome creature approaching him was no

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

other than the dreaded Nuckelavee. The lower part of this terrible
monster, as seen by Tammie, was like a great horse with flappers like
fins about his legs, with a mouth as wide as a whale's, from whence came
breath like steam from a brewing-kettle. He had but one eye, and that as
red as fire. On him sat, or rather seemed to grow from his back, a huge
man with no legs, and arms that reached nearly to the ground. His head
was as big as a clue of simmons (a clue of straw ropes, generally about
three feet in diameter), and this huge head kept rolling from one
shoulder to the other as if it meant to tumble off. But what to Tammie
appeared most horrible of all, was that the monster was skinless; this
utter want of skin adding much to the terrific appearance of the
creature's naked body,--the whole surface of it showing only red raw
flesh, in which Tammie saw blood, black as tar, running through yellow
veins, and great white sinews, thick as horse tethers, twisting,
stretching, and contracting as the monster moved. Tammie went slowly on
in mortal terror, his hair on end, a cold sensation like a film of ice
between his scalp and his skull, and a cold sweat bursting from every
pore. But he knew it was useless to flee, and he said, if he had to die,
he would rather see who killed him than die with his back to the foe. In
all his terror Tammie remembered what he had heard of Nuckelavee's
dislike to fresh water, and, therefore, took that side of the road
nearest to the loch. The awful moment came when the lower part of the
head of the monster got abreast of Tammie. The mouth of the

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

monster yawned like a bottomless pit. Tammie found its hot breath like
fire on his face: the long arms were stretched out to seize the unhappy
man. To avoid, if possible, the monster's clutch, Tammie swerved as near
as he could to the loch; in doing so one of his feet went into the loch,
splashing up some water on the foreleg of the monster, whereat the horse
gave a snort like thunder and shied over to the other side of the road,
and Tammie felt the wind of Nuckelavee's clutches as he narrowly escaped
the monster's grip. Tammie saw his opportunity, and ran with all his
might; and sore need had he to run, for Nuckelavee had turned and was
galloping after him, and bellowing with a sound like the roaring of the
sea. In front of Tammie lay a rivulet, through which the surplus water
of the loch found its way to the sea, and Tammie knew, if he could only
cross the running water, he was safe; so he strained every nerve. As he
reached the near bank another clutch was made at him by the long arms.
Tammie made a desperate spring and reached the other side, leaving his
bonnet in the monster's clutches. Nuckelavee gave a wild unearthly yell
of disappointed rage as Tammie fell senseless on the safe side of the
water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_95"></span>[197:2](sfft61.htm#fr_95) Mr. W. Traill Dennison
in the *Scottish Antiquary*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Two Shepherds](sfft62)
