[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft35)  [Next](sfft37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WATER FAIRIES. <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55)

THE Dracæ are a sort of water-spirits who inveigle women and children
into the recesses which they inhabit, beneath lakes and rivers, by
floating past them, on the surface of the water, in the shape of gold
rings or cups. The women thus seized are employed as nurses, and after
seven years are permitted to revisit earth. Gervase of Tilbury mentions
one woman in particular who had been allured by observing a wooden dish,
or cup, float by her, while she was washing clothes in the river. Being
seized as soon as she reached the depths, she was conducted into one of
the subterranean recesses, which she described as very

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

magnificent, and employed as nurse to one of the brood of the hag who
had allured her. During her residence in this capacity, having
accidentally touched one of her eyes with an ointment of serpent's
grease, she perceived, at her return to the world, that she had acquired
the faculty of seeing the *Dracæ*, when they intermingle themselves with
men. Of this power she was, however, deprived by the touch of her
ghostly mistress, whom she had one day incautiously addressed. It is a
curious fact that this story, in almost all its parts, is current in
both the Highlands and Lowlands of Scotland, with no other variation
than the substitution of Fairies for Dracæ, and the cavern of a hill for
that of a river. Indeed many of the vulgar account it extremely
dangerous to touch anything which they may happen to find without
saining (blessing) it, the snares of the enemy being notorious and
well-attested. A poor woman of Teviotdale having been fortunate enough,
as she thought herself, to find a wooden beetle, at the very time when
she needed such an implement, seized it without pronouncing a proper
blessing, and, carrying it home, laid it above her bed to be ready for
employment in the morning. At midnight the window of her cottage opened,
and a loud voice was heard calling up some one within by a strange and
uncouth name. The terrified cottager ejaculated a prayer, which, we may
suppose, ensured her personal safety; while the enchanted implement of
housewifery, tumbling from the bedstead, departed by the window with no
small noise and precipitation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[124:1](sfft36.htm#fr_55) Sir Walter Scott,
*Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fairy Transportation](sfft37)
