[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rh33)  [Next](rh35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

# CHAPTER 33

After supper Robin signalled to his men to bend their bows. The knight
was startled, for he thought they intended to choose him for their
target.

He was quickly undeceived, however, for two arrows were set up as butts
for these archers. The knight marvelled indeed to see so small a mark
given in this; waning light. A garland of leaves was balanced on the top
of each arrow, and Robin laid down the rules. Whoever failed to speed
his shaft through this garland--and it was to be done without knocking
it of the arrow--was to yield up his own shaft to Robin, and receive
also a buffet from the hand of Friar Tuck.

"Master," said Stuteley, "that may not be, for the good friar is not yet
come to confess us this day." He winked his eyes at Robin, well knowing
that the friar sat near to the other monks.

"Doubtless he will be here ere the game be ended," replied Robin,
smiling. "I prithee commence soon as I clap my hands."

Little John, limping, Stuteley and old Warrenton each flew their arrows
truly through the garlands, as did many of the rest. Poor Midge and
Arthur-à-Bland were not so fortunate, for though both came near to doing
it, the garlands unkindly fell of an instant after their shafts had
flown through them.

"Where is the friar?" cried Robin, affecting to peer into the distance,
already blue-grey with twilight. "Surely he is late tonight."

Then Tuck could bear it no longer, but stood up in his place. "Come near
to me, thou villainous archers," he roared, "and I will buffet you right
well."

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

"Ah, Brother, what are you saying?" cried the knight, anxiously. Surely
you forget our vows and our cloth."

"I forget neither the one nor the other," returned Tuck. "But I would be
no true man did I submit to watch quietly such bungling as these fellows
have done. Come hither, Midge."

"You know them--you are of this company?" continued the knight, as if in
alarm.

"I am very proud to be of it, Brother," said the friar.

"I crave a boon," the knight then said, turning to Robin. "This is a
little man who will receive the buffets; and though I seem a priest, yet
am I willing to take the blow instead."

"If you would care to have a buffet from me," the friar cried, "you are
most welcome. For though my arm is sore still from our play of this
morn, I warrant me there is still some strength left in it"; and he
rolled up his sleeve.

"Take, then, the first blow," said the knight, "and I promise you I will
return it you with interest."

A smile lit up the face of the jolly friar. He turned up the sleeve of
his cassock still further, and smote the false abbot such a blow as
would have felled an ox.

"Thou hittest well, Brother," the knight remarked, coolly.

The friar was amazed to see him withstand such a blow, and so was Robin.
"Now, 'tis my turn," the knight said; and, baring his arm, he dealt Tuck
such a blow as to send him flat upon his back.

There was a general laugh at this; but the exertion had caused the
abbot's cowl to slip away from his head. The strong face and light beard
of the Black Knight showed plainly to them all. "Alas, Your Majesty,"
cried Sir Richard of the Lee, springing up; "you have betrayed
yourself."

"It is the King!" cried Scarlett, in sheer surprise; and reverently he
knelt before the Black Knight. Robin glanced questioningly towards the
greenwood men; then knelt himself beside Scarlett. At once the whole
company fell upon their knees also.

"My lord King," said Robin, in hushed voice, "I crave mercy for my men
and for myself. We have not chosen this life from any wickedness, but
rather have come to it perforce."

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

The King towered amongst them. "Swear," cried he, in clear, loud voice.
"Swear that you will forsake your wild ways, Robin Fitzooth, and will
come with your men into my Court, and be good and faithful subjects from
this night, and I will give you all the pardon that you crave."

"We will come into your Court and into your service, Sire," answered
Robin, gratefully, "nor ask anything better in this world than that."

The King bade them rise and continue their sports. "Night is come and I
must ask a lodging of you--even as your chaplain gave me of his
hospitality yester e'en," he said, comfortably. "And tell me, Robin,
where is your Marian? What laggard in love are you to be here without
her?"

"Nay, Sire," said the little page, coming forward, "Robin is no laggard,
nor am I far to seek. He is a very valiant, honorable man, and should
indeed be a knight of this realm, if all men had their deserts."

Richard smiled then, and bent his haughty head to kiss the little hand
she had extended to him. "Thou speakest truth, lady," he answered. "And
I had not forgotten how the fair lands of Broadweald once were in Hugh
Fitzooth's honest keeping. It may be that they will return to his son
one day, for folks tell me that Guy of Gisborne is no more."

He turned to Scarlett. "And you are Master Geoffrey of Montfichet," said
he, fixing his keen eyes on the other's face, "son of my father's
friend, George Montfichet of Gamewell? And prithee, Master Geoffrey,
what have you done with my little cousin, Aimée of Aragon?"

Scarlett confusedly explained that she was safe in his father's hall at
Gamewell. "It seemeth, then, that you also have stolen from our Sheriff
at Nottingham, Master Scarlett?" Richard observed, quizzing him. "Surely
all men's hands are against Monceux!"

"Even as all men's hands are against venomous reptiles and the like,"
observed the friar, nodding his head. He had recovered from the buffet
which Richard's hand had dealt, and had seated himself conveniently to
watch the scene. He was truly the one least put about by it.

The King eyed him, and smiled to note his quiet self-possession. "What
can I find for you, Brother?" he asked, indulgently. "Some fat living,
where there are no wicked to chastise, and where the work is easy and
well endowed?"

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

"I only wish for peace in this life," replied the friar. "Mine is a
simple nature, and I care not for the gewgaws and shams of Court. Give
me a good meal and a cup of the right brew, health, and enough for the
day, and I ask no more either of my God or of my King."

Richard sighed. "You ask the greatest thing in the world,
Brother--contentment. It is not mine to give or to deny. Yet if I can
help you to find that wondrous jewel, I will do it right heartily." He
glanced curiously from one to the other of the greenwood men. "Which of
you is called Allan-a-Dale?" he asked; and when Allan had come forward,
"So," said Richard, half-sternly, "you are the man who stole a bride
from her man at my church doors of Plympton. What have you to say in
excuse of this wickedness?"

"Only that I loved her, Sire, and that she loved me," said Allan. "Your
Norman baron would have forced her to wed with him, desiring her lands."

"Which since hath been forfeited by my lord of Hereford," said Richard,
quickly. "I know your story, Allan. Take back your lands and hers from
me this night, and live in peace and loyalty upon them with your dame.
Fennel, she is called, is't not so? 'Tis a pretty name."

"I thank you humbly, Sire," said Allan-a-Dale, joyfully. "And Fennel
shall thank you for herself. She will do it far better than I, be sure
of it."

"Where is your dame?" said the King, looking about and half-expecting to
find her clad like Marian in boy's attire.

"She also is at Gamewell," said Sir Richard, hastily. "We left her there
this morning when on our way to Copmanhurst. The Princess will take her
into her train, and protect both Mistress Fennel and her lord."

"Our Princess will need a protector for her own self, I am thinking,"
said the King, thoughtfully. "Come hither, Scarlett, and kneel before
me!"

Geoffrey wonderingly did so. "Arise, Geoffrey Earl of Nottingham," cried
Richard, striking his shoulder with the flat of his sword; "take back
your freedom from my hands, and be no more ashamed to attend our Court
disguised and in false pretence. From this moment you have the
overlordship of this forest for your father's sake and mine,

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

and you are worthy to ask the hand of any woman in this realm."

It was impossible not to perceive the King's gracious meaning, although
Geoffrey could scarce believe in his good fortune. He thanked his King
in a voice full of gratitude and affection. "You did say that the
Princess of Aragon might need a protector, Sire," he added, trembling at
his own audacity. "Will you grant me permission to be her champion and
defy the world?"

"'Tis what I had promised for you, my lord of Nottingham," said Richard,
quietly, "and best reason for your knighthood! Watch well over her, and
guard her from herself--if need be."

For Much the Miller, for Middle the Tinker, for Little John, Stuteley
and old Warrenton the King had kindly words. He knew them all, it
seemed; and they marvelled more and more amongst themselves to hear how
he was aware of all their histories. There was no adventurer, no man of
them whom he did not know by name and fame, at least; and this King
proved so gracious and royal a man that all of them loved him forthwith
and dubbed him in their hearts a right worthy monarch.

They built a great fire, having now no more fear of Monceux or Hereford,
or any one of them. The Sheriff would hold his office from Will
Scarlett's hands from now!

The archers from Nottingham who had been held as prisoners were at once
released, and the King signalled for Sir Richard's followers to appear.
This they did with a rush, and Robin saw then how the King had held them
all truly in his hand, for these fellows, and even Sir Richard of the
Lee, their master, would have had to obey him had he ordered them to
engage the greenwood men in sudden combat.

As it was, all were merry and boon companions. Laughter and song floated
upward as the jumping flames of the campfire they had built. The friar
sang them the song which Robin had heard so often, and Robin himself
played upon the harp. Night came and they slept--King of England and his
subjects together, in all joy and happiness. The fire burned low, and
deep Sherwood watched over them--forest mother of them all.

\*        \*        \*

Next morning the King asked if they had any spare liveries of the
scarlet and white. "For," said he, "'tis only fair that I should lead
you

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

into the city of Nottingham clad as you are yourselves, since now you
are my bodyguard."

So Nottingham awoke to find a great company of men approaching It
Foremost came a number of archers dressed all in bright liveries and
carrying their bows unslung in token of peace. Behind them marched a
motley host--the servitors of Sir Richard and of old George of Gamewell,
and last of all the Sheriff's own archers.

Monceux came out to meet them with Master Simeon, whilst my lord of
Hereford watched furtively from the city walls. The chief of the
approaching host rode forward, and his stern, dark face was plain to
see.

"'Tis the King!" cried Carfax, who knew Richard well. "Now may our
tongues be politic and say the right words."

"Go to meet him, Simeon," whispered the Sheriff, all in a flutter of
fear and hope. "'Tis like that he hath encountered Sir Richard of the
Lee, and so will know his story of things. Be prudent, be humble."

But Richard waved Carfax haughtily aside. "I will speak with your
master, fellow," he said, harshly. Carfax shrank cringingly to one side,
and Monceux dismounted from his milk-white horse to meet his King.

"Greetings and welcome, Sire, from this your faithful city," began
Monceux, very hurriedly. "The joyful tidings of your return were brought
to me two days agone, and at once I did prepare for your coming."

"With a hanging to wit, and murderous attack upon the castle of this
faithful knight," said Richard. "A welcome not much to our mind,
Sheriff."

"Sire, when the hanging was going forward I did not then know you were
so near," explained Monceux, making matters worse. "And, for the matter
of that, 'twas for foul murder that I would have hanged the villain, who
did escape through your knight's evil practises. Thereby I do accuse Sir
Richard of offending against the laws."

"Enough, Master Monceux," interrupted the King, contemptuously. "The
murder was not done by the man whose life you did seek so earnestly to
end. The killing of Fitzwalter, my warden of these gates, was due to the
foul hands of your own cook, Roger de Burgh. As you have stomach for a
hanging, see to it that this fellow be brought to book. Know you this
writing?"

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

And Richard showed him the parchment which Will Scarlett had found in
the hearth of the hall at Nottingham Castle.

Monceux turned green and white, and gasped for air. "I had no hand in
this dreadful business, Sire, I swear it," he gurgled. "We did conspire
between us to entice the maid Fitzwalter into Nottingham, I confess,
hoping that Robin Hood, the outlaw, would come to visit her, and we
might so trap him. He hath been the author of this mischief, I promise
you, and is a villainous wretch. If Roger killed Master Fitzwalter,
'twas done in the belief that he was engaged with Hood."

"As I thought," muttered the new Earl of Nottingham, under his breath.

"Therefore," said Richard, slowly, "you, Monceux, knew all along that
Little John was not guilty, and yet did seek to hang him."

"Sire, he stole my plate also, and had been excommunicated by my lord of
Hereford."

"Take Roger and hang him speedily," cried the King, to end it. "And
bring me to the Bishop. Stay!" he called to the quickly retreating
Sheriff; "ere you go, Monceux, learn that from henceforward you must
look for patronage from this my lord of Nottingham," he added, with a
gesture. "He will be your master, and you will hold the feof of
Nottingham Castle at his hands."

"Will Scarlett--Master Geoffrey of Montfichet--you?" gasped Monceux.

"Even I, Master Sheriff," replied the man of many names.

"Know also, Monceux," added Richard, indicating Robin and his men,
"these are my archers and especial guards. From now the ban of
excommunication must be removed."

The Bishop had come down from the walls and had drawn nigh. "Fetch me
book and candle, Carfax," said he, "and I will remove the ban."

"You will be wise to do so, my lord," the King said, significantly. The
Bishop deemed it prudent to give no particular heed to his sire's tone.
At once he proceeded to take off the ban of excommunication he had so
hastily pronounced upon Robin Hood and the rest of his merry men.

"Now, Robin, take payment for your entertainment of me in the

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

woods," the King said, in a voice that would brook no denial. Robin drew
near and kneeled before him, doubtfully. "Rise, Robin of Huntingdon,
first Earl of the shire!" cried Richard, tapping him with the point of
his blade. "Take rank amongst my knights, and learn that thy King
recognizeth above the other neither Saxon nor Norman of his
subjects--all to me are English; and I love the man who is brave and who
dealeth fairly as he may with his fellowmen. You have kept the spirit of
liberty alive in this my land, and I hold no anger against you because
you have been impatient under wrong."

His proud voice was silent; while Robin Earl of Huntingdon seized his
King's hand to his lips and kissed it in a wonderment of gratitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](rh35)
