[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010253)  [Next](2010255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—</span>*The Destruction of the
Churches.*

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p2.1"></span>All</span> these things were fulfilled in
us, when we saw with our own eyes the houses of prayer thrown down to
the very foundations, and the Divine and Sacred Scriptures committed to
the flames in the midst of the market-places, and the shepherds of the
churches basely hidden here and there, and some of them captured
ignominiously, and mocked by their enemies. When also, according to
another prophetic word, “Contempt was poured out upon rulers, and he
caused them to wander in an untrodden and pathless way.” <span
id="fr_2499"></span>[2500](#fn_2499)

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p4"></span>2. But it is not our place to describe
the sad misfortunes which finally came upon them, as we do not think it
proper, moreover, to record their divisions and unnatural conduct to
each other before the persecution. Wherefore we have decided to relate
nothing concerning them except the things in which we can vindicate the
Divine judgment.

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p5"></span>3. Hence we shall not mention those
who were shaken by the persecution, nor those who in everything
pertaining to salvation were shipwrecked, and by their own will were
sunk in the depths of the flood. But we shall introduce into this
history in general only those events which may be usefull first to
ourselves and afterwards to posterity. <span
id="fr_2500"></span>[2501](#fn_2500) Let us therefore proceed to
describe briefly the sacred conflicts of the witnesses of the Divine
Word.

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p7"></span>4. It was in the nineteenth year of
the reign of Diocletian, <span id="fr_2501"></span>[2502](#fn_2501) in
the month Dystrus, <span id="fr_2502"></span>[2503](#fn_2502) called
March by the Romans, when the feast of the Saviour’s passion was near at
hand, <span id="fr_2503"></span>[2504](#fn_2503) that royal edicts were
published everywhere, commanding that the churches be leveled to the
ground and the Scriptures be destroyed by fire, and ordering that those
who held places of honor be degraded, and that the household servants,
if they persisted in the profession of Christianity, be deprived of
freedom. <span id="fr_2504"></span>[2505](#fn_2504)

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p12"></span><span id="page_325">p. 325</span>
<span id="iii.xiii.iii-Page_325"></span>5. Such was the first edict
against us. But not long after, other decrees were issued, commanding
that all the rulers of the churches in every place be first thrown into
prison, <span id="fr_2505"></span>[2506](#fn_2505) and afterwards by
every artifice be compelled to sacrifice. <span
id="fr_2506"></span>[2507](#fn_2506)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2499"></span>[324:2500](2010254.htm#fr_2499) <span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p3"></span> [Ps. cvii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#040)<span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2500"></span>[324:2501](2010254.htm#fr_2500) <span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p6"></span> Gibbon uses this passage as the basis
for his severe attack upon the honesty of Eusebius (*Decline and Fall,*
chap. 16), but he has certainly done our author injustice (cf. the
remarks made on p. 49, above).

<span id="fn_2501"></span>[324:2502](2010254.htm#fr_2501) <span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p8"></span> Diocletian began to reign Sept. 17,
284, and therefore his nineteenth year extended from Sept. 17, 302, to
Sept. 16, 303. Eusebius is in agreement with all our authorities in
assigning this year for the beginning of the persecution, and is
certainly correct. In regard to the month, however, he is not so
accurate. Lactantius, who was in Nicomedia at the time of the beginning
of the persecution, and certainly much better informed than Eusebius in
regard to the details, states distinctly (in his *De mort. pers.* chap.
12) that the festival of the god Terminus, the seventh day before the
Kalends of March (i.e. Feb. 23), was chosen by the emperors for the
opening of the persecution, and there is no reason for doubting his
exact statement. At the beginning of the *Martyrs of Palestine* (p. 342,
below) the month Xanthicus (April) is given as the date, but this is
still further out of the way. It was probably March or even April before
the edicts were published in many parts of the empire, and Eusebius may
have been misled by that fact, not knowing the exact date of their
publication in Nicomedia itself. We learn from Lactantius that on
February 23d the great church of Nicomedia, together with the copies of
Scripture found in it, was destroyed by order of the emperors, but that
the edict of which Eusebius speaks just below was not issued until the
following day. For a discussion of the causes which led to the
persecution of Diocletian see below, p. 397.

<span id="fn_2502"></span>[324:2503](2010254.htm#fr_2502) <span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p9.1"></span>Δύστρος</span>, the seventh month of the
Macedonian year, corresponding to our March. See the table on p. 403,
below.

<span id="fn_2503"></span>[324:2504](2010254.htm#fr_2503) <span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p10"></span> Valesius (*ad locum*) states, on the
authority of Scaliger and Petavius, that Easter fell on April 18th in
the year 303. I have not attempted to verify the statement.

<span id="fn_2504"></span>[324:2505](2010254.htm#fr_2504) <span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11"></span> This is the famous First Edict of
Diocletian, which is no longer extant, and the terms of which therefore
have to be gathered from the accounts of Eusebius and Lactantius. The
interpretation of the edict has caused a vast deal of trouble. It is
discussed very fully by Mason in his important work, *The Persecution of
Diocletian,* p. 105 sq. and p. 343 sq. As he remarks, Lactantius simply
describes the edict in a general way, while Eusebius gives an accurate
statement of its substance, even reproducing its language in part. The
first provision (that the churches be leveled to the ground) is simply a
carrying out of the old principle, that it was unlawful for the
Christians to hold assemblies, under a new form. The second provision,
directed against the sacred books, was entirely new, and was a very
shrewd move, revealing at the same time an appreciation on the part of
the authors of the persecution of the important part which the
Scriptures occupied in the Christian Church. The third provision, as
Mason has pointed out, is a substantial reproduction of a part of the
edict of Valerian, and was evidently consciously based upon that edict.
(Upon the variations from the earlier edict, see Mason, p. 115 sq.) It
is noticeable that not torture nor death is decreed, but only civil
degradation. This degradation, as can be seen from a comparison with the
description of Lactantius (*ibid.* chap. 13) and with the edict of
Valerian (given in Cyprian’s Epistle to Successus, Ep. No. 81, *al.*
80), consisted, in the case of those who held public office (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.1"></span>τιμῆς
ἐπειλημμένους</span>), in the loss of rank and also of citizenship; that
is, they fell through two grades, as is pointed out by Mason. In the
interpretation of the fourth provision, however, Mason does not seem to
me to have been so successful. The last clause runs <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.2"></span>τοὺς δὲ ἐν οἰκετίαις,
εἰ ἐπιμένοιεν τῇ τοῦ χριστιανισμοῦ προθέσει ἐλευθερίας
στερεῖσθαι</span>. The difficult point is the interpretation of the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.3"></span>τοὺς ἐν
οἰκετίαις</span>. The words usually mean “household slaves,” and are
commonly so translated in this passage. But, as Valesius remarks, there
is certainly no sense then in depriving them of freedom (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.5"></span>λευθερία</span>)
which they do not possess. Valesius consequently translates *plebeii,*
“common people,” and Mason argues at length for a similar interpretation
(p. 344 sq.), looking upon these persons as common people, or
individuals in private life, as contrasted with the officials mentioned
in the previous clause. The only objection, but in my opinion a fatal
objection, to this attractive interpretation is that it gives the phrase
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.6"></span>οἱ ἐν
οἰκετίαις</span> a wider meaning than can legitimately be applied to it.
Mason remarks: “The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.7"></span>οἰκετία</span> means, and is here a
translation of, *familia;* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.8"></span>οἱ ἐν οἰκετίαις</span> means *ii qui in
familiis sunt,*—not graceful Latin certainly, but plainly signifying
‘those who live in private households.’ Now in private households there
lived not *only* slaves, thank goodness, but free men too, both as
masters and as servants; therefore in the phrase <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.9"></span>τοὺς ἐν
οἰκετίαις</span> itself there is nothing which forbids the paraphrase
‘private persons.’” But I submit that to use so clumsy a phrase, so
unnecessary a circumlocution, to designate simply private people in
general—<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.10"></span>οἱ
πολλοί</span>—would be the height of absurdity. The interpretation of
Stroth (which is approved by Heinichen) seems to me much more
satisfactory. He remarks: “Das Edict war zunächst nur gegen zwei Klassen
von Leuten gerichtet, einmal gegen die, welche in kaiserlichen Æmtern
standen, und dann gegen die freien oder freigelassenen Christen, welche
bei den Kaisern oder ihren Hofleuten und Statthaltern in Diensten
standen, und zu ihrem Hausgesinde gehörten.” This seems to me more
satisfactory, both on verbal and historical grounds. The words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p11.11"></span>οἱ ἐν
οἰκετίαις</span> certainly cannot, in the present case, mean “household
slaves,” but they can mean servants, attendants, or other persons at
court, or in the households of provincial officials, who did not hold
rank as officials, but at the same time were freemen born, or freedmen,
and thus in a different condition from slaves. Such persons would
naturally be reduced to slavery if degraded at all, and it is easier to
think of their reduction to slavery than of that of the entire mass of
Christians not in public office. Still further, this proposition finds
support in the edict of Valerian, in which this class of people is
especially mentioned. And finally, it is, in my opinion, much more
natural to suppose that this edict (whose purpose I shall discuss on p.
399) was confined to persons who were in some way connected with
official life,—either as chiefs or assistants or servants,—and therefore
in a position peculiarly fitted for the formation of plots against the
government, than that it was directed against Christians
indiscriminately. The grouping together of the two classes seems to me
very natural; and the omission of any specific reference to bishops and
other church officers, who are mentioned in the second edict, is thus
fully explained, as it cannot be adequately explained, in my opinion, on
any other ground.

<span id="fn_2505"></span>[325:2506](2010254.htm#fr_2505) <span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p13"></span> As we learn from chap. 6, §8, the
edict commanding the church officers to be seized and thrown into prison
followed popular uprisings in Melitene and Syria, and if Eusebius is
correct, was caused by those outbreaks. Evidently the Christians were
held in some way responsible for those rebellious outbursts (possibly
they were a direct consequence of the first edict), and the natural
result of them must have been to make Diocletian realize, as he had not
realized before, that the existence of such a society as the Christian
Church within the empire—demanding as it did supreme allegiance from its
members—was a menace to the state. It was therefore not strange that
what began as a purely political thing, as an attempt to break up a
supposed treasonable plot formed by certain Christian officials, should
speedily develop into a religious persecution. The first step in such a
persecution would naturally be the seizure of all church officers (see
below, p. 397 sq.).

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p14"></span>The decrees of which Eusebius speaks
in this paragraph are evidently to be identified with the one mentioned
in chap. 6, §8. This being so, it is clear that Eusebius’ account can
lay no claims to chronological order. This must be remembered, or we
shall fall into repeated difficulties in reading this eighth book. We
are obliged to arrange the order of events for ourselves, for his
account is quite desultory, and devoid both of logical and chronological
sequence. The decrees or writings (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p14.1"></span>γρ€μματα</span>) mentioned in this
paragraph constituted really but one edict (cf. chap. 6, §8), which is
known to us as the Second Edict of Diocletian. Its date cannot be
determined with exactness, for, as Mason remarks, it may have been
issued at any time between February and November; but it was probably
published not many months after the first, inasmuch as it was a result
of disturbances which arose in consequence of the first. Mason is
inclined to place it in March, within a month after the issue of the
first, but that seems to me a little too early. In issuing the edict
Diocletian followed the example of Valerian in part, and yet only in
part; for instead of commanding that the church officers be slain, he
commanded only that they be seized. He evidently believed that he could
accomplish his purpose best by getting the leading men of the church
into his hands and holding them as hostages, while denying them the
glory of martyrdom (cf. Mason, p. 132 sq.). The persons affected by the
edict, according to Eusebius, were “all the rulers of the churches”
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.iii-p14.2"></span>τοὺς τῶν
ἐκκλησιῶν προέδρους π€ντας</span>; cf. also *Mart. Pal.* Introd., §2).
In chap. 6, §8, he says <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p14.3"></span>τοὺς πανταχόσε τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν
προεστῶτας</span>. These words would seem to imply that only the bishops
were intended, but we learn from Lactantius (*De mort. pers.* 15) that
presbyters and other officers (*presbyteri ac ministri*) were included,
and this is confirmed, as Mason remarks (p. 133, note), by the sequel.
We must therefore take the words used by Eusebius in the general sense
of “church officers.” According to Lactantius, their families suffered
with them (*cum omnibus suis deducebantur*), but Eusebius says nothing
of that.

<span id="fn_2506"></span>[325:2507](2010254.htm#fr_2506) <span
id="iii.xiii.iii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.iii-p15"></span> We learn from Lactantius (*l.c.*)
that the officers of the church, under the terms of the second edict,
were thrown into prison without any option being given them in the
matter of sacrificing. They were not asked to sacrifice, but were
imprisoned unconditionally. This was so far in agreement with Valerian’s
edict, which had decreed the instant death of all church officers
without the option of sacrificing. But as Eusebius tells us here, they
were afterwards called upon to sacrifice, and as he tells us in the
first paragraph of the next chapter, multitudes yielded, and that of
course meant their release, as indeed we are directly told in chap. 6,
§10. We may gather from the present passage and from the other passages
referred to, taken in connection with the second chapter of the *Martyrs
of Palestine,* that this decree, ordaining their release on condition of
sacrificing, was issued on the occasion of Diocletian’s Vicennalia,
which were celebrated in December, 303, on the twentieth anniversary of
the death of Carus, which Diocletian reckoned as the beginning of his
reign, though he was not in reality emperor until the following
September. A considerable time, therefore, elapsed between the edict
ordaining the imprisonment of church officers and the edict commanding
their release upon condition of sacrificing. This latter is commonly
known as Diocletian’s Third Edict, and is usually spoken of as still
harsher than any that preceded it. It is true that it did result in the
torture of a great many,—for those who did not sacrifice readily were to
be compelled to do so, if possible,—but their death was not aimed at. If
they would not sacrifice, they were simply to remain in prison, as
before. Those who did die at this time seem to have died under torture
that was intended, not to kill them, but to bring about their release.
As Mason shows, then, this third edict was of the nature of an amnesty;
was rather a step toward toleration than a sharpening of the
persecution. The prisons were to be emptied, as was customary on such
great occasions, and the church officers were to be permitted to return
to their homes, on condition that they should sacrifice. Inasmuch as
they had not been allowed to leave prison on any condition before, this
was clearly a mark of favor (see Mason, p. 206 sq.). Many were released
even without sacrificing, and in their desire to empty the prisons, the
governors devised various expedients for freeing at least a part of
those who would not yield (cf. the instances mentioned in the next
chapter). At the same time, some governors got rid of their prisoners by
putting them to death, sometimes simply by increasing the severity of
the tortures intended to try them, sometimes as a penalty for rash or
daring words uttered by the prisoners, which were interpreted as
treasonable, and which, perhaps, the officials had employed their
ingenuity, when necessary, to elicit. Thus many might suffer death,
under various legal pretenses, although the terms of the edict did not
legally permit death to be inflicted as a punishment for Christianity.
The death penalty was not decreed until the issue of the Fourth Edict
(see below, *Mart. Pal.* chap.3, note 2).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](2010255)
