[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010046)  [Next](2010048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—</span>*Philo’s Embassy to Caius
in Behalf of the Jews.*

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>Philo</span> has given us an account, in
five books, of the misfortunes of the Jews under Caius. <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) He recounts at the same time the
madness of Caius: how he called himself a god, and performed as emperor
innumerable acts of tyranny; and he describes further the miseries of
the Jews under him, and gives a report of the embassy upon which he
himself was sent to Rome in behalf of his fellow-countrymen in
Alexandria; <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) how when he appeared
before Caius in behalf of the laws of his fathers he received nothing
but laughter and ridicule, and almost incurred the risk of his life.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p5"></span>2. Josephus also makes mention of these
things in the eighteenth book of his Antiquities, in the following
words: <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) “A sedition having arisen
in Alexandria between the Jews that dwell there and the Greeks, <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) three deputies were chosen from each
faction and went to Caius.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p8"></span>3. One of the Alexandrian deputies was
Apion, <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) who uttered many slanders
against the Jews; among other things saying that they neglected the
honors due to Cæsar. For while all other subjects of Rome erected altars
and temples to Caius, and in all other respects treated him just as they
did the gods, they alone considered it disgraceful to honor him with
statues and to swear by his name.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p10"></span>4. And when Apion had uttered many
severe charges by which he hoped that Caius would be aroused, as indeed
was likely, Philo, the chief of the Jewish embassy, a man celebrated in
every respect, a brother of Alexander the Alabarch, <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) and not unskilled in philosophy, was
prepared to enter <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="iii.vii.vi-Page_109"></span>upon a defense in reply to his
accusations.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p12"></span>5. But Caius prevented him and ordered
him to leave, and being very angry, it was plain that he meditated some
severe measure against them. And Philo departed covered with insult and
told the Jews that were with him to be of good courage; for while Caius
was raging against them he was in fact already contending with God.”

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p13"></span>6. Thus far Josephus. And Philo
himself, in the work *On the Embassy* <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) which he wrote, describes accurately
and in detail the things which were done by him at that time. But I
shall omit the most of them and record only those things which will make
clearly evident to the reader that the misfortunes of the Jews came upon
them not long after their daring deeds against Christ and on account of
the same.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p15"></span>7. And in the first place he relates
that at Rome in the reign of Tiberius, Sejanus, who at that time enjoyed
great influence with the emperor, made every effort to destroy the
Jewish nation utterly; <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) and that
in Judea, Pilate, under whom the crimes against the Saviour were
committed, attempted something contrary to the Jewish law in respect to
the temple, which was at that time still standing in Jerusalem, and
excited them to the greatest tumults. <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[108:301](2010047.htm#fr_300) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p3"></span> Upon this work, see Schürer, p. 855
sqq. According to him, the whole work embraced five books, and probably
bore the title <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p3.1"></span>περὶ ἀρετῶν καὶ πρεσβείας πρὸς Γ€ϊον</span>.
Eusebius cites what seems to be the same work under these two different
titles in this and in the next chapter; and the conclusion that they
were but one work is confirmed by the fact that Eusebius (in chap. 18)
mentions the work under the title *On the Virtues,* which he says that
Philo humorously prefixed to his work, describing the impiety of Caius.
The omission of the title <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p3.2"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p3.3"></span>πρεσβεία</span> in so complete a catalogue
of Philo’s works makes its identification with <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p3.4"></span>περὶ ἀρετῶν</span> very probable. Of the
five, only the third and fourth are extant,—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p3.5"></span>εἰς Φλ€κκον</span>, *Adversus Flaccum,* and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.vi-p3.6"></span>περὶ πρεσβείας
πρὸς Γ€ϊον</span>, *de legatione ad Cajum* (found in Mangey’s ed. Vol.
II. p. 517–600). Book I., which is lost, contained, probably, a general
introduction; Book II., which is also lost, contained an account of the
oppression of the Jews during the time of Tiberius, by Sejanus in Rome,
and by Pilate in Judea (see below, note 9); Book III., *Adversus
Flaccum* (still extant), contains an account of the persecution of the
Jews of Alexandria at the beginning of the reign of Caius; Book IV.,
*Legatio ad Cajum* (still extant), describes the sufferings which came
upon the Jews as a result of Caius’ command that divine honors should
everywhere be paid him; Book V., the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p3.7"></span>παλινωδία</span> (which is lost), contained
an account of the change for the better in the Jews’ condition through
the death of Caius, and the edict of toleration published by Claudius.
Upon the other works of Philo, see chap. 18, below.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[108:302](2010047.htm#fr_301) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p3.8"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p4"></span> The occasion of this embassy was a
terrible disturbance which had arisen between the Jews and Greeks in
Alexandria, and had continued with occasional interruptions for more
than a year. Much blood had been shed, and affairs were becoming
constantly worse. All efforts to secure peace utterly failed, and
finally, in 40 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>, the Greeks dispatched an
embassy to the emperor, hoping to secure from him an edict for the
extermination of the Jews. The Jews, on their side, followed the example
of the Greeks, sending an embassy for their own defense, with Philo at
its head. The result was as Eusebius relates, and the Jews were left in
a worse condition than before, from which, however, they were speedily
relieved by the death of Caius. Claudius, who succeeded Caius, restored
to them for a time religious freedom and all the rights which they had
hitherto enjoyed.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[108:303](2010047.htm#fr_302) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p6"></span> Josephus, *Ant.* XVIII. 8. 1.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[108:304](2010047.htm#fr_303) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p7"></span> This sedition, mentioned above, began
in 38 <span class="c13"><span id="iii.vii.vi-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span>,
soon after the accession of Caius. The Jews, since the time of Alexander
the Great, when they had come in great numbers to the newly founded
city, Alexandria, had enjoyed with occasional interruptions high favor
there, and were among the most influential inhabitants. They possessed
all the rights of citizenship and stood upon an equality with their
neighbors in all respects. When Alexandria fell into the hands of the
Romans, all the inhabitants, Jews as well as Greeks, were compelled to
take a position subordinate to the conquerors, but their condition was
not worse than that of their neighbors. They had always, however, been
hated more or less by their fellow-citizens on account of their
prosperity, which was the result of superior education and industry.
This enmity came to a crisis under Caius, when the financial condition
of Egypt was very bad, and the inhabitants felt themselves unusually
burdened by the Roman demands. The old hatred for their more prosperous
neighbors broke out afresh, and the terrible disturbance mentioned was
the result. The refusal of the Jews to worship Caius as a God was made a
pretext for attacking them, and it was this refusal which gained for
them the hatred of Caius himself.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[108:305](2010047.htm#fr_304) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p9"></span> Apion, chief of the Greek deputies, was
a grammarian of Alexandria who had won great fame as a writer and Greek
scholar. He seems to have been very unscrupulous and profligate, and was
a bitter and persistent enemy of the Jews, whom he attacked very
severely in at least two of his works—the *Egyptian History* and a
special work *Against the Jews,* neither of which is extant. He was very
unscrupulous in his attacks, inventing the most absurd and malicious
falsehoods, which were quite generally believed, and were the means of
spreading still more widely the common hatred of the Jews. Against him
Josephus wrote his celebrated work, *Contra Apionem* (more fully *de
antiquitate Judæorum contra Apionem*), which is still extant, and in the
second book of which he exposes the ignorance and mendacity of Apion. In
the Pseudo-Clementines he plays an important (but of course fictitious)
role as an antagonist of the Gospel. The extant fragments of Apion’s
works are given, according to Lightfoot, in Müller’s *Fragm. Hist.
Græc.* II. 506 sq., and in Fabricius’ *Bibl. Græc.* I. 503, and VII. 50.
Compare Lightfoot’s article in Smith and Wace’s *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*

<span id="fn_305"></span>[108:306](2010047.htm#fr_305) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p11"></span> The Alabarch was the chief magistrate
of the Jews at Alexandria. Alexander was a very rich and influential
Jew, who was widely known and held in high esteem. His son Tiberius
Alexander was appointed procurator of Judea in 46 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vii.vi-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span>, as successor
of Cuspius Fadus. Philo thus belonged to a high and noble Jewish family.
The accuracy of Josephus’ statement that Philo was the brother of the
Alabarch Alexander has been denied (e.g., by Ewald. *Gesch. des
Jüdischen Volkes,* Vol. VI. p. 235), and the Alabarch has been assumed
to have been the nephew of Philo, but this without sufficient ground
(compare Schürer, *ibid.* p. 832, note 5).

<span id="fn_306"></span>[109:307](2010047.htm#fr_306) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p14"></span> See note 1, above. The work is cited
here under the title <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p14.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p14.2"></span>πρεσβεία</span> (*Legatio*).

<span id="fn_307"></span>[109:308](2010047.htm#fr_307) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p16"></span> The Jews in Rome had enjoyed the favor
of Augustus, and had increased greatly in numbers and influence there.
They were first disturbed by Tiberius, who was very hostile to them, and
to whose notice all the worst sides of Jewish character were brought by
their enemies, especially by Sejanus, who had great influence with the
emperor, and was moreover a deadly enemy of the Jews. The Jews were
driven out of Rome, and suffered many acts of violence. After the death
of Sejanus, which took place in 31 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p16.1"></span>a.d.</span>, they were allowed to return,
and their former rights were restored.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[109:309](2010047.htm#fr_308) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p17"></span> Pilate proved himself exceedingly
tyrannical and was very obnoxious to the Jews, offending them greatly at
different times during his administration by disregarding their
religious scruples as no procurator before him had ventured to do. Soon
after his accession he changed his quarters from Cæsarea to Jerusalem,
and introduced the Roman standard into the Holy City. The result was a
great tumult, and Pilate was forced to yield and withdraw the offensive
ensigns (Josephus, *B. J.* II. 9. 2; see the next chapter). At another
time he offended the Jews by hanging in his palace some shields
inscribed with the names of heathen deities, which he removed only upon
an express order of Tiberius (Philo, *ad Caium,* chap. 38). Again, he
appropriated a part of the treasure of the temple to the construction of
an aqueduct, which caused another terrible tumult which was quelled only
after much bloodshed (Josephus, *B. J.* II. 9. 4; see the next chapter).
For further particulars about Pilate, see chap. 7, below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](2010048)
