[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010219)  [Next](2010221) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—*The Bishops of Rome in
those Times.*

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.iii-p2.1"></span>Cornelius</span>, <span
id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164) having held the episcopate in the
city of Rome about three years, was succeeded by Lucius. <span
id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165) He died in less than eight months,
and transmitted his office to Stephen. <span
id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166) Diony<span id="page_294">p.
294</span> <span id="iii.xii.iii-Page_294"></span>sius wrote to him the
first of his letters on baptism, <span
id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167) as no small controversy had arisen
as to whether those who had turned from any heresy should be purified by
baptism. For the ancient custom prevailed in regard to such, that they
should receive only the laying on of hands with prayers. <span
id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[293:2165](2010220.htm#fr_2164) <span
id="iii.xii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p3"></span> On Cornelius, see Bk. VI. chap. 39,
note 3.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[293:2166](2010220.htm#fr_2165) <span
id="iii.xii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p4"></span> Eusebius makes Cornelius’ episcopate a
year too long (see Bk. VI. chap. 39, note 3), and hence puts the
accession of Julius too late. Jerome puts him in the second year of
Gallus (see the same note) and gives the duration of his episcopate as
eight months, agreeing with Eusebius in the present passage. The
Armenian *Chron.* puts Lucius in the seventh year of Philip, and assigns
only two months to his episcopate. But it is far out of the way, as also
in regard to Cornelius. The Liberian catalogue assigns three years and
eight months to Lucius’ episcopate, putting his death in 255; but
Lipsius has shown conclusively that this must be incorrect, and
concludes that he held office eight months, from June, 253, to March,
254. He was banished while bishop of Rome, but returned very soon, and
died in a short time, probably a natural death. The strife in regard to
the lapsed, begun while Cornelius was bishop, continued under him, and
he followed the liberal policy of his predecessor. One letter of Cyprian
addressed to him is extant (*Ep.* 57; *al.* 61).

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[293:2167](2010220.htm#fr_2166) <span
id="iii.xii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p5"></span> Lipsius puts the accession of Stephen
on the twelfth of May, 254, and his death on the second of August, 257,
assigning him an episcopate of three years, two months and twenty-one
days. The dates given by the chief authorities vary greatly. The
Liberian catalogue gives four years, two months and twenty-one days,
which Lipsius corrects simply by reading three instead of four years,
for the latter figure is impossible (see chap. 5, note 5). Eusebius, in
chap. 5, tells us that Stephen held office two years. Jerome’s version
of the *Chron.* says three years, but puts his accession in the second
year of Gallus, which is inconsistent with his own statement that
Cornelius became bishop in the first year of Gallus. The Armenian
*Chron.* agrees with Eusebius’ statement in chap. 5, below, in assigning
two years to the episcopate of Stephen, but puts his accession in the
seventh year of Philip, which, like his notices of Cornelius and Lucius
is far out of the way.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p6"></span>The discussion in regard to the lapsed
still continued under Stephen. But the chief controversy of the time was
in regard to the re-baptism of heretics, which caused a severe rupture
between the churches of Rome and Carthage. Stephen held, in accordance
with ancient usage and the uniform custom of the Roman church (though
under Callistus heretics were re-baptized according to Hippolytus,
*Phil.* IX. 7), that baptism, even by heretics and schismatics, is
valid; and that one so baptized is not to be re-baptized upon entering
the orthodox church, but is to be received by the imposition of hands.
Cyprian, on the other hand, supported by the whole of the Asiatic and
African church, maintained the invalidity of such baptism and the
necessity of re-baptism. The controversy became very sharp, and seems to
have resulted in Stephen’s hurling an excommunication against the
Asiatic and African churches. Compare the epistle of Firmilian to
Cyprian (*Ep.* 75), and that of Dionysius, quoted by Eusebius in chap.
5, below. Stephen appears to have been a man of very dictatorial and
overbearing temper, if our authorities are to be relied upon, and seems
to have made overweening claims in regard to Rome’s prerogatives; to
have been the first in fact to assume that the bishop of Rome had the
right of exercising control over the whole Church (see especially the
epistle of Firmilian to Cyprian; Cyprian’s *Epistles,* No. 74, *al.*
75). It must be remembered, however, that we know Stephen only through
the accounts of his opponents. It had been the practice in the churches
of Asia for a long time before Cyprian to re-baptize heretics and
schismatics (cf. the epistle of Firmilian to Cyprian, and the epistle of
Dionysius, quoted by Eusebius in chap. 5, below), and the custom
prevailed also in Africa, though it seems to have been a newer thing
there. Cyprian, in his epistle to Jubaianus (*Ep.* 72, *al.* 73), does
not trace it back beyond Agrippinus, bishop of Carthage, under whom the
practice was sanctioned by a council (186–187 or 215–217 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xii.iii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>). Under
Cyprian himself the practice was confirmed by a council at Carthage, in
255 <span class="c13"><span id="iii.xii.iii-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span> The
more liberal view of the Roman church, however, in time prevailed and
was confirmed with some limitations by the Council of Arles, in 314.
Stephen figures in tradition as a martyr, but there is no reason to
think that he was one, for the Church was enjoying comparative peace at
the time of his death. Two epistles are extant, addressed to him by
Cyprian (Nos. 66 and 71, *al.* 68 and 72). A number of Cyprian’s
epistles refer to Stephen.

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[294:2168](2010220.htm#fr_2167) <span
id="iii.xii.iii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p7"></span> Six epistles by Dionysius on the
subject of baptism are mentioned by Eusebius (see below, chap. 5, note
6). It is clear that Dionysius, so far as Eusebius knew, wrote but one
to Stephen on this subject, for he calls the one which he wrote to
Xystus the second (in chap. 5). Dionysius’ own opinion on the subject of
re-baptism is plain enough from Eusebius’ words in this chapter, and
also from Dionysius’ own words in chap. 5, below. He sided with the
entire Eastern and African church in refusing to admit the validity of
heretical baptism, and in requiring a convert from the heretics to be
“washed and cleansed from the filth of the old and impure leaven” (see
chap. 5, §5).

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[294:2169](2010220.htm#fr_2168) <span
id="iii.xii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p8"></span> See note 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](2010221)
