[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010074)  [Next](2010076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—</span>*The Famine which
oppressed them.*

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p2.1"></span>Taking</span> the fifth book of the History
of Josephus again in our hands, let us go through the tragedy of events
which then occurred. <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634)

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p4"></span>2. “For the wealthy,” he says, “it was
equally dangerous to remain. For under pretense that they were going to
desert men were put to death for their wealth. The madness of the
seditions increased with the famine and both the miseries were inflamed
more and more day by day.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p5"></span>3. Nowhere was food to be seen; but,
bursting into the houses men searched them thoroughly, and whenever they
found anything to eat they tormented the owners on the ground that they
had denied that they had anything; but if they found nothing, they
tortured them on the ground that they had more carefully concealed it.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p6"></span>4. The proof of their having or not
having food was found in the bodies of the poor wretches. Those of them
who were still in good condition they assumed were well supplied with
food, while those who were already wasted away they passed by, for it
seemed absurd to slay those who were on the point of perishing for want.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p7"></span>5. Many, indeed, secretly sold their
possessions for one measure of wheat, if they belonged to the wealthier
class, of barley if they were poorer. Then shutting themselves up in the
innermost parts of their houses, some ate the grain uncooked on account
of their terrible want, while others baked it according as necessity and
fear dictated.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p8"></span>6. Nowhere were tables set, but,
snatching the yet uncooked food from the fire, they tore it in pieces.
Wretched was the fare, and a lamentable spectacle it was to see the more
powerful secure an abundance while the weaker mourned.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p9"></span>7. Of all evils, indeed, famine is the
worst, and it destroys nothing so effectively as shame. For that which
under other circumstances is worthy of respect, in the midst of famine
is despised. Thus women snatched the food from the very mouths of their
husbands and children, from their fathers, and what was most pitiable of
all, mothers from their babes. And while their dearest ones were wasting
away in their arms, they were not ashamed to take away from them the
last drops that supported life.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p10"></span>8. And even while they were eating
thus they did not remain undiscovered. But everywhere the rioters
appeared, to rob them even of these portions of food. For whenever they
saw a house shut up, they regarded it as a sign that those inside were
taking food. And immediately bursting open the doors they rushed in and
seized what they were eating, almost forcing it out of their very
throats.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p11"></span>9. Old men who clung to their food
were beaten, and if the women concealed it in their hands, their hair
was torn for so doing. There was pity neither for gray hairs nor for
infants, but, taking up the babes that clung to their morsels of food,
they dashed them to the ground. But to those that anticipated their
entrance and swallowed what they were about to seize, they were still
more cruel, just as if they had been wronged by them.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p12"></span>10. And they devised the most terrible
modes of torture to discover food, stopping up the privy passages of the
poor wretches with bitter herbs, and piercing their seats with sharp
rods. And men suffered things horrible even to hear of, for the sake of
compelling them to confess to the possession of one loaf of bread, or in
order that they might be made to disclose a single drachm of barley
which they had concealed. But the tormentors themselves did not suffer
hunger.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p13"></span>11. Their conduct might indeed have
seemed less barbarous if they had been driven to it by necessity; but
they did it for the sake of exercising their madness and of providing
sustenance for themselves for days to come.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p14"></span>12. And when any one crept out of the
city by night as far as the outposts of the Romans to collect wild herbs
and grass, they went to meet him; and when he thought he had already
escaped the enemy, they seized what he had brought with him, and even
though oftentimes the man would entreat them, and, calling upon the most
awful name of God, adjure them to give him a portion of what he had
obtained at the risk of his life, they would give him nothing back.
Indeed, it was fortunate if the one that was plundered was not also
slain.”

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p15"></span>13. To this account Josephus, after
relating other things, adds the following: <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) “The possibility of going out of the
city being brought to an end, <span id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636)
all hope of safety for the Jews was cut off. And the famine increased
and devoured the people by houses and families. And the rooms were
filled with dead women and children, the lanes of the city with the
corpses of old men.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p18"></span>14. Children and youths, swollen with
the famine, wandered about the market-places like shadows, and fell down
wherever the death agony overtook them. The sick were not strong enough
to bury even their own relatives, and those who had the strength <span
id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span
id="iii.viii.vi-Page_140"></span>hesitated because of the multitude of
the dead and the uncertainty as to their own fate. Many, indeed, died
while they were burying others, and many betook themselves to their
graves before death came upon them.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p19"></span>15. There was neither weeping nor
lamentation under these misfortunes; but the famine stifled the natural
affections. Those that were dying a lingering death looked with dry eyes
upon those that had gone to their rest before them. Deep silence and
death-laden night encircled the city.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p20"></span>16. But the robbers were more terrible
than these miseries; for they broke open the houses, which were now mere
sepulchres, robbed the dead and stripped the covering from their bodies,
and went away with a laugh. They tried the points of their swords in the
dead bodies, and some that were lying on the ground still alive they
thrust through in order to test their weapons. But those that prayed
that they would use their right hand and their sword upon them, they
contemptuously left to be destroyed by the famine. Every one of these
died with eyes fixed upon the temple; and they left the seditious alive.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p21"></span>17. These at first gave orders that
the dead should be buried out of the public treasury, for they could not
endure the stench. But afterward, when they were not able to do this,
they threw the bodies from the walls into the trenches.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p22"></span>18. And as Titus went around and saw
the trenches filled with the dead, and the thick blood oozing out of the
putrid bodies, he groaned aloud, and, raising his hands, called God to
witness that this was not his doing.”

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p23"></span>19. After speaking of some other
things, Josephus proceeds as follows: <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) “I cannot hesitate to declare what my
feelings compel me to. I suppose, if the Romans had longer delayed in
coming against these guilty wretches, the city would have been swallowed
up by a chasm, or overwhelmed with a flood, or struck with such
thunderbolts as destroyed Sodom. For it had brought forth a generation
of men much more godless than were those that suffered such punishment.
By their madness indeed was the whole people brought to destruction.”

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p25"></span>20. And in the sixth book he writes as
follows: <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) “Of those that perished
by famine in the city the number was countless, and the miseries they
underwent unspeakable. For if so much as the shadow of food appeared in
any house, there was war, and the dearest friends engaged in
hand-to-hand conflict with one another, and snatched from each other the
most wretched supports of life.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p27"></span>21. Nor would they believe that even
the dying were without food; but the robbers would search them while
they were expiring, lest any one should feign death while concealing
food in his bosom. With mouths gaping for want of food, they stumbled
and staggered along like mad dogs, and beat the doors as if they were
drunk, and in their impotence they would rush into the same houses twice
or thrice in one hour.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p28"></span>22. Necessity compelled them to eat
anything they could find, and they gathered and devoured things that
were not fit even for the filthiest of irrational beasts. Finally they
did not abstain even from their girdles and shoes, and they stripped the
hides off their shields and devoured them. Some used even wisps of old
hay for food, and others gathered stubble and sold the smallest weight
of it for four Attic drachmæ. <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639)

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p30"></span>23. “But why should I speak of the
shamelessness which was displayed during the famine toward inanimate
things? For I am going to relate a fact such as is recorded neither by
Greeks nor Barbarians; horrible to relate, incredible to hear. And
indeed I should gladly have omitted this calamity, that I might not seem
to posterity to be a teller of fabulous tales, if I had not innumerable
witnesses to it in my own age. And besides, I should render my country
poor service if I suppressed the account of the sufferings which she
endured.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p31"></span>24. “There was a certain woman named
Mary that dwelt beyond Jordan, whose father was Eleazer, of the village
of Bathezor <span id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) (which signifies the
*house of hyssop*). She was distinguished for her family and her wealth,
and had fled with the rest of the multitude to Jerusalem and was shut up
there with them during the siege.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p33"></span>25. The tyrants had robbed her of the
rest of the property which she had brought with her into the city from
Perea. And the remnants of her possessions and whatever food was to be
seen the guards rushed in daily and snatched away from her. This made
the woman terribly angry, and by her frequent reproaches and
imprecations she aroused the anger of the rapacious villains against
herself.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p34"></span>26. But no one either through anger or
pity would slay her; and she grew weary of finding food for others to
eat. The search, too, was already become everywhere difficult, and the
famine was piercing her bowels and marrow, and resentment was raging
more violently than famine. Taking, therefore, anger and necessity as
her counsellors, she proceeded to do a most unnatural thing.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p35"></span>27. Seizing her child, a boy which was
sucking at her breast, she said, Oh, wretched child, in war, in famine,
in sedition, for what do I pre<span id="page_141">p. 141</span> <span
id="iii.viii.vi-Page_141"></span>serve thee? Slaves among the Romans we
shall be even if we are allowed to live by them. But even slavery is
anticipated by the famine, and the rioters are more cruel than both.
Come, be food for me, a fury for these rioters, <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) and a bye-word to the world, for this
is all that is wanting to complete the calamities of the Jews.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p37"></span>28. And when she had said this she
slew her son; and having roasted him, she ate one half herself, and
covering up the remainder, she kept it. Very soon the rioters appeared
on the scene, and, smelling the nefarious odor, they threatened to slay
her immediately unless she should show them what she had prepared. She
replied that she had saved an excellent portion for them, and with that
she uncovered the remains of the child.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p38"></span>29. They were immediately seized with
horror and amazement and stood transfixed at the sight. But she said
This is my own son, and the deed is mine. Eat for I too have eaten. Be
not more merciful than a woman, nor more compassionate than a mother.
But if you are too pious and shrink from my sacrifice, I have
already <span id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642) eaten of it; let the
rest also remain for me.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p40"></span>30. At these words the men went out
trembling, in this one case being affrighted; yet with difficulty did
they yield that food to the mother. Forthwith the whole city was filled
with the awful crime, and as all pictured the terrible deed before their
own eyes, they trembled as if they had done it themselves.

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p41"></span>31. Those that were suffering from the
famine now longed for death; and blessed were they that had died before
hearing and seeing miseries like these.”

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p42"></span>32. Such was the reward which the Jews
received for their wickedness and impiety, against the Christ of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_634"></span>[139:635](2010075.htm#fr_634) <span
id="iii.viii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p3"></span> Josephus, *B. J.* Bk. V. chap. 10, §§2
and 3.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[139:636](2010075.htm#fr_635) <span
id="iii.viii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p16"></span> *Ibid.*chap. 12, §§3 and 4.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[139:637](2010075.htm#fr_636) <span
id="iii.viii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p17"></span> Titus had just completed the building
of a wall about the city by which all egress from the town was shut off.
Josephus gives an account of the wall in the paragraph immediately
preceding.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[140:638](2010075.htm#fr_637) <span
id="iii.viii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p24"></span> *Ibid.*chap. 13, §6.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[140:639](2010075.htm#fr_638) <span
id="iii.viii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p26"></span> *Ibid.*Bk. VI. chap. 3, §§3 and 4.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[140:640](2010075.htm#fr_639) <span
id="iii.viii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p29.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p29.2"></span>Αττικῶν τεσσ€ρων</span>; the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.vi-p29.3"></span>δραχμῶν</span> is to
be supplied. An Attic drachm, according to some authorities, was equal
to about fifteen cents, according to others (among them Liddell and
Scott), to about nineteen cents.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[140:641](2010075.htm#fr_640) <span
id="iii.viii.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p32.1"></span>βαθεζώρ</span>. Some <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.vi-p32.2"></span>mss.</span> have <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.vi-p32.3"></span>βαθεχώρ</span>, and
the <span class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.vi-p32.4"></span>mss.</span> of
Josephus have <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p32.5"></span>βηθεζώβ</span>, which Whiston translates
Bethezub.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[141:642](2010075.htm#fr_641) <span
id="iii.viii.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p36"></span> “In accordance with the idea that the
souls of the murdered tormented, as furies, those who were most guilty
of their death” (Stroth).

<span id="fn_642"></span>[141:643](2010075.htm#fr_642) <span
id="iii.viii.vi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.vi-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p39.1"></span>ἤ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p39.2"></span>δη</span>. All the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p39.3"></span>mss.</span> of Eusebius read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.vi-p39.4"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.vi-p39.5"></span>μῶν</span>. Some of
the <span class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.vi-p39.6"></span>mss.</span> of
Josephus read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p39.7"></span>ἤ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p39.8"></span>δη</span>, and Rufinus translates *nam et
ego prior comedi.* Valesius, without <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p39.9"></span>ms.</span> authority (but apparently with
the support of some <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p39.10"></span>mss.</span> of Josephus, for Whiston
translates “one-half”) reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p39.11"></span>ἥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.vi-p39.12"></span>μισυ</span>, a half, and he is followed
by the English and German translators. Some change from the reading of
the <span class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.vi-p39.13"></span>mss.</span>
of Eusebius is certainly necessary; and though the alteration made by
Valesius produces very good sense and seems quite natural, I have
preferred to accept the reading which is given by many of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.vi-p39.14"></span>mss.</span> of
Josephus, and which has the support of Rufinus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](2010076)
