[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010584)  [Next](2010586) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXVI</span>.—*How on the
Discovery of Prohibited Books among the Heretics, Many of them return to
the Catholic Church.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxvi-p2.1"></span>Thus</span> were the lurking-places of
the heretics broken up by the emperor’s command, and the savage beasts
they harbored (I mean the chief authors of their impious doctrines)
driven to flight. Of those whom they had deceived, some, intimidated by
the emperor’s threats, disguising their real sentiments, crept secretly
into the Church. For since the law directed that search should be made
for their books, those of them who practiced evil and forbidden arts
were detected, and these were ready to secure their own safety by
dissimulation of every kind. <span id="fr_3305"></span>[3306](#fn_3305)
Others, however, there were, who voluntarily and with real sincerity
embraced a better hope. Meantime the prelates of the several churches
continued to make strict inquiry, utterly rejecting those who attempted
an entrance under the specious disguise of false pretenses, while those
who came with sincerity of purpose were proved for a time, and after
sufficient trial numbered with the congregation. Such was the treatment
of those who stood charged with rank heresy: those, however, who
maintained no impious doctrine, but had been separated from the one body
through the influence of schismatic advisers, were received without
difficulty or delay. Accordingly, numbers thus revisited, as it were,
their own country after an absence in a foreign land, and acknowledged
the Church as a mother from whom they had wandered long, and to whom
they now returned with joy and gladness. Thus the members of the entire
body became united, and compacted in one harmonious whole; and the one
catholic Church, at unity with itself, shone with full luster, while no
heretical or schismatic body anywhere continued to exist. <span
id="fr_3306"></span>[3307](#fn_3306) And the credit of having achieved
this mighty work our Heaven-protected emperor alone, of all who had gone
before him, was able to attribute to himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3305"></span>[540:3306](2010585.htm#fr_3305) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxvi-p3"></span> Here again it is worth noting, for
history and for edification, that books were prohibited and heretics
treated just as the Christians did not like to “be done by,” by the
heathen.

<span id="fn_3306"></span>[540:3307](2010585.htm#fr_3306) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.lxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.lxvi-p4"></span> This famous “church unity,” for
which Constantine has been blessed or execrated, as the case might be,
in all the ages since, was hardly more complete than modern unified
churches where all the members held different pet doctrines and are
prepared to fight for them to the bitter end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](2010586)
