[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010369)  [Next](2010371) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.iv-p1"></span> 3. *Constantine’s Leprosy; Healing
and Baptism by Silvester*.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.iv-p2"></span>This tale is one of the most
frequently found. The earliest account is said to be that of the Acts of
Silvester. Some of the many who repeat it are Ephraem, Cedrenus,
Zonaras. The following account is mainly from Glycas, p. 461–462.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.iv-p3"></span>When Constantine was fighting against
Maxentius, after he had seen the sign of the cross, he was victorious.
Then, forgetting, he was conquered, and grieving, he fell asleep and had
a vision in which the blow of a switch on his nostrils brought blood
which flowed down on his linen tunic in the form of a cross. Seeing
this, he was filled with penitence, and became again victorious. Being
led away a second time into idolatry through his wife Fausta, he was
divinely afflicted with leprosy. The priests prescribed a bath in the
blood of infants, and it was ordered; but when he heard the lamentations
of the mothers, he said it was better to suffer than that so many
infants should perish. Therefore the apostles, Peter and Paul as some
say, appeared to him and told him Silvester would cure him, as he did.
There are many varieties of the story and various details as to baptism,
but in general the whole series of stories regarding his baptism at Rome
centers in this story, and gratitude for this cure is the supposed
occasion of the famous donation of Constantine. In this the
circumstances of the miracle are given at length,—the words of the
apostles, Silvester’s identification of them as apostles by portraits,
the immersion, and subsequent instruction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](2010371)
