[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010135)  [Next](2010137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—</span>*Apolinarius, Bishop
of the Church of Hierapolis.*

<span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p2.1"></span>A number</span> of works of
Apolinarius <span id="fr_1314"></span>[1315](#fn_1314) have been
preserved by many, and the following have <span id="page_207">p.
207</span> <span id="iii.ix.xxvii-Page_207"></span>reached us: the
Discourse addressed to the above-mentioned emperor, <span
id="fr_1315"></span>[1316](#fn_1315) five books Against the
Greeks, <span id="fr_1316"></span>[1317](#fn_1316) On Truth, a first and
second book, <span id="fr_1317"></span>[1318](#fn_1317) and those which
he subsequently wrote against the heresy of the Phrygians, <span
id="fr_1318"></span>[1319](#fn_1318) which not long afterwards came out
with its innovations, <span id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319) but at
that time was, as it were, in its incipiency, since Montanus, with his
false prophetesses, was then laying the foundations of his error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[206:1315](2010136.htm#fr_1314) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3"></span> The first extant notice of
Apolinarius is that of Serapion, bishop of Antioch from about 192 to 209
(see Harnack, *Zeit des Ignatius,* p. 46), in the epistle quoted by
Eusebius in V. 19. We learn from this notice that Apolinarius was
already dead when Serapion wrote (he calls him “most blessed bishop”;
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.1"></span>μακαριώτατος</span>), and that he had been
a skillful opponent of Montanism. His name is not mentioned again, so
far as we know, by any Father of the second or third century. Jerome
(*de vir. ill.* 26) simply repeats the account of Eusebius, but in his
*Epist. ad Magnum,* c. 4 (Migne, I. 607), he enumerates Apolinarius
among those Christian writers who were acquainted with heathen
literature, and made use of it in the refutation of heresies. Photius
(*Cod.* 14) praises his literary style in high terms. Socrates (*H. E.*
III. 7) names Apolinarius with Irenæus, Clement of Alexandria, and
Serapion as holding that the incarnate Christ had a human soul (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.2"></span>ž</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.3"></span>μψυχον τὸν
ἐνανθρωπήσαντα</span>). Jerome, in his *de vir. ill.* chap. 18, mentions
an Apolinarius in connection with Irenæus as a chiliast. But in his
*Comment. in Ezech.* Bk. XI. chap. 36, he speaks of Irenæus as the
first, and Apolinarius as the last, of the Greek Millenarians, which
shows that some other Apolinarius is meant in that place, and therefore
without doubt in the former passage also; and in another place (*Prooem.
in lib. XVIII. Comm. in Esaiam*) he says that Apolinarius replied to
Dionysius of Alexandria on the subject of the Millenium, and we are
therefore led to conclude that Apolinarius, bishop of Laodicea (of the
fourth century), is meant (see Routh, *Rel. Sac.* I. 174). Of the
bishops of Hierapolis, besides Apolinarius, we know only Papias and
Abircius Marcellus (of whom we have a Martyrdom, belonging to the second
century; see Pitra, *Spic. Solesm.* III. 533), who, if he be identical
with the Abircius Marcellus of Eusebius, Bk. V. chap. 16 (as Harneck
conjectures) must have been bishop after, not before Apolinarius (see
note 6 on Bk. V. chap. 16). It is impossible to determine the exact date
of Apolinarius’ episcopate, or of his death. As we see from Serapion’s
notice of him, he must have been dead at least before 202. And if
Abircius Marcellus was bishop after him, and also bishop in the second
century, Apolinarius must have died some years before the year 200, and
thus about the same time as Melito. The fact that he is mentioned so
commonly in connection with Melito, sometimes before and sometimes after
him, confirms this conclusion. The *Chron.* mentions him as flourishing
in the tenth (Syncellus and Jerome), or the eleventh (Armenian) year of
Marcus Aurelius. His Apology was addressed, as we learn from Eusebius,
to Marcus Aurelius; and the fact that only the one emperor is mentioned
may perhaps be taken (as some have taken it) as a sign that it was
written while Marcus Aurelius was sole emperor (i.e. between 169 and
176). In Bk. V. chap. 5, Eusebius speaks of the story of the thundering
legion as recorded by Apolinarius, and it has been thought (e.g. by
Salmon, in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*) that this circumstance was
recorded in the *Apology,* which cannot then have been written before
the year 174. Harnack, however, remarks that this venturesome report can
hardly have stood in a work addressed to the emperor himself. But that
seems to assume that the story was not fully believed by Apolinarius,
which can hardly have been the case. The truth is, the matter cannot be
decided; and no more exact date can be given for the *Apology.*
Eusebius, in the present chapter, informs us that he has seen four works
by Apolinarius, but says that there were many others extant in his day.
In addition to the ones mentioned by Eusebius, we know of a work of his,
*On the Passover* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.4"></span>περὶ τοῦ π€σχα</span>), which is mentioned
by the *Chron. Paschale,* and two brief fragments of which are preserved
by it. These fragments have caused a discussion as to whether
Apolinarius was a Quartodeciman or not. The language of the first
fragment would seem to show clearly that he was opposed to the
Quartodecimans, and this explains the fact that he is never cited by the
later Quartodecimans as a witness for their opinions. The tone of the
work, however, as gathered from the fragments, shows that it must have
been written before the controversy had assumed the bitter tone which it
took when Victor became bishop of Rome; i.e. it was written, probably,
in the seventies (see, also, Bk. V. chap. 23, note 1). Photius (*Cod.*
14) mentions three apologetic works by Apolinarius known to him: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.5"></span>πρὸς ῞Ελληνας, περὶ
εὐσεβείας</span>, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.6"></span>περὶ ἀληθείας</span>. The first and last
are mentioned by Eusebius, but the second is a work otherwise unknown to
us. There is no reason to suppose, as some have done, that the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.7"></span>περὶ εὐσεβείας</span>
does not designate a separate work (cf. e.g., Donaldson, *Hist. of
Christ. Lit. and Doctrine,* III. 243), for Eusebius expressly says that
he mentions only a part of Apolinarius’ writings. Theodoret (*Hær. Fab.*
I. 21) mentions Apolinarius, together with Musanus and Clement, as
having written against the Severians (see chap. 29, below). But, as
Harnack justly remarks (p. 235), the most we can conclude from this is
that Apolinarius in his Anti-Montanistic work, had mentioned the
Severians with disapproval. Five <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.8"></span>mss.</span> of Eusebius, and the *Church
Hist.* of Nicephorus, mention just after the work *On Truth,* a work
*Against the Jews,* in two books (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.9"></span>καὶ πρὸς ᾽Ιουδαίους πρῶτον καὶ
δεύτερον</span>). The words are found in many of our editions, but are
omitted by the majority of the best Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.10"></span>mss.</span>, and also by Rufinus and
Jerome, and therefore must be regarded as an interpolation; and so they
are viewed by Heinichen, Laemmer, Otto, Harnack, and others. Harnack
suggests that they were inserted under the influence of Bk. V. chap. 17,
§5, where the works of Miltiades are given. We thus have knowledge of
six, and only six, distinct works of Apolinarius, though, since no
writer has pretended to give a complete list, it is quite probable that
he wrote many others.

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[207:1316](2010136.htm#fr_1315) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p3.11"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p4"></span> On the approximate date of this
Apology, see the previous note. No fragments of the work are now extant,
unless the account of the thundering legion mentioned by Eusebius in Bk.
V. chap. 5 belong to it (see the previous note). Jerome speaks of the
work as an *insigne volumen pro fide Christianorum,* and in chap. 26,
§1, Eusebius speaks of it as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p4.1"></span>λόγος ὑπερ τῆς πίστεως</span>. This has
given rise to the idea that the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p4.2"></span>περὶ εὐσεβείας</span> mentioned by Photius
may be identical with this Apology (see the previous note). But such an
important work would certainly not have been mentioned with such an
ambiguous title by Photius. We may conclude, in fact, that Photius had
not seen the Apology. The *Chron. Paschale* mentions the Apology in
connection with those of “Melito and many others,” as addressed to the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius.

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[207:1317](2010136.htm#fr_1316) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p5"></span> No fragments of this work are known
to us. Nicephorus (*H. E.* IV. 11) says that it was in the form of a
dialogue, and it is quite possible that he speaks in this case from
personal knowledge, for the work was still extant in the time of
Photius, who mentions it in *Cod.* 14 (see Harnack, p. 236).

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[207:1318](2010136.htm#fr_1317) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p6"></span> No fragments of this work are extant,
and its nature is unknown to us. It may have resembled the work of
Melito upon the same subject (see the previous chapter). The work is
mentioned by Photius as one of three, which he had himself seen.

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[207:1319](2010136.htm#fr_1318) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p7"></span> Eusebius states here that the works
against the Montanists were written later than the other works
mentioned. Where he got this information we do not know; it is possible,
as Harnack suggests, that he saw from the writings themselves that
Marcus Aurelius was no longer alive when they were composed. Eusebius
speaks very highly of these Anti-Montanistic works, and in Bk. V. chap.
16, §1, he speaks of Apolinarius as a “powerful weapon and antagonist”
of the Montanists. And yet it is a remarkable fact that he does not take
his account of the Montanists from the works of Apolinarius, but from
later writings. This fact can be explained only as Harnack explains it
by supposing that Apolinarius was not decided and clear enough in his
opposition to the sect. The writer from whom Eusebius quotes is
certainly strong enough in his denunciations to suit Eusebius or any one
else. Eusebius’ statement, that the Montanistic movement was only
beginning at the time Apolinarius wrote against it (i.e. according to
him between 175 and 180), is far from the truth (see on this subject,
Bk. V. chap. 16, note 12). How many of these works Apolinarius wrote,
and whether they were books, or merely letters, we do not know. Eusebius
says simply <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p7.1"></span>καὶ
ἃ μετὰ ταῦτα συνέγραψε</span>. Serapion (in Eusebius, Bk. V. chap. 19)
calls them <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p7.2"></span>γρ€μματα</span>, which Jerome (*de vir.
ill.* chap. 41) translates *litteras.* These <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p7.3"></span>γρ€μματα</span> are taken as “letters” by
Valesius, Stroth, Danz, and Salmon; but Otto contends that the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p7.4"></span>γρ€μματα</span>,
in the usage of Eusebius (cf. Eusebius, V. 28. 4), properly means
“writings” or “books” (*scripta* or *libri*), not “letters,” and so the
word is translated by Closs. The word itself is not absolutely decisive,
but it is more natural to translate it “writings,” and the circumstances
of the case seem to favor that rather than the rendering “letters.” I
have therefore translated it thus in Bk. VI. chap. 19. On the life and
writings of Apolinarius, see especially Salmon’s article in the *Dict.
of Christ. Biog.* and Harnack’s *Texte und Untersuch.* I. 1, 232–239.
The few extant fragments of his works are published by Routh (I.
151–174), and by Otto (IX. 479–495); English translation in the
*Ante-Nicene Fathers,* VIII. 772.

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[207:1320](2010136.htm#fr_1319) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvii-p8.1"></span>καινοτομηθείσης</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](2010137)
