[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010357)  [Next](2010359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p1"></span> §7. *General Characterization.*

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p2"></span>Before trying to gather into
continuous statement the traits of character which have been examined, a
few general characterizations must be mentioned at least. Beginning at
the bottom, the unfriendly, or hostile, or at the least unsympathetic,
heathen testimonies generalize him as at least relatively and on the
whole both great and good. The general tendency of heathen testimony is
to represent him as admirable in the early part of his reign, but
execrable, or less admirable, in the latter part; that of Christian
writers is to represent a growth of excellence, which raises him to
saintship at the end. This is most natural. Favoring Christianity was
itself a moral fall to a heathen, and bestowing money on Christians
would be robbery. The turning of his character was with his changing
face towards Christianity, and culminated in the overthrow of Licinius.
Licinius fought really as the champion of heathenism. The adherents of a
lost cause are characterizing their victor. It is like an ex-Confederate
characterizing Lincoln or Grant. The point of view is different. Honest
and true men in the South thought Lincoln a curse, and often in popular
verdict his character was “black.” The popular proverb quoted by Victor
(*Epit.* p. 51), “Bull-necked for ten years, for twelve a freebooter,
and for ten a spendthrift (immature child),” has just the value of a
Southern popular opinion of Lincoln, or a rural Northerner’s of “Jeff
Davis.” Indeed, the first might summarize at times the Southern popular
verdict of Grant; the second, a frequently expressed estimate of
Lincoln’s conduct in the emancipation of slaves; and the third, their
view of the enormous expenditure for pensions of Union soldiers, even as
it was fifteen years ago. But even the rather severe Victor, who reports
this proverb, finds Constantine “most excellent *(commodissimus)* in
many respects,”—in respect of certain laws, in his patronage of the
arts, especially that of letters, as scholar, as author, in the hearing
of delegations and complaints (p. 51). Again, “Praxagoras, though a
heathen, says that in all sorts of virtue and personal excellence and
good fortune, Constantine outshone all the emperors who preceded him”
(Photius, *Cod.* 62, ed. Müller, p. 1). And finally, the heathen
Eutropius, who characterizes from his standpoint so admirably, <span
id="fr_3045"></span>[3046](#fn_3045) though he naturally finds that “in
the beginning of his reign he might have been compared to the best
princes; in the latter part, only to those of middling character,”
nevertheless records “that innumerable good qualities of mind and body
were present in him,” and that he was “deservedly enrolled among the
gods,”—using the *meruit* which he uses also of Aurelian, but not
generally, and not even of Constantius. On purely heathen testimony,
therefore, Constantine, taken by and large, was comparatively remarkable
and admirable. A moderate Christian characterization is that of
Theophanes (p. 29): “Pre-eminent for masculine strength of character,
penetration of mind, well-disciplined power of thought; for unbending
righteousness, ready benevolence, thorough majestic beauty of
countenance, mighty and successful in war, great in wars with the
barbarians, invincible in domestic wars, and so firm and unshaken in
faith that through prayer he obtained the victory in all his battles.”
<span id="page_435">p. 435</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.vii-Page_435"></span>Remembering, therefore, that in order
to understand a character in past centuries one must project himself
into his time; remembering again the circumstances of his time and its
practice, we shall, without forgetting any of the acts on which he has
been judged, find him on indisputable testimony superior to most of the
other emperors in character, and as much above the circumstances of his
times as would characterize a man of to-day as of peculiarly high moral
character. In view of this, it is uncritical, and a violence to
historical evidence, to approach one whom, at death, the heathen thought
worthy to be enrolled among the gods, and the Christians canonized as
saint (in the Greek calendar), as other than one who, taken all in all,
was of unusual excellence of character. As in any synthesis, any
organization, subordinate facts must be viewed in their relation to
their center and whole, as by any law of criminal procedure acts must be
judged in the light of general character, so any rational, legal,
scientific, historical estimate of Constantine must be in view of this
fact.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3045"></span>[434:3046](2010358.htm#fr_3045) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p3"></span> Constantine, being a man of great
energy, bent upon effecting whatever he had settled in his mind.…But the
pride of prosperity caused Constantine greatly to depart from his former
agreeable mildness of temper. Falling first upon his own relatives, he
put to death his son, an excellent man; his sister’s son, a youth of
amiable disposition; soon afterwards his wife; and subsequently many of
his friends.”

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vii-p4"></span>“He was a man who, in the beginning
of his reign, might have been compared to the best princes; in the
latter part of it, only to those of middling character. Innumerable good
qualities of mind and body were apparent in him; he was exceedingly
ambitious of military glory, and had great success in his wars; a
success, however, not more than proportioned to his exertions. After he
had terminated the Civil War, he also overthrew the Goths on various
occasions, granting them at last peace, and leaving on the minds of the
barbarians a strong remembrance of his kindness. He was attached to the
arts of peace and to liberal studies, and was ambitious of honorable
popularity, which he, indeed, sought by every kind of liberality and
obligingness. Though he was slow, from suspicion, to serve some of his
friends, yet he was exceedingly generous towards others, neglecting no
opportunity to add to their riches and honors. He enacted many laws,
some good and equitable, but most of them superfluous, and some severe.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](2010359)
