[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010019)  [Next](2010021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c29"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.i-p2.1"></span>Eusebius’ Church History.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>§1.</span> *Date of its Composition*

<span id="iii.iii.iii.i-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>The</span> work with which we are
especially concerned at this time is the *Church History*, the original
Greek of which is still extant in numerous <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.i-p4.2"></span>mss.</span> It consists of ten books, to
which is added in most of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.i-p4.3"></span>mss.</span> the shorter form of the
*Martyrs of Palestine* (see above, p. 29). The date of the work can be
determined with considerable exactness. It closes with a eulogy of
Constantine and his son Crispus; and since the latter was put to death
by his father in the summer of 326, the *History* must have been
completed before that time. On the other hand, in the same chapter
Eusebius refers to the defeat of Licinius, which took place in the year
323 <span class="c13"><span id="iii.iii.iii.i-p4.4"></span>a.d.</span>
This gives a fixed *terminus a quo*. It is not quite certain from
Eusebius’ words whether the death of Licinius had already taken place at
the time he wrote, but it seems probable that it had, and if so, the
completion of the work must be put as late as the summer of 324. On the
other hand, not the slightest reference is made to the Council of Nicæa,
which met in the summer of 325; and still further the tenth book is
dedicated to Paulinus, at one time bishop of Tyre and afterward bishop
of Antioch (see Euseb. *Contra Marc*. I. 4, and Philost. *H. E*. III.
15), who was already dead in the summer of 325: for at the Nicene
Council, Zeno appears as bishop of Tyre, and Eustathius as bishop of
Antioch (see for further particulars Lightfoot, p. 322). We are thus led
to place the completion of the *History* in the year 324, or, to give
the widest possible limits, between the latter part of 323 and the early
part of 325 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.i-p4.5"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii.i-p5"></span>But the question has been raised
whether the earlier books may not have been composed some years before
this. Lightfoot (following Westcott) supposes that the first nine books
were completed not long after the edict of Milan and before the outbreak
of the quarrel between Constantine and Licinius in 314. There is
considerable to be said in favor of this theory. The language used in
the dedication of the tenth book seems to imply that the nine books had
been completed some time before, and that the tenth is added as a sort
of postscript. The close of the ninth book strengthens that conclusion.
Moreover, it would seem from the last sentences of that book that
Constantine and Licinius were in perfect harmony at the time it was
written, a state of affairs which did not exist after 314. On the other
hand, it must be noticed that in Book IX. chap. 9 Licinius’ “madness” is
twice referred to as having “not yet” seized him (in §1 <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>οὔπω μανέντος
τοτε</span>, and in §12 <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iii.i-p5.2"></span>οὔπω τότε ἐφ᾽ ἣν ὕστερον ἐκπέπτωκε
μανίαν, τὴν δι€νοιαν ἐκτραπείς</span>). It is necessary either to
interpret both these clauses as later insertions (possibly by Eusebius’
own hand at the time when he added the tenth book; cf. also p. 30,
above), or to throw the composition of the ninth book down to the year
319 or later. It is difficult to decide between these alternatives, but
I am inclined on the whole to think that Westcott’s theory is probably
correct, and that the two clauses can best be interpreted as later
insertions. The very nature of his *History* would at any rate lead us
to think that Eusebius spent some years in the composition of it, and
that the earlier books, if not published, were at least completed long
before the issue of the ten books as a whole. The *Chronicle* is
referred to as already written in I. 1; the *Eclogæ Proph*. (? see
below, p. 85) in I. 2 and 6; the *Collection of Ancient Martyrdoms* in
IV. 15, V. preface, 4, and 22; the *Defense of Origen* in VI. 23, 33,
and 36; the *Life of Pamphilus* in VI. 32, VII. 32, and VIII. 13. In
VIII. 13 Eusebius speaks also of his intention of relating the
sufferings of the martyrs in another work (but see above, p. 30).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](2010021)
