[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010158)  [Next](2010160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p1"></span> <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="iii.x.xix-Page_235"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*The Manner in which
Apollonius refuted the Phrygians, and the Persons* <span
id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616) *whom he Mentions.*

<span id="iii.x.xix-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p3.1"></span>As</span> the so-called Phrygian heresy <span
id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617) was still flourishing in Phrygia in
his time, Apollonius <span id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618) also, an
ecclesiastical writer, undertook its refutation, and wrote a special
work against it, correcting in detail the false prophecies current among
them and reproving the life of the founders of the heresy. But hear his
own words respecting Montanus:

<span id="iii.x.xix-p6"></span>2. “His actions and his teaching show who
this new teacher is. This is he who taught the dissolution of
marriage; <span id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619) who made laws for
fasting; <span id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620) who named Pepuza and
Tymion, <span id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621) small towns in
Phrygia, Jerusalem, wishing to gather people to them from all
directions; who appointed collectors of money; <span
id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622) who contrived the receiving of
gifts under the name of offerings; who provided salaries for those who
preached his doctrine, that its teaching might prevail through
gluttony.” <span id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623)

<span id="iii.x.xix-p12"></span>3. He writes thus concerning Montanus;
and a little farther on he writes as follows concerning his
prophetesses: “We show that these first prophetesses themselves, as soon
as they were filled with the Spirit, abandoned their husbands. How
falsely therefore they speak who call Prisca a virgin.” <span
id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624)

<span id="iii.x.xix-p14"></span>4. Afterwards he says: “Does not all
Scripture seem to you to forbid a prophet to receive gifts and
money? <span id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625) When therefore I see
the prophetess receiving gold and silver and costly garments, how can I
avoid reproving her?”

<span id="iii.x.xix-p16"></span>5. And again a little farther on he
speaks thus concerning one of their confessors:

<span id="iii.x.xix-p17"></span>“So also Themiso, <span
id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626) who was clothed with plausible
covetousness, could not endure the sign of confession, but threw aside
bonds for an abundance of possessions. Yet, though he should have been
humble on this account, he dared to boast as a martyr, and in imitation
of the apostle, he wrote a certain catholic <span
id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627) epistle, <span id="page_236">p.
236</span> <span id="iii.x.xix-Page_236"></span>to instruct those whose
faith was better than his own, contending for words of empty sound, and
blaspheming against the Lord and the apostles and the holy Church.”

<span id="iii.x.xix-p20"></span>6. And again concerning others of those
honored among them as martyrs, he writes as follows:

<span id="iii.x.xix-p21"></span>“Not to speak of many, let the
prophetess herself tell us of Alexander, <span
id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628) who called himself a martyr, with
whom she is in the habit of banqueting, and who is worshiped <span
id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629) by many. We need not mention his
robberies and other daring deeds for which he was punished, but the
archives <span id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630) contain them.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p25"></span>7. Which of these forgives the sins of
the other? Does the prophet the robberies of the martyr, or the martyr
the covetousness of the prophet? For although the Lord said, ‘Provide
neither gold, nor silver, neither two coats,’ <span
id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631) these men, in complete opposition,
transgress in respect to the possession of the forbidden things. For we
will show that those whom they call prophets and martyrs gather their
gain not only from rich men, but also from the poor, and orphans, and
widows.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p27"></span>8. But if they are confident, let them
stand up and discuss these matters, that if convicted they may hereafter
cease transgressing. For the fruits of the prophet must be tried; ‘for
the tree is known by its fruit.’ <span
id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632)

<span id="iii.x.xix-p29"></span>9. But that those who wish may know
concerning Alexander, he was tried by Æmilius Frontinus, <span
id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633) proconsul at Ephesus; not on
account of the Name, <span id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634) but for
the robberies which he had committed, being already an apostate. <span
id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635) Afterwards, having falsely declared
for the name of the Lord, he was released, having deceived the faithful
that were there. <span id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636) And his own
parish, from which he came, did not receive him, because he was a
robber. <span id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637) Those who wish to
learn about him have the public records <span
id="fr_1638"></span>[1639](#fn_1638) of Asia. And yet the prophet with
whom he spent many years knows nothing about him! <span
id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639)

<span id="iii.x.xix-p37"></span>10. Exposing him, through him we expose
also the pretense <span id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640) of the
prophet. We could show the same thing of many others. But if they are
confident, let them endure the test.”

<span id="iii.x.xix-p39"></span>11. Again, in another part of his work
he speaks as follows of the prophets of whom they boast:

<span id="iii.x.xix-p40"></span>“If they deny that their prophets have
received gifts, let them acknowledge this: that if they are convicted of
receiving them, they are not prophets. And we will bring a multitude of
proofs of this. But it is necessary that all the fruits of a prophet
should be examined. Tell me, does a prophet dye his hair? <span
id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641) Does a prophet stain his
eyelids? <span id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642) Does a prophet
delight in adornment? Does a prophet play with tables and dice? Does a
prophet lend on usury? Let them confess whether these things are lawful
or not; but I will show that they have been done by them.” <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643)

<span id="iii.x.xix-p44"></span>12. This same Apollonius states in the
same work that, at the time of his writing, it was the fortieth year
since Montanus had begun his pretended prophecy. <span
id="fr_1644"></span>[1645](#fn_1644)

<span id="iii.x.xix-p46"></span>13. And he says also that Zoticus, who
was mentioned by the former writer, <span
id="fr_1645"></span>[1646](#fn_1645) when Maximilla was pretending to
prophesy in Pepuza, resisted her and endeavored to refute the spirit
that was working in her; but was prevented by those who agreed with her.
He mentions also a certain Thraseas <span
id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646) among the martyrs of that time.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p49"></span>He speaks, moreover, of a tradition that
the Saviour commanded his apostles not to depart from Jerusalem for
twelve years. <span id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647) He uses
testimonies also from the Revelation of John, <span
id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648) and <span id="page_237">p.
237</span> <span id="iii.x.xix-Page_237"></span>he relates that a dead
man had, through the Divine power, been raised by John himself in
Ephesus. <span id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649) He also adds other
things by which he fully and abundantly exposes the error of the heresy
of which we have been speaking. These are the matters recorded by
Apollonius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[235:1617](2010159.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p2"></span> Or *events* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p2.1"></span>τίνων</span>).

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[235:1618](2010159.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p4"></span> On the name, see chap. 16, note 2.

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[235:1619](2010159.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p5"></span> Of this Apollonius we know little more
than what Eusebius tells us in this chapter. The author of
*Prædestinatus* (in the fifth century) calls him bishop of Ephesus, but
his authority is of no weight. Jerome devotes chap. 40 of his *de vir.
ill.* to Apollonius, but it is clear that he derives his knowledge
almost exclusively from Eusebius. He adds the notice, however, that
Tertullian replied to Apollonius’ work in the seventh book of his own
work, *de Ecstasi* (now lost). The character of Apollonius’ work may be
gathered from the fragments preserved by Eusebius in this chapter. It
was of the same nature as the work of the anonymous writer quoted in
chap. 16, very bitter in tone and not over-scrupulous in its statements.
Apollonius states (see in §12, below) that he wrote the work forty years
after the rise of Montanism. If we accepted the Eusebian date for its
beginning (172), this would bring us down to 212, but (as remarked
above, in chap. 16, note 12) Montanism had probably begun in a quiet way
sometime before this, and so Apollonius’ forty years are perhaps to be
reckoned from a somewhat earlier date. His mention of “the prophetess”
as still living (in §6, below) might lead us to think that Maximilia was
still alive when he wrote; but when the anonymous wrote she was already
dead, and the reasons for assigning the latter to a date as early as 192
are too strong to be set aside. We must therefore suppose Apollonius to
be referring to some other prophetess well known in his time. That there
were many such prophetesses in the early part of the third century is
clear from the works of Tertullian. Jerome (*ibid.*) states that an
account of the death of Montanus and his prophetesses by hanging was
contained in Apollonius’ work, but it has been justly suspected that he
is confusing the work of the anonymous, quoted in chap. 16, above, with
the work of Apollonius, quoted in this chapter. The fragments of
Apollonius’ work, preserved by Eusebius, are given, with a commentary,
in Routh’s *Rel. Sac.* I. p. 467 sq., and an English translation in the
*Ante-Nicene Fathers,* VIII. p. 775 sq.

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[235:1620](2010159.htm#fr_1619) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p7"></span> We are not to gather from this that the
Montanists forbade marriage. They were, to be sure, decidedly ascetic in
their tendencies, and they did teach the unlawfulness of second
marriages,—which had long been looked upon with disfavor in many
quarters, but whose lawfulness the Church had never denied,—and
magnified the blessedness of the single state; but beyond this they did
not go, so far as we are able to judge. Our chief sources for the
Montanistic view of marriage are Tertullian’s works *ad Uxorem, de
Pudicit., de Monogamia, de Exhort. ad castitat.,* and Epiphanius’ *Hær.*
XLVIII. 9.

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[235:1621](2010159.htm#fr_1620) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p8"></span> One great point of dispute between the
Montanists and the Catholics was the subject of fasts (cf. Hippolytus,
VIII. 12, X. 21, who makes it almost the only ground of complaint
against the Montanists). The Montanist prophetesses ordained two new
fasts of a week each in addition to the annual paschal fast of the
Church; and the regulations for these two weeks were made very severe.
Still further they extended the duration of the regular weekly
(Wednesday and Friday) fasts, making them cover the whole instead of
only a part of the day. The Catholics very strenuously opposed these
ordinances, not because they were opposed to fasting (many of them
indulged extensively in the practice), but because they objected to the
imposition of such extra fasts as binding upon the Church. They were
satisfied with the traditional customs in this matter, and did not care
to have heavier burdens imposed upon the Christians in general than
their fathers had borne. Our principal sources for a knowledge of the
dispute between the Montanists and Catholics on this subject are
Tertullian’s *de Jejuniis;* Epiphanius, *Hær.* XLVIII. 8; Jerome, *Ep.
ad Marcellam* (Migne, *Ep.* XLI. 3), *Comment. in Matt.* c. 9, vers. 15;
and Theodoret, *Hær. Fab.* III. 2.

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[235:1622](2010159.htm#fr_1621) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p9"></span> Pepuza was an obscure town in the
western part of Phrygia; Tymion, otherwise unknown, was probably
situated in the same neighborhood. Pepuza was early made, and long
continued, the chief center—the Jerusalem—of the sect, and even gave its
name to the sect in many quarters. Harnack has rightly emphasized the
significance of this statement of Apollonius, and has called attention
to the fact that Montanus’ original idea must have been the gathering of
the chosen people from all the world into one region, that they might
form one fold, and freed from all the political and social relations in
which they had hitherto lived might await the coming of the Lord, who
would speedily descend, and set up his kingdom in this new Jerusalem.
Only after this idea had been proved impracticable did Montanism adapt
itself to circumstances and proceed to establish itself in the midst of
society as it existed in the outside world. That Montanus built upon the
Gospel of John, and especially upon chaps. x. and xvii., in this
original attempt of his, is perfectly plain (cf. Harnack’s
*Dogmengeschichte,* I. p. 319 and 323. With this passage from
Apollonius, compare also Epiphanius, *Hær.* XLVIII. 14 and XLIX. 1., and
Jerome *Ep. ad Marcellam*).

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[235:1623](2010159.htm#fr_1622) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p10"></span> This appointment of economic officers
and the formation of a compact organization were a part of the one
general plan, referred to in the previous note, and must have marked the
earliest years of the sect. Later, when it was endeavoring to adapt
itself to the catholic Church, and to compromise matters in such a way
as still to secure recognition from the Church, this organization must
have been looked upon as a matter of less importance, and indeed
probably never went far beyond the confines of Phrygia. That it
continued long in that region, however, is clear from Jerome’s words in
his Epistle to Marcella already referred to. Compare also chap 16, note
25.

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[235:1624](2010159.htm#fr_1623) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p11"></span> There can be little doubt that the
Church teachers and other officers were still supported by voluntary
contributions, and hence Apollonius was really scandalized at what he
considered making merchandise of spiritual things (cf. the *Didache,*
chaps. XI. and XII.; but even in the *Didache* we find already a sort of
stated salary provided for the prophets; cf. chap. XII.). For him to
conclude, however, from the practice instituted by the Montanists in
accordance with their other provisions for the formation of a compact
organization, that they were avaricious and gluttonous, is quite
unjustifiable, just as much so as if our salaried clergy to-day should
be accused, as a class, of such sins.

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[235:1625](2010159.htm#fr_1624) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p13"></span> See chap. 16, note 18.

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[235:1626](2010159.htm#fr_1625) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p15"></span> See note 8.

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[235:1627](2010159.htm#fr_1626) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p18"></span> On Themiso, see chap. 16, note 31.

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[235:1628](2010159.htm#fr_1627) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p19.1"></span>καθολικὴν ἐπιστολήν</span>. Catholic in the
sense in which the word is used of the epistles of James, Peter, John,
and Jude; that is, general, addressed to no particular church. The
epistle is no longer extant. Its “blasphemy” against the Lord and his
apostles lay undoubtedly in its statement of the fundamental doctrine of
the Montanists, that the age of revelation had not ceased, but that
through the promised Paraclete revelations were still given, which
supplemented or superseded those granted the apostles by Christ.

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[236:1629](2010159.htm#fr_1628) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p22"></span> This fragment gives us our only
information in regard to this Alexander. That there may be some truth in
the story told by Apollonius cannot be denied. It is possible that
Alexander was a bad man, and that the Montanists had been deceived in
him, as often happens in all religious bodies. Such a thing might much
more easily happen after the sect had been for a number of years in a
flourishing condition than in its earlier years; and the exactness of
the account, and the challenge to disprove it, would seem to lend it
some weight. At the same time Apollonius is clearly as unprincipled and
dishonest a writer as the anonymous, and hence little reliance can be
placed upon any of his reports to the discredit of the Montanists. If
the anonymous made so many accusations out of whole cloth, Apollonius
may have done the same in the present instance; and the fact that many
still “worshiped” him would seem to show that Apollonius’ accusations,
if they possessed any foundation, were at any rate not proven.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[236:1630](2010159.htm#fr_1629) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p23"></span> A very common accusation brought
against various sects. Upon the significance of it, see Harnack,
*Dogmengeschichte,* I. p. 82, note 2.

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[236:1631](2010159.htm#fr_1630) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p24.1"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p24.2"></span>πισθόδομος</span>, originally the back
chamber of the old temple of Athenæ on the Acropolis at Athens, where
the public treasure was kept. It then came to be used of the inner
chamber of any temple where the public treasure was kept, and in the
present instance is used of the apartment which contained the public
records or archives. Just below, Apollonius uses the phrase <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xix-p24.3"></span>δημόσιον ἀρχεῖον</span>,
in referring to the same thing.

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[236:1632](2010159.htm#fr_1631) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p26"></span> [Matt.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="iii.x.xix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[236:1633](2010159.htm#fr_1632) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p28"></span> [Matt. xii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#033)<span id="iii.x.xix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[236:1634](2010159.htm#fr_1633) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p30"></span> We know, unfortunately, nothing about
this proconsul, and hence have no means of fixing the date of this
occurrence.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[236:1635](2010159.htm#fr_1634) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p31"></span> i.e. of Christ.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[236:1636](2010159.htm#fr_1635) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p32.1"></span>παραβ€της</span>

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[236:1637](2010159.htm#fr_1636) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p33.1"></span>εἶτα ἐπιψευσ€μενος τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ κυρίου
ἀπολέλυται πλανήσας τοὺς ἐκεῖ πιστούς</span>. The meaning seems to be
that while in prison he pretended to be a Christian, and thus obtained
the favor of the brethren, who procured his release by using their
influence with the judge.

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[236:1638](2010159.htm#fr_1637) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p34"></span> We have no means of controlling the
truth of this statement.

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[236:1639](2010159.htm#fr_1638) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p35.1"></span>δημόσιον ἀρχεῖον</span>.

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[236:1640](2010159.htm#fr_1639) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p36.1"></span>ὃ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p36.2"></span>ν ὁ προφήτης συνόντα πολλοῖς žτεσιν
ἀγνοεῖ</span>, as is read by all the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p36.3"></span>mss.</span>, followed by the majority of the
editors. Heinichen reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p36.4"></span>ᾧ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p36.5"></span>ὁ προφήτης συνὼν πολλοις žτεσιν
ἀγνοεῖ</span>, but the emendation is quite unnecessary. The <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xix-p36.6"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xix-p36.7"></span>γνοεῖ</span> implies
ignorance of the man’s true character; although with him so many years,
he *knows nothing about him, is ignorant of his true character!* The
sentence is evidently ironical.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[236:1641](2010159.htm#fr_1640) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p38.1"></span>τὴν ὑπόστασιν</span>

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[236:1642](2010159.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p41.1"></span>β€πτεται</span>

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[236:1643](2010159.htm#fr_1642) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xix-p42.1"></span>στιβίζεται</span>

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[236:1644](2010159.htm#fr_1643) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p43"></span> Knowing what we do of the asceticism
and the severe morality of the Montanists, we can look upon the
implications of this passage as nothing better than baseless slanders.
That there might have been an individual here and there whose conduct
justified this attack cannot be denied, but to bring such accusations
against the Montanists in general was both unwarranted and absurd, and
Apollonius cannot but have been aware of the fact. His language is
rather that of a bully or braggadocio who knows the untruthfulness of
his statements, than of a man conscious of his own honesty and of the
reliability of his account.

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[236:1645](2010159.htm#fr_1644) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p45"></span> On the date of Apollonius’ work, see
above, note 3.

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[236:1646](2010159.htm#fr_1645) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p47"></span> See chap. 16, §17.

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[236:1647](2010159.htm#fr_1646) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p48"></span> This Thraseas is undoubtedly to be
identified with Thraseas, “bishop and martyr of Eumenia,” mentioned by
Polycrates, as quoted in chap. 24, below. We know no more about him than
is told us there.

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[236:1648](2010159.htm#fr_1647) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p50"></span> Clement (*Strom.* VI. 5) records the
same tradition, quoting it from the *Preaching of Peter,* upon which
work, see Bk. III. chap. 3, note 8, above.

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[236:1649](2010159.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p51"></span> Compare Eusebius’ promise in Bk. III.
chap. 24, §18, and see note 21 on that chapter.

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[237:1650](2010159.htm#fr_1649) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p52"></span> No one else, so far as I am aware,
records this tradition, but it is of a piece with many others in regard
to John which were afloat in the early Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](2010160)
