[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010549)  [Next](2010551) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI</span>.—*That the Building
should surpass all the Churches in the World in the Beauty of its Walls,
its Columns, and Marbles.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>“It</span> will be well, therefore, for
your sagacity to make such arrangements and provision of all things
needful for the work, that not only the church itself as a whole may
surpass all others whatsoever in beauty, but that the details of the
building may be of such a kind that the fairest structures in any city
of the empire may be excelled by this. And with respect to the erection
and decoration of the walls, this is to inform you that our friend
Dracilianus, the deputy of the Prætorian Præfects, and the governor of
the province, have received a charge from us. For our pious directions
to them are to the effect that artificers and laborers, and whatever
they shall understand from your sagacity to be needful for the
advancement of the work, shall forthwith be furnished by their care. And
as to the columns and marbles, whatever you shall judge, after actual
inspection of the plan, to be especially precious and serviceable, be
diligent to send information to us in writing, in order that whatever
quantity or sort of materials we shall esteem from your letter to be
needful, may be procured from every quarter, as required, for it is
fitting that the most marvelous place in the world should be worthily
decorated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](2010551)
