[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010394)  [Next](2010396) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.i.x"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i.x-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.i.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*Of the Need for this
History, and its Value for Edification.*

<span id="iv.vi.i.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.i.x-p2.1"></span>However</span>, hard as it is to speak
worthily of this blessed character, and though silence were the safer
and less perilous course, nevertheless it is incumbent on me, if I would
escape the charge of negligence and sloth, to trace as it were a verbal
portraiture, by way of memorial of the pious prince, in imitation of the
delineations of human art. For I should be ashamed of myself were I not
to employ my best efforts, feeble though they be and of little value, in
praise of one who honored God with such surpassing devotion. I think too
that my work will be on other grounds both instructive and necessary,
since it will contain a description of those royal and noble actions
which are pleasing to God, the Sovereign of all. For would it not be
disgraceful that the memory of Nero, and other impious and godless
tyrants far worse than he, should meet with diligent writers to
embellish the relation of their worthless deeds with elegant language,
and record them in voluminous histories, and that I should be silent, to
whom God himself has vouchsafed such an emperor as all history records
not, and has permitted me to come into his presence, and enjoy his
acquaintance and society? <span id="fr_3071"></span>[3072](#fn_3071)

<span id="iv.vi.i.x-p4"></span>Wherefore, if it is the duty of any one,
it certainly is mine, to make an ample proclamation of his virtues to
all in whom the example of noble actions is capable of inspiring the
love of God. For some who have written the lives of worthless
characters, and the history of actions but little tending to the
improvement of morals, from private motives, either love or enmity, and
possibly in some cases with no better object than the display of their
own learning, have exaggerated unduly their description of actions
intrinsically base, by a refinement and elegance of diction. <span
id="fr_3072"></span>[3073](#fn_3072) And thus they have become to those
who by the Divine favor had been kept apart from evil, teachers not of
good, but of what should be silenced in oblivion and darkness. But my
narrative, however unequal to the greatness of the deeds it has to
describe, will yet derive luster even from the bare relation of noble
actions. And surely the record of conduct that has been pleasing to God
will afford a far from unprofitable, indeed a most instructive study, to
persons of well-disposed minds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3071"></span>[484:3072](2010395.htm#fr_3071) <span
id="iv.vi.i.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i.x-p3"></span> The Bagster translation, following
Valesius, divides the tenth chapter, making the eleventh begin at this
point.

<span id="fn_3072"></span>[484:3073](2010395.htm#fr_3072) <span
id="iv.vi.i.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i.x-p5"></span> It looks as if there might perhaps be a
direct hit at Lactantius here, as having, through “enmity,” described
actions intrinsically base in peculiarly elegant diction; but
Lactantius’ descriptions are hardly more realistic than Eusebius’ own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](2010396)
