[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010132)  [Next](2010134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—</span>*Theophilus Bishop of
Antioch.*

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Of</span> Theophilus, <span
id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265) whom we have mentioned as bishop of
the church of Antioch, <span id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266) three
elementary works addressed to Autolycus are extant; also another writing
entitled Against the Heresy of Hermogenes, <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267) in which he makes use of
testimonies from the Apocalypse of John, and finally certain other
catechetical books. <span id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268)

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p10"></span>2. And as the heretics, no less then
than at other times, were like tares, destroying the pure harvest of
apostolic teaching, the pastors of the churches everywhere hastened to
restrain them as wild beasts from the fold of Christ, at one time by
admonitions and exhortations to the brethren, at another time by
contending more openly against them in oral discussions and refutations,
and again by correcting their opinions with most accurate proofs in
written works.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p11"></span>3. And that Theophilus also, with the
others, contended against them, is manifest from a certain discourse of
no common merit written by him against Marcion. <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269) This work too, with the others of
which we have spoken, has been preserved to the present day.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p13"></span>Maximinus, <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270) the seventh from the apostles,
succeeded him as bishop of the church of Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[202:1266](2010133.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p3"></span> Eusebius is the only Eastern writer of
the early centuries to mention Theophilus and his writings. Among the
Latin Fathers, Lactantius and Gennadius refer to his work, *ad
Autolycum;* and Jerome devotes chap. 25 of his *de vir. ill.* to him.
Beyond this there is no direct mention of Theophilus, or of his works,
during the early centuries (except that of Malalas, which will be
referred to below). Eusebius here calls Theophilus bishop of Antioch,
and in chap. 20 makes him the sixth bishop, as does also Jerome in his
*de vir. ill.* chap. 25. But in his epistle, *ad Algas.* (Migne, *Ep.*
121), Jerome calls him the seventh bishop of Antioch, beginning his
reckoning with the apostle Peter. Eusebius, in his *Chron.*, puts the
accession of Theophilus into the ninth year of Marcus Aurelius (169);
and this may be at least approximately correct. The accession of his
successor Maximus is put into the seventeenth year (177); but this date
is at least four years too early, for his work, *ad Autolycum,* quotes
from a work in which the death of Marcus Aurelius (who died in 180) was
mentioned, and hence cannot have been written before 181 or 182. We know
that his successor, Maximus, became bishop sometime between 189 and 192,
and hence Theophilus died between 181 and that time. We have only
Eusebius’ words (Jerome simply repeats Eusebius’ statement) for the fact
that Theophilus was bishop of Antioch (his extant works do not mention
the fact, nor do those who quote from his writings), but there is no
good ground for doubting the truth of the report. We know nothing more
about his life.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p4"></span>In addition to the works mentioned in
this chapter, Jerome (*de vir. ill.*) refers to Commentaries upon the
Gospel and the book of Proverbs, in the following words: *Legi sub
nomine ejus in Evangelium et in Proverbia Salomonis Commentarios qui
mihi cum superiorum voluminum elegantia et phrasi non videntur
congruere.* The commentary upon the Gospel is referred to by Jerome
again in the preface to his own commentary on Matthew; and in his
epistle, *ad Algasiam,* he speaks of a harmony of the four Gospels, by
Theophilus (*qui quatuor Evangelistarum in unum opus dicta compingens*),
which may have been identical with the commentary, or may have formed a
basis for it. This commentary is mentioned by none of the Fathers before
or after Jerome; and Jerome himself expresses doubts as to its
genuineness, or at least he does not think that its style compares with
that of the other works ascribed to Theophilus. Whether the commentary
was genuine or not we have no means of deciding, for it is no longer
extant. There is in existence a Latin commentary on the Gospels in four
books, which bears the name of Theophilus, and is published in Otto’s
*Corpus Apol.* Vol. VIII. p. 278–324. This was universally regarded as a
spurious work until Zahn, in 1883 (in his *Forschungen zur Gesch. des N.
T. Canons,* Theil II.) made an elaborate effort to prove it a genuine
work of Theophilus of Antioch. Harnack, however, in his *Texte und
Unters.* I. 4, p. 97–175, has shown conclusively that Zahn is mistaken,
and that the extant commentary is nothing better than a Post-Nicene
compilation from the works of various Latin Fathers. Zahn, in his reply
to Harnack (*Forschungen,* Theil III. Beilage 3), still maintains that
the Commentary is a genuine work of Theophilus, with large
interpolations, but there is no adequate ground for such a theory; and
it has found few, if any, supporters. We must conclude, then, that if
Theophilus did write such a commentary, it is no longer extant.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p5"></span>The three books addressed to Autolycus
(a heathen friend otherwise unknown to us) are still extant in three
Mediæval <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> and have been frequently
published both in the original and in translation. The best edition of
the original is that of Otto (*Corp. Apol.* Vol. VIII.); English
translation by Dods, in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. II. p. 85–121.
The work is an apology, designed to exhibit the falsehood of idolatry
and the truth of Christianity. The author was a learned writer, well
acquainted with Greek philosophy; and his literary style is of a high
order. He acknowledges no good in the Greek philosophers, except what
they have taken from the Old Testament writers. The genuineness of the
work has been attacked, but without sufficient reason.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p6"></span>From Book II. chap. 30 of his *ad
Autol.* we learn that Theophilus had written also a work *On History.*
No such work is extant, nor is it mentioned by Eusebius or any other
Father. Malalas, however, cites a number of times “The chronologist
Theophilus,” and it is possible that he used this lost historical work.
It is possible, on the other hand, that he refers to some other unknown
Theophilus (see Harnack, *Texte und Unters.* I. 1, p. 291).

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[202:1267](2010133.htm#fr_1266) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p7"></span> In chap. 20, above.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[202:1268](2010133.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p8"></span> This work against Hermogenes is no
longer extant. Harnack (p. 294 ff.) gives strong grounds for supposing
that it was the common source from which Tertullian, in his work *ad
Hermogenem,* Hippolytus, in his *Phil.* VIII. 10 and X. 24, and Clement
of Alexandria, in his *Proph. Selections*, 56, all drew. If this be
true, as seems probable, the Hermogenes attacked by these various
writers is one man, and his chief heresy, as we learn from Tertullian
and Hippolytus, was that God did not create the world out of nothing,
but only formed it out of matter which, like himself, was eternally
existent.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[202:1269](2010133.htm#fr_1268) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p9"></span> These catechetical works (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p9.1"></span>τινα κατηχητικὰ
βιβλία</span>), which were extant in the time of Eusebius, are now lost.
They are mentioned by none of the Fathers except Jerome, who speaks of
*alii breves elegantesque tractatus ad ædificationem Ecclesiæ
pertinentes* as extant in his time. We know nothing more of their nature
than is thus told us by Jerome.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[202:1270](2010133.htm#fr_1269) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p12"></span> This work, which is also now lost, is
mentioned by no other Father except Jerome, who puts it first in his
list of Theophilus’ writings, but does not characterize it in any way,
though he says it was extant in his time. Irenæus, in four passages of
his great work, exhibits striking parallels to Bk. II. chap. 25 of
Theophilus’ *ad Autol.*, which have led to the assumption that he knew
the latter work. Harnack, however, on account of the shortness of time
which elapsed between the composition of the *ad Autol.* and Irenæus’
work, and also on account of the nature of the resemblances between the
parallel passages, thinks it improbable that Irenæus used the *ad
Autol.,* and concludes that he was acquainted rather with Theophilus’
work against Marcion, a conclusion which accords best with the facts
known to us.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[202:1271](2010133.htm#fr_1270) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p14"></span> Here, and in Bk. V. chap. 19, §1,
Eusebius gives this bishop’s name as Maximinus. In the *Chron.* we find
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p14.1"></span>Μ€ξιμος</span>,
and in Jerome’s version Maximus, though one <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p14.2"></span>ms.</span> of the latter gives Maximinus.
According to the *Chron.* he became bishop in 177, and was succeeded by
Serapion in 190. As remarked in note 1, above, the former date is
incorrect, for Theophilus must have lived at least as late as 181 or
182. We cannot reach certainty in regard to the date either of his
accession or of his death; but if Eusebius’ statement (in Bk. V. chap.
19), that Serapion was bishop while Commodus was still emperor, is to be
believed (see further, Bk. V. chap. 19, note 1), Maximinus must have
died at least as early as 192, which gives us for his episcopate some
part of the period from 181 to 192. We know no particulars in regard to
the life of Maximinus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](2010134)
