[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010572)  [Next](2010574) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.liv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.liv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.liv-p1.1"></span>Chapter LIV</span>.—*Destruction of Idol
Temples and Images everywhere.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.liv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.liv-p2.1"></span>All</span> these things the emperor
diligently performed to the praise of the saving power of Christ, and
thus made it his constant aim to glorify his Saviour God. On the other
hand he used every means to rebuke the superstitious errors of the
heathen. Hence the entrances of their temples in the several cities were
left exposed to the weather, being stripped of their doors at his
command; the tiling of others was removed, and their roofs destroyed.
From others again the venerable statues of brass, of which the
superstition of antiquity had boasted for a long series of years, were
exposed to view in all the public places of the imperial city: so that
here a Pythian, there a Sminthian Apollo, excited the contempt of the
beholder: while the Delphic tripods were deposited in the hippodrome and
the Muses of Helicon in the palace itself. In short, the city which bore
his name was everywhere filled with brazen statues of the most exquisite
workmanship, which had been dedicated in every province, and which the
deluded victims of superstition had long vainly honored as gods with
numberless victims and burnt sacrifices, though now at length they
learnt to renounce their error, when the emperor held up the very
objects of their worship to be the ridicule and sport of all beholders.
With regard to those images which were of gold, he dealt with them in a
different manner. For as soon as he understood that the ignorant
multitudes were inspired with a vain and childish dread of these
bugbears of error, wrought in gold and silver, he judged it right to
remove these also, like stumbling-stones thrown in the way of men
walking in the dark, and henceforward to open a royal road, plain and
unobstructed to all. Having formed this resolution, he considered no
soldiers or military force of any sort needful for the suppression of
the evil: a few of his own friends sufficed for this service, and these
he sent by a simple expression of his will to visit each several
province. Accordingly, sustained by confidence in the emperor’s pious
intentions and their own personal devotion to God, they passed through
the midst of numberless tribes and nations, abolishing this ancient
error in every city and country. They ordered the priests themselves,
amidst general laughter and scorn, to bring their gods from their dark
recesses to the light of day: they then stripped them of their
ornaments, and exhibited to the gaze of all the unsightly reality which
had been hidden beneath a painted exterior. Lastly, whatever part of the
material appeared valuable they scraped off and melted in the fire to
prove its worth, after which they secured and set apart whatever they
judged needful for their purpose, leaving to the superstitious
worshipers that which was altogether useless, as a memorial of their
shame. Meanwhile our admirable prince was himself engaged in a work
similar to what we have described. For at the same time that these
costly images of the dead were stripped, as we have said, of their
precious materials, he also attacked those composed of brass; causing
those to be dragged from their places with ropes and as it were carried
away captive, whom the dotage of mythology had esteemed as gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV](2010574)
