[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010611)  [Next](2010613) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI</span>.—*Amendment of the
Law in Force respecting Childless Persons, and of the Law of Wills.*

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxvi-p2.1"></span>So</span> numerous, indeed, were the
benefits of this kind conferred by the emperor on every province, as to
afford ample materials to any who might desire to record them. Among
these may be instanced those laws which he entirely remodelled, and
established on a more equitable basis: the nature of which reform may be
briefly and easily explained. The childless were punished under the old
law with the forfeiture of their hereditary property, a merciless
statute, which dealt with them as positive criminals. The emperor
annulled this, and decreed that those so circumstanced should inherit.
He regulated the question on the principles of equity and justice,
arguing willful transgressors should be chastised with the penalties
their crimes deserve. But nature herself denies children to many, who
long, perhaps, for a numerous offspring, but are disappointed of their
hope by bodily infirmity. Others continue childless, not from any
dislike of posterity, but because their ardent love of philosophy <span
id="fr_3325"></span>[3326](#fn_3325) renders them averse to the conjugal
union. Women, too, consecrated to the service of God, have maintained a
pure and spotless virginity, and have devoted themselves, soul and body
to a life of entire chastity and holiness. What then? Should this
conduct be deemed worthy of punishment, or rather of admiration and
praise; since to desire this state is in itself honorable, and to
maintain it surpasses the power of unassisted nature? Surely those whose
bodily infirmity destroys their hope of offspring are worthy of pity,
not of punishment: and he who devotes himself to a higher object calls
not for chastisement, but especial admiration. On such principles of
sound reason did the emperor rectify the defects of this law. Again,
with regard to the wills of dying persons, the old laws had ordained
that they should be expressed, even at the latest breath, as it were, in
certain definite words, and had prescribed the exact form and terms to
be employed. This practice had occasioned many fraudulent attempts to
hinder the intentions of the deceased from <span id="page_547">p.
547</span> <span id="iv.vi.iv.xxvi-Page_547"></span>being carried into
full effect. As soon as our emperor was aware of these abuses, he
reformed this law likewise, declaring that a dying man ought to be
permitted to indicate his last wishes in as few words as possible, and
in whatever terms he pleased; and to set forth his will in any written
form; or even by word of mouth, provided it were done in the presence of
proper witnesses, who might be competent faithfully to discharge their
trust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3325"></span>[546:3326](2010612.htm#fr_3325) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxvi-p3"></span> \[The word “philosophy,” here and in
the 28th chapter, plainly indicates that virginity which was so highly
honored in the earlier ages of Christianity, and the undue exaltation of
which was productive, necessarily, of evils which it is scarcely
possible to estimate at their full extent.—*Bag.*\] On the growing
prevalence of the practice of virginity compare Hatch, *Virgins,* in
Smith and Cheetham, *Dict.* But this note belongs rather to the
paragraph below; for the author does not refer to Christian virginity
but primarily to philosophical celibacy in this instance. The
Neo-Platonic philosophy of the times, through its doctrine of the
purification of the soul by its liberation from the body or sensuous
things, taught celibacy and ascetic practices generally. So Plotinus (d.
270 <span class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.iv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>)
practiced and taught to a degree, and Porphyry (d. 301+) more
explicitly. Compare rich literature on Neo-Platonism, and conveniently
Zeller, *Outlines of Gr. Philos.* Lond., 1886, p. 326–43, *passim.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](2010613)
