[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010305)  [Next](2010307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvi.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xvi.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—</span>*The Victory of
Constantine, and the Blessings which under him accrued to the Subjects
of the Roman Empire.*

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvi.ix-p2.1"></span>To</span> him, therefore, God granted, from
heaven above, the deserved fruit of piety, the trophies of victory over
the impious, and he cast the guilty one with all his counselors and
friends prostrate at the feet of Constantine.

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p3"></span>2. For when Licinius carried his madness
to the last extreme, the emperor, the friend of God, thinking that he
ought no longer to be tolerated, acting upon the basis of sound
judgment, and mingling the firm principles of justice with humanity,
gladly determined to come to the protection of those who were oppressed
by the tyrant, and undertook, by putting a few destroyers out of the
way, to save the greater part of the human race. <span
id="fr_2983"></span>[2984](#fn_2983)

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p5"></span>3. For when he had formerly exercised
humanity alone and had shown mercy to him who was not worthy of
sympathy, nothing was accomplished; for Licinius did not renounce his
wickedness, but rather increased his fury against the peoples that were
subject to him, and there was left to the afflicted no hope of
salvation, oppressed as they were by a savage beast.

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p6"></span>4. Wherefore, the protector of the
virtuous, mingling hatred for evil with love for good, went forth with
his son Crispus, a most beneficent prince, <span
id="fr_2984"></span>[2985](#fn_2984) and extended a saving right hand to
all that were perishing. Both of them, father and son, under the
protection, as it were, of God, the universal King, with the Son of God,
the Saviour of all, as their leader and ally, drew up their forces on
all sides against the enemies of the Deity and won an easy
victory; <span id="fr_2985"></span>[2986](#fn_2985) God having prospered
them in the battle in all respects according to their wish.

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p9"></span>5. Thus, suddenly, and sooner than can
be told, those who yesterday and the day before breathed death and
threatening were no more, and not even their names were remembered, but
their inscriptions and their honors suffered the merited disgrace. And
the things which Licinius with his own eyes had seen come upon the
former impious tyrants he himself likewise suffered, because he did not
receive instruction nor learn wisdom from the chastisements of his
neighbors, but followed the same path of impiety which they had trod,
and was justly hurled over the same precipice. Thus he lay prostrate.

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p10"></span>6. But Constantine, the mightiest
victor, adorned with every virtue of piety, together with his son
Crispus, a most God-beloved prince, and in all respects like his father,
recovered the East which belonged to them; <span
id="fr_2986"></span>[2987](#fn_2986) and they formed one united Roman
empire as of old, bringing under their peaceful sway the whole world
from the rising of the sun to the opposite quarter, both north and
south, even to the extremities <span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.ix-Page_387"></span>of the declining day.

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p12"></span>7. All fear therefore of those who had
formerly afflicted them was taken away from men, and they celebrated
splendid and festive days. Everything was filled with light, and those
who before were downcast beheld each other with smiling faces and
beaming eyes. With dances and hymns, in city and country, they glorified
first of all God the universal King, because they had been thus taught,
and then the pious emperor with his God-beloved children.

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p13"></span>8. There was oblivion of past evils and
forgetfulness of every deed of impiety; there was enjoyment of present
benefits and expectation of those yet to come. Edicts full of clemency
and laws containing tokens of benevolence and true piety were issued in
every place by the victorious emperor. <span
id="fr_2987"></span>[2988](#fn_2987)

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p15"></span>9. Thus after all tyranny had been
purged away, the empire which belonged to them was preserved firm and
without a rival for Constantine and his sons alone. <span
id="fr_2988"></span>[2989](#fn_2988) And having obliterated the
godlessness of their predecessors, recognizing the benefits conferred
upon them by God, they exhibited their love of virtue and their love of
God, and their piety and gratitude to the Deity, by the deeds which they
performed in the sight of all men.

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p17"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xvi.ix-p17.1"></span>The end, with God’s help, of the Tenth Book
of the Church History of Eusebius Pamphili.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2983"></span>[386:2984](2010306.htm#fr_2983) <span
id="iii.xvi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p4"></span> Eusebius speaks in the same way of the
origin of the war in his *Vita Const*. II. 3. Cf. the previous chapter,
note 1.

<span id="fn_2984"></span>[386:2985](2010306.htm#fr_2984) <span
id="iii.xvi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p7"></span> Κρίσπῳ Βασιλεῖ φιλανθρωποτ€τῳ. Crispus,
the oldest son of Constantine, by his first wife Minervina, was born
about the beginning of the fourth century, made Cæsar in 317, and put to
death by Constantine in 326 on suspicion, whether justified or not we do
not know, of conspiracy and treason. Our sources agree in pronouncing
him a young man of most excellent character and marked ability; and
indeed he proved his valor and military talents in the west in a
campaign against the Franks, and also in the present war with Licinius,
in which he won a great naval battle, and thus contributed materially to
his father’s victory. His execution is the darkest blot on the memory of
Constantine, and however it may be palliated can never, as it seems, be
excused. Eusebius prudently omits all reference to it in his *Vita
Const*.

<span id="fn_2985"></span>[386:2986](2010306.htm#fr_2985) <span
id="iii.xvi.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p8"></span> The final battle was fought in
September, 323. See the previous chapter, note 4.

<span id="fn_2986"></span>[386:2987](2010306.htm#fr_2986) <span
id="iii.xvi.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p11"></span> τὴν οἰκείαν ἑ& 252·αν ἀπελ€μβανον.
Constantine’s sole right to the East was the right of conquest.

<span id="fn_2987"></span>[387:2988](2010306.htm#fr_2987) <span
id="iii.xvi.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p14"></span> Some of these laws of Constantine have
been preserved by Eusebius in his *Vita Const*. Bk. II.

<span id="fn_2988"></span>[387:2989](2010306.htm#fr_2988) <span
id="iii.xvi.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.ix-p16"></span> It is clear from this statement, as
well as from the references to Crispus in the previous paragraphs, that
the *History* was completed before his execution. See above, p. 45.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Supplementary Notes and Tables.](2010307)
