[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010020)  [Next](2010022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_46">p. 46</span>
<span id="iii.iii.iii.ii-Page_46"></span>§2. *The Author’s Design*.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.ii-p2"></span>That the composition of a history of
the Church was Eusebius’ own idea, and was not due to any suggestion
from without, seems clear, both from the absence of reference to any one
else as prompting it, and from the lack of a dedication at the beginning
of the work. The reasons which led him to undertake its composition seem
to have been both scientific and apologetic. He lived, and he must have
realized the fact, at the opening of a new age in the history of the
Church. He believed, as he frequently tells us, that the period of
struggle had come to an end, and that the Church was now about entering
upon a new era of prosperity. He must have seen that it was a peculiarly
fitting time to put on record for the benefit of posterity the great
events which had taken place within the Church during the generations
that were past, to sum up in one narrative all the trials and triumphs
which had now emerged in this final and greatest triumph, which he was
witnessing. He wrote, as any historian of the present day would write,
for the information and instruction of his contemporaries and of those
who should come after, and yet there was in his mind all the time the
apologetic purpose, the desire to exhibit to the world the history of
Christianity as a proof of its divine origin and efficacy. The plan
which he proposed to himself is stated at the very beginning of his
work: “It is my purpose to write an account of the successions of the
holy apostles, as well as of the times which have elapsed from the days
of our Saviour to our own; and to relate how many and how important
events are said to have occurred in the history of the Church; and to
mention those who have governed and presided over the Church in the most
prominent parishes, and those who in each generation have proclaimed the
divine word either orally or in writing. It is my purpose also to give
the names and the number and the times of those who through love of
innovation have run into the greatest errors, and proclaiming themselves
discoverers of knowledge, falsely so-called, have, like fierce wolves,
unmercifully devastated the flock of Christ. It is my intention,
moreover, to recount the misfortunes which immediately came upon the
whole Jewish nation in consequence of their plots against our Saviour,
and to record the ways and the times in which the divine word has been
attacked by the Gentiles, and to describe the character of those who at
various periods have contended for it in the face of blood and tortures,
as well as the confessions which have been made in our own days, and
finally the gracious and kindly succour which our Saviour afforded them
all.” It will be seen that Eusebius had a very comprehensive idea of
what a history of the Church should comprise, and that he was fully
alive to its importance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](2010022)
