[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010199)  [Next](2010201) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxx"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXX.—</span>*The Pupils of Origen.*

<span id="iii.xi.xxx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxx-p2.1"></span>While</span> Origen was carrying on his
customary duties in Cæsarea, many pupils came to him not only from the
vicinity, but also from other countries. Among these Theodorus, the same
that was distinguished among the bishops of our day under the name of
Gregory, <span id="fr_2019"></span>[2020](#fn_2019) and his brother
<span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxx-Page_276"></span>Athenodorus, <span
id="fr_2020"></span>[2021](#fn_2020) we know to have been especially
celebrated. Finding them deeply interested in Greek and Roman learning,
he infused into them a love of philosophy, and led them to exchange
their old zeal for the study of divinity. Remaining with him five years,
they made such progress in divine things, that although they were still
young, both of them were honored with a bishopric in the churches of
Pontus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2019"></span>[275:2020](2010200.htm#fr_2019) <span
id="iii.xi.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxx-p3"></span> Our sources for a knowledge of the life
of Gregory, who is known as Gregory Thaumaturgus (“wonder-worker”), are
numerous, but not all of them reliable. He is mentioned by Eusebius here
and in Bk. VII. chaps. 14 and 28, and a brief account of his life and
writings is given by Jerome (de *vir. ill.* chap. 65), who adds some
particulars not mentioned by Eusebius. There is also extant Gregory’s
*Panegyrical Oration* in praise of Origen, which contains an outline of
the earlier years of his life. Gregory of Nyssa about a century later
wrote a life of Gregory Thaumaturgus, which is still extant, but which
is full of marvelous stories, and contains little that is trustworthy.
Gregory’s fame was very great among his contemporaries and succeeding
generations, and many of the Fathers have left brief accounts of him, or
references to him which it is not necessary to mention here. He was a
native of Neo-Cæsarea in Pontus (according to Gregory Nyssa), the same
city of which he was afterward bishop, was of wealthy parentage, and
began the study of law when quite young (see his own *Orat. Paneg.*
chap. 5). Coming to Cæsarea, in Palestine, on his way to Berytus, where
he and his brother Athenodorus were to attend a school of law, he met
Origen, and was so attracted by him that he and his brother remained in
Cæsarea five years (according to Eusebius and Jerome) and studied logic,
physics, mathematics, ethics, Greek philosophy, and theology with him
(see his *Orat*). At the end of this time the brothers returned to
Pontus, and afterwards were made bishops, Gregory of Neo-Cæsarea, his
native place; Athenodorus of some unknown city (Eusebius here and in
VII. 14 and 28 says only that they were both bishops of churches in
Pontus). Of the remarkable events connected with the ordination of
Gregory, which are told by Gregory of Nyssa, it is not necessary to
speak here. He was a prominent scholar and writer, and a man universally
beloved and respected for his deep piety and his commanding ability, but
his fame rested chiefly upon the reports of his miracle-working, which
were widespread. The prodigies told of him are numerous and marvelous.
Eusebius is silent about this side of his career (whether because of
ignorance or incredulity we cannot tell, but the latter seems most
probable), but Jerome refers to his fame as a miracle-worker, Gregory of
Nyssa’s *Vita,* is full of it, and Basil and other later writers dwell
upon it. What the foundation for all these traditions was we do not
know. He was a famous missionary, and seems to have been remarkably
successful in converting the pagans of his diocese, which was almost
wholly heathen when he became bishop. This great missionary success may
have given rise to the tales of supernatural power, some cause above the
ordinary being assumed by the common people as necessary to account for
such results. Miracles and other supernatural phenomena were quite
commonly assumed in those days as causes of conversions—especially if
the conversions themselves were in any way remarkable (cf. e.g. the
close of the anonymous *Dialogue with Herbanus, a Jew*). Not only the
miracles, but also many other events reported in Gregory of Nyssa’s
*Vita,* must be regarded as unfounded; e.g. the account of a long period
of study in Alexandria of which our more reliable sources contain no
trace. The veneration in which Gregory held Origen is clear enough from
his panegyric, and the great regard which Origen cherished for Gregory
is revealed in his epistle to the latter, written soon after Gregory’s
arrival in Neo-Cæsarea, and still preserved in the *Philocalia,* chap.
13. The works of Gregory known to us are his *Panegyrical Oration* in
praise of Origen, delivered in the presence of the latter and of a great
multitude before Gregory’s departure from Cæsarea, and still extant; a
paraphrase of the book of Ecclesiastes, mentioned by Jerome (*l.c.*),
and likewise extant; several epistles referred to by Jerome (*l.c.*),
only one of which, his so-called *Canonical Epistle,* addressed to an
anonymous bishop of Pontus, is still preserved; and finally a
trinitarian creed, or confession of faith, which is given by Gregory of
Nyssa in his *Vita,* and whose genuineness has been warmly disputed
(e.g. by Lardner, Works, II. p. 634 sq.); but since Caspari’s defense of
it in his *Gesch. d. Taufsymbols und der Glaubensregel,* its
authenticity may be regarded as established. These four writings,
together with some works falsely ascribed to Gregory, are translated in
*The Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Am. ed., Vol. VI. p. 1–80. Original Greek in
Migne’s *Patr. Gr*. X. 983–1343. See also Ryssel’s *Gregorius
Thaumaturgus. Sein Leben und seine Schriften;* Leipzig, 1880. Ryssel
gives (p. 65–79) a German translation of two hitherto unknown Syriac
writings of Gregory, one on the equality of Father, Son, and Spirit, and
the other on the passibility and impassibility of God. Gregory’s dates
cannot be fixed with exactness; but as he cannot have seen Origen in
Cæsarea until after 231, and was very young when he met him there, he
must have been born as late as the second decade of the third century.
As he was with Origen at least five years, he can hardly have taken his
farewell of him until after the persecution of Maximinus (i.e. after
238), for we cannot suppose that he pronounced his panegyrical oration
during that persecution. He speaks in the first chapter of that oration
of not having delivered an oration for eight years, and this is commonly
supposed to imply that it was eight years since he had begun to study
with Origen, in which case the oration must be put as late as 239, and
it must be assumed, if Eusebius’ five years are accepted as accurate,
that he was absent for some three years during that period (perhaps
while the persecution was going on). But the eight years cannot be
pressed in this connection, for it is quite possible that they may have
been reckoned from an earlier time, perhaps from the time when he began
the study of law, which was before he met Origin (see *Panegyr.* chaps.
1 and 5). If we were to suppose the order followed by Eusebius strictly
chronological, we should have to put Gregory’s acquaintance with Origen
into the reign of Gordian (238–244). The truth is, the matter cannot be
decided. He is said by Gregory of Nyssa to have retired into concealment
during the persecution of Decius, and to have returned to his charge
again after its close. He was present with his brother Athenodorus at
one of the councils called to consider the case of Paul of Samosata (see
Bk. VII. chap. 28), but was not present at the final one at which Paul
was condemned (see *ibid.* chaps. 29 and 30, and note 2 on the latter
chapter). This one was held about 265 (see *ibid.* chap. 29, note 1),
and hence it is likely that Gregory was dead before that date.

<span id="fn_2020"></span>[276:2021](2010200.htm#fr_2020) <span
id="iii.xi.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxx-p4"></span> Athenodorus is known to us only as the
brother of Gregory and bishop of some church or churches in Pontus (see
Bk. VII. chaps. 14 and 28).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI](2010201)
