[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010182)  [Next](2010184) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—</span>*The Writings of
Clement.* <span id="fr_1839"></span>[1840](#fn_1839)

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p4.1"></span>All</span> the eight Stromata of Clement
are preserved among us, and have been given by <span id="page_259">p.
259</span> <span id="iii.xi.xiii-Page_259"></span>him the following
title: “Titus Flavius Clement’s Stromata of Gnostic Notes on the True
Philosophy.” <span id="fr_1840"></span>[1841](#fn_1840)

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p7"></span>2. The books entitled Hypotyposes <span
id="fr_1841"></span>[1842](#fn_1841) are of the same number. In them he
mentions Pantænus <span id="fr_1842"></span>[1843](#fn_1842) by name as
his teacher, and gives his opinions and traditions.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p10"></span>3. Besides these there is his
Hortatory Discourse addressed to the Greeks; <span
id="fr_1843"></span>[1844](#fn_1843) three books of a work entitled the
Instructor; <span id="fr_1844"></span>[1845](#fn_1844) another with the
title What Rich Man is Saved? <span id="fr_1845"></span>[1846](#fn_1845)
the work on the Passover; <span id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846)
discussions on Fasting and on Evil Speaking; <span
id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847) the Hortatory Discourse on
Patience, or To Those Recently Baptized; <span
id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848) and the one bearing the title
Ecclesiastical Canon, or Against the Judaizers, <span
id="fr_1849"></span>[1850](#fn_1849) which he dedicated <span
id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span id="iii.xi.xiii-Page_260"></span>to
Alexander, the bishop mentioned above.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p19"></span>4. In the Stromata, he has not only
treated extensively <span id="fr_1850"></span>[1851](#fn_1850) of the
Divine Scripture, but he also quotes from the Greek writers whenever
anything that they have said seems to him profitable.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p21"></span>5. He elucidates the opinions of many,
both Greeks and barbarians. He also refutes the false doctrines of the
heresiarchs, and besides this, reviews a large portion of history,
giving us specimens of very various learning; with all the rest he
mingles the views of philosophers. It is likely that on this account he
gave his work the appropriate title of Stromata. <span
id="fr_1851"></span>[1852](#fn_1851)

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p23"></span>6. He makes use also in these works of
testimonies from the disputed Scriptures, <span
id="fr_1852"></span>[1853](#fn_1852) the so-called Wisdom of
Solomon, <span id="fr_1853"></span>[1854](#fn_1853) and of Jesus, the
son of Sirach, and the Epistle to the Hebrews, <span
id="fr_1854"></span>[1855](#fn_1854) and those of Barnabas, <span
id="fr_1855"></span>[1856](#fn_1855) and Clement <span
id="fr_1856"></span>[1857](#fn_1856) and Jude. <span
id="fr_1857"></span>[1858](#fn_1857)

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p30"></span>7. He mentions also Tatian’s <span
id="fr_1858"></span>[1859](#fn_1858) Discourse to the Greeks, and speaks
of Cassianus <span id="fr_1859"></span>[1860](#fn_1859) as the author of
a chronological work. He refers to the Jewish authors Philo, <span
id="fr_1860"></span>[1861](#fn_1860) Aristobulus, <span
id="fr_1861"></span>[1862](#fn_1861) Josephus, <span
id="fr_1862"></span>[1863](#fn_1862) Demetrius, <span
id="fr_1863"></span>[1864](#fn_1863) and Eupolemus, <span
id="fr_1864"></span>[1865](#fn_1864) as showing, all of them, in their
works, that Moses and the Jewish race existed before the earliest origin
of the Greeks.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p38"></span>8. These books abound also in much
other learning. In the first of them <span
id="fr_1865"></span>[1866](#fn_1865) the author speaks of him<span
id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span id="iii.xi.xiii-Page_261"></span>self
as next after the successors of the apostles.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p40"></span>9. In them he promises also to write a
commentary on Genesis. <span id="fr_1866"></span>[1867](#fn_1866) In his
book on the Passover <span id="fr_1867"></span>[1868](#fn_1867) he
acknowledges that he had been urged by his friends to commit to writing,
for posterity, the traditions which he had heard from the ancient
presbyters; and in the same work he mentions Melito and Irenæus, and
certain others, and gives extracts from their writings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1839"></span>[258:1840](2010183.htm#fr_1839) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p2"></span> On the life of Clement, see Bk. V.
chap. 11, note 1. He was a very prolific writer, as we can gather from
the list of works mentioned in this chapter. The list is repeated by
Jerome (*de vir. ill.* c. 38) and by Photius (*Cod.* 109–111), the
former of whom merely copies from Eusebius, with some mistakes, while
the latter copies from Jerome, as is clear from the similar variations
in the titles given by the last two from those given by Eusebius, and
also by the omission in both their lists of one work named by Eusebius
(see below, note 10). Eusebius names ten works in this chapter. In
addition to these there are extant two quotations from a work of Clement
entitled <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p2.1"></span>περὶ
προνοίας</span>. There are also extant two fragments of a work <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p2.2"></span>περί ψυχῆς</span>. In
the *Instructor,* Bk. II. chap. 10, Clement refers to a work *On
Continence* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p2.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p2.4"></span>περὶ ἐγκρατείας</span>) as already written
by himself, and there is no reason to doubt that this was a separate
work, for the third book of the *Stromata* (to which Fabricius thinks he
refers), which treats of the same subject, was not yet written. The work
is no longer extant. In the *Instructor,* Bk. III. chap. 8, Clement
speaks of a work which he had written *On Marriage* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p2.5"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p2.6"></span>γαμικὸς λόγος</span>).
It has been thought possible that he may have referred here to his
discussion of the same subject in Bk. II. chap. 10 of the same work (see
the Bishop of Lincoln’s work on Clement, p. 7), but it seems more
probable that he referred to a separate work now lost. Potter, p. 1022,
gives a fragment which is possibly from this work.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p3"></span>In addition to these works, referred to
as already written, Clement promises to write on *First Principles*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p3.1"></span>περὶ
ἀρχῶν</span>; *Strom.* III. 3, IV. 1, 13, V. 14, *et al.*); on
*Prophecy* (*Strom.* I. 24, IV. 13, V. 13); on *Angels* (*Strom.* VI.
13); on the *Origin of the World* (*Strom.* VI. 18),—perhaps a part of
the proposed work on *First Principles,* and perhaps to be identified
with the commentary on Genesis, referred to below by Eusebius (see note
28),—*Against Heresies* (*Strom.* IV. 13), on the *Resurrection*
(*Instructor,* I. 6, II. 10). It is quite possible that Clement regarded
his promises as fulfilled by the discussions which he gives in various
parts of the *Stromata* themselves, or that he gave up his original
purpose.

<span id="fn_1840"></span>[259:1841](2010183.htm#fr_1840) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p5"></span> Clement’s three principal works, the
*Exhortation to the Greeks* (see below, note 5), the *Instructor* (note
6), and the *Stromata,* form a connected series of works, related to one
another (as Schaff says) very much as apologetics, ethics, and
dogmatics. The three works were composed in the order named. The
*Stromata* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p5.1"></span>Στρωματεῖς</span>) or *Miscellanies* (said
by Eusebius in this passage to bear the title <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p5.2"></span>τῶν κατὰ τὴν ἀληθῆ φιλοσοφίαν γνωστικῶν
ὑπομνημ€των στρωματεῖς</span>) are said by Eusebius and by Photius
(*Cod.* 109) to consist of eight books. Only seven are now extant,
although there exists a fragment purporting to be a part of the eighth
book, but which is in reality a portion of a treatise on logic, while in
the time of Photius some reckoned the tract *Quis dives salvetur* as the
eighth book (Photius, *Cod.* 111). There thus exists no uniform
tradition as to the character of the lost book, and the suggestion of
Westcott seems plausible, that at an early date the logical introduction
to the *Hypotyposes* was separated from the remainder of the work, and
added to some <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p5.3"></span>mss.</span> of the *Stromata* as an eighth
book. If this be true, the *Stromata* consisted originally of only seven
books, and hence we now have the whole work (with the exception of a
fragment lost at the beginning). The name <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p5.4"></span>Στρωματεῖς</span>, “patchwork,”
sufficiently indicates the character of the work. It is without
methodical arrangement, containing a heterogeneous mixture of science,
philosophy, poetry, and theology, and yet is animated by one idea
throughout,—that Christianity satisfies the highest intellectual desires
of man,—and hence the work is intended in some sense as a guide to the
deeper knowledge of Christianity, the knowledge to be sought after by
the “true Gnostic.” It is full of rich thoughts mingled with worthless
crudities, and, like nearly all of Clement’s works, abounds in wide and
varied learning, not always fully digested. The date at which the work
was composed may be gathered from a passage in Bk. I. chap. 21, where a
list of the Roman emperors is closed with a mention of Commodus, the
exact length of whose reign is given, showing that he was already dead,
but also showing apparently that his successor was still living. This
would lead us to put the composition at least of the first book in the
first quarter of the year 193. It might of course be said that Pertinax
and Didius Julianus are omitted in this list because of the brevity of
their reigns, and this is possible, since in his own list he gives the
reigns of the emperors simply by years, omitting Otho and Vitellius. The
other list which he quotes, however, gives every emperor, with the
number of years, months, and even days of each reign, so that there is
no reason, at least in that list, for the omission of Pertinax and
Didius Julianus. It seems probable that, under the influence of that
exact list, and of the recentness of the reigns of the two emperors
named, Clement can hardly have omitted them if they had already ruled.
We can say with absolute certainty, however, only that the work was
written after 192. Clement left Alexandria in 202, or before, and this,
as well as the rest of his works, was written in all probability before
that time at the latest.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p6"></span>The standard edition of Clement’s works
is that of Potter, Oxford, 1715, in two vols. (reprinted in Migne’s
*Patr. Gr.,* Vols. VIII. and IX.). Complete English translation in the
*Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Amer. ed., Vol. II. On his writings, see
especially Westcott’s article in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* and for
the literature on the subject Schaff’s *Ch. Hist.* II. 781.

<span id="fn_1841"></span>[259:1842](2010183.htm#fr_1841) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p8"></span> The *Hypotyposes* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p8.1"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p8.2"></span>ποτυπώσεις</span>), or
*Outlines* (Eusebius calls them <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p8.3"></span>οἱ ἐπιγεγραμμένοι ὑποτυπώσεων αὐτοῦ
λόγοι</span>), are no longer extant, though fragments have been
preserved. The work (which was in eight books, according to this
passage) is referred to by Eusebius, in Bk. I. chap. 12 (the fifth
book), in Bk. II. chap. 1 (the sixth and seventh books), in Bk. II.
chaps. 9 and 23 (the seventh book), chap. 15 (the sixth book), in Bk. V.
chap. 11, and in Bk. VI. chap. 14 (the book not specified). Most of
these extracts are of a historical character, but have to do (most of
them, not all) with the apostolic age, or the New Testament. We are told
in chap. 14 that the work contained abridged accounts of all the
Scriptures, but Photius (*Cod.* 109) says that it seems to have dealt
only with Genesis, Exodus, the Psalms, Ecclesiastes, the epistles of
Paul, and the Catholic epistles (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p8.4"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p8.5"></span>δὲ ὅλος σκοπὸς ὡσανεὶ ἑρμηνεῖαι τυγχ€νουσι
τῆς Γεγέσεως κ.τ.λ</span>.). Besides the detached quotations there are
extant three series of extracts which are supposed to have been taken
from the *Hypotyposes.* These are *The Summaries from Theodotus, The
Prophetic Selections,* and the *Outlines on the Catholic Epistles.* On
these fragments, which are very corrupt and desultory, see Westcott in
the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* They discuss all sorts of doctrines, and
contain the interpretations of the most various schools, and it is not
always clearly stated whether Clement himself adopts the opinion given,
or whether he is simply quoting from another for the purpose of refuting
him. Photius condemns parts of the *Hypotyposes* severely, but it seems,
from these extracts which we have, that he may have read the work, full
as it was of the heretical opinions of other men and schools, without
distinguishing Clement’s own opinions from those of others, and that
thus he may carelessly have attributed to him all the wild notions which
he mentions. These extracts as well as the various references of
Eusebius show that the work, like most of the others which Clement
wrote, covered a great deal of ground, and included discussions of a
great many collateral subjects. It does not seem, in fact, to have been
much more systematic than the *Instructor* or even the *Stromata.* It
seems to have been intended as a part of the great series, of which the
*Exhortation,* *Instructor,* and *Stromata* were the first three. If so,
it followed them. We have no means of ascertaining its date more
exactly.

<span id="fn_1842"></span>[259:1843](2010183.htm#fr_1842) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p8.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p9"></span> Pantænus, see above, Bk. V. chap. 10,
note 1.

<span id="fn_1843"></span>[259:1844](2010183.htm#fr_1843) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p11"></span> The *Exhortation to the Greeks*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p11.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p11.2"></span>λόγος προτρεπτικὸς
πρὸς ῞Ελληνας</span>), the first of the series of three works mentioned
in note 2, is still extant in its entirety. It is called by Jerome (*de
vir. ill.* chap. 38) *Adversus Gentes, liber unus,* but, as Westcott
remarks, it was addressed not to the Gentiles in general, but to the
Greeks, as its title and its contents alike indicate. The general aim of
the book is to “prove the superiority of Christianity to the religions
and philosophies of heathendom,” and thus to lead the unbeliever to
accept it. It is full of Greek mythology and speculation, and exhibits,
as Schaff says, almost a waste of learning. It was written before the
*Instructor,* as we learn from a reference to it in the latter (chap.
1). It is stated above (Bk. V. chap. 28, §4), by the anonymous writer
against the Artemonites, that Clement wrote (at least some of his works)
before the time of Victor of Rome (i.e. before 192 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p11.3"></span>a.d.</span>), and hence
Westcott concludes that this work was written about 190, which cannot be
far out of the way.

<span id="fn_1844"></span>[259:1845](2010183.htm#fr_1844) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p12"></span> *The Instructor* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p12.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p12.2"></span>παιδαγωγός</span>, or,
as Eusebius calls it here, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p12.3"></span>τρεῖς τε οι τοῦ ἐπιγεγραμμένου
παιδαγωγοῦ</span>), is likewise extant, in three books. The work is
chiefly of a moral and practical character, designed to furnish the new
convert with rules for the proper conduct of his life over against the
prevailing immoralities of the heathen. Its date is approximately fixed
by the fact that it was written after the *Exhortation* to which it
refers, and before the *Stromata,* which refers to it (see *Strom.* VI.
1).

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[259:1846](2010183.htm#fr_1845) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p13"></span> The *Quis Dives Salvetur?* as it is
called (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p13.1"></span>τίς ὁ
σωζόμενος πλούσιος</span>), is a brief tract, discussing the words of
Christ in <span id="iii.xi.xiii-p13.2"></span>[Mark x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#017)<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p13.3"></span>
sqq. It is still extant, and contains the beautiful story of John and
the robber, quoted by Eusebius in Bk. III. chap. 23. It is an eloquent
and able work; and when compared with the prevailing notions of the
Church of his day, its teaching is remarkably wise and temperate. It is
moderately ascetic, but goes to no extremes, and in this furnishes a
pleasing contrast to the writings of most of the Fathers of Clement’s
time.

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[259:1847](2010183.htm#fr_1846) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p14.1"></span>τὸ περὶ τοῦ π€σχα σύγγραμμα</span>. This
work is no longer extant, nor had Photius seen it, although he reports
that he had heard of it. Two fragments of it are found in the *Chronicon
Paschale,* and are given by Potter. The work was composed, according to
§9, below, at the instigation of friends, who urged him to commit to
writing the traditions which he had received from the ancient
presbyters. From Bk. IV. chap. 26, we learn that it was written in reply
to Melito’s work on the same subject (see notes 5 and 23 on that
chapter); and hence we may conclude that it was undertaken at the
solicitation of friends who desired to see the arguments presented by
Melito, as a representative of the Quartodeciman practice, refined. The
date of the work we have no means of ascertaining, for Melito’s work was
written early in the sixties (see *ibid.*).

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[259:1848](2010183.htm#fr_1847) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p15.1"></span>διαλέξεις περὶ νηστείας καὶ περὶ
καταλαλιᾶς</span>. Photius knew both these works by report (the second
under the title <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p15.2"></span>περὶ κακολογίας</span>), but had not seen
them. Jerome calls the first *de jejunio disceptatio,* the second *de
obtrectatione liber unus.* Neither of them is now extant; but fragments
of the second have been preserved, and are given by Potter.

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[259:1849](2010183.htm#fr_1848) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p16.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p16.2"></span>προτρεπτικὸς εἰς ὑπομονὴν ἢ πρὸς τοὺς
νεωστὶ βεβαπτισμένους</span>. This work is mentioned neither by Jerome
nor by Photius, nor has any vestige of it been preserved, so far as we
know.

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[259:1850](2010183.htm#fr_1849) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p17.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p17.2"></span>ἐπιγεγραμμένος κανὼν ἐκκλησιαστικὸς, ἢ
πρὸς τοὺς ᾽Ιουδαϊζόντας</span>. Jerome: *de canonibus ecclesiasticis, et
adversum eos, qui Judæorum sequuntur errorum.* Photius mentions the
work; calling it <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p17.3"></span>περὶ κανόνων ἐκκλησιαστικῶν</span>, but he
had not himself seen it. It is no longer extant, but a few fragments
have been preserved, and are given by Potter.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p18"></span>Danz (*De Eusebio,* p. 90) refers to
Clement’s *Stromata,* lib. VI. p. 803, ed. Potter, where he says that
“the ecclesiastical canon is the agreement or disagreement of the law
and the prophets with the testament given at the coming of Christ.” Danz
concludes accordingly that in this work Clement wished to show to those
who believed that the teaching of the law and the prophets was not only
different from, but superior to the teachings of the Christian
faith,—that is, to the Judaizers,—that the writers of the Old and New
Testaments were in full harmony. This might do, were it not for the fact
that the work is directed not against Jews, but against Judaizers, i.e.
Judaizing Christians. A work to prove the Old and New Testament in
harmony with each other could hardly have been addressed to such
persons, who must have believed them in harmony before they became
Christians. The truth is, the phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p18.1"></span>κανὼν ἐκκλησιαστικός</span> is used by the
Fathers with a great variety of meanings, and the fact that Clement used
it in one sense in one of his works by no means proves that he always
used it in the same sense. It is more probable that the work was devoted
to a discussion of certain practices or modes of living in which the
Judaizers differed from the rest of the Church Catholic, perhaps in
respect to feasts (might a reference to the Quartodeciman practice have
been perhaps included?), fasts and other ascetic practices, observance
of the Jewish Sabbaths, &c. This use of the word in the sense of
*regula* was very common (see Suicer’s *Thesaurus*). The work was
dedicated, according to Eusebius, to the bishop Alexander, mentioned
above in chap. 8 and elsewhere. This is sufficient evidence that it was
written considerably later than the three great works already referred
to. Alexander was a student of Clement’s; and since he was likewise a
fellow-pupil of Origen’s (see chap. 8, note 6), his student days under
Clement must have extended at least nearly to the time when Clement left
Alexandria (i.e. in or before 202. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p18.2"></span>a.d.</span>). But Clement of course cannot
have dedicated a work to him while he was still his pupil, and in fact
we shall be safe in saying that Alexander must have gained some
prominence before Clement would be led to dedicate a work to him. We
think naturally of the period which Clement spent with him while he was
in prison and before he became bishop of Jerusalem (see chap. 11). It is
quite possible that Clement’s residence in Cappadocia with Alexander had
given him such an acquaintance with Judaizing heresies and practices
that he felt constrained to write against them, and at the same time had
given him such an affection for Alexander that he dedicated his work to
him.

<span id="fn_1850"></span>[260:1851](2010183.htm#fr_1850) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p20"></span> Literally, “made a spreading” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p20.1"></span>κατ€στρωσιν
πεποίηται</span>). Eusebius here plays upon the title of the work (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p20.2"></span>Στρωματεῖς</span>).

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[260:1852](2010183.htm#fr_1851) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p22"></span> See note 2.

<span id="fn_1852"></span>[260:1853](2010183.htm#fr_1852) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p24.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p24.2"></span>ντιλεγομένων γραφῶν</span>. On the
*Antilegomena,* see Bk. III. chap 25, note 1.

<span id="fn_1853"></span>[260:1854](2010183.htm#fr_1853) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p25"></span> The Wisdom of Solomon and the Wisdom
of Sirach were two Old Testament apocryphal books. The Church of the
first three centuries made, on the whole, no essential difference
between the books of the Hebrew canon and the Apocrypha. We find the
Fathers, almost without exception, quoting from both indiscriminately.
It is true that catalogues were made by Melito, Origen, Athanasius, and
others, which separated the Apocrypha from the books of the Hebrew
canon; but this represented theory simply, not practice, and did not
prevent even themselves from using both classes as Scripture. Augustine
went so far as to obliterate completely all distinction between the two,
in theory as well as in practice. The only one of the early Fathers to
make a decided stand against the Apocrypha was Jerome; but he was not
able to change the common view, and the Church continued (as the
Catholic Church continues still) to use them all (with a few minor
exceptions) as Holy Scripture.

<span id="fn_1854"></span>[260:1855](2010183.htm#fr_1854) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p26"></span> On the Epistle to the Hebrews, see
Bk. III. chap. 3, note 17.

<span id="fn_1855"></span>[260:1856](2010183.htm#fr_1855) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p27"></span> On the Epistle of Barnabas, see Bk.
III. chap. 25, note 20.

<span id="fn_1856"></span>[260:1857](2010183.htm#fr_1856) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p28"></span> The Epistle of Clement, see Bk. III.
chap. 16, note 1.

<span id="fn_1857"></span>[260:1858](2010183.htm#fr_1857) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p29"></span> On the Epistle of Jude, see Bk. II.
chap. 23, note 47.

<span id="fn_1858"></span>[260:1859](2010183.htm#fr_1858) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p31"></span> On Tatian and his works, see Bk. IV.
chap. 29, note 1.

<span id="fn_1859"></span>[260:1860](2010183.htm#fr_1859) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p32"></span> This Cassianus is mentioned twice by
Clement: once in *Strom.* I. 21, where Clement engages in a
chronological study for the purpose of showing that the wisdom of the
Hebrews is older than that of the Greeks, and refers to Cassian’s
*Exegetica* and Tatian’s *Address to the Greeks* as containing
discussions of the same subject; again in *Strom.* III. 13 sqq., where
he is said to have been the founder of the sect of the *Docetæ,* and to
have written a work, *De continentia* or *De castitate* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p32.1"></span>περὶ ἐγκρατείας ἢ περὶ
εὐνουχίας</span>), in which he condemned marriage. Here, too, he is
associated with Tatian. He seems from these references to have been,
like Tatian, an apologist for Christianity, and also like him to have
gone off into an extreme asceticism, which the Church pronounced
heretical (see Bk. IV. chap. 29, note 4). Whether he was personally
connected with Tatian, or is mentioned with him by Clement simply
because his views were similar, we do not know, nor can we fix the date
at which he lived. Neither of his works referred to by Clement is now
extant. Jerome (*de vir. ill.* chap. 38) mentions the work which
Eusebius speaks of here, but says that he had not been able to find a
copy of it. It is called by Clement, in the passage referred to here by
Eusebius, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p32.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p32.3"></span>Εξηγητικοὶ</span>, and so Eusebius calls
it in his *Præf. Evang.* X. 12, where he quotes from Clement. But here
he speaks of it as a <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p32.4"></span>χρονογραφία</span>, and Jerome transcribes
the word without translating it. We can gather from Clement’s words
(*Strom.* I. 21) that the work of Cassianus dealt largely with
chronology, and hence Eusebius’ reference to it under the name <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p32.5"></span>χρονογραφία</span> is
quite legitimate.

<span id="fn_1860"></span>[260:1861](2010183.htm#fr_1860) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p32.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p33"></span> On Philo and his works, see Bk. II.
chaps. 4, 5, 17 and 18.

<span id="fn_1861"></span>[260:1862](2010183.htm#fr_1861) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p34"></span> The Aristobulus referred to here was
an Alexandrian Jew and Peripatetic philosopher (see the passages in
Clement and Eusebius referred to below), who lived in the second century
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p34.1"></span>b.c.</span>, and
was the author of *Commentaries upon the Mosaic Law,* the chief object
of which was to prove that Greek philosophy was borrowed from the books
of Moses (see Clement, *Strom.* V. 14, who refers only to Peripatetic
philosophy, which is too narrow). The work is referred to by Clement of
Alexandria (in his *Stromata,* I. 15; V. 14; VI. 3, &c.), by Eusebius
(in his *Præp. Evang.* VII. 14; VIII. 9, 10; XIII. 12, &c.), by
Anatolius (as quoted by Eusebius below, in Bk. VII. chap. 32), and by
other Fathers. The work is no longer extant, but Eusebius gives two
considerable fragments of it in his *Præp. Evang.* VIII. 10, and XIII.
12. See Schürer’s *Gesch. d. jüdischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu,* II. p.
760 sq. Schürer maintains the authenticity of the work against the
attacks of many modern critics.

<span id="fn_1862"></span>[260:1863](2010183.htm#fr_1862) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p35"></span> On Josephus and his works, see Bk.
III. chap. 9.

<span id="fn_1863"></span>[260:1864](2010183.htm#fr_1863) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p36"></span> Demetrius was a Grecian Jew, who
wrote, toward the close of the third century <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p36.1"></span>b.c.</span>, a *History of Israel,* based
upon the Scripture records, and with especial reference to chronology.
Demetrius is mentioned by Josephus (who, however, wrongly makes him a
heathen; *contra Apionem,* I. 23), by Clement of Alexandria, and by
Eusebius. His work is no longer extant, but fragments of it are
preserved by Clement (*Strom.* I. 21) and by Eusebius (*Præp. Evang.*
IX. 21 and 29). See Schürer, *ibid.* p. 730 sq.

<span id="fn_1864"></span>[260:1865](2010183.htm#fr_1864) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p37"></span> Eupolymus was also a Jewish
historian, who wrote about the middle of the second century <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p37.1"></span>b.c.</span>, and is
possibly to be identified with the Eupolymus mentioned in <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p37.2"></span>[1 Macc. viii.
17](../../../bib/apo/ma1008.htm#017)<span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p37.3"></span>. He wrote a *History of the Jews,* which
is referred to under various titles by those that mention it, and which
has consequently been resolvent into three separate works by many
scholars, but without warrant, as Schürer has shown. The work, like that
of Aristobulus, was clearly designed to show the dependence of Greek
philosophy upon Hebrew wisdom (see Clement’s *Strom.* I. 23). It is no
longer extant, but fragments have been preserved by Clement of
Alexandria (*Strom.* I. 21, which gives us data for reckoning the time
at which Eupolymus wrote, and I. 23) and by Eusebius (*Præp. Evang.* IX.
17, 26, 30–34, and probably 39). See Schürer *ibid.* p. 732 sq.

<span id="fn_1865"></span>[260:1866](2010183.htm#fr_1865) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p39"></span> Eusebius is apparently still
referring to Clement’s *Stromata.* In saying that Clement <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p39.1"></span>ὧ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p39.2"></span>ν ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ περὶ
ἑαυτοῦ δηλοι ὡς žγγιστα τῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων γενομένου διαδοχῆς</span>, he
was perhaps thinking of the passage in *Strom.* I. 1, where Clement
says, “They \[i.e. his teachers\], preserving the tradition of the
blessed doctrine, derived directly from the holy apostles, Peter, James,
John, and Paul, the sons receiving it from the fathers (but few were
like the fathers), came by God’s will to us also to deposit those
ancestral and apostolic seeds.” Clement in this passage does not mean to
assert that his teachers were immediate disciples of the apostles, but
only that they received the traditions of the apostles in direct descent
from their immediate disciples. Eusebius’ words are a little ambiguous,
but they seem to imply that he thought that Clement was a pupil of
immediate disciples of the apostles, which Clement does not assert in
this passage, and can hardly have asserted in any passage, for he was in
all probability born too late to converse with those who had seen any of
the apostles.

<span id="fn_1866"></span>[261:1867](2010183.htm#fr_1866) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p41"></span> In his *Stromata* (VI. 18) Clement
refers to a work on the origin of the world, which was probably to form
a part of his work *On Principles.* This is perhaps the reference of
which Eusebius is thinking when he says that Clement in the *Stromata*
promises <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p41.1"></span>εἰς τὴν
Γένεσιν ὑπομνηματιεῖσθειν</span>. If so, Eusebius’ words, which imply
that Clement promised to write a commentary on Genesis, are misleading.

<span id="fn_1867"></span>[261:1868](2010183.htm#fr_1867) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p42"></span> On this work, see note 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](2010184)
