[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010355)  [Next](2010357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p1"></span> §5. *Moral Characteristics.*

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p2"></span>(a) *In relations with events, things,
or persons.* First of all, Constantine excelled in *Energy,* that
fundamental of all developed character. He was pre-eminent for masculine
strength of character (Theoph. p. 29), a man of energy (*vir ingens,*
Eutrop. 10. 1). This was manifested at every turn, in his successful
military activity under Diocletian, in the decisive acts at the time of
leaving him, in the prosecution of campaigns against Maximian,
Maxentius, Licinius, in the wholesale way in which he pushed internal
improvements, the building of Constantinople, the multiplication of
Christian houses of worship, in his studies, in his law-making; in
short, in everything he touched there was the same teeming, resistless
energy of the man. His *Determination* was “bent on effecting whatever
he had settled in his mind” (Eutrop. 10. 5). His *Rapidity of action*
when he rejoined his father is described by Lactantius as incredible
(Lact. c. 24). He showed the same alacrity in his quick return and
surprise of Maximian, in his first entry into Italy, and in his campaign
against Licinius. This energy and activity rose to positive
*Impetuosity,* which led him at Verona, before Rome, and at Cibalis to
plunge into the midst of battle, communicating his own resistless,
indomitable, alert will to do, to his soldiers. Closely linked with
these qualities was that personal *Courage and Valor,* inherited from
his father (Paneg. 307, c. 3), mentioned by Eusebius (*V. C.* 1. 11),
and explicitly or implicitly by almost every one. This most indubitable
of all his qualities was witnessed to even by the scoffing Julian as
“inexpressibly” great (*Orat.* p. 13), and mentioned even in the work
whose chief aim seems, almost, to detract from Constantine (*Cæs.* p.
23). United with all these characteristics of greatness was a
far-reaching *Ambition*. This on the one hand is represented to be an
ambition for power and glory. He was “exceedingly ambitious of military
glory” (Eutrop. 10. 7); “aspiring to the sovereignty of the whole world”
(Eutrop. 10. 5). According to Zosimus, at the time of the appointment of
Severus and Maximin, already having his mind set on attaining royalty he
was roused to a greater desire by the honor conferred on Severus and
Maximin, and this eager desire of power was already well known to many.
On the other hand, this ambition is represented to be a burning zeal for
righting wrongs; his <span id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-Page_424"></span>wars against Maxentius and Licinius
real crusades, and his actual objective in all things the reform to be
effected. If the fruit proves the motive, this was so; for he
consistently used or tried to use his power for what he thought public
good. This he did in Gaul, after his victories, in his legislation, and
in his internal improvements.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p3"></span>In view of all this powerfulness of
personality, it may be said of all successes of this “man of power”
(Eutrop. 10. 5) what Eutropius says of his success in war, that it was
great, “but not more than proportioned to his exertions” (Eutrop.). With
all this energy of personality, however, he was far from being
headstrong. On the contrary, he showed marked *Prudence,* resembling his
father in this also (Paneg. 307, c. 3). Sustaining so long the delicate
position at the court of Diocletian, all his provision for guarding the
frontiers, his long-suffering in waiting to be confirmed Cæsar, in
waiting his opportunity to meet Maxentius, in waiting and getting
everything in hand before meeting Licinius, his wise moderation in
demand on the conquered, and the not pressing forward until he had
everything well arranged, show this, and a high degree of *Patience*
withal. This latter virtue was peculiarly characteristic whether
exercised in respect of things or plans or people, and his great
patience in listening to complaints (Naz. c. 24) is only a part of the
whole. As he was patient, so he was distinguished for *Perseverance,*
and “firm and unshaken” (Theoph. p. 29) *Steadfastness.* So great energy
united with these other qualities barely needs testimony to suggest
great *Faithfulness* to his tasks in hand, as in that “strict attention
to his military duties” which Lactantius says (c. 18) characterized him
as a young man. In brief, his whole personality was a marked example of
that balance of power and the measuring of remote ends which is included
under the word *Self-control,* in the use of the philosophy of which he,
as well as his father, was a disciple. In this exercise of his great
energy towards himself he was recognized to be remarkable. This
self-control was manifested especially in his unusual *Chastity.* As a
young man he was marked by correct moral habits (*probis moribus,* Lact.
c. 18). The specific testimony of Eusebius to this (*V. C.*) would have
comparatively little weight on a point like this, and the same might be
said, in a measure, of the testimony of the Panegyrists (Naz. c. 24;
307, c. 4; 313, c. 4), who mention this virtue. But panegyrical art
would forbid the laudation of what was conspicuously lacking; rather it
would not be mentioned, and the general testimony goes to show at least
a contemporary reputation for extraordinary continence, considering his
time and environment. His relationship with Minervina hardly touches
this reputation, whether she was wife or only legitimate concubine. The
accusations and innuendoes of Julian, *Cæsars,* have, in any fairly
critical estimate, hardly more than the weight of some malignant gossip
whose backbiting is from his own heart. “Honi soit qui mat y pense.”
Like Licinius, he seems to have been unable to understand that purity of
heart which permitted the free companionship of women in social or
religious life. Julian’s general charge of luxuriousness and
sensuousness (p. 43, 306, 25, 38, 42, &c.) must be regarded largely in
the same light; for this delight in soft garments, precious gems, games,
and festivities was, if we can judge aright, in no sense “enervating
pleasure and voluptuous indulgence”: for he was indefatigable in studies
and works of all sorts, although it is perhaps to be referred to the
vanity and love of display of which he is accused, and of which more
later.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p4"></span>(b) *In relations with people.* In
general he was *Amiable,*—popular with the soldiers, popular even with
his subdued enemies (Eutrop. 10. 7). Diocletian reminded Galerius (Lact.
c. 18) that he was “amiable,” and he must have been so; for he was
“loved by soldiers” (Eumen. c. 16), and so “endeared to the troops” that
in the appointment of Cæsar he was “the choice of every individual”
(Lact. c. 18). This popularity he indeed “sought by every kind of
liberality and obligingness” (Eutr. 10. 7.), but what he sought he
found.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p5"></span>A very large element in this popularity
was the universal *Mildness, Mercifulness,* and *Forbearance* which he
showed. In these is found a class of characteristics which stand
alongside his energy of character as peculiarly characteristic and
great. “He whose familiar habit it was to save men’s lives” (*V. C.* 4.
6), as a young man promised, in the opinion of Diocletian <span
id="page_425">p. 425</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii.v-Page_425"></span>
(Lact. c. 18), to be “milder and more merciful than his father.” Even in
the opinion of Julian he was “far more humane (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-p5.1"></span>πραότερον</span>), and in very many other
respects superior to others, as I would demonstrate if there were
opportunity” (Julian, *Orat.* p. 15); and he again (p. 96) speaks of him
in laudatory terms as contrasted with the other emperors. Eusebius, as
might be expected, is still stronger in expression, and sets Constantine
“in contrast with tyrants who were stained with blood of countless
numbers,” saying that in Constantine’s reign “the sword of justice lay
idle,” and men were “rather constrained by a paternal authority than
governed by the stringent power of the laws” (*V. C.* 3. 1). This
mercifulness he manifested on every occasion. “When Sigusium was on
fire,” he directed greater effort towards saving it than he had to
capturing it (Naz. *Paneg.* c. 21). At the taking of Rome he punished a
certain few only of those most intimate with Maxentius (Zos.), and even
Zosimus notes the great joy and relief of people at the exchange of
Constantine for Maxentius. It is noticeable that in the inscriptions the
epithet “clementissimus,” most rare of other emperors, is found a
considerable number of times of him. So great was this mildness of
conduct that he was “generally blamed for his clemency” (*V. C.* 4. 31),
on the ground that crimes were not visited with their proper penalties.
The testimony to this humaneness of character is almost unlimited and
conclusive, but there is more or less evidence which is urged in
qualification or contradiction. It is rather a common thing to say that
he was at first mild, but later pride of prosperity caused him greatly
to depart from this former agreeable mildness of temper (Eutrop.). Then
the execution of the various members of his own family (cf. discussion
below), the exposure of prisoners to the wild beasts (Eumen. *Paneg.* c.
12), his severe decree against those who should conceal copies of the
works of Arius (Socr. 1. 9), his treatment of the Jews (Greg. Niceph.,
or at least his laws), and the severe penalties of some of his laws are
among the points brought against him. But the remark of Eutropius is to
be interpreted by the “former agreeable mildness of temper,” to which he
himself witnesses, and the fact that this latter period was that where
the points of view of the two men had widely diverged. The exposure of
prisoners to wild beasts was no evidence of cruelty in itself; for under
the customs then prevailing it might have been cruelty to his subjects
not to have done this, and his treatment of the barbarian enemies is
rather to be interpreted in the light of the testimony of Eutropius that
he “left on the minds of the barbarians \[Goths\] a strong remembrance
of his kindness” (10. 7). His treatment of his family is discussed
elsewhere, but whatever its bearings may be, there is no just
historico-psychological ground whatever for the use of the word which is
so freely bandied,—cruelty. Cruel he was not in any sense. Even the
extreme of the Panegyrist who says to him, “you are such by inheritance
and destiny that you cannot be cruel” (Eumen. *Paneg.* c. 14), is nearer
the truth. The penalties of his laws lay him open in a degree to a
charge of growing severity; but it was great, if sometimes mistaken and
overzealous, regard for what he deemed the public welfare, and on quite
a different plane from anything which we express as cruelty. Though with
the growing conservatism of a man who finds his purposes of mercy
continually perverted and his indulgences abused, he yet remained to the
end of his life most merciful and mild compared with those who went
before and who followed.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p6"></span>This fact becomes more clear in seeing
how he excelled in kindred virtues. The *Patience* already mentioned,
distinguished forbearance, and undoubted benevolence, or at least
generosity, are traits which group with mercy and have no fellowship
with cruelty. And these he had. He showed distinguished *Forbearance,*
and that oftentimes, as in a disturbance at Antioch, where he “applied
with much forbearance the remedy of persuasion” (*V. C.* 3. 59). The
outrageous conduct of those who, in the Arian disturbances, dared “even
to insult the statues of the emperor…had little power to excite his
anger, but rather caused in him sorrow of spirit” (*V. C.* 3. 4), “and
he endured with patience men who were exasperated against himself.”
These words are by Eusebius, to be sure; but his conduct with Donatists,
Arians, Maximinianus, and Licinius, in individual and on the whole, show
that in fact he did habitually exercise great forbearance. To this was
added much activity of positive *Kindness.* On first accession he
“visited with much <span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-Page_426"></span>considerate kindness all those
provinces” (*V. C.* p. 23). This kindness was shown throughout his
reign, and brightly illustrated in his treatment of the persecuted
Christians from the beginning,—in his acts in Gaul, in his famous
toleration edict, in his letter to Maximin, and in his acts throughout.
After his victory over Maxentius came the edict that those wrongfully
deprived of their estates should be permitted to enjoy them
again,…unjustly exiled were recalled and freed from imprisonment (Euseb.
*V. C.* 1. 41). After the victory over Licinius he recalled Christian
exiles, ordered restitution of property, released from labor in mines,
from the solitude of islands, from toil in public works, &c., those who
had been oppressed in these ways (*V. C.* p. 70–71). There is strong
concensus of testimony to a very lovable habitual exercise of this trait
in his “readiness to grant hearing,” “patience in listening,” and
“kindness of response” to those whose complaints he had patiently
listened to (Naz. 24). He was most excellent (*commodissimus*) to hear
embassies and complaints of provinces (Vict. *Epit.* p. 51),—a testimony
which is borne out by the facts. His *Generosity* is equally undoubted.
His magnificent gifts and largesses to the army were still remembered in
the time of Julian (*Orat.* p. 13). His constant and lavish giving to
the Christians is Eusebius’ unending theme: but it was not to the
churches alone; for we read of his munificence to heathen tribes (*V.
C.* 2. 22), his liberality to the poor (*V. C.* 1. 43) in giving money
for clothing, provision for orphans and widows, marriage portions for
virgins, compensation to losers in law suits (*V. C.* 4. 4). It was
“scarcely possible to be near him without benefit” (*V. C.* 1. 43; cf.
*V. C.* 3. 16; 3. 22; 4. 44).

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p7"></span>Though slow to serve some friends
through suspicion (i.e. *dubius* thus explained), he was “exceedingly
generous towards others, neglecting no opportunity to add to their
riches and honors” (Eutrop. 10. 7). “With royal magnificence he unlocked
all his treasures and distributed his gifts with rich and high-souled
liberality” (*V. C.* 3. 1). He seems to have carried it rather to
excess, even on the showing of Eusebius. “No one could request a favor
of the emperor, and fail of obtaining what he sought.…He devised new
dignities, that he might invest a larger number with the tokens of his
favor” (*V. C.* 4. 2). It is worth giving the account by Eusebius of
this conduct in full here. He says (*V. C.* 4. 54) that this “was a
virtue, however, which subjected him to censure from many, in
consequence of the baseness of wicked men, who ascribed their own crimes
to the emperor’s forbearance. In truth, I can myself bear testimony to
the grievous evils which prevailed during those times: I mean the
violence of rapacious and unprincipled men, who preyed on all classes of
society alike, and the scandalous hypocrisy of those who crept into the
church.…His own benevolence and goodness of heart, the genuineness of
his own faith, and his truthfulness of character induced the emperor to
credit the professions of those reputed Christians who craftily
preserved the semblance of sincere affection for his person. The
confidence he reposed in such men sometimes forced him into conduct
*unworthy of himself,* of which envy took advantage to cloud in this
respect the luster of his character.” There seems, therefore, some
ground for the charge of *Prodigality,* that he “wasted public money in
many useless buildings, some of which he shortly after destroyed because
they were not built to stand” (Zos.), and (Zos. p. 104) “gave great
largesses to ill-deserving persons, mistaking profusion for munificence”
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p7.1"></span>τὴν γὰρ ἀσωτίαν
ἡγεῖτο φιλοτιμίαν</span>). Zosimus adds that to do this, he “imposed
severe taxes on all, so severe that fathers were obliged to prostitute
their daughters to raise the money, that tortures were employed, and in
consequence whole villages depopulated.” This testimony is, however, by
one bitterly prejudiced, who regarded money spent on Christian houses of
worship as worse than wasted, and indicates only what appears from
Eusebius as well, that expenditures for cities, schools, and churches
built, and for other matters, must have been enormous. But so, too, they
were enormous under other emperors, and Constantine, at least, instead
of spending on debauchery, seems to have had something to show for it.
As to taxes, Zosimus would undoubtedly sympathize with the Kentucky
moonshiners in their “oppression” by revenue officers, if he were here
now and Constantine were President, and would fulminate in the daily
papers against the wicked party which by its wicked tariff compels men
to marry <span id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-Page_427"></span>their daughters to rich husbands in
order to get their taxes paid,—and incidental luxuries supplied. But
that does not say that an exorbitant tariff, to supply “jobs” which
shall furnish rich “spoils” for those who have “pulls” out of the
pockets of the many, is good; yet this, in modern phrase, is about what
Constantine did. Constantine’s trust in his friends and generosity to
the unworthy, with its consequences on the tax-payers, reminds
strikingly of some of our own soldier-presidents, whom we love and
admire without approving all their acts. And yet, on the other hand,
much of the expenditure was for solid improvement, and could only be
criticised by those who now oppose expenditures for navy, for improved
postal service, public buildings, subsidies, &c.; though yet, again, his
wholesale way of doing things also reminds one of the large generosity
of some modern politicians in their race for popularity, with their
Pension, Education, River and Harbor, and what not liberalities out of
the pockets of the people. But whatever unwisdom may have been mingled,
all this profusion shows in him a generosity of character which was at
least amiable, and in the main genuine. His generosity took also the
form of *Hospitality,* as shown by his entertainings at the Council of
Nicæa (*V. C.* 4. 49). With all these qualities of amiable popularity
there seems to have been joined a yet more fundamental element, of
permanent influence among men, in a spirit of *Justice* so marked that
the claim of the Panegyrist is hardly too sweeping when he says that
“all who took refuge with him for whatever cause he treated justly and
liberally” (Paneg. 307. 5)—if there is added “up to his light and
ability.” Closely linked with this again is that “Unbending
righteousness” of which Theophanes (p. 29) speaks. And to all these
qualities was added that synthesis of qualities,—a remarkable *Tact* in
his intercourse with men, a trait typically exemplified in his conduct
at the Council of Nicæa, where “the emperor gave patient audience to all
alike, and reviewed every proposition with steadfast attention, and by
occasionally assisting the arguments of each party in turn, he gradually
disposed even the most vehement disputants to a
reconciliation,…persuading some, convincing others by his reasonings,
praising those who spoke well, and urging all to unity of sentiment,
until at last he succeeded in bringing them to one mind and judgment
respecting every disputed question” (*V. C.* 3. 13).

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p8"></span>But success with men and popularity
seem to have opened that pitfall of success,—*Vanity,*—and it is charged
that he fell thereinto, although there is testimony to the exact
contrary. According to Victor (*Epit.* p. 51) he was “immeasurably
greedy of praise.” This agrees with, and is at the same time modified by
Eutropius’ testimony to his ambition for glory and for honorable
popularity (10. 7), and his apparently complacent reception of the
outrageous flattery of Optatian (cf. his letter), seems at least to show
some weakness in this direction. So again his tendency toward
*Magnificence,* as shown in his assuming the diadem and his dress in
general (cf. above), in the splendor of banquets as witnessed by his
approving friend (*V. C.* 3. 15), his desire to do on a large scale
whatever he did, whether in the building of cities or splendid houses of
worship, or in book-binding ornamentations of pearls and gems. And yet
again it is shown in what seems at this distance his *Conceit,* sublime
in its unconsciousness in reckoning himself a sort of thirteenth, but,
it would seem, a facile princeps apostle, in the disposition for his
burial, “anticipating with extraordinary fervor of faith that his body
would share their title with the apostles themselves.…He accordingly
caused twelve coffins to be set up in this church, like sacred pillars,
in honor and memory of the apostolic number, in the centre of which his
own was placed, having six of theirs on either side of it” (*V. C.* 4.
60). One can seem to read in this a whole history of unblushing
flattery, and it reminds that Eunapius (*Vic. ædes.* p. 41) has spoken
of his pleasure in the stimulant of “intoxicating flattery.” Still it is
not to be supposed that this was a peculiarly weak vanity or an
absorbing one. The testimony to his *Modesty* (*V. C.* 3. 10), though by
Eusebius, is too circumstantial to be wholly unreal, and the testimony
to his Humility in his “indignation at excessive praise” (*V. C.* 4.
48), and the records of Eusebius that he “was not rendered arrogant by
these plaudits nor uplifted by the praises” (Euseb. *V. C.* 1. 39), and
of the Chronicon Paschale (p. 521) that “he was not at all puffed up by
the acclamations,” evidently represent a <span id="page_428">p.
428</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii.v-Page_428"></span>genuine thing. This
mixed character is too frequently met with to be incomprehensible. Real
power, recognizing its own success, glad of the recognition of others,
not at bottom because of cold vanity, but from warm appreciation of
human friendliness, became through success in carrying out what seemed
to him, and were, divine plans, fired with the thought that he was the
especial and necessary minister of God, that his thoughts and will were
directly touched by the Divine Will and thus that whatever he thought or
willed was infallible. He is not unlike some modern rulers. The spirit,
though one of real vanity, or egotism at least, has an element of
nobleness in it, and in most of its manifestations commands respect
along with the smile. The accusation of Zosimus of *Arrogance* “when he
had attained to the sole authority,” and that he “gave himself up to the
unrestrained exercise of his power,” must be interpreted like those of
other un-Christian witnesses, in the light of the fact that his actions
worked relative hardships to the non-Christians, and that very justice
to the Christians would seem injustice to them, and if Constantine was
more than just, his generosity was at some one’s expense. His energy of
execution and constant success, with his dominating idea of a Divine
mission, would naturally engender this faith in his own infallibility;
for what is arrogance but this vanity joined with power? His action
toward schismatics—Donatists, Arians, or orthodox troublers of his
peace—was such as to suggest some degree of this vice. Yet his success
in keeping the followers of the old religion fairly mollified, and his
generally successful tact, showed that this was in no sense a dominating
and unrelieved characteristic. Two other weaknesses closely allied with
these are also imputed to Constantine: *Jealousy,* as illustrated by the
statement that “wishing to minimize the deeds of his predecessors, he
took pains to tarnish their virtues by giving them jocose epithets”
(Dion. Cont. 2 \[Müller, p. 199\]; cf. Vict. *Epit.* p. 51), and
*Suspiciousness* (Eutrop. 10. 7); for which latter, a man who had
survived as many plots as he had, might well be excused. Again and again
and again he trusted men, and they deceived him. His conduct with
Maximian shows that at least in the beginning, before he had had so much
experience of untrustworthiness, he was remarkably free from this. A
much more serious charge is that of *Faithlessness* preferred by
Zosimus, who says (2. 28), “in violation of his oaths (for this was
customary with him)” and twice repeats the charge. Eusebius, on the
other hand, tells what great pains Constantine took not to be the one to
break peace with Licinius (*V. C.*). One is worth as little as the
other. The charge seems to rest mainly or wholly on his conduct towards
Licinius, in beginning war and in putting him to death. A small boy once
held a smaller boy in a firm grip, but agreed to spare him the cuffing
he deserved because he was smaller. The smaller small boy promptly set
his teeth in the leg of the larger small boy, and was properly cuffed
for it. Thereupon the smaller small boy’s big brother was filled with
indignation, which he manifested by seeking and finding the same fate.
The indignation in behalf of Licinius seems to be in large measure big
brother indignation—indignation with the wrong party. He appears to have
been one of those who held a compact to be binding on the other party
only. It wasn’t in the bargain that he should persecute the Christians,
or in the other bargain that he should plot his benefactor’s overthrow.
That king in Scripture who took back his promise to forgive a debt of
ten thousand talents was not faithless.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p9"></span>(c) *In relations with his family.* He
was a filial *Son,* having the confidence of his father, as shown in his
wish of succession, and showing his mother all honors when he came to
power (cf. coins showing her position as empress, and *V.C.*). “And well
may his character be styled blessed for his filial piety as well as on
other grounds” (*V. C.* 3. 47).

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p10"></span>It is in this relation to his family,
however, that the most serious attacks on the character of Constantine
have been made. Eutropius says: “But the pride of prosperity caused
Constantine greatly to depart from his former agreeable mildness of
temper. Falling first upon his own relatives, he put to death his son,
an excellent man; his sister’s son, a youth of amiable disposition; soon
afterwards his wife; and subsequently many of his friends.” This has
been a battle-ground of accusation or excusation in all the centuries.
The testimony is very meagre and uncertain, but this much may be said:
1. That any jury would regard the fact of deaths as evidenced. It is
<span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-Page_429"></span>witnessed by Eutrop. (10. 6), Zos.,
Vict., Hieron., &c. 2. That he was unjustifiable is not proven. In
respect to the death of Fausta, at least, there was probably just cause;
whether love intrigue or other intrigue, there seems to have been some
real occasion. The death of Crispus, too, was from no mere suspicions,
but on apparently definite grounds of distrust. It is historical
assumption to say that he had no good grounds, whatever these may have
been—illicit relationship with Fausta or more probably political
intrigue. At the worst, he was put to death on false but, at the time,
apparently true accusation: what has been done by judges and juries of
the best intention. <span id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040) Of
Licinius, his sister’s son, it can hardly be said that he had the same
reason, as he was still a boy. But remembering the inherited character
of Licinius, and noticing the curious fact that the cordiality between
Constantia and Constantine was peculiarly great to the end, it seems as
if there must have been some mitigating circumstance. <span
id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041) In all historical candor it looks
as if there had been some general intrigue against Constantine which had
been met in this way; but the fairest verdict to enter is “causes
unknown.”

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p13"></span>In estimating the characteristic value
of the acts it must be noted, 1. That it has in no sense the character
of private execution. The emperor was judge. Even if he mistook evidence
and put to death an innocent man, it was as when a judge does the same.
2. That the relative moral character of punishments inflicted is
conditioned by the custom of punishment. An English judge of the past
was not as cruel in hanging a man for theft, as a modern one in applying
the extreme penalty of the law to an offense with mitigating
circumstances, would be. 3. That all law of evidence, all rhyme and
reason, says that any man’s any act is to be interpreted in the light of
his *general character.* Where evidence is lacking or doubtful, such
evidence of general character has actual weight, and may be conclusive.
In application to these acts note (*a*) The peculiar forbearance which
Constantine exercised toward Maximian. (*b*) The conclusive universal
testimony to the general mildness of his character and his habitual
mercifulness. In view of this, it is to be judged that there was some
real, or appearing, great ground of judicial wrath. 4. That Constantine
had suffered from plots on the part of his own relatives over and over
again, and spared, and been plotted against again, as in the cases of
Maximian, Bassianus, and Licinius. 5. That they were not put to death
“in a gust of passion” at once, but in successive acts. In view of these
things it is fair and just to say that they were put to death on grounds
which seemed just and for the welfare of society, and their deaths in no
sense indicate cruelty or unnaturalness on the part of Constantine. Even
the death of Licinius must be interpreted by the political ethics of the
times and its circumstances. So long as sentimentalists continue to send
bouquets to murderers and erect monuments to anarchists, they will
regard execution, even legal execution, as *prima facie* evidence of
cruelty, and the killing of a murderer in self-defense, or the hanging
of a traitor, as crime. Constantine’s whole character ensures that if he
thought he could have spared them, or any one, with safety, he would
have done so. <span id="fr_3042"></span>[3043](#fn_3042)

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p15"></span>In general he was a faithful *husband*
as respects marital virtue, and a good *father.* He took care that his
children should be well educated. Crispus was under Lactantius
(Hieron.), and the others perhaps under Arborius (“Auson. de Prof.
Burdig. 16”); at all events, he had the most accomplished teachers of
secular learning to instruct in the art of war, and in political and
legal science (*V. C.* 4. 51), and both by his own instruction and that
of men of approved piety, took special pains with their religious
training. He early appointed them to offices of authority, and
distributed the empire among them.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p16"></span><span id="page_430">p. 430</span>
<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-Page_430"></span>(d) *In relations with friends.*
His general conduct toward his friends was marked by very great
liberality (cf. above). Eutropius speaks emphatically of this even while
he uses the expression which has been such a puzzle to all, that “toward
some of his friends he was double” (or dangerous), a phrase which is
interpreted by Johannes Ant. as meaning “to some of friends false
(unsound, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-p16.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-p16.2"></span>πούλως</span>) and unsafe (unwholesome,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p16.3"></span>οὐχ
ὑγιῶς</span>)” (ed. Müller 4. p. 602–3). His uniform effort to please
his friends has been discussed above.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p17"></span>(e) *In relations with society.* 1. As
*General* he seems to have been popular with his own soldiers (cf.
above), inspiring them with enthusiasm and energy. Toward hostile
soldiers he was merciful (cf. above), not following up an advantage
further than was necessary, and toward conquered enemies unusually
forbearing; e.g. at Sigusium, at Rome, with Maximian, with Licinius, and
with the Goths (cf. above). His generalship is characterized by careful
provision for the guarding of his rear, and by rapidity of movement and
dash in actual conflict. 2. As *Legislator* he “enacted many laws, some
good, but most of them superfluous, and some severe” (Eutrop. 10. 8). He
seems to have had a weakness for law-making which, at all events, shows
a characteristic respect for law little shared by his early
contemporaries. Of course Eutropius would consider all laws in favor of
Christians superfluous. Laws for the abolition of idolatrous practices,
for the erection of Christian houses of worship, observance of the
Lord’s Day (*V. C.* 4. 23), permitting cases to be tried before bishops
(Soz. 1. 9; Euseb. *H. E.* 10. 7; Cod. Theod. Tit. de episc. 2) &c.,
would surely seem so. But even in other laws Constantine seems to have
had at times an abnormal zeal for law-making, when his energies were not
occupied in war or church-building. The laws were generally wise and, at
the least, benevolently or righteously meant. Such were the abolition of
crucifixion (Vict. *Cæs.*) and of gladiatorial shows (*V. C.* 4. 25;
Socr. 1. 8; C. Theod. 15. 12. 1), the law that the families of slaves
were not to be separated (C. Theod. 2.25), that forbidding the scourging
of debtors (C. Theod. 7. 3), and that repressing calumny (Vict. *Epit.*
51). Among the “severe” laws were such as punished certain forms of
illicit intercourse with death. 3. As *Statesman* his policy was broad
and far-reaching. He fully organized and carefully established one
section of his territory before he enlarged. He changed the whole
constitution of the empire, both civil and military (cf. Wordsworth, in
Smith & W.). He inaugurated reforms in finance, and especially was most
assiduous in the matter of internal improvements, restoring and building
from one end of the empire to the other. The great characteristic
consummation of his reign was the union of Church and State, over which
men are still divided as to whether it was a tremendous blessing or a
tremendous curse. Tremendous it surely was in its shaping power on world
history. (Compare numerous titles under *Literature.*) The general
statement of Eutropius that “in the beginning of his reign he might have
been compared to the best princes, in the latter part only to those of a
middling character,” must be interpreted by the fact that during the
latter part of his reign he was so associated with Christianity, in
itself a falling away in the eyes of the old religionists. His reign was
one of order and justice such as few were, and an order out of chaos, a
reign in which it could be peculiarly said that “chastity was safe and
marriage protected” (Naz. c. 38), where a man’s life and property were
secure as under few of the Roman emperors. It is idle to refuse the
title of Great to a man who, from the beginning, followed a consistent,
though developing policy, organized the interior, and securely guarded
the frontier of his empire at each enlargement, and finally unified the
whole on such a basis as to secure large internal prosperity and
development.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[429:3041](2010356.htm#fr_3040) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p11"></span> It is hardly necessary to say that
the various tales of the remorse of Constantine for the death of Crispus
are mythical. The tale of Sopater has been mentioned. That of Codinus
(*De signo Cp.* p. 62–63), also that, “in regret for death of Crispus,
he erected a statue of pure silver with the inscription, ‘My unjustly
treated son,’ and did penance besides,” falls into the same category.

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[429:3042](2010356.htm#fr_3041) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p12"></span> Seeck (*Ztschr. f. wiss. Theol.*
1890, p. 73) maintains that it is established (“urkundlich fest”) that
Licinius was still living in 336, in which case he would have been more
than twenty years old. He maintains also that he was not the son of
Constantine, but the illegitimate son of Licinius by a slave woman.

<span id="fn_3042"></span>[429:3043](2010356.htm#fr_3042) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.v-p14"></span> On this question compare especially
monographs of Görres and Seeck. See under *Literature,* where other
titles, e.g. Hug and Wegnerus, will also be found. In general, the
remark of Ludermann (Lipsius, *Theol. Jahrb.* 1886, p. 108) is valid,
“The arguments against Constantine’s Christianity, which are drawn from
his moral character, have ever been the weakest.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](2010357)
