[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010278)  [Next](2010280) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.</span>

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.ix-p2.1"></span>Up</span> to the sixth year the storm had
been incessantly raging against us. Before this time there had been a
very large number of confessors of religion in the so-called Porphyry
quarry in Thebais, which gets its name from the stone found there. Of
these, one hundred men, lacking three, together with women and infants,
were sent to the governor of Palestine. When they confessed the God of
the universe and Christ, Firmilianus, <span
id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662) who had been sent there as governor
in the place of Urbanus, directed, in accordance with the imperial
command, that they should be maimed by burning the sinews of the ankles
of their left feet, and that their right eyes with the eyelids and
pupils should first be cut out, and then destroyed by hot irons to the
very roots. And he then sent them to the mines in the province to endure
hardships with severe toil and suffering.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p4"></span>2. But it was not sufficient that these
only who suffered such miseries should be deprived of their eyes, but
those natives of Palestine also, who were mentioned just above as
condemned to pugilistic combat, since they would neither receive food
from the royal storehouse nor undergo the necessary preparatory
exercises.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p5"></span>3. Having been brought on this account
not only before the overseers, but also before Maximinus himself, and
having manifested the noblest persistence in confession by the endurance
of hunger and stripes, they received like punishment with those whom we
have mentioned, and with them other confessors in the city of Cæsarea.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p6"></span>4. Immediately afterwards others who
were gathered to hear the Scriptures read, were seized in Gaza, and some
endured the same sufferings in the feet and eyes; but others were
afflicted with yet greater torments and with most terrible tortures in
the sides.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p7"></span>5. One of these, in body a woman, but in
understanding a man, would not endure the threat of fornication, and
spoke directly against the tyrant who entrusted the government to such
cruel judges. She was first scourged and then raised aloft on the stake,
and her sides lacerated.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p8"></span>6. As those appointed for this purpose
applied the tortures incessantly and severely at the command of the
judge, another, with mind fixed, like the former, on virginity as her
aim,—a woman who was altogether mean in form and contemptible in
appearance; but, on the other hand, strong in soul, and endowed with an
understanding superior to her body,—being unable to bear the merciless
and cruel and inhuman deeds, with a boldness beyond that of the
combatants famed among the Greeks, cried out to the judge from the midst
of the crowd: “And how long will you thus cruelly torture my sister?”
But he was greatly enraged, and ordered the woman to be immediately
seized.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p9"></span>7. Thereupon she was brought forward and
having called herself by the august name of the Saviour, she was first
urged by words to sacrifice, and as she refused she was dragged by force
to the altar. But her sister continued to maintain her former zeal, and
with intrepid and resolute foot kicked the altar, and overturned it with
the fire that was on it.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p10"></span>8. Thereupon the judge, enraged like a
wild beast, inflicted on her such tortures in her sides as he never had
on any one before, striving almost to glut himself with her raw flesh.
But when his madness was satiated, he bound them both together, this one
and her whom she called sister, and condemned them to death by fire. It
is said that the first of these was from the country of Gaza; the other,
by name Valentina, was of Cæsarea, and was well known to many.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p11"></span>9. But how can I describe as it
deserves the martyrdom which followed, with which the thrice-blessed
Paul was honored. He was condemned to death at the same time with them,
under one sentence. At the time of his martyrdom, as the executioner was
about to cut off his head, he requested a brief respite.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p12"></span>10. This being granted, he first, in a
clear and distinct voice, supplicated God in behalf of his
fellow-Christians, <span id="fr_2663"></span>[2664](#fn_2663) praying
for their pardon, and that freedom might soon be restored to them. Then
he asked for the conversion of the Jews to God through Christ; and
proceeding in order he requested the same things for the Samaritans, and
besought that those Gentiles, who were in error and were ignorant of
God, might come to a knowledge of him, and adopt the true religion. Nor
did he leave neglected the mixed multitude who were standing around.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p14"></span>11. After all these, oh! great and
unspeakable forbearance! he entreated the God of the universe for the
judge who had condemned him to death, and for the highest <span
id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="iii.xiv.ix-Page_350"></span>rulers, and also for the one who was
about to behead him, in his hearing and that of all present, beseeching
that their sin toward him should not be reckoned against them.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p15"></span>12. Having prayed for these things with
a loud voice, and having, as one who was dying unjustly, moved almost
all to compassion and tears, of his own accord he made himself ready,
and submitted his bare neck to the stroke of the sword, and was adorned
with divine martyrdom. This took place on the twenty-fifth day of the
month Panemus, <span id="fr_2664"></span>[2665](#fn_2664) which is the
eighth before the Kalends of August.

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p17"></span>13. Such was the end of these persons.
But not long after, one hundred and thirty admirable athletes of the
confession of Christ, from the land of Egypt, endured, in Egypt itself,
at the command of Maximinus the same afflictions in their eyes and feet
with the former persons, and were sent to the above-mentioned mines in
Palestine. But some of them were condemned to the mines in Cilicia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[349:2663](2010279.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="iii.xiv.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p3"></span> Of Firmilianus, the successor of
Urbanus, we know only what is told us here and in chaps. 9 and 11,
below. In the latter chapter, §31, his execution is recorded.

<span id="fn_2663"></span>[349:2664](2010279.htm#fr_2663) <span
id="iii.xiv.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.ix-p13.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.ix-p13.2"></span>μοεθνῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_2664"></span>[350:2665](2010279.htm#fr_2664) <span
id="iii.xiv.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.ix-p16"></span> i.e. July 25 (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.ix-p16.1"></span>a.d.</span> 308). See the table on p. 403,
below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](2010280)
