[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010683)  [Next](2010685) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*The Emperor
thankfully ascribes his Victories and all other Blessings to Christ; and
condemns the Conduct of the Tyrant Maximin, the Violence of whose
Persecution had enhanced the Glory of Religion.*

<span id="iv.vii.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xxii-p2.1"></span>To</span> thee, Piety, I ascribe the cause
of my own prosperity, and of all that I now possess. To this truth the
happy issue of all my endeavors bears testimony: brave deeds, victories
in war, and triumphs over conquered foes. This truth the great city
itself allows with joy and praise. The people, too, of that much-loved
city accord in the same sentiment, though once, deceived by ill-grounded
hopes, they chose a ruler unworthy of themselves, <span
id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482) a ruler who speedily received the
chastisement which his audacious deeds deserved. But be it far from me
now to recall the memory of these events, while holding converse with
thee, Piety, and essaying with earnest endeavor to address thee with
holy and gentle words. Yet will I say one thing, which haply shall not
be unbefitting or unseemly. A furious, a cruel, and implacable war was
maintained by the tyrants against thee, Piety, and thy holy churches:
nor were there wanting some in Rome itself who exulted at a calamity so
grievous to the public weal. Nay, the battlefield was prepared; when
thou didst stand forth, <span id="fr_3483"></span>[3484](#fn_3483) and
present thyself a voluntary victim, supported by faith in God. Then
indeed it was that the cruelty of ungodly men, which raged incessantly
like a devouring fire, wrought for thee a wondrous and ever memorable
glory. Astonishment seized the spectators themselves, when they beheld
the very executioners who tortured the bodies of their holy victims
wearied out, and disgusted at the cruelties; <span
id="fr_3484"></span>[3485](#fn_3484) the bonds loosened, the engines of
torture powerless, the flames extinguished, while the sufferers
preserved their constancy unshaken even for a moment. What, then, hast
thou gained by these atrocious deeds, most impious of men? <span
id="fr_3485"></span>[3486](#fn_3485) And what was the cause of thy
insane fury? Thou wilt say, doubtless, these acts of thine were done in
honor of the gods. What gods are these? or what worthy conception hast
thou of the Divine nature? Thinkest thou the gods are subject to angry
passions as thou art? Were it so indeed, it had been better for thee to
wonder at their strange determination than obey their harsh command,
when they urged thee to the unrighteous slaughter of innocent men. Thou
wilt allege, perhaps, the customs of thy ancestors and the opinion of
mankind in general, as the cause of this conduct. I grant the fact: for
those customs are very like the acts themselves, and proceed from the
self-same source of folly. Thou thoughtest, it may be, that some special
power resided in images formed and fashioned by human art; and hence thy
reverence, and diligent care lest they should be defiled: those mighty
and highly exalted gods, thus dependent on the care of men!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[578:3483](2010684.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="iv.vii.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxii-p3"></span> \[Maxentius (W. Lowth in
loc.).—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3483"></span>[578:3484](2010684.htm#fr_3483) <span
id="iv.vii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxii-p4"></span> This passage clearly refers to the
voluntary sufferings of the martyrs. See the note of Valesius.

<span id="fn_3484"></span>[578:3485](2010684.htm#fr_3484) <span
id="iv.vii.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxii-p5"></span> “At a loss to invent fresh cruelties,”
*Bag.;* “And perplexed at the labor and trouble they met with,” *1709;*
“And reluctantly pursuing their terrible work,” *Molz.*

<span id="fn_3485"></span>[578:3486](2010684.htm#fr_3485) <span
id="iv.vii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxii-p6"></span> Alluding to Maximin, the most bitter
persecutor of the Christians, as appears from the title of this chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](2010685)
