[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010687)  [Next](2010689) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI</span>.—*The Emperor ascribes
his Personal Piety to God; and shows that we are bound to seek Success
from God, and attribute it to him; but to consider Mistakes as the
Result of our own Negligence.*

<span id="iv.vii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>When</span> men commend my services, which
owe their origin to the inspiration of Heaven, do they not clearly
establish the truth that God is the cause of the exploits I have
performed? Assuredly they do: for it belongs to God to do whatever is
best, and to man, to perform the commands of God. I believe, indeed, the
best and noblest course of action is, when, before an attempt is made,
we provide as far as possible for a secure result: and surely all men
know that the holy service in which these hands have been employed has
originated in pure and genuine faith towards God; that whatever has been
done for the common welfare has been effected by active exertion
combined with supplication and prayer; the consequence of which has been
as great an amount of individual and public benefit as each could
venture to hope for himself and those he holds most dear. They have
witnessed battles, and have been spectators of a war in which the
providence of God has granted victory to this people: <span
id="fr_3491"></span>[3492](#fn_3491) they have seen how he has favored
and seconded our prayers. For righteous prayer is a thing invincible;
and no one fails to attain his object who addresses holy supplication to
God: nor is a refusal possible, except in the case of wavering
faith; <span id="fr_3492"></span>[3493](#fn_3492) for God is ever
favorable, ever ready to approve of human virtue. While, therefore, it
is natural for man occasionally to err, yet God is not the cause of
human error. Hence it becomes all pious persons to render thanks to the
Saviour of all, first for our own individual security, and then for the
happy posture of public affairs: at the same time intreating the favor
of Christ with holy prayers and constant supplications, that he would
continue to us our present blessings. For he is the invincible ally and
protector of the righteous: he is the supreme judge of all things, the
prince of immorality, the Giver of everlasting life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3491"></span>[580:3492](2010688.htm#fr_3491) <span
id="iv.vii.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxvi-p3"></span> i.e. the Roman. So *Val.* and *Hein.,*
but *Val.* thinks it may perhaps rather be “to my army.”

<span id="fn_3492"></span>[580:3493](2010688.htm#fr_3492) <span
id="iv.vii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.xxvi-p4"></span> Better, literally, “slackening faith.”
There is somewhat of loss from the primitive and real conception of
faith in the fixing of the word “wavering” as the conventional
expression for weak. Faith is the steadfast current of personality
towards an object, and poverty of faith is more often the abatement or
slackening of that steady, insistent activity than the wavering of
doubt. There is more unbelief than disbelief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Oration of Eusebius.](2010689)
