[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010168)  [Next](2010170) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—</span>*Those who first
advanced the Heresy of Artemon; their Manner of Life, and how they dared
to corrupt the Sacred Scriptures.*

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p2.1"></span>In</span> a laborious work by one of these
writers against the heresy of Artemon, <span
id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734) which Paul of Samosata <span
id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735) attempted to revive again in our
day, there is an account appropriate to the history which we are now
examining.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p6"></span>2. For he criticises, as a late
innovation, the above-mentioned heresy which teaches that the Saviour
was a mere man, because they were attempting to magnify it as
ancient. <span id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736) Having given in his
work many other arguments in refutation of their blasphemous falsehood,
he adds the following words:

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p8"></span>3. “For they say that all the early
teachers and the apostles received and taught what they now declare, and
that the truth of the Gospel was preserved until the times of Victor,
who was the thirteenth bishop of Rome from Peter, <span
id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737) but that from his successor,
Zephyrinus, <span id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738) the truth had
been corrupted.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p11"></span>4. And what they say might be
plausible, if first of all <span id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span
id="iii.x.xxix-Page_247"></span>the Divine Scriptures did not contradict
them. And there are writings of certain brethren older than the times of
Victor, which they wrote in behalf of the truth against the heathen, and
against the heresies which existed in their day. I refer to Justin <span
id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739) and Miltiades <span
id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740) and Tatian <span
id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741) and Clement <span
id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742) and many others, in all of whose
works Christ is spoken of as God. <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743)

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p17"></span>5. For who does not know the works of
Irenæus <span id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744) and of Melito <span
id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745) and of others which teach that
Christ is God and man? <span id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) And
how many psalms and hymns, <span id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747)
written by the faithful brethren from the beginning, celebrate Christ
the Word of God, speaking of him as Divine.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p22"></span>6. How then since the opinion held by
the Church has been preached for so many years, can its preaching have
been delayed as they affirm, until the times of Victor? And how is it
that they are not ashamed to speak thus falsely of Victor, knowing well
that he cut off from communion Theodotus, the cobbler, <span
id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) the leader and father of this
God-denying apostasy, and the first to declare that Christ is mere man?
For if Victor agreed with their opinions, as their slander affirms, how
came he to cast out Theodotus, the inventor of this heresy?”

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p24"></span>7. So much in regard to Victor. His
bishopric lasted ten years, and Zephyrinus was appointed his successor
about the ninth year of the reign of Severus. <span
id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749) The author of the above-mentioned
book, concerning the founder of this heresy, narrates another event
which occurred in the time of Zephyrinus, using these words:

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p26"></span>8. “I will remind many of the brethren
of a fact which took place in our time, which, had it happened in Sodom,
might, I think, have proved a warning to them. There was a certain
confessor, Natalius, <span id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750) not long
ago, but in our own day.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p28"></span>9. This man was deceived at one time by
Asclepiodotus <span id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751) and another
Theodotus, <span id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752) a money-changer.
Both of them were disciples of Theodotus, the cobbler, who, as I have
said, was the first person excommunicated by Victor, bishop at that
time, on account of this sentiment, or rather senselessness. <span
id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753)

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p32"></span>10. Natalius was persuaded by them to
allow himself to be chosen bishop of this heresy with a salary, to be
paid by them, of one hundred and fifty denarii a month. <span
id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754)

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p34"></span>11. When he had thus connected himself
with them, he was warned oftentimes by the Lord through visions. For the
compassionate God and our Lord Jesus Christ was not willing that a
witness of his own sufferings, being cast out of the Church, should
perish.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p35"></span>12. But as he paid little regard to the
visions, because he was en<span id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span
id="iii.x.xxix-Page_248"></span>snared by the first position among them
and by that shameful covetousness which destroys a great many, he was
scourged by holy angels, and punished severely through the entire
night. <span id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755) Thereupon having risen
in the morning, he put on sackcloth and covered himself with ashes, and
with great haste and tears he fell down before Zephyrinus, the bishop,
rolling at the feet not only of the clergy, but also of the laity; and
he moved with his tears the compassionate Church of the merciful Christ.
And though he used much supplication, and showed the welts of the
stripes which he had received, yet scarcely was he taken back into
communion.”

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p37"></span>13. We will add from the same writer
some other extracts concerning them, which run as follows: <span
id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756)

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p39"></span>“They have treated the Divine
Scriptures recklessly and without fear. They have set aside the rule of
ancient faith; and Christ they have not known. They do not endeavor to
learn what the Divine Scriptures declare, but strive laboriously after
any form of syllogism which may be devised to sustain their impiety. And
if any one brings before them a passage of Divine Scripture, they see
whether a conjunctive or disjunctive form of syllogism can be made from
it.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p40"></span>14. And as being of the earth and
speaking of the earth, and as ignorant of him who cometh from above,
they forsake the holy writings of God to devote themselves to
geometry. <span id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757) Euclid is
laboriously measured <span id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) by some
of them; and Aristotle and Theophrastus are admired; and Galen, perhaps,
by some is even worshiped.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p43"></span>15. But that those who use the arts of
unbelievers for their heretical opinions and adulterate the simple faith
of the Divine Scriptures by the craft of the godless, are far from the
faith, what need is there to say? Therefore they have laid their hands
boldly upon the Divine Scriptures, alleging that they have corrected
them.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p44"></span>16. That I am not speaking falsely of
them in this matter, whoever wishes may learn. For if any one will
collect their respective copies, and compare them one with another, he
will find that they differ greatly.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p45"></span>17. Those of Asclepiades, <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) for example, do not agree with
those of Theodotus. And many of these can be obtained, because their
disciples have assiduously written the corrections, as they call them,
that is the corruptions, <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760) of
each of them. Again, those of Hermophilus <span
id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761) do not agree with these, and those
of Apollonides <span id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762) are not
consistent with themselves. For you can compare those prepared by them
at an earlier date with those which they corrupted later, and you will
find them widely different.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p50"></span>18. But how daring this offense is, it
is not likely that they themselves are ignorant. For either they do not
believe that the Divine Scriptures were spoken by the Holy Spirit, and
thus are unbelievers, or else they think themselves wiser than the Holy
Spirit, and in that case what else are they than demoniacs? For they
cannot deny the commission of the crime, since the copies have been
written by their own hands. For they did not receive such Scriptures
from their instructors, nor can they produce any copies from which they
were transcribed.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p51"></span>19. But some of them have not thought
it worth while to corrupt them, but simply deny the law and the
prophets, <span id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) and thus through
their lawless and impious teaching under pretense of grace, have sunk to
the lowest depths of perdition.”

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p53"></span>Let this suffice for these things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[246:1735](2010169.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p3"></span> This anonymous work against the heresy
of Artemon is no longer extant, and the only fragments of it which we
have are those preserved by Eusebius in this chapter. Theodoret (*Hær.
Fab.* II. 5) mentions the work, and says that it was directed against
the heresies of Theodotus and Artemon, and that it bore the name *Little
Labyrinth.* It is plain, from the fragments which Eusebius gives, that
it was written in Rome some little time before the middle of the third
century, probably not far from 230 or 240 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> The work is commonly ascribed to
Hippolytus, in favor of which may be urged both the time and the place
of its composition as well as some internal resemblance between it and
the *Philosophumena.* On the other hand, Photius (*Cod. 48*) ascribes to
Caius of Rome a work against Artemon, which may well be identical with
the anonymous work quoted in the present chapter. It is therefore
contended by some (e.g. by Salmon) that Caius was the author of the
work. It must be noted, however, that in the same connection Photius
ascribes another work to Caius which we know to have been written by
Hippolytus, and hence his testimony is rather in favor of Hippolytus
than Caius as the author of the work. On the other hand several
objections have been urged by Salmon against the Hippolytine authorship,
which, while not decisive, yet make it extremely doubtful. In view of
these facts, we must conclude that it is possible, but very improbable,
that Hippolytus wrote the work; that it is not impossible, though we are
quite without evidence for the supposition, that Caius wrote it; that it
is more likely that a work which even to Eusebius was anonymous, was
written by an unknown man, who must remain unknown to us also. The
extant fragments of the work are given, with notes, by Routh in his
*Rel. Sac.,* and an English translation in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,*
Vol. V. p. 601 sq., among the works of Caius. Although the work is said
by Eusebius to have been directed against the heresy of Artemon, he has
preserved only extracts relating to the Theodoti and their heresy. They
are described also by Hippolytus, both in his lost *Syntagma* (as we can
learn from Pseudo-Tertullian, Epiphanius, and Philaster) and in his
*Philosophumena* (VII. 23–24, and X. 19). Other ancient writers that
mention him know only what our anonymous author or Hippolytus reports.
It seems that the older Theodotus, a native of Byzantium, came to Rome
in the time of Eleutherus or Victor, and taught a species of
adoptionism, which reminds us somewhat of the Asia Minor Alogi, in whose
circle he may have been trained. Hippolytus informs us that he was
orthodox in his theology and cosmology, but that he was heretical in his
Christology. He did not deny Christ’s birth from a virgin (as the
Ebionites had done), but he did deny his divinity, teaching that he was
a mere man (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxix-p3.2"></span>ψιλὸς
ἄνθρωπος</span>), upon whom the Holy Spirit descended at the time of his
baptism, in consequence of which he became the Christ, received power to
fulfill his special mission and by his righteousness was raised above
all other men. The descent of the Holy Spirit, however, although raising
him to a very exalted position, did not make him divine; some of
Theodotus’ followers denying that he ever acquired divinity, others
believing that he acquired it by his resurrection. Theodotus was
excommunicated by Victor on account of his heretical Christology, but
gained a number of followers, and after his excommunication founded a
schismatical sect, which had a bishop Natalius, to whom a regular salary
was paid (see below, §10), and which continued under the leadership of
another Theodotus, a banker, and a certain Asclepiodotus, both of them
disciples of the first Theodotus, during the episcopate of Zephyrinus,
but seems soon to have disappeared, and to have exerted comparatively
little influence during its brief existence. Theodotus, the banker,
appears to have agreed substantially with the older Theodotus, but to
have indulged himself in speculations concerning Melchizedek,
pronouncing him to be a heavenly power still higher than Christ.
Epiphanius makes the second Theodotus the founder of a second party, and
gives his school the name of Melchizedekians, which appears in later
works on heresy, but there is no reason to suppose that there were two
separate parties.

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p4"></span>A few years later another attempt was
made in Rome to revive the old adoptionist Christology (essentially the
same as that represented by Hermas early in the second century), by a
certain Artemon, against whom the *Little Labyrinth,* quoted in this
chapter, was directed. It is common to connect Artemon and his followers
with the Theodotians; but, as Harnack remarks, it is plain that they did
not look upon themselves as the followers of the Theodoti (see below,
note 15). We cannot tell, however, in what respect their Christology
differed from that of the latter, for we know very little about them.
They at any rate agreed with the Theodotians in denying the divinity of
Christ. From the epistle of the synod of Antioch (quoted below, in Bk.
VII. chap. 30) we learn that Artemon was still living in the year 268,
or thereabouts. He seems, however to have accomplished little in Rome,
and to have dropped into comparative obscurity some time before this; at
least, we hear nothing of him during all these years. In the controversy
with Paul of Samosata he was called the father of the latter (see below
Bk. VII. chap. 30, §16), and thus acquired considerable celebrity in the
East, where his name became permanently connected with that of Paul as
one of the leading heretics. Whether Paul really learned his Christology
from Artemon we do not know, but that it closely resembled that of the
latter there can be no doubt. He really reproduced the old adoptionist
Christology of Hermas (as both the Theodotians and Artemon had done),
but modified it under the influence partly of Origen’s teachings, partly
of the Aristotelian method. For further particulars in regard to the
Theodoti and Artemon, see the remaining notes on this chapter. For an
admirable discussion of the whole subject, see Harnack’s
*Dogmengeschichte,* I. p. 573 sq. On the *Little Labyrinth,* see
especially the *Dict. of Christian Biog.* III. p. 98.

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[246:1736](2010169.htm#fr_1735) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p5"></span> On Paul of Samosata, see below, Bk.
VII. chap. 27, note 4.

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[246:1737](2010169.htm#fr_1736) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p7"></span> The Artemonites were certainly correct
in maintaining that the adoptionism which they held was, at least in its
essential principles, an ancient thing, and their opponents were wrong
in trying to deny it. It is the Christology which Hermas represents, and
early in the second century it was undoubtedly a widespread popular
belief. No one thought of questioning the orthodoxy of Hermas. The
Christology of the Theodotians and of Artemon was an innovation,
however, in so far as it attempted to formulate in scientific terms and
to treat philosophically what had hitherto been only a popular belief.
So soon as the logical conclusions were drawn, and its consequences to
the divinity of the Son were perceived, it began to be felt as heresy,
but not until then.

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[246:1738](2010169.htm#fr_1737) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p9"></span> On Victor, see above, chap. 22, note 1.
Victor is the thirteenth bishop if Cletus and Anencletus be reckoned as
one, otherwise the fourteenth. This is used by Salmon as an argument
against the Hippolytine authorship of the *Little Labyrinth,* for
Hippolytus reckoned Cletus and Anencletus as two bishops, and therefore
made Victor the fourteenth (see above, Bk. III. chap. 13, note 3).

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[246:1739](2010169.htm#fr_1738) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p10"></span> The dates of Zephyrinus’ episcopate
are to be gained by reckoning backward from that of Callistus, which is
shown in Bk. VI. chap. 21, note 3, to have begun in the year 217. A
comparison of the various sources shows that Zephyrinus was bishop
eighteen or nineteen years, which brings us back to the year 198 or 199
as the date of his accession. Eusebius says “about the ninth year of the
reign of Severus,” which according to the correct reckoning would be the
year 201, but according to his erroneous reckoning of the dates of the
emperors’ reigns (see the note already referred to) gives the year 200,
so that the agreement is reasonably close (see Lipsius’ *Chron. der röm.
Bischöfe,* p. 172 sq., and see above, Bk. V. chap. 22, note 1). In Bk.
IX. of his great work Hippolytus gives quite an account of Zephyrinus
and his successor, Callistus. The former is described as ignorant and
illiterate, a taker of bribes, an uninformed and shamefully corrupt man,
&c. How much of this is true and how much is due to prejudice, we cannot
tell. But it seems at least to be a fact that Zephyrinus was completely
under the influence of Callistus, as Hippolytus states. We learn from
the latter that Zephyrinus at least countenanced the heresy of
Patripassianism (at the opposite extreme from that of the Theodotians
and Artemon), if he did not directly teach it.

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[247:1740](2010169.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p12"></span> On Justin Martyr, see Bk. IV. chap.
11, note 20.

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[247:1741](2010169.htm#fr_1740) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p13"></span> On Miltiades, see above, chap. 17,
note 1.

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[247:1742](2010169.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p14"></span> On Tatian, see Bk. III. chap. 29. The
fact that Tatian is here spoken of with respect is urged by Salmon as an
argument against the Hippolytine authorship of this work, for Hippolytus
devotes two chapters of his *Philosophumena* (VIII. 9, X. 14) to the
heresy of Tatian.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[247:1743](2010169.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p15"></span> On Clement of Alexandria, see above,
chap. 11, note 1.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[247:1744](2010169.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p16.1"></span>θεολογεῖται ὁ χριστός</span>. Our author is
quite correct in making this statement. The apologists are agreed in
their acceptance of the Logos Christology of which they are the earliest
patristic exponents, and in the time of Clement of Alexandria it had
become, as yet in an undeveloped form, the commonly accepted doctrine of
the orthodox Church.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[247:1745](2010169.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p18"></span> On Irenæus, see Bk. IV. chap. 21, note
9.

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[247:1746](2010169.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p19"></span> On Melito, see Bk. IV. chap. 26, note
1.

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[247:1747](2010169.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p20"></span> Irenæus’ utterances on this subject
were epoch-making in the history of doctrine. No one before him had
emphasized so energetically and brought out so clearly the God-manhood
of Christ. His great significance in Christology is the emphasis which
he laid upon the unity of God and man in Christ,—a unity in which the
integrity both of the divine and of the human was preserved. Our author
is also doubtless correct in saying that Melito called Christ God and
man. If the two fragments from the *Discourse on the Soul and Body*, and
from the *Discourse on the Cross* (printed from the Syriac by Cureton,
in his *Spic. Syr.* p. 52 sq.), be genuine, as is quite probable (see
above, Bk. IV. chap. 26, note 1), we have clear indications that Melito
taught both the humanity and the deity of Christ (“when He was become
incarnate through the womb of the Virgin, and was born man.” “Inasmuch
as He was man, He needed food; still, inasmuch as He was God, He ceased
not to feed the universe”).

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[247:1748](2010169.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p21"></span> This passage is sometimes interpreted
as indicating that hymns written by the Christians themselves were sung
in the church of Rome at this time. But this is by no means implied. So
far as we are able to gather from our sources, nothing, except the
Psalms and New Testament hymns (such as the “Gloria in Excelsis,” the
“Magnificat,” the “Nunc Dimittis,” &c.), was as a rule, sung in public
worship before the fourth century (the practice which had sprung up in
the church of Antioch seems to have been exceptional; see Kraus, p.
673). Before the end of that century, however, the practice of singing
other hymns in the service of the Church had become common, both in the
East and West. On the other hand, the private use of hymns among the
Christians began very early. We need refer here only to Pliny’s epistle
to Trajan (translated above, in Bk. III. chap. 33, note 1); Clement of
Alexandria, *Strom.* VII. 7; Tertullian, *ad Uxor.* II. 8; Origen,
*Contra Cels.* VIII. 67; the epistle of Dionysius quoted below, in Bk.
VII. chap. 24, &c. Compare the article *Hymnen* in Kraus’
*Real-Encyclopädie der Christl. Alterthümer,* and the article *Hymns* in
Smith and Cheetham’s *Dict. of Christ. Antiquities.*

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[247:1749](2010169.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p23.1"></span>τὸν σκυτέα</span>: “cobbler,” or “worker in
leather.” On Theodotus, see above, note 1. As Harnack remarks, the
Artemonites must have known that Victor had excommunicated Theodotus,
and therefore, if they regarded themselves as his followers, it would
have been impossible to claim that all the Roman bishops, including
Victor, held their opinions. When to this is added the apparent effort
of our author to identify the Artemonites with the Theodotians, it
becomes clear that they must themselves have denied their connection
with them, though in what points they differed with them, we do not know
(see above, note 1; and cf. Harnack’s *Dogmengesch.* I. p. 583).

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[247:1750](2010169.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p25"></span> See above, note 5.

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[247:1751](2010169.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p27"></span> Of Natalius, we know only what is told
us in this passage. The suggestion of Valesius that he might be
identified with Cæcilius Natalis, the heathen who is represented as
converted by Octavius, in the *Octavius* of Minucius Felix, is quite
baseless.

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[247:1752](2010169.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p29.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p29.2"></span>Ασκληπιοδότου</span>, according to all the
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xxix-p29.3"></span>mss.</span> except
one, which reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p29.4"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p29.5"></span>Ασκληπι€δου</span>, and with which
Nicephorus and Theodoret agree. He is undoubtedly the same man that is
referred to in §17, below, where all the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p29.6"></span>mss.</span> unite in reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxix-p29.7"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxix-p29.8"></span>Ασκληπι€δου</span>. Of
this man we know only what is told us in this chapter. Theodoret (*Hær.
Fab.* II. 5) mentions him, but adds nothing new, while Hippolytus in his
*Philosophumena,* and apparently in his lost *Syntagma,* passes him by
without notice.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[247:1753](2010169.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p29.9"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p30"></span> On this second Theodotus, a
money-changer or banker (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p30.1"></span>τραπεζίτης</span>,) who is distinguished
from the first Theodotus by both our sources (Hippolytus and the *Little
Labyrinth* quoted here), see above, note 1.

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[247:1754](2010169.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p31"></span> The Greek contains a play of words at
this point: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p31.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p31.2"></span>πὶ ταύτῃ τῇ φρονήσει, μᾶλλον δὲ
ἀφροσύνῃ</span>.

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[247:1755](2010169.htm#fr_1754) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p33"></span> This is the earliest instance we have
of a salaried clergyman. The practice of paying salaries was followed
also by the Montanists, and brought great reproach upon them (see above,
chap. 18, note 8). A Roman denarius was equal to about seventeen cents,
so that Natalius’ monthly salary was a little over twenty-five dollars.

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[248:1756](2010169.htm#fr_1755) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p36"></span> It is not necessary to doubt the truth
of this report, if we substitute “muscular Christians” for “holy
angels.” As Stroth dryly remarks: “Eben kein löblich Geschäft für die
heiligen Engel; es werden aber ohne zweifel Engel mit guten starken
Knochen und Nerven gewesen sein.”

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[248:1757](2010169.htm#fr_1756) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p38"></span> The information which is given us here
in regard to the methods of the Theodotians is very interesting. What is
said in regard to their philosophical principles makes it evident that
they used the grammatical and critical mode of exegesis as opposed to
the prevalent allegorical mode. Nothing could seem more irreverent and
irreligious to the Church of that age than such a method of
interpretation, the method which we now recognize as the only true one.
They were, moreover, textual critics. They may have been rash in their
methods, but it is not necessary to suppose them dishonest in their
purposes. They seem to have looked upon the Scriptures as inspired as
truly as their opponents did, but they believed that radical criticism
was needed if the true reading of the originals was to be reached, while
their opponents were shocked at anything of the kind. That textual
criticism was necessary, even at that early day, is clear enough from
the words of Irenæus (quoted in chap. 20, above), and from the words of
Dionysius (quoted in Bk. IV. chap. 23), as well as from many other
sources. Finally, these men seem to have offended their opponents by the
use of dialectical methods in their treatment of theology. This is very
significant at that early date. It is indeed the earliest instance known
to us of that method which seemed entirely irreligious to the author of
the *Little Labyrinth,* but which less than a century later prevailed in
the Antiochian school, and for a large part of the Middle Ages ruled the
whole Church.

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[248:1758](2010169.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p41"></span> The author makes a play here upon the
word *earth,* which cannot be reproduced in a translation. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxix-p41.1"></span>γεωμετρίαν</span>
(literally, “*earth*-measure”) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p41.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p41.3"></span>πιτηδεύουσιν, ὡσὰν ἐκ τῆς γῆς ὄντες καὶ ἐκ
τῆς γῆς λαλοῦντες</span>

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[248:1759](2010169.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p41.4"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p42.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p42.2"></span>Ευκλείδης</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p42.3"></span>γεωμετρεῖται</span>: literally, *Euclid is
geometrized.*

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[248:1760](2010169.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p46"></span> All the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p46.1"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p46.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p46.3"></span>Ασκληπι€δου</span>, which is adopted by
most of the editors. Rufinus and Nicephorus, however, followed by a few
editors, among them Heinichen, read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p46.4"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p46.5"></span>Ασκληπιοδότου</span> (see above, note 18).

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[248:1761](2010169.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p46.6"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p47.1"></span>κατωρθωμένα, τουτέστιν ἠφανισμένα</span>

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[248:1762](2010169.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p48"></span> Of this Hermophilus we know nothing
more.

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[248:1763](2010169.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p49.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p49.2"></span>Απολλωνίδου</span>, which is the reading of
one ancient <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p49.3"></span>ms.</span>, of Rufinus, Theodoret, and
Nicephorus, and which is adopted by Stroth, Burton, Heinichen, and
Closs. The majority of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p49.4"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p49.5"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxix-p49.6"></span>Απολλωνίου</span>, while a few read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxix-p49.7"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxix-p49.8"></span>Απολλωνι€δου</span>

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[248:1764](2010169.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="iii.x.xxix-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxix-p52"></span> These persons can hardly have rejected
the Law and the Prophets utterly,—at least, no hint is given us that
they maintained a fundamental difference between the God of the Old and
the God of the New Testament, as Marcion did,—nor would such wholesale
rejection be natural for critics such as they were. It is more likely
that they simply, as many of the Gnostics did, emphasized the merely
relative authority of the Old Testament, and that they applied
historical criticism to it, distinguishing between its various parts in
the matter of authority. Such action is just what we should expect from
members of a critical school like that of Theodotus, and such criticism
in its extremest form would naturally seem to an orthodox Catholic the
same as throwing over the whole book. Cf. Harnack, *Dogmengeschicte,* p.
579 and p. 488 sqq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI](2010170)
