[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010516)  [Next](2010518) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.lxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.lxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.lxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXXII</span>.—*The Excess of his
Pious Concern caused him to shed Tears; and his Intended Journey to the
East was postponed because of These Things.*

<span id="iv.vi.ii.lxxii-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.lxxii-p2.1"></span>Restore</span> me then my quiet days,
and untroubled nights, that the joy of undimmed light, the delight of a
tranquil life, may henceforth be my portion. Else must I needs mourn,
with constant tears, nor shall I be able to pass the residue of my days
in peace. For while the people of God, whose fellow-servant I am, are
thus divided amongst themselves by an unreasonable and pernicious spirit
of contention, how is it possible that I shall be able to maintain
tranquillity of mind? And I will give you a proof how great my sorrow
has been on this behalf. Not long since I had visited Nicomedia, and
intended forthwith to proceed from that city to the East. It was while I
was hastening towards you, and had already accomplished the greater part
of the distance, that the news of this matter reversed my plan, that I
might not be compelled to see with my own eyes that which I felt myself
scarcely able even to hear. Open then for me henceforward by your unity
of judgment that road to the regions of the East which your dissensions
have closed against me, and permit me speedily to see yourselves and all
other peoples rejoicing together, and render due acknowledgment to God
in the language of praise and thanksgiving for the restoration of
general concord and liberty to all.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIII](2010518)
