[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010140)  [Next](2010142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.i"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="iii.x.i-Page_211"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.x.i-p1.1"></span>Book V.</span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.i-p2.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.i-p3.1"></span>Soter</span>, <span
id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344) bishop of the church of Rome, died
after an episcopate of eight years, and was succeeded by
Eleutherus, <span id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345) the twelfth from
the apostles. In the seventeenth year of the Emperor Antoninus
Verus, <span id="fr_1346"></span>[1347](#fn_1346) the persecution of our
people was rekindled more fiercely in certain districts on account of an
insurrection of the masses in the cities; and judging by the number in a
single nation, myriads suffered martyrdom throughout the world. A record
of this was written for posterity, and in truth it is worthy of
perpetual remembrance.

<span id="iii.x.i-p7"></span>2. A full account, containing the most
reliable information on the subject, is given in our Collection of
Martyrdoms, <span id="fr_1347"></span>[1348](#fn_1347) which constitutes
a narrative instructive as well as historical. I will repeat here such
portions of this account as may be needful for the present purpose.

<span id="iii.x.i-p9"></span>3. Other writers of history record the
victories of war and trophies won from enemies, the skill of generals,
and the manly bravery of soldiers, defiled with blood and with
innumerable slaughters for the sake of children and country and other
possessions.

<span id="iii.x.i-p10"></span>4. But our narrative of the government of
God <span id="fr_1348"></span>[1349](#fn_1348) will record in
ineffaceable letters the most peaceful wars waged in behalf of the peace
of the soul, and will tell of men doing brave deeds for truth rather
than country, and for piety rather than dearest friends. It will hand
down to imperishable remembrance the discipline and the much-tried
fortitude of the athletes of religion, the trophies won from demons, the
victories over invisible enemies, and the crowns placed upon all their
heads.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[211:1345](2010141.htm#fr_1344) <span
id="iii.x.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p4"></span> On Soter, see above, Bk. IV. chap. 19,
note 2.

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[211:1346](2010141.htm#fr_1345) <span
id="iii.x.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p5"></span> Eusebius in his *Chronicle* gives the date
of Eleutherus’ accession as the seventeenth year of Marcus Aurelius (177
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.x.i-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>), and puts
his death into the reign of Pertinax (192), while in chap. 22 of the
present book he places his death in the tenth year of Commodus (189).
Most of our authorities agree in assigning fifteen years to his
episcopate, and this may be accepted as undoubtedly correct. Most of
them, moreover, agree with chap. 22 of this book, in assigning his death
to the tenth year of Commodus, and this too may be accepted as accurate.
But with these two data we are obliged to push his accession back into
the year 174 (or 175), which is accepted by Lipsius (see his *Chron. der
röm. Bischöfe,* p. 184 sq.). We must therefore suppose that he became
bishop some two years before the outbreak of the persecution referred to
just below, in the fourteenth or fifteenth year of Marcus Aurelius. In
the Armenian version of the *Chron.* Eleutherus is called the thirteenth
bishop of Rome (see above, Bk. IV. chap. 19, note 5), but this is a
mistake, as pointed out in the note referred to. Eleutherus is mentioned
in Bk. IV, chap. 11, in connection with Hegesippus, and also in Bk. IV.
chap. 22, by Hegesippus himself. He is chiefly interesting because of
his connection with Irenæus and the Gallican martyrs (see chap. 4,
below), and his relation to the Montanistic controversy (see chap. 3).
Bede, in his *Hist. Eccles.,* chap. 4, connects Eleutherus with the
origin of British Christianity, but the tradition is quite groundless.
One of the decretals and a spurious epistle are falsely ascribed to him.

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[211:1347](2010141.htm#fr_1346) <span
id="iii.x.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p6"></span> i.e., the seventeenth year of the reign of
Marcus Aurelius, <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.i-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 177 (upon Eusebius’ confusion of
Marcus Aurelius with Lucius Verus, see below, p. 390, note). In the
*Chron.* the persecution at Lyons and Vienne is associated with the
seventh year of Marcus Aurelius (167), and consequently some (e.g.
Blondellus, Stroth, and Jachmann), have maintained that the notice in
the present passage is incorrect, and Jachmann has attacked Eusebius
very severely for the supposed error. The truth is, however, that the
notice in the *Chron.* (in the Armenian, which represents the original
form more closely than Jenner’s version does) is not placed opposite the
seventh year of Marcus Aurelius (as the notices in the *Chron.* commonly
are), but is placed after it, and grouped with the notice of Polycarp’s
martyrdom, which occurred, not in 167, but in 155 or 156 (see above, Bk.
IV. chap. 15, note 2). It would seem, as remarked by Lightfoot
(*Ignatius,* I. p. 630), that Eusebius simply connected together the
martyrdoms which he supposed occurred about this time, without intending
to imply that they all took place in the same year. Similar groupings of
kindred events which occurred at various times during the reign of an
emperor are quite common in the *Chron.* (cf. the notices of martyrdoms
under Trajan and of apologies and rescripts under Hadrian). Over against
the distinct statement of the history, therefore, in the present
instance, the notice in the *Chron.* is of no weight. Moreover, it is
clear from the present passage that Eusebius had strong grounds for
putting the persecution into the time of Eleutherus, and the letter sent
by the confessors to Eleutherus (as recorded below in chap. 4) gives us
also good reason for putting the persecution into the time of his
episcopate. But Eleutherus cannot have become bishop before 174 (see
Lipsius’ *Chron. der röm. Bischöfe,* p. 184 sq., and note 2, above).
There is no reason, therefore, for doubting the date given here by
Eusebius.

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[211:1348](2010141.htm#fr_1347) <span
id="iii.x.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p8"></span> All the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.i-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.i-p8.2"></span>μαρτύρων</span>, but I have followed Valesius
(in his notes) and Heinichen in reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.i-p8.3"></span>μαρτυρίων</span>, which is supported by the
version of Rufinus (*de singulorum martyriis*), and which is the word
used by Eusebius in all his other references to the work (Bk. IV. chap.
15 and Bk. V. chaps. 4 and 21), and is in fact the proper word to be
employed after <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.i-p8.4"></span>συναγωγή</span>, “collection.” We speak
correctly of a “collection of martyrdoms,” not of a “collection of
martyrs,” and I cannot believe that Eusebius, in referring to a work of
his own, used the wrong word in the present case. Upon the work itself,
see the Prolegomena, p. 30, of this volume.

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[211:1349](2010141.htm#fr_1348) <span
id="iii.x.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.i-p11.1"></span>τοῦ κατὰ θεὸν πολιτεύματος</span>, with the
majority of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.i-p11.2"></span>mss.</span> supported by Rufinus. Some <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.x.i-p11.3"></span>mss.</span>, followed by
Stroth, Burton, and Schwegler, read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.i-p11.4"></span>καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.i-p11.5"></span>κατὰ θεὸν</span> (see
Heinichen’s note *in loco*). Christophorsonus translates *divinam
vivendi rationem,* which is approved by Heinichen. But the contrast
drawn seems to be rather between earthly kingdoms, or governments, and
the kingdom, or government, of God; and I have, therefore, preferred to
give <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.i-p11.6"></span>πολίτευμα</span> its ordinary meaning, as is
done by Valesius (*divinæ reipublicæ*), Stroth (*Republik Gottes*), and
Closs (*Staates Gottes*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](2010142)
