[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010181)  [Next](2010183) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—</span>*Serapion and his Extant
Works.*

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is probable that others have
preserved other memorials of Serapion’s <span
id="fr_1830"></span>[1831](#fn_1830) literary industry, <span
id="fr_1831"></span>[1832](#fn_1831) but there have reached us only
those addressed to a certain Domninus, who, in the time of persecution,
fell away from faith in Christ to the Jewish will-worship; <span
id="fr_1832"></span>[1833](#fn_1832) and those addressed <span
id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span id="iii.xi.xii-Page_258"></span>to
Pontius and Caricus, <span id="fr_1833"></span>[1834](#fn_1833)
ecclesiastical men, and other letters to different persons, and still
another work composed by him on the so-called Gospel of Peter. <span
id="fr_1834"></span>[1835](#fn_1834)

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p8"></span>2. He wrote this last to refute the
falsehoods which that Gospel contained, on account of some in the parish
of Rhossus <span id="fr_1835"></span>[1836](#fn_1835) who had been led
astray by it into heterodox notions. It may be well to give some brief
extracts from his work, showing his opinion of the book. He writes as
follows:

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p10"></span>3. “For we, brethren, receive both
Peter and the other apostles as Christ; but we reject intelligently the
writings falsely ascribed to them, knowing that such were not handed
down to us.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p11"></span>4. When I visited you I supposed that
all of you held the true faith, and as I had not read the Gospel which
they put forward under the name of Peter, I said, If this is the only
thing which occasions dispute among you, let it be read. But now having
learned, from what has been told me, that their mind was involved in
some heresy, I will hasten to come to you again. Therefore, brethren,
expect me shortly.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p12"></span>5. But you will learn, brethren, from
what has been written to you, that we perceived the nature of the heresy
of Marcianus, <span id="fr_1836"></span>[1837](#fn_1836) and that, not
understanding what he was saying, he contradicted himself.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p14"></span>6. For having obtained this Gospel from
others who had studied it diligently, namely, from the successors of
those who first used it, whom we call Docetæ <span
id="fr_1837"></span>[1838](#fn_1837) (for most of their opinions are
connected with the teaching of that school <span
id="fr_1838"></span>[1839](#fn_1838) ) we have been able to read it
through, and we find many things in accordance with the true doctrine of
the Saviour, but some things added to that doctrine, which we have
pointed out for you farther on.” So much in regard to Serapion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1830"></span>[257:1831](2010182.htm#fr_1830) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p3"></span> On Serapion, see Bk. V. chap. 19, note
1.

<span id="fn_1831"></span>[257:1832](2010182.htm#fr_1831) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p4"></span> The Greek reads: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p4.1"></span>τοῦ δὲ Σαραπίωνος τῆς
περὶ λόγους ἀσκήσεως καὶ ἄλλα μὲν εἰκὸς σώζεσθαι παρ᾽ ἐτέροις
ὑπομνήματα</span>

<span id="fn_1832"></span>[257:1833](2010182.htm#fr_1832) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p5"></span> Of this Domninus we know only what is
told us here. It is suggested by Daniell (in the *Dict. of Christ.
Biog.* IV. 630) that this shows that the prohibition uttered by Severus
against the Jews “must have been soon relaxed, if it ever was enforced.”
But in regard to this it must be said, in the first place, that Severus’
decree was not levelled against the Jews, but only against conversion to
Judaism,—against the *fieri,* not the *esse, Judæos.* The object of the
edict was not to disturb the Jews in the exercise of their national
faith, but to prevent their proselyting among the non-Jewish residents
of the empire. If Domninus, therefore, fell from Christianity into
Judaism on account of the persecution, it seems highly probable that he
was simply a converted Jew, who gave up now, in order to avoid
persecution, his new faith, and again practised the religion of his
fathers. Nothing, therefore, can be concluded from Domninus’ case as to
the strictness with which Severus’ law was carried out, even if we
suppose Domninus to have fallen from Christianity into Judaism. But it
must be remarked, in the second place, that it is by no means certain
that Eusebius means to say that Domninus fell into Judaism, or became a
Jew. He is said to have fallen into “Jewish will-worship” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p5.2"></span>κπεπτωκότα ἐπὶ τὴν
᾽Ιουδαϊκὴν ἐθελοθρησκείαν</span>). The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p5.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p5.4"></span>θελοθρησκεία</span> occurs for the first
time in [Col. ii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)<span
id="iii.xi.xii-p5.5"></span>, and means there an “arbitrary,
self-imposed worship” (Ellicott), or a worship which one “affects”
(Cremer). The word is used there in connection with the Oriental
theosophic and Judaistic errors which were creeping into the churches of
Asia Minor at the time the epistle was written, and it is quite possible
that the word may be used in the present case in reference to the same
class of errors. We know that these theosophizing and Judaizing
tendencies continued to exert considerable influence in Asia Minor and
Syria during the early centuries, and that the Ebionites and the
Elcesaites were not the only ones affected by them (see Harnack,
*Dogmengesch.* I. 218 sq.). The lapse of any one into Ebionism, or into
a Judaizing Gnosticism, or similar form of heresy—a lapse which cannot
have been at all uncommon among the fanatical Phrygians and other
peoples of that section—might well be called a lapse into “Jewish
will-worship.” We do not know where Domninus lived, but it is not
improbable that Asia Minor was his home, and that he may have fallen
under the influence of Montanism as well as of Ebionism and Judaizing
Gnosticism. I suggest the possibility that his lapse was into heresy
rather than into Judaism pure and simple, for the reason that it is
easier, on that ground, to explain the fact that Serapion addressed a
work to him. He is known to us only as an opponent of heresy, and it may
be that Domninus’ lapse gave him an opportunity to attack the heretical
notions of these Ebionites, or other Judaizing heretics, as he had
attacked the Montanists. It seems to the writer, also, that it is thus
easier to explain the complex phrase used, which seems to imply
something different from Judaism pure and simple.

<span id="fn_1833"></span>[258:1834](2010182.htm#fr_1833) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p5.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p6"></span> See Bk. V. chap. 19, note 4.

<span id="fn_1834"></span>[258:1835](2010182.htm#fr_1834) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p7"></span> On the so-called “Gospel of Peter,” see
Bk. III. chap. 3, note 7.

<span id="fn_1835"></span>[258:1836](2010182.htm#fr_1835) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p9"></span> Rhossus, or Rhosus, was a city of
Syria, lying on the Gulf of Issus, a little to the northwest of Antioch.

<span id="fn_1836"></span>[258:1837](2010182.htm#fr_1836) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p13"></span> This Marcianus is an otherwise unknown
personage, unless we are to identify him, as Salmon suggests is
possible, with Marcion. The suggestion is attractive, and the reference
to *Docetæ* gives it a show of probability. But there are serious
objections to be urged against it. In the first place, the form of the
name, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p13.1"></span>Μαρκιανός</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p13.2"></span>Μαρκίων</span>. The two
names are by no means identical. Still, according to Harnack, we have
more than once <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p13.3"></span>Μαρκιανοί</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p13.4"></span>Μαρκιανισταί</span> for
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p13.5"></span>Μαρκιωνισταί</span> (see his *Quellenkritik
d. Gesch. d. Gnosticismus,* p. 31 sqq.). But again, how can Marcion have
used, or his name been in any way connected with, a Gospel of *Peter?*
Finally, the impression left by this passage is that “Marcianus” was a
man still living, or at any rate alive shortly before Serapion wrote,
for the latter seems only recently to have learned what his doctrines
were. He certainly cannot have been so ignorant of the teachings of the
great “heresiarch” Marcion. We must, in fact, regard the identification
as improbable.

<span id="fn_1837"></span>[258:1838](2010182.htm#fr_1837) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p15"></span> By Docetism we understand the doctrine
that Christ had no true body, but only an apparent one. The word is
derived from <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p15.1"></span>δοκέω</span>, “to seem or appear.” The
belief is as old as the first century (cf. <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p15.2"></span>[1 John iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#002)<span id="iii.xi.xii-p15.3"></span>;
[2 John 7](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xi.xii-p15.4"></span>), and was a favorite one with most of the
Gnostic sects. The name *Docetæ,* however, as a general appellation for
all those holding this opinion, seems to have been used first by
Theodoret (*Ep.* 82). But the term was employed to designate a
particular sect before the end of the second century; thus Clement of
Alexandria speaks of them in *Strom.* VII. 17, and Hippolytus (*Phil.*
VIII. 8. 4, and X. 12; *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Amer. ed.), and it is
evidently this particular sect to which Serapion refers here. An
examination of Hippolytus’ account shows that these *Docetæ* did not
hold what we call Docetic ideas of Christ’s body; in fact, Hippolytus
says expressly that they taught that Christ was born, and had a true
body from the Virgin (see *Phil.* VIII. 3). How the sect came to adopt
the name of *Docetæ* we cannot tell. They seem to have disappeared
entirely before the fourth century, for no mention of them is found in
Epiphanius and other later heresiologists. As was remarked above,
Theodoret uses the term in a general sense and not as the appellation of
a particular sect, and this became the common usage, and is still.
Whether there was anything in the teaching of the sect to suggest the
belief that Christ had only an apparent body, and thus to lead to the
use of their specific name for all who held that view, or whether the
general use of the name *Docetæ* arose quite independently of the sect
name, we do not know. The latter seems more probable. The *Docetæ*
referred to by Hippolytus being a purely Gnostic sect with a belief in
the reality of Christ’s body, we have no reason to conclude that the
“Gospel of Peter” contained what we call Docetic teaching. The
description which Serapion gives of the gospel fits quite well a work
containing some such Gnostic speculations as Hippolytus describes, and
thus adding to the Gospel narrative rather than denying the truth of it
in any part. He could hardly have spoken as he did of a work which
denied the reality of Christ’s body. See, on the general subject,
Salmon’s articles *Docetæ* and *Docetism* in the *Dict. of Christ.
Biog.*

<span id="fn_1838"></span>[258:1839](2010182.htm#fr_1838) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p16"></span> The interpretation of these last two
clauses is beset with difficulty. The Greek reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p16.1"></span>τουτέστι παρὰ τῶν
διαδόχων τῶν καταρξαμένων αὐτοῦ, οὓς Δοκητὰς καλοῦμεν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p16.2"></span>, (</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p16.3"></span>τὰ γὰρ φρονήματα τὰ
πλείονα ἐκείνων ἐστὶ τῆς διδασκαλίας</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p16.4"></span>),</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p16.5"></span>κ.τ.λ</span>. The words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p16.6"></span>τῶν καταρξαμένων
αὐτοῦ</span> are usually translated “who preceded him,” or “who led the
way before him”; but the phrase hardly seems to admit of this
interpretation, and moreover the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p16.7"></span>αὐτοῦ</span> seems to refer not to
Marcianus, whose name occurs some lines back, but to the gospel which
has just been mentioned. There is a difficulty also in regard to the
reference of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p16.8"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p16.9"></span>κείνων</span>, which is commonly connected
with the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p16.10"></span>τῆς διδασκαλίας</span>, but which seems to
belong rather with the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p16.11"></span>φρονήματα</span> and to refer to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p16.12"></span>διαδοχῶν τῶν
καταρξαμένων</span>. It thus seems necessary to define the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xii-p16.13"></span>τῆς διδασκαλίας</span>
more closely, and we therefore venture, with Closs, to insert the words
“of that school,” referring to the *Docetæ* just mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](2010183)
