[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010134)  [Next](2010136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.—</span>*Melito and the
Circumstances which he records.*

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p2.1"></span>In</span> those days also Melito, <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275) bishop of the parish in Sardis, and
Apolinarius, <span id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276) bishop of
Hierapolis, enjoyed great distinction. Each of them on his own part
addressed apologies in behalf of the faith to the above-mentioned
emperor <span id="fr_1277"></span>[1278](#fn_1277) of the Romans who was
reigning at that time.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p10"></span>2. The following works of these
writers have come to our knowledge. Of Melito, <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278) the two books On the
Passover, <span id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279) and <span
id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span id="iii.ix.xxvi-Page_204"></span>one
On the Conduct of Life and the Prophets, <span
id="fr_1280"></span>[1281](#fn_1280) the discourse On the Church, <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281) and one On the Lord’s Day, <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282) still further one On the Faith of
Man, <span id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283) and one On his
Creation, <span id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284) another also On the
Obedience of Faith, and one On the Senses; <span
id="fr_1285"></span>[1286](#fn_1285) besides these the work On the Soul
and Body, <span id="fr_1286"></span>[1287](#fn_1286) and that On
Baptism, <span id="fr_1287"></span>[1288](#fn_1287) and the one On
Truth, <span id="fr_1288"></span>[1289](#fn_1288) and On the Creation
and Generation of Christ; <span id="fr_1289"></span>[1290](#fn_1289) his
discourse also On Prophecy, <span id="fr_1290"></span>[1291](#fn_1290)
and that On Hospitality; <span id="fr_1291"></span>[1292](#fn_1291)
still further, The Key, <span id="fr_1292"></span>[1293](#fn_1292) and
the books On the Devil and the Apocalypse of John, <span
id="fr_1293"></span>[1294](#fn_1293) and the work On the Corporeality of
God, <span id="fr_1294"></span>[1295](#fn_1294) and finally the book
ad<span id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-Page_205"></span>dressed to Antoninus. <span
id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295)

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p30"></span>3. In the books On the Passover he
indicates the time at which he wrote, beginning with these words: “While
Servilius Paulus was proconsul of Asia, at the time when Sagaris
suffered martyrdom, there arose in Laodicea a great strife concerning
the Passover, which fell according to rule in those days; and these were
written.” <span id="fr_1296"></span>[1297](#fn_1296)

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p32"></span>4. And Clement of Alexandria refers to
this work in his own discourse On the Passover, <span
id="fr_1297"></span>[1298](#fn_1297) which, he says, he wrote on
occasion of Melito’s work.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p34"></span>5. But in his book addressed to the
emperor he records that the following events happened to us under him:
“For, what never before happened, <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[1299](#fn_1298) the race of the pious is now
suffering persecution, being driven about in Asia by new decrees. For
the shameless informers and coveters of the property of others, taking
occasion from the decrees, openly carry on robbery night and day,
despoiling those who are guilty of no wrong.” And a little further on he
says: “If these things are done by thy command, well and good. For a
just ruler will never take unjust measures; and we indeed gladly accept
the honor of such a death.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p36"></span>6. But this request alone we present
to thee, that thou wouldst thyself first examine the authors of such
strife, and justly judge whether they be worthy of death and punishment,
or of safety and quiet. But if, on the other hand, this counsel and this
new decree, which is not fit to be executed even against barbarian
enemies, be not from thee, much more do we beseech thee not to leave us
exposed to such lawless plundering by the populace.”

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p37"></span>7. Again he adds the following: <span
id="fr_1299"></span>[1300](#fn_1299) “For our philosophy formerly
flourished among the Barbarians; but having sprung up among the nations
under thy rule, during the great reign of thy ancestor Augustus, it
became to thine empire especially a blessing of auspicious omen. For
from that time the power of the Romans has grown in greatness and
splendor. To this power thou hast succeeded, as the desired
possessor, <span id="fr_1300"></span>[1301](#fn_1300) and such shalt
thou continue with thy son, if thou guardest the philosophy which grew
up with the empire and which came into existence with Augustus; that
philosophy which thy ancestors also honored along with the other
religions.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p40"></span>8. And a most convincing proof that
our doctrine flourished for the good of an empire happily begun, is
this—that there has no evil happened since Augustus’ reign, but that, on
the contrary, all things have been splendid and glorious, in accordance
with the prayers of all.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p41"></span>9. Nero and Domitian, alone, persuaded
by certain calumniators, have wished to slander our doctrine, and from
them it has come to pass that the falsehood <span
id="fr_1301"></span>[1302](#fn_1301) has been <span id="page_206">p.
206</span> <span id="iii.ix.xxvi-Page_206"></span>handed down, in
consequence of an unreasonable practice which prevails of bringing
slanderous accusations against the Christians. <span
id="fr_1302"></span>[1303](#fn_1302)

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p44"></span>10. But thy pious fathers corrected
their ignorance, having frequently rebuked in writing <span
id="fr_1303"></span>[1304](#fn_1303) many who dared to attempt new
measures against them. Among them thy grandfather Adrian appears to have
written to many others, and also to Fundanus, <span
id="fr_1304"></span>[1305](#fn_1304) the proconsul and governor of Asia.
And thy father, when thou also wast ruling with him, wrote to the
cities, forbidding them to take any new measures against us; among the
rest to the Larissæans, to the Thessalonians, to the Athenians, and to
all the Greeks. <span id="fr_1305"></span>[1306](#fn_1305)

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p48"></span>11. And as for thee,—since thy
opinions respecting the Christians <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[1307](#fn_1306) are the same as theirs, and indeed
much more benevolent and philosophic,—we are the more persuaded that
thou wilt do all that we ask of thee.” These words are found in the
above-mentioned work.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p50"></span>12. But in the Extracts <span
id="fr_1307"></span>[1308](#fn_1307) made by him the same writer gives
at the beginning of the introduction a catalogue of the acknowledged
books of the Old Testament, which it is necessary to quote at this
point. He writes as follows:

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p53"></span>13. “Melito to his brother
Onesimus, <span id="fr_1308"></span>[1309](#fn_1308) greeting: Since
thou hast often, in thy zeal for the word, expressed a wish to have
extracts made from the Law and the Prophets concerning the Saviour and
concerning our entire faith, and hast also desired to have an accurate
statement of the ancient book, as regards their number and their order,
I have endeavored to perform the task, knowing thy zeal for the faith,
and thy desire to gain information in regard to the word, and knowing
that thou, in thy yearning after God, esteemest these things above all
else, struggling to attain eternal salvation.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p55"></span>14. Accordingly when I went East and
came to the place where these things were preached and done, I learned
accurately the books of the Old Testament, and send them to thee as
written below. Their names are as follows: Of Moses, five books:
Genesis, Exodus, Numbers, Leviticus, <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[1310](#fn_1309) Deuteronomy; Jesus Nave, Judges,
Ruth; of Kings, four books; of Chronicles, two; the Psalms of
David, <span id="fr_1310"></span>[1311](#fn_1310) the Proverbs of
Solomon, Wisdom also, <span id="fr_1311"></span>[1312](#fn_1311)
Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs, Job; of Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah; of the
twelve prophets, one book <span id="fr_1312"></span>[1313](#fn_1312) ;
Daniel, Ezekiel, Esdras. <span id="fr_1313"></span>[1314](#fn_1313) From
which also I have made the extracts, dividing them into six books.” Such
are the words of Melito.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[203:1276](2010135.htm#fr_1275) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p3"></span> The first extant notice of Melito,
bishop of Sardis, is found in the letter addressed by Polycrates to
Bishop Victor of Rome (c. 190–202 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>) in support of the
Quartodeciman practice of the Asia Minor churches. A fragment of this
letter is given by Eusebius in Bk. V. chap. 24, and from it we learn
that Melito also favored the Quartodeciman practice, that he was a man
whose walk and conversation were altogether under the influence of the
Holy Spirit, and that he was buried at Sardis. Polycrates in this
fragment calls Melito a eunuch. Whether the word is to be understood in
its literal sense or is to be taken as meaning simply that Melito lived
in “virgin continence” is disputed. In favor of the latter
interpretation may be urged the fact that the Greek word and its Latin
equivalent were very commonly used by the Fathers in this figurative
sense, e.g. by Athenagoras, by Tertullian, by Clement of Alexandria, by
Cassianus (whose work on continence bore the title <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p3.2"></span>περὶ ἐγκρατείας, ἢ περὶ
εὐνουχίας</span>), by Jerome, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Gregory
Nazianzen, &c. (see Smith and Wace’s *Dict. of Christ. Biog.,* article
*Melito,* and Suicer’s *Thesaurus*). On the other hand, such continence
cannot have been a rare thing in Asia Minor in the time of Polycrates,
and the fact that Melito is called specifically “the eunuch” looks
peculiar if nothing more than that is meant by it. The case of Origen,
who made himself a eunuch for the sake of preserving his chastity, at
once occurs to us in this connection (see Renan, *L’eglise chret.* p.
436, and compare Justin Martyr’s *Apol.* I. 29). The canonical rule that
no such eunuch could hold clerical office came later, and hence the fact
that Melito was a bishop cannot be urged against the literal
interpretation of the word here. Polycrates’ meaning hardly admits of an
absolute decision, but at least it cannot be looked upon as it is by
most historians as certain that he uses the word here in its figurative
sense.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p4"></span>Polycrates says nothing of the fact
that Melito was a writer, but we learn from this chapter (§4), and from
Bk. VI. chap. 13, that Clement of Alexandria, in a lost work, mentioned
his writings and even wrote a work in reply to one of his (see below,
note 23). According to the present chapter he was a very prolific
writer, and that he was a man of marked talent is clear from Jerome’s
words in his *de vir. ill.* chap. 24 (where he refers to Tertullian’s
lost work, *de Ecstasi*): *Hujus* \[i.e. *Melitonis*\] *elegans et
declamatorium ingenium Tertullianus in septem libris, quos scripsit
adversus ecclesiam pro Montano, cavillatur, dicens eum a plerisque
nostrorum prophetam putari.* In spite of the fact that Tertullian
satirized Melito’s talent, he nevertheless was greatly influenced by his
writings and owed much to them (see the points of contact between the
two men given by Harnack, p. 250 sqq.). The statement that he was
regarded by many as a prophet accords well with Polycrates’ description
of him referred to above. The indications all point to the fact that
Melito was decidedly ascetic in his tendencies, and that he had a great
deal in common with the spirit which gave rise to Montanism and even
made Tertullian a Montanist, and yet at the same time he opposed
Montanism, and is therefore spoken of slightingly by Tertullian. His
position, so similar to that of the Montanists, was not in favor with
the orthodox theologians of the third century, and this helps to explain
why, although he was such a prolific and talented writer, and although
he remained orthodox, he nevertheless passed almost entirely out of the
memory of the Church of the third and following centuries. To this is to
be added the fact that Melito was a chiliast; and the teachings of the
Montanists brought such disrepute upon chiliasm that the Fathers of the
third and following centuries did not show much fondness for those who
held or had held these views. Very few notices of Melito’s works are
found among the Fathers, and none of those works is to-day extant.
Eusebius is the first to give us an idea of the number and variety of
his writings, and he does little more than mention the titles, a fact to
be explained only by his lack of sympathy with Melito’s views.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p5"></span>The time at which Melito lived is
indicated with sufficient exactness by the fact that he wrote his
*Apology* during the reign of Marcus Aurelius, but after the death of
his brother Lucius, i.e. after 169 (see below, note 21); and that when
Polycrates wrote his epistle to Victor of Rome, he had been dead already
some years. It is possible (as held by Piper, Otto, and others) that his
*Apology* was his last work, for Eusebius mentions it last in his list.
At the same time, it is quite as possible that Eusebius enumerates
Melito’s works simply in the order in which he found them arranged in
the library of Cæsarea, where he had perhaps seen them. Of the dates of
his episcopacy, and of his predecessors and successors in the see of
Sardis, we know nothing.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6"></span>In addition to the works mentioned in
this chapter by Eusebius, who does not pretend to give a full list, we
find in Anastasius Sinaita’s *Hodegos seu dux viæ c. aceph.* fragments
from two other works entitled <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6.1"></span>εἰς τὸ π€θος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6.2"></span>περὶ σαρκώσεως
χριστοῦ</span> (the latter directed against Marcion), which cannot be
identified with any mentioned by Eusebius (see Harnack, I. 1, p. 254).
The *Codex Nitriacus Musei Britannici* 12,156 contains four fragments
ascribed to Melito, of which the first belongs undoubtedly to his
genuine work <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6.3"></span>περὶ
ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος</span>, which is mentioned in this chapter by
Eusebius. The second purports to be taken from a work, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6.4"></span>περὶ σταυροῦ</span>, of
which we hear nowhere else, and which may or may not have been by
Melito. The third fragment bears the title *Melitonis episcopi de fide,*
and might be looked upon as an extract from the work <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6.5"></span>περὶ πίστεως</span>,
mentioned by Eusebius (as Otto regards it); but the same fragment is
four times ascribed to Irenæus by other early authorities, and an
analysis of these authorities shows that the tradition in favor of
Irenæus is stronger than that in favor of Melito, and so Harnack
mentions a work, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6.6"></span>περὶ πίστεως</span>, which is ascribed by
Maximus Confessor to Irenæus, and from which the quotation may have been
taken (see Harnack, *ibid.* p. 266 ff.). The fourth fragment was taken
in all probability from Melito’s work, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6.7"></span>περὶ π€θους</span>, mentioned by
Anastasius. An Apology in Syriac, bearing the name of Melito, is extant
in another of the Nitrian <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6.8"></span>mss.</span> in the British Museum (No.
14,658), and has been published with an English translation by Cureton,
in his *Spic. Syr.* (p. 41–51). It has been proved, however, that this
Apology (which we have entire) was not written by Melito, but probably
by an inhabitant of Syria, in the latter part of the second, or early
part of the third century,—whether originally in the Greek or Syriac
language is uncertain (see Harnack, p. 261 ff., and Smith and Wace, Vol.
III. p. 895). In addition to the genuine writings, there must be
mentioned also some spurious works which are still extant. Two Latin
works of the early Middle Ages, entitled *de transitu Mariæ* and *de
passione S. Joannis Evangelistæ,* and also a *Catena* of the latter
Middle Ages on the Apocalypse, and a *Clavis Scripturæ* of the
Carlovingian period (see below, note 18), bear in some <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p6.9"></span>mss.</span> the name of
Melito. This fact shows that Melito’s name was not entirely forgotten in
the Occidental Church of the Middle Ages, though little exact knowledge
of him seems to have existed.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p7"></span>On Melito and his writings, see Piper’s
article in the *Theol. Studien und Kritiken,* 1838, p. 54–154; Salmon’s
article in Smith and Wace, and especially Harnack’s *Texte und Unters.*
I. 1, p. 240–278. The extant fragments of Melito’s writings are given in
Routh’s *Rel. Sac.* I. 111–153, and in Otto’s *Corp. Apol.* IX. 374–478,
and an English translation in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. VIII. p.
750–762.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[203:1277](2010135.htm#fr_1276) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p8"></span> On Apolinarius and his writings, see
chap. 27.

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[203:1278](2010135.htm#fr_1277) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p9"></span> Marcus Aurelius.

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[203:1279](2010135.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p11"></span> The following list of Melito’s works
is at many points very uncertain, owing to the various readings of the
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p11.1"></span>mss.</span> and
versions. We have as authorities for the text, the Greek <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p11.2"></span>mss.</span> of Eusebius,
the *History* of Nicephorus, the translation of Rufinus, chap. 24 of
Jerome’s *de vir. ill.,* and the Syriac version of this passage of
Eusebius’ *History,* which has been printed by Cureton, in his *Spic.
Syr.* p. 56 ff.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[203:1280](2010135.htm#fr_1279) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p12"></span> The quotation from this work given by
Eusebius in §7, perhaps enables us to fix approximately the date at
which it was written. Rufinus reads Sergius Paulus, instead of Servilius
Paulus, which is found in all the Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p12.1"></span>mss.</span> Sergius Paulus is known to
have had his second consulship in 168, and it is inferred by Waddington
that he was proconsul about 164 to 166 (see *Fastes des provinces
Asiatiques,* chap. 2, §148). No Servilius Paulus is known in connection
with the province of Asia, and hence it seems probable that Rufinus is
correct; and if so, the work on the Passover was written early in the
sixties. The fragment which Eusebius gives in this chapter is the only
part of his work that is extant. It was undoubtedly in favor of the
Quartodeciman practice, for Polycrates, who was a decided Quartodeciman,
cites Melito in support of his position.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[204:1281](2010135.htm#fr_1280) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13"></span> The exact reading at this point is
disputed. I read, with a number of <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13.1"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13.2"></span>τὸ περὶ πολιτείας καὶ προφητῶν</span>,
making but one work, *On the Conduct of Life and the Prophets.* Many
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13.3"></span>mss.</span>
followed by Valesius, Heinichen, and Burton, read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13.4"></span>τὰ</span> instead of
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13.5"></span>τό</span>, thus
making either two works (one *On the Conduct of Life,* and the other *On
the Prophets),* or one work containing more than one book. Rufinus
translates *de optima conversatione liber unus, sed et de prophetis,*
and the Syriac repeats the preposition, as if it read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13.6"></span>καὶ περὶ πολιτείας καὶ
περὶ προφητῶν</span>. It is not quite certain whether Rufinus and the
Syriac thought of two works in translating thus, or of only one. Jerome
translates, *de vita prophetarum librum unum,* and in accordance with
this translation Otto proposes to read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13.7"></span>τῶν προφητῶν</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13.8"></span>καὶ προφητῶν</span>.
But this is supported by no <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p13.9"></span>ms.</span> authority, and cannot be
accepted.

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p14"></span>No fragments of this work are extant.

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[204:1282](2010135.htm#fr_1281) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p15.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p15.2"></span>περὶ ἐκκλησίας</span>. Jerome, *de
ecclesia librum unum.*

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[204:1283](2010135.htm#fr_1282) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p16.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p16.2"></span>περὶ κυριακῆς λόγος</span>. Jerome, *de
Die Dominica librum unum.*

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[204:1284](2010135.htm#fr_1283) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p17"></span> Valesius, Otto, Heinichen, and other
editors, following the majority of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p17.1"></span>mss.</span>, read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p17.2"></span>περὶ φύσεως
ἀνθρώπου</span>, *On the Nature of Man.* Four important <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p17.3"></span>mss.</span>, however,
read <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p17.4"></span>περὶ
πίστεως ἀνθρώπου</span>, and this reading is confirmed both by Rufinus
and by the Syriac; whether by Jerome also, as claimed by Harnack, is
uncertain, for he omits both this work and the one *On the Obedience of
Faith,* given just below, and mentions a *de fide librum unum,* which
does not occur in Eusebius’ list, and which may have arisen through
mistake from either of the titles given by Eusebius, or, as seems more
probable, may have been derived from the title of the work mentioned
below, *On the Creation and Generation of Christ,* as remarked in note
15. If this supposition be correct, Jerome omits all reference to this
work <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p17.5"></span>περὶ
πίστεως ἀνθρώπου</span>. The text of Jerome is unfortunately very
corrupt at this point. In the present passage <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p17.6"></span>πίστεως</span> is better supported by
tradition than <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p17.7"></span>φύσεως</span>, and at the same time is the
more difficult reading, and hence I have adopted it as more probably
representing the original.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[204:1285](2010135.htm#fr_1284) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p17.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p18.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p18.2"></span>περὶ πλ€σεως</span>. Jerome, *de plasmate
librum unum.*

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[204:1286](2010135.htm#fr_1285) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19"></span> All the Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.1"></span>mss.</span> combine these two titles into
one, reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.3"></span>περὶ ὑπακοῆς πίστεως αἰσθητηρίων</span>:
“On the subjection (or *obedience*) of the senses to faith.” This
reading is adopted by Valesius, Heinichen, Otto, and others; but
Nicephorus reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.4"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.5"></span>περὶ ὑπακοῆς πίστεως, καὶ ὁ περὶ
αἰσθητηρίων</span>, and Rufinus translates, *de obedientia fidei, de
sensibus,* both of them making two works, as I have done in the text.
Jerome leaves the first part untranslated, and reads only *de sensibus,*
while the Syriac reproduces only the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.6"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.7"></span>περὶ ὑπακοῆς</span> (or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.9"></span>κοῆς</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.10"></span>πίστεως</span>,
omitting the second clause. Christophorsonus, Stroth, Zimmermann,
Burton, and Harnack consequently read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.11"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.12"></span>περὶ ὑπακοῆς πίστεως, ὁ περὶ
αἰσθητηρίων</span>, concluding that the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.13"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.14"></span>περὶ</span> after <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.15"></span>πίστεως</span> have
fallen out of the Greek text. I have adopted this reading in my
translation.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[204:1287](2010135.htm#fr_1286) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p19.16"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20"></span> A serious difficulty arises in
connection with this title from the fact that most of the Greek <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.1"></span>mss.</span> read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.3"></span>περὶ ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος
ἢ νοός</span>, while the Syriac, Rufinus, and Jerome omit the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.4"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.5"></span>νοός</span> entirely.
Nicephorus and two of the Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.6"></span>mss.</span> meanwhile read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.7"></span>ἦ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.8"></span>ν ἐν οἷς</span>, which
is evidently simply a corruption of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.9"></span>ἢ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.10"></span>νοός</span>, so that the Greek <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.11"></span>mss.</span> are
unanimous for this reading. Otto, Crusè, and Salmon read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.12"></span>καὶ νοός</span>, but
there is no authority for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.13"></span>καὶ</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.14"></span>ἤ</span>, and the
change cannot be admitted. The explanation which Otto gives (p. 376) of
the change of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.15"></span>ἤ</span> to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.16"></span>καὶ</span> will not hold, as Harnack
shows on p. 247, note 346. It seems to me certain that the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.17"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.18"></span>νοός</span> did not
stand in the original, but that the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.19"></span>νοός</span>, (either alone or preceded by
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.20"></span>ἤ</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.21"></span>καί</span>) was
written upon the margin by some scribe perhaps as an alternative to
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.22"></span>ψυχῆς</span>,
perhaps as an addition in the interest of trichotomy, and was later
inserted in the text after <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.23"></span>ψυχῆς</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.24"></span>σώματος</span>, under
the impression that it was an alternative title of the book. My reasons
for this opinion are the agreement of the versions in the omission of
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.25"></span>νοός</span>,
the impossibility of explaining the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.26"></span>ἢ</span> before <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.27"></span>νοός</span> in the original text, the
fact that in the Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.28"></span>mss.</span>, in Rufinus, and in the
Syriac, the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.29"></span>καὶ περὶ ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος</span> are
repeated further down in the list,—a repetition which Harnack thinks was
made inadvertently by Eusebius himself, and which in omitting <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.30"></span>νοός</span> confirms
the omission of it in the present case,—and finally, a fact which seems
to me decisive, but which has apparently hitherto escaped notice, that
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.31"></span>νοός</span>, follows instead of precedes
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.32"></span>σώματος</span>, and thus breaks the
logical order, which would certainly have been preserved in the title of
a book.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[204:1288](2010135.htm#fr_1287) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p20.33"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p21.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p21.2"></span>περὶ λουτροῦ</span>; Jerome, *de
baptismate.*

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[204:1289](2010135.htm#fr_1288) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p22"></span> Apolinarius (according to chap. 27)
also wrote a work *On Truth,* and the place which it holds in that list,
between an apologetical work addressed to the Greeks and one addressed
to the Jews, makes it probable that it too bore an apologetic character,
being perhaps devoted to showing that Christianity is pre-eminently the
truth. Melito’s work on the same subject very likely bore a similar
character, as suggested by Salmon.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[204:1290](2010135.htm#fr_1289) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p23"></span> Six <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p23.1"></span>mss.</span>, with Nicephorus, read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p23.2"></span>κτίσεως</span>,
“creation,” but five <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p23.3"></span>mss.</span>, with the Syriac and Rufinus,
and possibly Jerome, read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p23.4"></span>πίστεως</span>. The latter reading
therefore has the strongest external testimony in its favor, but must be
rejected (with Stroth, Otto, Heinichen, Harnack, etc.) as evidently a
dogmatic correction of the fourth century, when there was an objection
to the use of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p23.5"></span>κτίσις</span> in connection with Christ.
Rufinus divides the one work *On the Creation and Generation of Christ*
into two,—*On Faith* and *On the Generation of Christ, and his
prophecy,* connecting the second with the next-mentioned work. Jerome
omits the first clause entirely at this point, and translates simply *de
generatione Christi librum unum.* The *de fide,* however, which he
inserts earlier in his list, where there is no corresponding word in the
Greek, may be the title which he omits here (see above, note 9),
displaced, as the title *de sensibus* is also displaced. If this be
true, he becomes with Rufinus and the Syriac a witness to the reading
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p23.6"></span>πίστεως</span>
instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p23.7"></span>κτίσεως</span>, and like Rufinus divides
the one work of Eusebius into two.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[204:1291](2010135.htm#fr_1290) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p23.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24"></span> All the Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.1"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.2"></span>καὶ λόγος αὐτοῦ περὶ προφητείας</span>,
which can rightly mean only “his work on Prophecy”; but Jerome
translates *de prophetia sua librum unum,* and Rufinus *de prophetia
ejus,* while the Syriac reads as if there stood in the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.3"></span>περὶ λόγου τῆς
προφητείας αὐτοῦ</span>. All three therefore connect the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.4"></span>αὐτοῦ</span> with the
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.5"></span>προφητείας</span> instead of with the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.6"></span>λόγος</span>,
which of course is much more natural, since the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.7"></span>αὐτοῦ</span> with the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.8"></span>λόγος</span>
seems quite unnecessary at this point. The translation of the Syriac,
Rufinus, and Jerome, however, would require <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.9"></span>περὶ προφητείας αὐτοῦ</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.10"></span>περὶ τῆς αὐτοῦ
προφητείας</span>, and there is no sign that the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.11"></span>αὐτοῦ</span>
originally stood in such connection with the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.12"></span>προφητείας</span>. We must, therefore,
reject the rendering of these three versions as incorrect.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[204:1292](2010135.htm#fr_1291) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p24.13"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p25.1"></span>περὶ φιλοξενίας</span>. After this title a
few of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p25.2"></span>mss.</span>, with Rufinus and the Syriac,
add the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p25.3"></span>καὶ περὶ ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος</span>, a
repetition of a title already given (see above, note 12).

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[204:1293](2010135.htm#fr_1292) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p25.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p26.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p26.2"></span>κλείς</span>; Jerome, *et alium librum qui
Clavis inscribitur.* The word is omitted in the Syriac version. The
nature of this work we have no means of determining. It is possible that
it was a key to the interpretation of the Scriptures, designed to guide
the reader in the study especially of the figures of the prophecies (cf.
Otto, p. 401) and of the Apocalypse. Piper is right, however, in saying
that it cannot have been intended to supply the allegorical meaning of
Scripture words, like the extant Latin *Clavis* of Pseudo-Melito,
mentioned just below; for Melito, who like Tertullian taught the
corporeality of God, must have been very literal—not allegorical—in his
interpretation of Scripture. A Latin work bearing the title *Melitonis
Clavis Sanctæ Scripturæ* was mentioned by Labbe in 1653 as contained in
the library of Clermont College, and after years of search was recovered
and published by Pitra in 1855 in his *Spicileg. Solesm.* Vols. II. and
III. He regarded the work as a translation, though with interpolations,
of the genuine <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p26.3"></span>κλείς</span> of Melito, but this
hypothesis has been completely disproved (see the article by Steitz in
the *Studien und Kritiken,* 1857, p. 184 sqq.), and the work has been
shown to be nothing more than a mediæval dictionary of allegorical
interpolations of Scripture, compiled from the Latin Fathers. There is,
therefore, no trace extant of Melito’s *Key.*

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[204:1294](2010135.htm#fr_1293) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p27"></span> All the Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p27.1"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p27.2"></span>καὶ τὰ περὶ τοῦ διαβόλου, καὶ τῆς
ἀποκαλύψεως ᾽Ιω€ννου</span>, making but one work, with two or more
books, upon the general subject, *The Devil and the Apocalypse of John.*
The Syriac apparently agrees with the Greek in this respect (see
Harnack, p. 248, note 350); but Jerome and Rufinus make two works, the
latter reading *de diabolo librum unum, de Apocalypsi Joannis librum
unum.* Origen, *in Psalm. III.* (ed. Lommatzsch, XI. p. 411), says that
Melito treated Absalom as a type of the devil warring against the
kingdom of Christ. It has been conjectured that the reference may be to
this work of Melito’s, and that reference is an argument for the
supposition that Melito treated the devil and the Apocalypse in one work
(cf. Harnack, p. 248, and Smith and Wace, p. 898).

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[204:1295](2010135.htm#fr_1294) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p28.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p28.2"></span>περὶ ἐνσωμ€του θεοῦ</span>. Jerome does
not translate this phrase, but simply gives the Greek. Rufinus renders
*de deo corpore induto,* thus understanding it to refer to the
incarnation of God, and the Syriac agrees with this rendering. But as
Harnack rightly remarks, we should expect, if this were the author’s
meaning, the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p28.3"></span>περὶ ἐνσωματώσεως θεοῦ</span>, or rather
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p28.4"></span>λόγου</span>.
Moreover, Origen (*Selecta in Gen.* I. 26; Lommatzsch, VIII. p. 49)
enumerates Melito among those who taught the corporeality of God, and
says that he had written a work <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p28.5"></span>περὶ τοῦ ἐνσώματον εἶναι τὸν θεόν</span>.
It is possible, of course, that he may not have seen Melito’s work, and
that he may have misunderstood its title and have mistaken a work on the
incarnation for one on the corporeality of God; but this is not at all
likely. Either he had read the book, and knew it to be upon the subject
he states, or else he knew from other sources that Melito believed in
the corporeality of God, and hence had no doubt that this work was upon
that subject. There is no reason in any case for doubting the accuracy
of Origen’s statement, and for hesitating to conclude that the work
mentioned by Eusebius was upon the corporeality of God. The close
relationship existing between Melito and Tertullian has already been
referred to, and this fact furnishes confirmation for the belief that
Melito held God to be corporeal, for we know Tertullian’s views on that
subject. Gennadius (*de eccles. dogmat.* chap. 4) classes Melito and
Tertullian together, as both teaching a corporeality in the Godhead.
What was the source of his statement, and how much dependence is to be
put upon it, we cannot say, but it is at least a corroboration of the
conclusion already reached. We conclude then that Rufinus and the Syriac
were mistaken in their rendering, and that this work discussed the
corporeality, not the incarnation, of God.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[205:1296](2010135.htm#fr_1295) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p28.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p29.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p29.2"></span>πὶ πᾶσι καὶ τὸ πρὸς ᾽Αντωνῖνον
βιβλίδιον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p29.3"></span>βιβλίδιον</span> (*libellus*) was the
technical name for a petition addressed to the emperor, and does not
imply that the work was a brief one, as Piper supposes. The *Apology* is
mentioned also in chap. 13, above, and at the beginning of this chapter.
Jerome puts it first in his list, with the words: *Melito Asianus,
Sardensis episcopus, librum imperatori M. Antonini Vero, qui Frontonis
oratoris discipulus fuit, pro christiano dogmate dedit.* This Apology is
no longer extant, and we have only the fragments which Eusebius gives in
this chapter. As remarked in note 1, above, the extant Syriac *Apology*
is not a work of Melito’s. The *Apology* is mentioned in Jerome’s
version of the *Chron.,* and is assigned to the tenth year of Marcus
Aurelius, 120 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p29.4"></span>a.d.</span> The notice is omitted in the
Armenian, which, however, assigns to the eleventh year of Marcus
Aurelius the *Apology* of Apolinarius, which is connected with that of
Melito in the *Ch. Hist.* Moreover, a notice of the *Apology* is given
by Syncellus in connection with the tenth year of Marcus Aurelius, and
also by the *Chron. Pasch.;* so that it is not improbable that Eusebius
himself mentioned it in his *Chron.,* and that its omission in the
Armenian is a mistake (as Harnack thinks likely). But though the notice
may thus have been made by Eusebius himself, we are nevertheless not at
liberty to accept the date given as conclusive. We learn from the
quotations given by Eusebius that the work was addressed to the emperor
after the death of Lucius Verus, i.e. after the year 169. Whether before
or after the association of Commodus with his father in the imperial
power, which took place in 176, is uncertain; but I am inclined to think
that the words quoted in §7, below, point to a prospective rather than
to a present association of Commodus in the empire, and that therefore
the work was written between 169 and 176. It must be admitted, however,
that we can say with certainty only that the work was written between
169 and 180. Some would put the work at the beginning of those
persecutions which raged in 177, and there is much to be said for this.
But the dates of the local and minor persecutions, which were so
frequent during this period, are so uncertain that little can be based
upon the fact that we know of persecutions in certain parts of the
empire in 177. Piper, Otto, and others conclude from the fact that the
*Apology* is mentioned last by Eusebius that it was Melito’s latest
work; but that, though not at all unlikely, does not necessarily follow
(see above, note 1).

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[205:1297](2010135.htm#fr_1296) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p31"></span> A Sagaris, bishop and martyr, and
probably the same man, is mentioned by Polycrates in his epistle to
Victor (Euseb. V. 24) as buried in Laodicea. This is all we know of him.
The date of his martyrdom, and of the composition of the work *On the
Passover,* depends upon the date of the proconsulship of Servilius (or
Sergius) Paulus (see above, note 5). The words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p31.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p31.2"></span>μπέσοντος κατὰ καιρόν</span> have
unnecessarily caused Salmon considerable trouble. The words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p31.3"></span>κατὰ καιρόν</span>
mean no more than “properly, regularly, according to appointment or
rule,” and do not render <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p31.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p31.5"></span>κείναις ταῖς ἡμέραις</span> superfluous,
as he thinks. The clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p31.6"></span>καὶ ἐγρ€φη ταῦτα</span> (“and these were
written”) expresses result,—it was in consequence of the passover strife
that Melito wrote this work.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[205:1298](2010135.htm#fr_1297) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p33"></span> This work of Clement’s, *On the
Passover,* which he says he wrote on occasion of Melito’s work, was
clearly written in reply to and therefore against the work of Melito,
not as a supplement to it, as Hefele supposes (*Conciliengesch.* I.
299). The work of Clement (which is mentioned by Eusebius, VI. 13, in
his list of Clement’s writings) is no longer extant, but some brief
fragments of it have been preserved (see Bk. VI. chap. 13, note 8).

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[205:1299](2010135.htm#fr_1298) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p35"></span> This statement of Melito’s is a very
remarkable one. See chap. 8, note 14.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[205:1300](2010135.htm#fr_1299) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p38"></span> The resemblance between this extract
from Melito’s *Apology* and the fifth chapter of Tertullian’s *Apology*
is close enough to be striking, and too close to be accidental.
Tertullian’s chapter is quite different from this, so far as its
arrangement and language are concerned, but the same thought underlies
both: That the emperors in general have protected Christianity; only
Nero and Domitian, the most wicked of them, have persecuted it; and that
Christianity has been a blessing to the reigns of all the better
emperors. We cannot doubt that Tertullian was acquainted with Melito’s
*Apology,* as well as with others of his works.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[205:1301](2010135.htm#fr_1300) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p39.1"></span>εὐκταῖος</span>

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[205:1302](2010135.htm#fr_1301) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p42"></span> The reference here seems to be to the
common belief that the Christians were responsible for all the evils
which at any time happened, such as earthquakes, floods, famines, etc.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[206:1303](2010135.htm#fr_1302) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p43.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p43.2"></span>φ᾽ ὧν καὶ τὸ τῆς συκοφαντίας ἀλόγῳ
συνηθεί& 139· περὶ τοὺς τοιούτους ῥυῆναι συμβέβηκε ψεῦδος</span>. The
sentence is a difficult one and has been interpreted in various ways,
but the translation given in the text seems to me best to express the
writer’s meaning.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[206:1304](2010135.htm#fr_1303) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p45.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p45.2"></span>γγρ€φως</span>: i.e. in *edicts* or
*rescripts.*

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[206:1305](2010135.htm#fr_1304) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p46"></span> This epistle to Fundanus is given in
chap. 9, above. Upon its genuineness, see chap. 8, note 14.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[206:1306](2010135.htm#fr_1305) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p47"></span> On these epistles of Antoninus Pius,
see chap. 13, note 9. These ordinances to the Larissæans, Thessalonians,
Athenians, and all the Greeks, are no longer extant. What their
character must have been is explained in the note just referred to.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[206:1307](2010135.htm#fr_1306) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p49.1"></span>περὶ τούτων</span>.

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[206:1308](2010135.htm#fr_1307) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p51.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p51.2"></span>ν δὴ ταῖς γραφείσαις αὐτῷ ἐκλογαῖς</span>.
Jerome speaks of this work as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p51.3"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p51.4"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p51.5"></span>κλογῶν</span>, *libros sex.* There are no
fragments of it extant except the single one from the preface given here
by Eusebius. The nature of the work is clear from the words of Melito
himself. It was a collection of testimonies to Christ and to
Christianity, drawn from the Old Testament law and prophets. It must,
therefore, have resembled closely such works as Cyprian’s *Testimonia,*
and the *Testimonia* of Pseudo-Gregory, and other anti-Jewish works, in
which the appeal was made to the Old Testament—the common ground
accepted by both parties—for proof of the truth of Christianity.
Although the *Eclogæ* of Melito were not anti-Jewish in their design,
their character leads us to classify them with the general class of
anti-Jewish works whose distinguishing mark is the use of Old Testament
prophecy in defense of Christianity (cf. the writer’s article on
*Christian Polemics against the Jews,* in the *Pres. Review,* July,
1888, and also the writer’s *Dialogue between a Christian and a Jew,*
entitled <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p51.6"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p51.7"></span>Αντιβολὴ Παπισκου καὶ φίλωνος</span>, New
York, 1889).

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p52"></span>On the canon which Melito gives, see
Bk. III. chap. 10, note 1.

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[206:1309](2010135.htm#fr_1308) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p54"></span> This Onesimus is an otherwise unknown
person.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[206:1310](2010135.htm#fr_1309) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p56"></span> Some <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p56.1"></span>mss.</span>, with Rufinus, place Leviticus
before Numbers, but the best <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p56.2"></span>mss.</span>, followed by Heinichen,
Burton, and others, give the opposite order.

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[206:1311](2010135.htm#fr_1310) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p56.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p57.1"></span>ψαλμῶν Δαβίδ</span>. Literally, “of the
Psalms of David” \[one book\].

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[206:1312](2010135.htm#fr_1311) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p58.1"></span>ἣ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p58.2"></span>καὶ Σοφία</span>: i.e. the Book of
Proverbs (see above, p. 200).

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[206:1313](2010135.htm#fr_1312) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p59"></span> Literally, “in one book” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p59.1"></span>τῶν δώδεκα ἐν
μονοβίβλῳ</span>).

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[206:1314](2010135.htm#fr_1313) <span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxvi-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p60.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p60.2"></span>Εσδρας</span>: the Greek form of the
Hebrew name <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.ix.xxvi-p60.3"></span>עֶזְרָא</span>, Ezra. Melito refers here
to the canonical Book of Ezra, which, among the Jews, commonly included
our Ezra and Nehemiah (see Bk. III. chap. 10, note 1).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](2010136)
