[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010291)  [Next](2010293) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xv.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xv.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*The Decree against us
which was engraved on Pillars.*

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xv.vii-p2.1"></span>The</span> memorials against us <span
id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737) and copies of the imperial edicts
issued in reply to them were engraved and set up on brazen pillars in
the midst of the cities, <span id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738) —a
course which had never been followed elsewhere. The children in the
schools had daily in their mouths the names of Jesus and Pilate, and the
Acts which had been forged in wanton insolence. <span
id="fr_2739"></span>[2740](#fn_2739)

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p6"></span>2. It appears to me necessary to insert
here this document of Maximinus which was posted on pillars, in order
that there may be made manifest at the same time the boastful and
haughty arrogance of the God-hating man, and the sleepless evil-hating
divine vengeance upon the impious, which followed close upon him, and
under whose pressure he not long afterward took the opposite course in
respect to us and confirmed it by written laws. <span
id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740)

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p8"></span>The rescript is in the following words:

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p9"></span>Copy of a translation of the rescript of
Maximinus in answer to the memorials against us, taken from the pillar
in Tyre.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p10"></span>3. “Now at length the feeble power of
the human mind has become able to shake off and to scatter every dark
mist of error, which before this besieged the senses of men, who were
more miserable than impious, and enveloped them in dark and destructive
ignorance; and to perceive that it is governed and estab<span
id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span id="iii.xv.vii-Page_361"></span>lished
by the beneficent providence of the immortal gods.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p11"></span>4. It passes belief how grateful, how
pleasing and how agreeable it is to us, that you have given a most
decided proof of your pious resolution; for even before this it was
known to every one how much regard and reverence you were paying to the
immortal gods, exhibiting not a faith of bare and empty words, but
continued and wonderful examples of illustrious deeds.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p12"></span>5. Wherefore your city may justly be
called a seat and dwelling of the immortal gods. At least, it appears by
many signs that it flourishes because of the presence of the celestial
gods.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p13"></span>6. Behold, therefore, your city,
regardless of all private advantages, and omitting its former petitions
in its own behalf, when it perceived that the adherents of that
execrable vanity were again beginning to spread, and to start the
greatest conflagration,—like a neglected and extinguished funeral pile
when its brands are rekindled,—immediately resorted to our piety as to a
metropolis of all religiousness, asking some remedy and aid.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p14"></span>7. It is evident that the gods have
given you this saving mind on account of your faith and piety.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p15"></span>“Accordingly that supreme and mightiest
Jove, who presides over your illustrious city, who preserves your
ancestral gods, your wives and children, your hearths and homes from
every destructive pest, has infused into your souls this wholesome
resolve; showing and proving how excellent and glorious and salutary it
is to observe with the becoming reverence the worship and sacred rites
of the immortal gods.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p16"></span>8. For who can be found so ignorant or
so devoid of all understanding as not to perceive that it is due to the
kindly care of the gods that the earth does not refuse the seed sown in
it, nor disappoint the hope of the husbandmen with vain expectation;
that impious war is not inevitably fixed upon earth, and wasted bodies
dragged down to death under the influence of a corrupted atmosphere;
that the sea is not swollen and raised on high by blasts of intemperate
winds; that unexpected hurricanes do not burst forth and stir up the
destructive tempest; moreover, that the earth, the nourisher and mother
of all, is not shaken from its lowest depths with a terrible tremor, and
that the mountains upon it do not sink into the opening chasms. No one
is ignorant that all these, and evils still worse than these, have
oftentimes happened hitherto.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p17"></span>9. And all these misfortunes have taken
place on account of the destructive error of the empty vanity of those
impious men, when it prevailed in their souls, and, we may almost say,
weighed down the whole world with shame.”

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p18"></span>10. After other words he adds: “Let
them look at the standing crops already flourishing with waving heads in
the broad fields, and at the meadows glittering with plants and flowers,
in response to abundant rains and the restored mildness and softness of
the atmosphere.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p19"></span>11. Finally, let all rejoice that the
might of the most powerful and terrible Mars has been propitiated by our
piety, our sacrifices, and our veneration; and let them on this account
enjoy firm and tranquil peace and quiet; and let as many as have wholly
abandoned that blind error and delusion and have returned to a right and
sound mind rejoice the more, as those who have been rescued from an
unexpected storm or severe disease and are to reap the fruits of
pleasure for the rest of their life.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p20"></span>12. But if they still persist in their
execrable vanity, let them, as you have desired, be driven far away from
your city and territory, that thus, in accordance with your praiseworthy
zeal in this matter, your city, being freed from every pollution and
impiety, may, according to its native disposition, attend to the sacred
rites of the immortal gods with becoming reverence.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p21"></span>13. But that ye may know how acceptable
to us your request respecting this matter has been, and how ready our
mind is to confer benefits voluntarily, without memorials and petitions,
we permit your devotion to ask whatever great gift ye may desire in
return for this your pious disposition.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p22"></span>14. And now ask that this may be done
and that ye may receive it; for ye shall obtain it without delay. This,
being granted to your city, shall furnish for all time an evidence of
reverent piety toward the immortal gods, and of the fact that you have
obtained from our benevolence merited prizes for this choice of yours;
and it shall be shown to your children and children’s children.”

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p23"></span>15. This was published against us in
all the provinces, depriving us of every hope of good, at least from
men; so that, according to that divine utterance, “If it were possible,
even the elect would have stumbled” <span
id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741) at these things.

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p25"></span>16. And now indeed, when the hope of
most of us was almost extinct, suddenly while those who were to execute
against us the above decree had in some places scarcely finished their
journey, God, the defender of his own Church, exhibited his heavenly
interposition in our behalf, well-nigh stopping the tyrant’s boasting
against us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[360:2738](2010292.htm#fr_2737) <span
id="iii.xv.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p3"></span> See above, chaps. 2 and 4.

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[360:2739](2010292.htm#fr_2738) <span
id="iii.xv.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p4"></span> These decrees must have been published
in this way in June, 312, or thereabouts; for in chap. 10, §12, we learn
that they were thus made public a little less than a year before the
final edict of toleration, which was apparently issued in May, 313.

<span id="fn_2739"></span>[360:2740](2010292.htm#fr_2739) <span
id="iii.xv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p5"></span> See chap. 5.

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[360:2741](2010292.htm#fr_2740) <span
id="iii.xv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.vii-p7.1"></span>οὐκ εἰς μακρὸν τἀναντία περὶ ἡμῶν
ἐβουλεύσατο τε καὶ δι᾽ ἐγγρ€φων νόμων ἐδογμ€τισε</span>. Crusè
translates, “So that he did not long devise hostilities and form decrees
against us.” It is true that the phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.vii-p7.2"></span>οὐκ εἰς μακρόν</span> may in general bear
the meaning “not for long,” as well as “not long afterward”; but an
examination of the numerous passages in which the words are used by
Eusebius (e.g. I. 11. 1; I. 13. 4; II. 6. 5; II. 7; III. 5. 7; IV. 7.
12; VII. 13. 1) will show that, with a single exception, he uniformly
employs them in the sense of “not long afterward.” The single exception
occurs in Bk. IV. chap. 7, §12, where the phrase is clearly used with
the other meaning—“not for long.” In view of this preponderance of
instances for the former use of the phrase in this single work, it seems
best in the present case—the only doubtful one, so far as I am aware—to
follow Valesius, Stroth, and Closs in translating “not long afterward,”
which is in full accord with the context, and more in harmony than the
other reading with the structure of this particular sentence.

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[361:2742](2010292.htm#fr_2741) <span
id="iii.xv.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p24"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span id="iii.xv.vii-p24.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](2010293)
