[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010700)  [Next](2010702) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.xii-p2.1"></span>And</span> now, victorious and mighty
Constantine, in this discourse, whose noble argument is the glory of the
Almighty King, let me lay before thee some of the mysteries of his
sacred truth: not as presuming to instruct thee, who art thyself taught
of God; nor to disclose to thee those secret wonders which he himself,
not through the agency of man, but through our common Saviour, and the
frequent light of his Divine presence has long since revealed and
unfolded to thy view: but in the hope of leading the unlearned to the
light, and displaying before those who know them not the causes and
motives of thy pious deeds.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p3"></span>2. True it is that thy noble efforts
for the daily worship and honor of the Supreme God throughout the
habitable world, are the theme of universal praise. But those records of
gratitude to thy Saviour and Preserver which thou hast dedicated in our
own province of Palestine, and in that city from which as from a
fountain-head the Saviour Word <span
id="fr_3536"></span>[3537](#fn_3536) has issued forth to all mankind;
and again, the hallowed edifices and consecrated temples which thou hast
raised as trophies of his victory over death; and those lofty and noble
structures, imperial monuments of an imperial spirit, which thou hast
erected in honor of the everlasting memory of the Saviour’s tomb; the
cause, I say, of these things is not equally obvious to all.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p5"></span>3. Those, indeed, who are enlightened
in heavenly knowledge by the power of the Divine Spirit, well understand
the cause, and justly admire and bless thee for that counsel and
resolution which Heaven itself inspired. On the other hand the ignorant
and spiritually blind regard these designs with open mockery and scorn,
and deem it a strange and unworthy thing indeed that so mighty a prince
should waste his zeal on the graves and monuments of the dead.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p6"></span>4. “Were it not better,” such a one
might say, “to cherish those rites which are hallowed by ancient usage;
to seek the favor of those gods and heroes whose worship is observed in
every province; instead of rejecting and disclaiming them, because
subject to the calamities incident to man? Surely they may claim equal
honors with him who himself has suffered: or, if they are to be
rejected, as not exempt from the sorrows of humanity, the same award
would justly be pronounced respecting him.” Thus, with important and
contracted brow, might he give utterance in pompous language to his
self-imagined wisdom.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p7"></span>5. Filled with compassion for this
ignorance, the gracious Word of our most beneficent Father freely
invites, not such a one alone, but all who are in the path of error, to
receive instruction in Divine knowledge; and has ordained the means of
such instruction throughout the world, in every country and village, in
cultivated and desert lands alike, and in every city: and, as a gracious
Saviour and Physician of the soul, calls on the Greek and the Barbarian,
the wise and the unlearned, the rich <span id="page_596">p. 596</span>
<span id="iv.viii.xii-Page_596"></span>and the poor, the servant and his
master, the subject and his lord, the ungodly, the profane, the
ignorant, the evil-doer, the blasphemer, alike to draw near, and hasten
to receive his heavenly cure. And thus in time past had he clearly
announced to all the pardon of former transgressions, saying, “Come unto
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.” <span id="fr_3537"></span>[3538](#fn_3537) And again, “I am not
come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.” <span
id="fr_3538"></span>[3539](#fn_3538) And he adds the reason, saying,
“For they that are whole need not a physician, but they that are
sick.” <span id="fr_3539"></span>[3540](#fn_3539) And again, “I desire
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent.” <span
id="fr_3540"></span>[3541](#fn_3540)

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p12"></span>6. Hence it is only for those who are
themselves instructed in Divine things and understand the motives of
that zeal of which these works are the result, to appreciate the more
than human impulse by which our emperor was guided, to admire his piety
toward God, and to believe his care for the memorial of our Saviour’s
resurrection to be a desire imparted from above, and truly inspired by
that Sovereign, to be whose faithful servant and minister for good is
his proudest boast.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p13"></span>7. In full persuasion, then, of thy
approval, most mighty emperor, I desire at this present time to proclaim
to all the reasons and motives of thy pious works. I desire to stand as
the interpreter of thy designs, to explain the counsels of a soul
devoted to the love of God. I propose to teach all men, what all should
know who care to understand the principles on which our Saviour God
employs his power, the reasons for which he who was the pre-existent
Controller of all things at length descended to us from heaven: the
reasons for which he assumed our nature, and submitted even to the power
of death. I shall declare the causes of that immortal life which
followed, and of his resurrection from the dead. Once more, I shall
adduce convincing proofs and arguments, for the sake of those who yet
need such testimony:

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p14"></span>8. and now let me commence my
appointed task.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p15"></span>Those who transfer the worship due to
that God who formed and rules the world to the works of his hand; who
hold the sun and moon, or other parts of this material system, nay, the
elements themselves, earth, water, air, and fire, in equal honor with
the Creator of them all; who give the name of gods to things which never
would have had existence, or even name, except as obedient to that Word
of God who made the world: such persons in my judgment resemble those
who overlook the master hand which gives its magnificence to a royal
palace; and, while lost in wonder at its roofs and walls, the paintings
of varied beauty and coloring which adorn them, and its gilded ceilings
and sculptures, ascribe to them the praise of that skill which belongs
to the artist whose work they are: whereas they should assign the cause
of their wonder, not to these visible objects, but to the architect
himself, and confess that the proofs of skill are indeed manifest, but
that he alone is the possessor of that skill who has made them what they
are.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p16"></span>9. Again, well might we liken those to
children, who should admire the seven-stringed lyre, and disregard him
who invented or has power to use it: or those who forget the valiant
warrior, and adorn his spear and shield with the chaplet of victory: or,
lastly, those who hold the squares and streets, the public buildings,
temples, and gymnasia of a great and royal city in equal honor with its
founder; forgetting that their admiration is due, not to lifeless
stones, but to him whose wisdom planned and executed these mighty works.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p17"></span>10. Not less absurd is it for those
who regard this universe with the natural eye to ascribe its origin to
the sun, or moon, or any other heavenly body. Rather let them confess
that these are themselves the works of a higher wisdom, remember the
Maker and Framer of them all, and render to him the praise and honor
above all created objects. Nay rather, inspired by the sight of these
very objects, let them address themselves with full purpose of heart to
glorify and worship him who is now invisible to mortal eye, but
perceived by the clear and unclouded vision of the soul, the supremely
sovereign Word of God. To take the instance of the human body: no one
has yet conferred the attribute of wisdom on the eyes, or head, the
hands, or feet, or other members, far less on the outward clothing, of a
wise and learned man: no one terms the philosopher’s household furniture
and utensils, wise: but every rational person admires that invisible and
secret power, the mind of the man himself.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p18"></span>11. How much more, then, is our
admiration due, not to the visible mechanism of the universe, material
as it is, and formed of the selfsame elements; but to that invisible
Word who has moulded and arranged it all, who is the only-begotten Son
of God, and whom the Maker of all things, who far transcends all being,
has begotten of himself, and appointed Lord and Governor of this
universe?

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p19"></span>12. For since it was impossible that
perishable bodies, or the rational spirits which he had created, should
<span id="page_597">p. 597</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xii-Page_597"></span>approach the Supreme God, by reason of
their immeasurable distance from his perfections, for he is unbegotten,
above and beyond all creation, ineffable, inaccessible, unapproachable,
dwelling, as his holy word assures us, <span
id="fr_3541"></span>[3542](#fn_3541) in the light which none can enter;
but they were created from nothing, and are infinitely far removed from
his unbegotten Essence; well has the all-gracious and Almighty God
interposed as it were an intermediate Power <span
id="fr_3542"></span>[3543](#fn_3542) between himself and them, even the
Divine omnipotence of his only-begotten Word. And this Power, which is
in perfect nearness and intimacy of union, with the Father which abides
in him, and shares his secret counsels, has yet condescended, in
fullness of grace, as it were to conform itself to those who are so far
removed from the supreme majesty of God. How else, consistently with his
own holiness could he who is far above and beyond all things unite
himself to corruptible and corporeal matter? Accordingly the Divine
Word, thus connecting himself with this universe, and receiving into his
hands the reins, as it were, of the world, turns and directs it as a
skillful charioteer according to his own will and pleasure.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p22"></span>13. The proof of these assertions is
evident. For supposing that those component parts of the world which we
call elements, as earth, water, air, and fire, the nature of which is
manifestly without intelligence, are self-existent; and if they have one
common essence, which they who are skilled in natural science call the
great receptacle, mother, and nurse of all things; and if this itself be
utterly devoid of shape and figure, of soul and reason; whence shall we
say it has obtained its present form and beauty? To what shall we
ascribe the distinction of the elements, or the union of things contrary
in their very nature? Who has commanded the liquid water to sustain the
heavy element of earth? Who has turned back the waters from their
downward course, and carried them aloft in clouds? Who has bound the
force of fire, and caused it to lie latent in wood, and to combine with
substances most contrary to itself? Who has mingled the cold air with
heat, and thus reconciled the enmity of opposing principles? Who has
devised the continuous succession of the human race, and given it as it
were an endless term of duration? Who has moulded the male and female
form, adapted their mutual relations with perfect harmony, and given one
common principle of production to every living creature? Who changes the
character of the fluid and corruptible seed, which in itself is void of
reason, and gives it its prolific power? Who is at this moment working
these and ten thousand effects more wonderful than these, nay,
surpassing all wonder, and with invisible influence is daily and hourly
perpetuating the production of them all?

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p23"></span>14. Surely the wonder-working and
truly omnipotent Word of God may well be deemed the efficient cause of
all these things: that Word who, diffusing himself through all creation,
pervading height and depth with incorporeal energy, and embracing the
length and breadth of the universe within his mighty grasp, has
compacted and reduced to order this entire system, from whose unreasoned
and formless matter he has framed for himself an instrument of perfect
harmony, the nicely balanced chords and notes of which he touches with
all-wise and unerring skill. He it is who governs the sun, and moon, and
the other luminaries of heaven by inexplicable laws, and directs their
motions for the service of the universal whole.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p24"></span>15. It is this Word of God who has
stooped to the earth on which we live, and created the manifold species
of animals, and the fair varieties of the vegetable world. It is this
same Word who has penetrated the recesses of the deep, has given their
being to the finny race, and produced the countless forms of life which
there exist. It is he who fashions the burden of the womb, and informs
it in nature’s laboratory with the principle of life. By him the fluid
and heavy moisture is raised on high, and then, sweetened by a purifying
change, descends in measured quantities to the earth, and at stated
seasons in more profuse supply.

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p25"></span>16. Like a skillful husbandman, he
fully irrigates the land, tempers the moist and dry in just proportion,
diversifying the whole with brilliant flowers, with aspects of varied
beauty, with pleasant fragrance, with alternating varieties of fruits,
and countless gratifications for the taste of men. But why do I dare
essay a hopeless task, to recount the mighty works of the Word of God,
and describe an energy which surpasses mortal thought? By some, indeed,
he has been termed the Nature of the universe, by others, the
World-Soul, by others, Fate. Others again have declared him to be the
most High God himself, strangely confounding things most widely
different; bringing down to this earth, uniting to a corruptible and
material body, and assigning to that supreme and unbegotten Power who is
Lord of all an intermediate place between <span id="page_598">p.
598</span> <span id="iv.viii.xii-Page_598"></span>irrational animals and
rational mortals on the one hand, and immortal beings on the
other. <span id="fr_3543"></span>[3544](#fn_3543)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3536"></span>[595:3537](2010701.htm#fr_3536) <span
id="iv.viii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p4"></span> Here the author seems to speak doubly
of the Word and the word.

<span id="fn_3537"></span>[596:3538](2010701.htm#fr_3537) <span
id="iv.viii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p8"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="iv.viii.xii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3538"></span>[596:3539](2010701.htm#fr_3538) <span
id="iv.viii.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p9"></span> [Matt. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)<span id="iv.viii.xii-p9.1"></span>.
R.V.: “For I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.” The text here
has the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.xii-p9.2"></span>εισμετανοιαν</span>, omitted by Tischendorf
and the revisers with <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iv.viii.xii-p9.3"></span>א</span> B, etc., but supported by CEGKL,
sab. cop., etc. It is worth noting that it is not in the Sinaitic, and
if this text reading is correct it would nearly overthrow the
possibility that this <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.xii-p9.4"></span>ms.</span> was one of those prepared under
the direction of Eusebius.

<span id="fn_3539"></span>[596:3540](2010701.htm#fr_3539) <span
id="iv.viii.xii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p10"></span> [Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span
id="iv.viii.xii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3540"></span>[596:3541](2010701.htm#fr_3540) <span
id="iv.viii.xii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p11"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.xii-p11.1"></span>[Ezek. xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023)<span
id="iv.viii.xii-p11.2"></span>. R.V.: “Have I any pleasure in the death
of the wicked, saith the Lord God: and not rather that he should return
from his way and live?”

<span id="fn_3541"></span>[597:3542](2010701.htm#fr_3541) <span
id="iv.viii.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p20"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.viii.xii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3542"></span>[597:3543](2010701.htm#fr_3542) <span
id="iv.viii.xii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p21"></span> \[This whole passage (which is
defended by Valesius) appears, if rigidly interpreted, to lie under
suspicion of a tinge of Arianism.—*Bag.*\] It savors directly of Philo.
His doctrine was of an ineffable God, above and separate from matter,
and defiled by any contact with it. To bring him into connection with
created things he introduced intermediate beings, or “powers,” the
universal power including all the rest being the Logos. Compare brief
account in Zeller’s *Outlines of Greek Philosophy,* p. 320–325;
Siegfried, *Philo von Alexandria* (Jena, 1875), especially p. 199 sq.,
219 sq., and p. 362–364, where he treats very inadequately of Eusebius’
dependence on Philo; also works of Philo and Eusebius’ *Præp.* and
*Demonst. Ev.* There is a chance of viewing the Word thus as created,
but if this is guarded against (as it is by him in the use of
“begotten”), there is nothing intrinsically heterodox in making the Word
the Creator of the world and only Revealer of the Father. The direct
Philonian influence is seen in the phraseology of the following
sentences.

<span id="fn_3543"></span>[598:3544](2010701.htm#fr_3543) <span
id="iv.viii.xii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xii-p26"></span> \[Of this somewhat obscure passage, a
translator can do no more than give as nearly as possible a literal
version. The intelligent reader will not fail to perceive that the
author, here and in the following chapter, has trodden on very dangerous
ground.—*Bag.*\] Compare above notes on the relations of Eusebius and
Philo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](2010702)
