[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010274)  [Next](2010276) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.</span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.v-p2.1"></span>Maximinus Cæsar <span
id="fr_2641"></span>[2642](#fn_2641) </span> having come at that time
into the government, as if to manifest to all the evidences of his
reborn enmity against God, and of his impiety, armed himself for
persecution against us more vigorously than his predecessors.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p4"></span>2. In consequence, no little confusion
arose among all, and they scattered here and there, endeavoring in some
way to escape the danger; and there was great commotion everywhere. But
what words would suffice for a suitable description of the Divine love
and boldness, in confessing God, of the blessed and truly innocent
lamb,—I refer to the martyr Apphianus, <span
id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642) —who presented in the sight of all,
before the gates of Cæsarea, a wonderful example of piety toward the
only God?

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p6"></span>3. He was at that time not twenty years
old. He had first spent a long time at Berytus, <span
id="fr_2643"></span>[2644](#fn_2643) for the sake of a secular Grecian
education, as he belonged to a very wealthy family. It is wonderful to
relate how, in such a city, he was superior to youthful passions, and
clung to virtue, uncorrupted neither by his bodily vigor nor his young
companions; living discreetly, soberly and piously, in accordance with
his profession of the Christian doctrine and the life of his teachers.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p8"></span>4. If it is needful to mention his native
country, and give honor to it as producing this noble athlete of piety,
we will do so with pleasure.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p9"></span>5. The young man came from Pagæ, <span
id="fr_2644"></span>[2645](#fn_2644) —if any one is acquainted with the
place,—a city in Lycia of no mean importance. After his return from his
course of study in Berytus, though his father held the first place in
his country, he could not bear to live with him and his relatives, as it
did not please them to live according to the rules of religion.
Therefore, as if he were led by the Divine Spirit, and in accordance
with a natural, or rather an inspired and true philosophy, regarding
this preferable to what is considered the glory of life, and despising
bodily comforts, he secretly left his family. And because of his faith
and hope in God, paying no attention to his daily needs, he was led by
the Divine Spirit to the city of Cæsarea, where was prepared for him the
crown of martyrdom for piety.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p11"></span>6. Abiding with us there, and conferring
with us in the Divine Scriptures diligently for a short time, and
fitting himself zealously by suitable exercises, he exhibited such an
end as would astonish any one should it be seen again.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p12"></span>7. Who, that hears of it, would not
justly admire his courage, boldness, constancy, and even more than these
<span id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="iii.xiv.v-Page_346"></span>the daring deed itself, which evidenced a
zeal for religion and a spirit truly superhuman?

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p13"></span>8. For in the second attack upon us
under Maximinus, in the third year of the persecution, edicts of the
tyrant were issued for the first time, commanding that the rulers of the
cities should diligently and speedily see to it that all the people
offered sacrifices. <span id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645)
Throughout the city of Cæsarea, by command of the governor, the heralds
were summoning men, women, and children to the temples of the idols, and
besides this, the chiliarchs were calling out each one by name from a
roll, and an immense crowd of the wicked were rushing together from all
quarters. Then this youth fearlessly, while no one was aware of his
intentions, eluded both us who lived in the house with him and the whole
band of soldiers that surrounded the governor, and rushed up to Urbanus
as he was offering libations, and fearlessly seizing him by the right
hand, straightway put a stop to his sacrificing, and skillfully and
persuasively, with a certain divine inspiration, exhorted him to abandon
his delusion, because it was not well to forsake the one and only true
God, and sacrifice to idols and demons.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p15"></span>9. It is probable that this was done by
the youth through a divine power which led him forward, and which all
but cried aloud in his act, that Christians, who were truly such, were
so far from abandoning the religion of the God of the universe which
they had once espoused, that they were not only superior to threats and
the punishments which followed, but yet bolder to speak with noble and
untrammeled tongue, and, if possible, to summon even their persecutors
to turn from their ignorance and acknowledge the only true God.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p16"></span>10. Thereupon, he of whom we are
speaking, and that instantly, as might have been expected after so bold
a deed, was torn by the governor and those who were with him as if by
wild beasts. And having endured manfully innumerable blows over his
entire body, he was straightway cast into prison.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p17"></span>11. There he was stretched by the
tormentor with both his feet in the stocks for a night and a day; and
the next day he was brought before the judge. As they endeavored to
force him to surrender, he exhibited all constancy under suffering and
terrible tortures. His sides were torn, not once, or twice, but many
times, to the bones and the very bowels; and he received so many blows
on his face and neck that those who for a long time had been well
acquainted with him could not recognize his swollen face.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p18"></span>12. But as he would not yield under this
treatment, the torturers, as commanded, covered his feet with linen
cloths soaked in oil and set them on fire. No word can describe the
agonies which the blessed one endured from this. For the fire consumed
his flesh and penetrated to his bones, so that the humors of his body
were melted and oozed out and dropped down like wax.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p19"></span>13. But as he was not subdued by this,
his adversaries being defeated and unable to comprehend his superhuman
constancy, cast him again into prison. A third time he was brought
before the judge; and having witnessed the same profession, being half
dead, he was finally thrown into the depths of the sea.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p20"></span>14. But what happened immediately after
this will scarcely be believed by those who did not see it. Although we
realize this, yet we must record the event, of which to speak plainly,
all the inhabitants of Cæsarea were witnesses. For truly there was no
age but beheld this marvelous sight.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p21"></span>15. For as soon as they had cast this
truly sacred and thrice-blessed youth into the fathomless depths of the
sea, an uncommon commotion and disturbance agitated the sea and all the
shore about it, so that the land and the entire city were shaken by it.
And at the same time with this wonderful and sudden perturbation, the
sea threw out before the gates of the city the body of the divine
martyr, as if unable to endure it. <span
id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646)

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p23"></span>Such was the death of the wonderful
Apphianus. It occurred on the second day of the month Xanthicus, <span
id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647) which is the fourth day before the
Nones of April, on the day of preparation. <span
id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2641"></span>[345:2642](2010275.htm#fr_2641) <span
id="iii.xiv.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p3"></span> On Maximinus and his attitude toward the
Christians, see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 14, note 2. He was made a Cæsar
at the time of the abdication of Diocletian and Maximian, May 1, 305,
and Egypt and Syria were placed under his supervision.

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[345:2643](2010275.htm#fr_2642) <span
id="iii.xiv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p5"></span> Apphianus is called, in the Syriac
version, Epiphanius. We know him only from this account of Eusebius. For
some remarks upon his martyrdom, see above, p. 8 sq.

<span id="fn_2643"></span>[345:2644](2010275.htm#fr_2643) <span
id="iii.xiv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p7"></span> The modern Beirût. A celebrated school
of literature and law flourished there for a number of centuries.

<span id="fn_2644"></span>[345:2645](2010275.htm#fr_2644) <span
id="iii.xiv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p10"></span> The <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.v-p10.1"></span>mss.</span>, according to Valesius, are
somewhat at variance in the spelling of this name, and the place is
perhaps to be identified with Araxa, a city of some importance in
northwestern Lycia.

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[346:2646](2010275.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="iii.xiv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p14"></span> This was simply a republication in its
fullness of Maximian’s fourth edict, which was referred to in chap. 3
(see note 2 on that chapter). Eusebius does not mean to say that this
was the first time that such an edict was published, but that this was
the first edict of Maximinus, the newly appointed Cæsar.

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[346:2647](2010275.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="iii.xiv.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p22"></span> It is perhaps not necessary to doubt
that an earthquake took place at this particular time. Nor is it
surprising that under the circumstances the Christians saw a miracle in
a natural phenomenon.

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[346:2648](2010275.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="iii.xiv.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p24"></span> Xanthicus was the eighth month of the
Macedonian year, and corresponded to our April (see table on p. 403,
below). The martyrdom of Apphianus must have taken place in 306, not
305; for according to the direct testimony of Lactantius (*de Mort.
pers.* chap. 19; the statement is unaccountably omitted in the English
translation given in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers*), Maximinus did not
become Cæsar until May 1, 305; while, according to the present chapter,
Apphianus suffered martyrdom after Maximinus had been raised to that
position. Eusebius himself puts the abdication of the old emperors and
the appointment of the new Cæsars early in April or late in March (see
above, chap. 3, §5, and the Syriac version of the *Martyrs,* p. 12), and
with him agree other early authorities. But it is more difficult to
doubt the accuracy of Lactantius’ dates than to suppose the others
mistaken, and hence May 1st is commonly accepted by historians as the
day of abdication. About the year there can be no question; for
Lactantius’ account of Diocletian’s movements during the previous year
exhibits a very exact knowledge of the course of events, and its
accuracy cannot be doubted. (For a fuller discussion of the date of the
abdication, see Tillemont’s *Hist. des Emp.,* 2d ed., IV. p. 609.) But
even if it were admitted that the abdication took place four or five
weeks earlier (according to Eusebius’ own statement, it did not at any
rate occur before the twenty-fourth of March: see chap. 3, above, and
the Syriac version, p. 12), it would be impossible to put Apphianus’
death on the second of April, for this would not give time for all that
must intervene between the day of his appointment and the republication
and execution of the persecuting edicts. In fact, it is plain enough
from the present chapter that Apphianus did not suffer until some time
after the accession of Maximinus, and therefore not until the following
year. Eusebius, as can be seen from the first paragraph of this work on
the martyrs, reckoned the beginning of the persecution in Palestine not
with the issue of the first edict in Nicomedia on Feb. 24, 303, but with
the month of April of that same year. Apphianus’ death therefore took
place at the very close of the third year of the persecution, according
to this reckoning.

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[346:2649](2010275.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="iii.xiv.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p25"></span> i.e. Friday, the old Jewish term being
still retained and widely used, although with the change of the Sabbath
from the seventh to the first day of the week it had entirely lost its
meaning. Upon the prevalence of the word among the Fathers as a
designation of Friday, see Suicer’s *Thesaurus,* s.v. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiv.v-p25.1"></span>παρασκευή</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiv.v-p25.2"></span>νηστεῖα</span>.
The day of Christ’s crucifixion was called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.v-p25.3"></span>μεγ€λη παρασκευή</span>, the “great
preparation.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](2010276)
