[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010131)  [Next](2010133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—</span>*Dionysius, Bishop
of Corinth, and the Epistles which he wrote.* <span
id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244)

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p4.1"></span>And</span> first we must speak of
Dionysius, who was appointed bishop of the church in Corinth, and
communicated freely of his inspired labors not only to his own people,
but also to those in foreign lands, and rendered the greatest service to
all in the catholic epistles which he wrote to the churches.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p5"></span>2. Among these is the one addressed to
the Lacedæmonians, <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245) containing
instruction in the orthodox faith and an admonition to peace and unity;
the one also addressed to the Athenians, exciting them to faith and to
the life prescribed by the Gospel, which he accuses them of esteeming
lightly, as if they had almost apostatized from the faith since the
martyrdom of their ruler Publius, <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246) which had taken place during the
persecutions of those days.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p8"></span>3. He mentions Quadratus <span
id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247) also, stating that he was appointed
their bishop after the martyrdom of Publius, and testifying that through
his zeal they were brought together again and their faith revived. He
records, moreover, that Dionysius the Areopagite, <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248) <span id="page_201">p. 201</span>
<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-Page_201"></span>who was converted to the faith
by the apostle Paul, according to the statement in the Acts of the
Apostles, <span id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249) first obtained the
episcopate of the church at Athens.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p12"></span>4. And there is extant another
epistle of his addressed to the Nicomedians, <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250) in which he attacks the heresy of
Marcion, and stands fast by the canon of the truth.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p14"></span>5. Writing also to the church that is
in Gortyna, <span id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251) together with the
other parishes in Crete, he commends their bishop Philip, <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252) because of the many acts of
fortitude which are testified to as performed by the church under him,
and he warns them to be on their guard against the aberrations of the
heretics.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p17"></span>6. And writing to the church that is
in Amastris, <span id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253) together with
those in Pontus, he refers to Bacchylides <span
id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254) and Elpistus, as having urged him
to write, and he adds explanations of passages of the divine Scriptures,
and mentions their bishop Palmas <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255) by name. He gives them much advice
also in regard to marriage and chastity, and commands them to receive
those who come back again after any fall, whether it be delinquency or
heresy. <span id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256)

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p22"></span>7. Among these is inserted also
another epistle addressed to the Cnosians, <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257) in which he exhorts Pinytus, bishop
of the parish, not to lay upon the brethren a grievous and compulsory
burden in regard to chastity, but to have regard to the weakness of the
multitude.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p25"></span>8. Pinytus, replying to this epistle,
admires and commends Dionysius, but exhorts him in turn to impart some
time more solid food, and to feed the people under him, when he wrote
again, with more advanced teaching, that they might not be fed
continually on these milky doctrines and imperceptibly grow old under a
training calculated for children. In this epistle also Pinytus’
orthodoxy in the faith and his care for the welfare of those placed
under him, his learning and his comprehension of divine things, are
revealed as in a most perfect image.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p26"></span>9. There is extant also another
epistle written by Dionysius to the Romans, and addressed to
Soter, <span id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258) who was bishop at that
time. We cannot do better than to subjoin some passages from this
epistle, in which he commends the practice of the Romans which has been
retained down to the persecution in our own days. His words are as
follows:

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p29"></span>10. “For from the beginning it has
been your practice to do good to all the brethren in various ways, and
to send contributions to many churches in every city. Thus relieving the
want of the needy, and making provision for the brethren in the mines by
the gifts which you have sent from the beginning, you Romans keep up the
hereditary customs of the Romans, which your blessed bishop Soter has
not only maintained, but also added to, furnishing an abundance of
supplies to the saints, and encouraging the brethren from abroad with
blessed words, as a loving father his children.”

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p30"></span>11. In this same epistle he makes
mention also of Clement’s epistle to the Corinthians, <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259) showing that it had been the custom
from the beginning to read it in the church. His words are as follows:
“To-day we have passed the Lord’s holy day, in which we have read your
epistle. From it, whenever we read it, we shall always be able to draw
advice, as also from the former epistle, which was written to us through
Clement.”

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p32"></span>12. The same writer also speaks as
follows concerning his own epistles, alleging that they had been
mutilated: “As the brethren desired me to write epistles, I wrote. And
these epistles the apostles of the devil have filled with tares, cutting
out some things and adding others. <span
id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260) For them a woe is reserved. <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261) It is, therefore, not to be
wondered <span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-Page_202"></span>at if some have attempted to
adulterate the Lord’s writings also, <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) since they have formed designs even
against writings which are of less account.” <span
id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263)

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p37"></span>There is extant, in addition to
these, another epistle of Dionysius, written to Chrysophora, <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264) a most faithful sister. In it he
writes what is suitable, and imparts to her also the proper spiritual
food. So much concerning Dionysius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[200:1245](2010132.htm#fr_1244) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p2"></span> Eusebius speaks, in this chapter, of
seven Catholic epistles, and of one addressed to an individual. None of
these epistles are now extant, though Eusebius here, and in Bk. II.
chap. 25, gives us four brief but interesting fragments from the Epistle
to the Romans. We know of the other epistles only what Eusebius tells us
in this chapter. That Dionysius was held in high esteem as a writer of
epistles to the churches is clear, not only from Eusebius’ statement,
but also from the fact that heretics thought it worth while to circulate
interpolated and mutilated copies of them, as stated below. The fact
that he wrote epistles to churches so widely scattered shows that he
possessed an extended reputation.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p3"></span>Of Dionysius himself (who is, without
foundation, called a martyr by the Greek Church, and a confessor by the
Latin Church) we know only what we are told by Eusebius, for Jerome (*de
vir ill.* 27) adds nothing to the account given in this chapter. In his
*Chron.* Eusebius mentions Dionysius in connection with the eleventh
year of Marcus Aurelius. According to Eusebius’ statement in this same
chapter, Dionysius’ Epistle to the Romans was addressed to the bishop
Soter, and as Eusebius had the epistle before him, there is no reason
for doubting his report. Soter was bishop from about 167 to 175 (see
above, chap. 19, note 4), and therefore the statements of the *Chron.*
and the *History* are in accord. When Dionysius died we do not know, but
he was no longer living in 199, for Bacchylus was bishop of Corinth at
that time (see Bk. V. chap. 22). It is commonly said that Dionysius was
the immediate successor of Primus, bishop of Corinth. This may be true,
but we have no ground for the assumption. We know only that Primus’
episcopate was synchronous, at least in part, with that of Pius of Rome
(see the previous chapter, note 2), who was bishop from about 139 or 141
to 154 or 156, and that Dionysius’ episcopate was synchronous at least
an part with that of Soter of Rome (about 167 to 175).

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[200:1246](2010132.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p6"></span> This is, so far as I am aware, the
earliest mention of a church at Lacedæmon or Sparta. The bishop of
Sparta is mentioned in the synodical letter of the province of Hellas to
the emperor Leo (457–477 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>), and also still later in the
Acts of the Sixth and Eighth General Synods, according to Wiltsch’s
*Geography and Statistics of the Church* (London ed. p. 134 and 466).

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[200:1247](2010132.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p7"></span> Of this Publius we know only what
Eusebius tells us here. What particular persecution is referred to we
cannot tell, but Publius’ martyrdom seems to have occurred in the reign
of Antoninus Pius or Marcus Aurelius; for he was the immediate
predecessor of Quadratus, who was apparently bishop at the time
Dionysius was writing.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[200:1248](2010132.htm#fr_1247) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p9"></span> We know nothing more about this
Quadratus, for he is to be distinguished from the prophet and from the
apologist (see chap. 3, note 2). Eusebius’ words seem to imply that he
was bishop at the time Dionysius was writing.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[200:1249](2010132.htm#fr_1248) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p10"></span> On Dionysius the Areopagite, see Bk.
III. chap. 4, note 20.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[201:1250](2010132.htm#fr_1249) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p11"></span> See [Acts xvii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034)<span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[201:1251](2010132.htm#fr_1250) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p13"></span> The extent of Dionysius’ influence
is shown by his writing an epistle to so distant a church as that of
Nicomedia in Bithynia, and also to the churches of Pontus (see below).
The fact that he considers it necessary to attack Marcionism in this
epistle to the Nicomedians is an indication of the wide and rapid spread
of that sect,—which indeed is known to us from many sources.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[201:1252](2010132.htm#fr_1251) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p15"></span> Gortyna was an important city in
Crete, which was early the seat of a bishop. Tradition, indeed, makes
Titus the first bishop of the church there.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[201:1253](2010132.htm#fr_1252) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p16"></span> Of this Philip, bishop of Gortyna,
and a contemporary of Dionysius, we know only what Eusebius tells us
here and in chap. 25.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[201:1254](2010132.htm#fr_1253) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p18"></span> Amastris was a city of Pontus, which
is here mentioned for the first time as the seat of a Christian church.
Its bishop is referred to frequently in the Acts of Councils during the
next few centuries (see also note 12, below).

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[201:1255](2010132.htm#fr_1254) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p19"></span> This Bacchylides is perhaps
identical with the Bacchylus who was afterward bishop of Corinth (Bk. V.
chap. 22). Elpistus is an otherwise unknown personage.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[201:1256](2010132.htm#fr_1255) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p20"></span> This Palmas, bishop of Amastris in
Pontus, presided as senior bishop over a council of the bishops of
Pontus held toward the close of the century on the paschal question (see
Bk. V. chap. 23). Nothing more is known of him.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[201:1257](2010132.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p21"></span> It is quite likely, as Salmon
suggests (in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*), that Dionysius, who wrote
against Marcion in this epistle to the Nicomedians, also had Marcionism
in view in writing on life and discipline to the churches of Pontus and
Crete. It was probably in consequence of reaction against their strict
discipline that he advocated the readmission to the Church of
excommunicated offenders, in this anticipating the later practice of the
Roman church, which was introduced by Callixtus and soon afterward
became general, though not without bitter opposition from many quarters.
Harnack (*Dogmengeschichte,* p. 332, note 4) throws doubt upon the
correctness of this report of Eusebius; but such doubt is unwarranted,
for Eusebius had Dionysius’ epistle before him, and the position which
he represents him as taking is quite in accord with the mildness which
he recommends to Pinytus, and is therefore just what we should expect.
The fact that Callixtus’ principle is looked upon by Tertullian and
Hippolytus as an innovation does not militate at all against the
possibility that Dionysius in Corinth, or other individuals in other
minor churches, held the same principles some time before.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[201:1258](2010132.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p23"></span> Cnossus, or Cnosus, was the capital
city of Crete.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p24"></span>This epistle is no longer extant, nor
do we know anything about Pinytus himself except what is told us here
and in chap. 21, above, where he is mentioned among the ecclesiastical
writers of the day. Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 28) only repeats what
Eusebius says, and Rufinus, in stating that Pinytus was convinced by the
epistle of Dionysius and changed his course, seems simply to have
misunderstood what Eusebius says about his admiration for and praise of
Dionysius. It is evident from the tone of his reply that Pinytus was not
led by Dionysius’ epistle to agree with him.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[201:1259](2010132.htm#fr_1258) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p27"></span> On Soter, see chap. 19, note 2.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p28"></span>This practice of the Roman church
combined with other causes to secure it that position of influence and
prominence which resulted in the primacy of its bishop, and finally in
the papacy. The position of the Roman church, as well as its prosperity
and numerical strength, gave it early a feeling that it was called upon
in an especial way to exercise oversight and to care for weaker sister
churches, and thus its own good offices helped to promote its influence
and its power.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[201:1260](2010132.htm#fr_1259) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p31"></span> On Clement’s Epistle to the
Corinthians, see Bk. III. chap. 16.

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[201:1261](2010132.htm#fr_1260) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p33"></span> See above, note 1.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[201:1262](2010132.htm#fr_1261) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p34"></span> Compare <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p34.1"></span>[Rev. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018)<span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p34.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[202:1263](2010132.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p35"></span> A probable, though not exclusive,
reference to Marcion, for he was by no means the only one of that age
that interpolated and mutilated the works of the apostles to fit his
theories. Apostolic works—true and false—circulated in great numbers,
and were made the basis for the speculations and moral requirements of
many of the heretical schools of the second century.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[202:1264](2010132.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p36.1"></span>οὐ τοιαύταις</span>

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[202:1265](2010132.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p38"></span> Chrysophora is an otherwise unknown
person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](2010133)
