[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010292)  [Next](2010294) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xv.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xv.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—</span>*The Misfortunes which
happened in Connection with these Things, in Famine, Pestilence, and
War.*

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xv.viii-p2.1"></span>The</span> customary rains and showers of
the winter season ceased to fall in their wonted <span id="page_362">p.
362</span> <span id="iii.xv.viii-Page_362"></span>abundance upon the
earth and an unexpected famine made its appearance, and in addition to
this a pestilence, and another severe disease consisting of an ulcer,
which on account of its fiery appearance was appropriately called a
carbuncle. <span id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742) This, spreading
over the whole body, greatly endangered the lives of those who suffered
from it; but as it chiefly attacked the eyes, it deprived multitudes of
men, women, and children of their sight.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p4"></span>2. In addition to this the tyrant was
compelled to go to war with the Armenians, who had been from ancient
times friends and allies of the Romans. As they were also
Christians <span id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743) and zealous in
their piety toward the Deity, the enemy of God had attempted to compel
them to sacrifice to idols and demons, and had thus made friends foes,
and allies enemies.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p7"></span>3. All these things suddenly took place
at one and the same time, and refuted the tyrant’s empty vaunt against
the Deity. For he had boasted that, because of his zeal for idols and
his hostility against us, neither famine nor pestilence nor war had
happened in his time. <span id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744) These
things, therefore, coming upon him at once and together, furnished a
prelude also of his own destruction.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p9"></span>4. He himself with his forces was
defeated in the war with the Armenians, and the rest of the inhabitants
of the cities under him were terribly afflicted with famine and
pestilence, so that one measure of wheat was sold for twenty-five
hundred Attic drachms. <span id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745)

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p11"></span>5. Those who died in the cities were
innumerable, and those who died in the country and villages were still
more. So that the tax lists which formerly included a great rural
population were almost entirely wiped out; nearly all being speedily
destroyed by famine and pestilence.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p12"></span>6. Some, therefore, desired to dispose
of their most precious things to those who were better supplied, in
return for the smallest morsel of food, and others, selling their
possessions little by little, fell into the last extremity of want.
Some, chewing wisps of hay and recklessly eating noxious herbs,
undermined and ruined their constitutions.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p13"></span>7. And some of the high-born women in
the cities, driven by want to shameful extremities, went forth into the
market-places to beg, giving evidence of their former liberal culture by
the modesty of their appearance and the decency of their apparel.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p14"></span>8. Some, wasted away like ghosts and
at the very point of death, stumbled and tottered here and there, and
too weak to stand fell down in the middle of the streets; lying
stretched out at full length they begged that a small morsel of food
might be given them, and with their last gasp they cried out Hunger!
having strength only for this most painful cry.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p15"></span>9. But others, who seemed to be better
supplied, astonished at the multitude of the beggars, after giving away
large quantities, finally became hard and relentless, expecting that
they themselves also would soon suffer the same calamities as those who
begged. So that in the midst of the market-places and lanes, dead and
naked bodies lay unburied for many days, presenting the most lamentable
spectacle to those that beheld them.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p16"></span>10. Some also became food for dogs, on
which account the survivors began to kill the dogs, lest they should
become mad and should go to devouring men.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p17"></span>11. But still worse was the pestilence
which consumed entire houses and families, and especially those whom the
famine was not able to destroy because of their abundance of food. Thus
men of wealth, rulers and governors and multitudes in office, as if left
by the famine on purpose for the pestilence, suffered swift and speedy
death. Every place therefore was full of lamentation; in every lane and
market-place and street there was nothing else to be seen or heard than
tears, with the customary instruments and the voices of the
mourners. <span id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746)

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p19"></span>12. In this way death, waging war with
these two weapons, pestilence and famine, destroyed whole families in a
short time, so that one could see two or three dead bodies carried out
at once.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p20"></span>13. Such were the rewards of the
boasting of Maximinus and of the measures of the cities against us.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p21"></span>Then did the evidences of the
universal zeal and piety of the Christians become manifest to all the
heathen.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p22"></span>14. For they alone in the midst of
such ills showed their sympathy <span id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span
id="iii.xv.viii-Page_363"></span>and humanity by their deeds. Every day
some continued caring for and burying the dead, for there were
multitudes who had no one to care for them; others collected in one
place those who were afflicted by the famine, throughout the entire
city, and gave bread to them all; so that the thing became noised abroad
among all men, and they glorified the God of the Christians; and,
convinced by the facts themselves, confessed that they alone were truly
pious and religious.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p23"></span>15. After these things were thus done,
God, the great and celestial defender of the Christians, having revealed
in the events which have been described his anger and indignation at all
men for the great evils which they had brought upon us, restored to us
the bright and gracious sunlight of his providence in our behalf; so
that in the deepest darkness a light of peace shone most wonderfully
upon us from him, and made it manifest to all that God himself has
always been the ruler of our affairs. From time to time indeed he
chastens his people and corrects them by his visitations, but again
after sufficient chastisement he shows mercy and favor to those who hope
in him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[362:2743](2010293.htm#fr_2742) <span
id="iii.xv.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.viii-p3.1"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.viii-p3.2"></span>νθραξ</span>: “*a carbuncle, malignant
pustule* (acc. to some, *small-pox*).” Liddell and Scott. Eusebius is
the only writer to tell us of this famine and pestilence during
Maximin’s reign, though Lactantius (*De Mort. pers.* 37) does refer in a
single sentence to a famine, without giving us any particulars in regard
to it, or informing us of its severity or extent.

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[362:2744](2010293.htm#fr_2743) <span
id="iii.xv.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p5"></span> We do not know when Christianity was
first preached in Armenia, but late in the third century Gregory, “the
Illuminator,” an Armenian of royal blood who had received a Christian
training in Cappadocia, returned as a missionary to his native land,
which was mainly heathen, and at the beginning of the fourth century
succeeded in converting the king, Tiridates III., and a large number of
the nobles and people, and Christianity was established as the state
religion (see the articles *Armenia* and *Gregory, the Illuminator,* in
the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*).

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p6"></span>The Armenians had been friends of the
Romans for many generations and allies in their wars with the Persians
on many occasions. The present war is mentioned, so far as I know, only
by Eusebius. According to §4, below, it ended in a defeat for Maximinus.
It cannot have been a war of great consequence. It was very likely
little more than a temporary misunderstanding, resulting perhaps in a
few skirmishes between troops on the border, and speedily settled by a
treaty of some kind or another. Maximinus at any rate could not afford
to quarrel long with his Eastern neighbors, in view of the struggle with
Licinius which he knew must come in time. Whether the Armenians or the
Romans were the aggressors in this affair, Eusebius does not tell us. It
is very probable, as Mason suggests, that Maximinus tried to put down
Christianity in Lesser Armenia, which was a Roman province and therefore
under his sway, and that their brethren in the kingdom of Armenia took
up arms against Rome to avenge their kindred and their faith.

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[362:2745](2010293.htm#fr_2744) <span
id="iii.xv.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p8"></span> See the previous chapter, § 8.

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[362:2746](2010293.htm#fr_2745) <span
id="iii.xv.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p10"></span> An Attic drachm was a silver coin,
worth about eighteen or nineteen cents.

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[362:2747](2010293.htm#fr_2746) <span
id="iii.xv.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p18"></span> αὐλῶν τε καὶ κτύπων.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](2010294)
