[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010210)  [Next](2010212) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xli"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p1"></span> <span id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xli-Page_283"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLI.—</span>*The Martyrs in
Alexandria.*

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p2.1"></span>The</span> same writer, in an epistle to
Fabius, <span id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079) bishop of Antioch,
relates as follows the sufferings of the martyrs in Alexandria under
Decius:

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p4"></span>“The persecution among us did not begin
with the royal decree, but preceded it an entire year. <span
id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080) The prophet and author of
evils <span id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081) to this city, whoever
he was, previously moved and aroused against us the masses of the
heathen, rekindling among them the superstition of their country.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p7"></span>2. And being thus excited by him and
finding full opportunity for any wickedness, they considered this the
only pious service of their demons, that they should slay us.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p8"></span>3. “They seized first an old man named
Metras, <span id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082) and commanded him to
utter impious words. But as he would not obey, they beat him with clubs,
and tore his face and eyes with sharp sticks, and dragged him out of the
city and stoned him.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p10"></span>4. Then they carried to their idol
temple a faithful woman, named Quinta, that they might force her to
worship. And as she turned away in detestation, they bound her feet and
dragged her through the entire city over the stone-paved streets, and
dashed her against the millstones, and at the same time scourged her;
then, taking her to the same place, they stoned her to death.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p11"></span>5. Then all with one impulse rushed to
the homes of the pious, and they dragged forth whomsoever any one knew
as a neighbor, and despoiled and plundered them. They took for
themselves the more valuable property; but the poorer articles and those
made of wood they scattered about and burned in the streets, so that the
city appeared as if taken by an enemy.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p12"></span>6. But the brethren withdrew and went
away, and ‘took joyfully the spoiling of their goods,’ <span
id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083) like those to whom Paul bore
witness. I know of no one unless possibly some one who fell into their
hands, who, up to this time, denied the Lord.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p14"></span>7. Then they seized also that most
admirable virgin, Apollonia, an old woman, and, smiting her on the jaws,
broke out all her teeth. And they made a fire outside the city and
threatened to burn her alive if she would not join with them in their
impious cries. And she, supplicating a little, was released, when she
leaped eagerly into the fire and was consumed.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p15"></span>8. Then they seized Serapion in his own
house, and tortured him with harsh cruelties, and having broken all his
limbs, they threw him headlong from an upper story. And there was no
street, nor public road, nor lane open to us, by night or day; for
always and everywhere, all of them cried out that if any one would not
repeat their impious words, he should immediately be dragged away and
burned.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p16"></span>9. And matters continued thus for a
considerable time. But a sedition and civil war came upon the wretched
people and turned their cruelty toward us against one another. <span
id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084) So we breathed for a little while
as they ceased from their rage against us. But presently the change from
that milder reign was announced to us, <span
id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085) and great fear <span
id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span id="iii.xi.xli-Page_284"></span>of
what was threatened seized us.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p19"></span>10. For the decree arrived, almost like
unto that most terrible time foretold by our Lord, which if it were
possible would offend even the elect. <span
id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086)

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p21"></span>11. All truly were affrighted. And many
of the more eminent in their fear came forward immediately; <span
id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087) others who were in the public
service were drawn on by their official duties; <span
id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088) others were urged on by their
acquaintances. And as their names were called they approached the impure
and impious sacrifices. Some of them were pale and trembled as if they
were not about to sacrifice, but to be themselves sacrifices and
offerings to the idols; so that they were jeered at by the multitude who
stood around, as it was plain to every one that they were afraid either
to die or to sacrifice.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p24"></span>12. But some advanced to the altars
more readily, declaring boldly that they had never been Christians. Of
these the prediction of our Lord is most true that they shall
‘hardly’ <span id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089) be saved. Of the
rest some followed the one, others the other of these classes, some fled
and some were seized.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p26"></span>13. And of the latter some continued
faithful until bonds and imprisonment, and some who had even been
imprisoned for many days yet abjured the faith before they were brought
to trial. Others having for a time endured great tortures finally
retracted.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p27"></span>14. But the firm and blessed pillars of
the Lord being strengthened by him, and having received vigor and might
suitable and appropriate to the strong faith which they possessed,
became admirable witnesses of his kingdom.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p28"></span>15. The first of these was Julian, a
man who suffered so much with the gout that he was unable to stand or
walk. They brought him forward with two others who carried him. One of
these immediately denied. But the other, whose name was Cronion, and
whose surname was Eunus, and the old man Julian himself, both of them
having confessed the Lord, were carried on camels through the entire
city, which, as you know, is a very large one, and in this elevated
position were beaten and finally burned in a fierce fire, <span
id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090) surrounded by all the populace.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p30"></span>16. But a soldier, named Besas, who
stood by them as they were led away rebuked those who insulted them. And
they cried out against him, and this most manly warrior of God was
arraigned, and having done nobly in the great contest for piety, was
beheaded.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p31"></span>17. A certain other one, a Libyan by
birth, but in name and blessedness a true Macar, <span
id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091) was strongly urged by the judge to
recant; but as he would not yield he was burned alive. After them
Epimachus and Alexander, having remained in bonds for a long time, and
endured countless agonies from scrapers <span
id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092) and scourges, were also consumed in
a fierce fire. <span id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093)

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p35"></span>18. And with them there were four
women. Ammonarium, a holy virgin, the judge tortured relentlessly and
excessively, because she declared from the first that she would utter
none of those things which he commanded; and having kept her promise
truly, she was dragged away. The others were Mercuria, a very remarkable
old woman, and Dionysia, the mother of many children, who did not love
her own children above the Lord. <span
id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094) As the governor was ashamed of
torturing thus ineffectually, and being always defeated by women, they
were put to death by the sword, without the trial of tortures. For the
champion, Ammonarium, endured these in behalf of all.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p37"></span>19. The Egyptians, Heron and Ater and
Isidorus, and with them Dioscorus, <span
id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095) a boy about fifteen years old, were
delivered up. At first the judge attempted to deceive the lad by fair
words, as if he could be brought over easily, and then to force him by
tortures, as one who would readily yield. But Dioscorus was neither
persuaded nor constrained.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p39"></span>20. As the <span id="page_285">p.
285</span> <span id="iii.xi.xli-Page_285"></span>others remained firm,
he scourged them cruelly and then delivered them to the fire. But
admiring the manner in which Dioscorus had distinguished himself
publicly, and his wise answers to his persuasions, he dismissed him,
saying that on account of his youth he would give him time for
repentance. And this most godly Dioscorus is among us now, awaiting a
longer conflict and more severe contest.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p40"></span>21. But a certain Nemesion, who also
was an Egyptian, was accused as an associate of robbers; but when he had
cleared himself before the centurion of this charge most foreign to the
truth, he was informed against as a Christian, and taken in bonds before
the governor. And the most unrighteous magistrate inflicted on him
tortures and scourgings double those which he executed on the robbers,
and then burned him between the robbers, thus honoring the blessed man
by the likeness to Christ.

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p41"></span>22. A band of soldiers, Ammon and Zeno
and Ptolemy and Ingenes, and with them an old man, Theophilus, were
standing close together before the tribunal. And as a certain person who
was being tried as a Christian, seemed inclined to deny, they standing
by gnashed their teeth, and made signs with their faces and stretched
out their hands, and gestured with their bodies. And when the attention
of all was turned to them, before any one else could seize them, they
rushed up to the tribunal saying that they were Christians, so that the
governor and his council were affrighted. And those who were on trial
appeared most courageous in prospect of their sufferings, while their
judges trembled. And they went exultingly from the tribunal rejoicing in
their testimony; <span id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096) God himself
having caused them to triumph gloriously.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[283:2080](2010211.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p3"></span> I read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p3.1"></span>φ€βιον</span> with the majority of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xli-p3.2"></span>mss.</span>, and with
Valesius, Stroth, Burton, Closs, and Crusè, preferring to adopt the same
spelling here that is used in the other passages in which the same
bishop is mentioned. A number of <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p3.3"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p3.4"></span>φαβιανόν</span>, which is supported by
Rufinus, and adopted by Schwegler, Laemmer, and Heinichen. On Fabius,
bishop of Antioch, see chap. 39, note 7. The time of his episcopate
stated in that note fixes the date of this epistle within narrow limits,
viz. between 250 and the spring of 253. The whole tone of the letter and
the discussion of the readmission of the lapsed would lead us to think
that the epistle was written after the close of the persecution, but in
§20, Dioscorus is said to be still among them, waiting for “a longer and
more severe conflict,” which seems to imply that the persecution, if not
raging at the time, was at least expected to break out again soon. This
would lead us to think of the closing months of Decius’ reign, i.e. late
in the year 251, and this date finds confirmation in the consideration
that the epistle (as we learn from chap. 44) was written after the
breaking out of the Novatian schism, and apparently after the election
of Novatian as opposition bishop, for Fabius can hardly have sided with
him against his bishop, so long as he was only a presbyter. Doubtless
Novatian’s official letter, announcing his election, had influenced
Fabius. But Novation was elected bishop in 251, probably in the summer
or early fall; at least, some months after Cornelius’ accession which
took place in February, 251. It seems, from chap. 44, that Fabius was
inclined to side with Novatian, and to favor his rigoristic principles.
This epistle was written (as we learn from chap. 42, §6) with the
express purpose of leading him to change his position and to adopt more
lenient principles in his treatment of the lapsed. It is with this end
in view that Dionysius details at such length in this chapter the
sufferings of the martyrs. He wishes to impress upon Fabius their piety
and steadfastness, in order to beget greater respect for their opinions.
Having done this, he states that they who best understood the
temptations to which the persecuted were exposed, had received the
lapsed, when repentant, into fellowship as before (see chap. 42, note
6). Dionysius’ own position in the matter comes out very clearly in this
epistle. He was in full sympathy with the milder treatment of the lapsed
advocated in Rome and in Carthage by Cornelius and Cyprian.

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[283:2081](2010211.htm#fr_2080) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p5"></span> The edict of Decius was published early
in the year 250, and therefore the persecution in Alexandria, according
to Dionysius, began in 249, while Philip was still emperor. Although the
latter showed the Christians favor, yet it is not at all surprising that
this local persecution should break out during his reign. The peace
which the Christians were enjoying naturally fostered the growth of the
Church, and the more patriotic and pious of the heathen citizens of the
empire must necessarily have felt great solicitude at its constant
increase, and the same spirit which led Decius to persecute would lead
many such persons to desire to persecute when the opportunity offered
itself; and the closing months of Philip’s reign were so troubled with
rebellions and revolutions that he had little time, and perhaps less
inclination, to interfere in such a minor matter as a local persecution
of Christians. The common people of Alexandria were of an excitable and
riotous disposition, and it was always easy there to stir up a tumult at
short notice and upon slight pretexts.

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[283:2082](2010211.htm#fr_2081) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p6.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p6.2"></span>κακῶν τῇ πόλει ταύτῃ μ€ντις καὶ
ποιητής</span>. The last word is rendered “poet” by most translators,
and the rendering is quite possible; but it is difficult to understand
why Dionysius should speak of this person’s being a poet, which could
have no possible connection with the matter in hand. It seems better to
take <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p6.3"></span>ποιητής</span> in its common sense of
“maker,” or “author,” and to suppose Dionysius to be thinking of this
man, not simply as the prophet of evils to the city, but also as their
author, in that he “moved and aroused against us the masses of the
heathen.”

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[283:2083](2010211.htm#fr_2082) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p9"></span> Of the various martyrs and confessors
mentioned in this chapter, we know only what is told us by Dionysius in
this epistle.

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[283:2084](2010211.htm#fr_2083) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p13"></span> [Heb. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)<span id="iii.xi.xli-p13.1"></span>.
Upon the authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews, see Bk. III. chap. 3,
note 17; and upon Eusebius’ opinion in the matter, see Bk. III. chap.
25, note 1.

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[283:2085](2010211.htm#fr_2084) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p17"></span> We know that the closing months of
Philip’s reign were troubled with seditions in various quarters; but
Dionysius is our only authority for this particular one, unless it be
connected, as some think, with the revolt which Zosimus describes as
aroused in the Orient by the bad government of Philip’s brother, who was
governor there, and by excessive taxation (see Tillemont, *Hist. des
Emp.* III. p. 272).

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[283:2086](2010211.htm#fr_2085) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p18"></span> This refers to the death of Philip and
the accession of Decius. The hostile edicts of the latter seem not to
have been published until some months after his accession, i.e. early in
250. But his hostility to Christianity might have been known from the
start, and it might have been understood that he would persecute as soon
as he had attended to the other more important matters connected with
his accession.

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[284:2087](2010211.htm#fr_2086) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p20"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span id="iii.xi.xli-p20.1"></span>.
Eusebius reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p20.2"></span>σκανδαλίσαι</span>; Matthew, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xli-p20.3"></span>πλανᾶθαι</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xli-p20.4"></span>πλανῆσαι</span>

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[284:2088](2010211.htm#fr_2087) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p22"></span> i.e. to sacrifice.

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[284:2089](2010211.htm#fr_2088) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p23.1"></span>οἱ δὲ δημοσιεύοντες ὑπὸ τῶν πρ€ξεων
ἤγοντο</span>. Every officer of the government under the imperial
regimen was obliged to sacrifice to the Gods upon taking office, and
also to sacrifice at stated times during his term of office, and upon
special occasions, or in connection with the performance of important
official duties. He might thus be called upon in his official capacity
frequently to offer sacrifices, and a failure to perform this part of
his duties was looked upon as sacrilege and punished as a crime against
the state. Christian officials, therefore, were always in danger of
suffering for their religion unless they were allowed as a special
favor, to omit the sacrifices, as was often the case under those
emperors who were more favorably inclined toward Christianity. A private
citizen was never obliged to sacrifice except in times of persecution,
when he might be ordered to do so as a test. But an official could not
carry out fully all the duties of his position without sacrificing. This
is one reason why many of the Christians avoided public office, and thus
drew upon themselves the accusation of a lack of patriotism (cf. Origen,
*Contra Cels.* VI. 5 sq., and Tertullian’s *Apol.* c. 42); and it is
also one reason why such Christians as happened to be in office were
always the first to suffer under a hostile emperor.

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[284:2090](2010211.htm#fr_2089) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p25"></span> Cf. [Matt. xix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023)<span id="iii.xi.xli-p25.1"></span>.
This sentence shows that Dionysius did not consider it impossible even
for those to be saved who denied Christ before enduring any suffering at
all. He was clearly willing to leave a possibility of salvation even to
the worst offenders, and in this agreed perfectly with Cornelius,
Cyprian, and the body of the Roman and Carthaginian churches.

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[284:2091](2010211.htm#fr_2090) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p29.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p29.2"></span>σβέστῳ πυρί</span>.

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[284:2092](2010211.htm#fr_2091) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p32"></span> The Greek word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xli-p32.1"></span>μ€καρ</span> means
“blessed.”

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[284:2093](2010211.htm#fr_2092) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p33.1"></span>ξυστῆρας</span>. “The instrument of torture
here mentioned was an iron scraper, calculated to wound and tear the
flesh as it passed over it” (Crusè).

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[284:2094](2010211.htm#fr_2093) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p34.1"></span>πυρὶ ἀσβέστῳ</span>.

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[284:2095](2010211.htm#fr_2094) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p36"></span> Rufinus adds at this point the words
*et alia Ammonaria* (“and another Ammonaria”). Valesius therefore
conjectures that the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p36.1"></span>καὶ ᾽Αμμον€ριον ἕτερα</span> must have
stood in the original text, and he is followed by Stroth and Heinichen.
The <span class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xli-p36.2"></span>mss.</span>,
however, are unanimous in their omission of the words, and the second
sentence below, which speaks of only a single Ammonarium, as if there
were no other, certainly argues against their insertion. It is possible
that Rufinus, finding only three women mentioned after Dionysius had
referred to four, ventured to insert the “other Ammonaria.”

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[284:2096](2010211.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p38"></span> It has been suggested (by Birks in the
*Dict. of Christ. Biog.*) that this Dioscorus may be identical with the
presbyter of the same name mentioned in Bk. VII. chap. 11, §24. But this
is quite impossible, for Dioscorus, as we learn from this passage, was
but fifteen years old at the time of the Decian persecution, and
Dionysius is still speaking of the same persecution when he mentions the
presbyter Dioscorus in the chapter referred to (see note 31 on that
chapter).

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[285:2097](2010211.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="iii.xi.xli-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xli-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xli-p42.1"></span>μαρτυρί& 139·</span>. It is difficult to
ascertain from Dionysius’ language whether these five soldiers suffered
martyrdom or whether they were released. The language admits either
interpretation, and some have supposed that the magistrate was so
alarmed at what he feared might be a general defection among the troops
that he dismissed these men without punishing them. At the same time it
seems as if Dionysius would have stated this directly if it were a fact.
There is nothing in the narrative to imply that their fate was different
from that of the others; and moreover, it hardly seems probable that the
defection of five soldiers should so terrify the judge as to cause him
to cease executing the imperial decree, and of course if he did not
execute it in the case of the soldiers, he could hardly do it in the
case of others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII](2010212)
