[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010100)  [Next](2010102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXII.—</span>*Symeon, Bishop of
Jerusalem, suffers Martyrdom.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is reported that after the age
of Nero and Domitian, under the emperor whose times we are now
recording, <span id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869) a persecution was
stirred up against us in certain cities in consequence of a popular
uprising. <span id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) In this persecution we
have understood that Symeon, the son of Clopas, who, as we have shown,
was the second bishop of the church of Jerusalem, <span
id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) suffered martyrdom.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p6"></span>2. Hegesippus, whose words we have
already quoted in various places, <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) is a witness to this fact also.
Speaking of certain heretics <span id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) he
adds that Symeon was accused by them at this time; and since it was
clear that he was a Christian, he was tortured in various ways for many
days, and astonished even the judge himself and his attendants in the
highest degree, and finally he suffered a death similar to that of our
Lord. <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p10"></span>3. But there is nothing like
hearing the historian himself, who writes as follows: “Certain of these
heretics brought accusation against Symeon, the son of Clopas, on the
ground that he was a descendant of David <span
id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875) and a Christian; <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-Page_164"></span>and thus he suffered martyrdom, at
the age of one hundred and twenty years, <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876) while Trajan was emperor and Atticus
governor.” <span id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p15"></span>4. And the same writer says that
his accusers also, when search was made for the descendants of David,
were arrested as belonging to that family. <span
id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) And it might be reasonably assumed
that Symeon was one of those that saw and heard the Lord, <span
id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) judging from the length of his life,
and from the fact that the Gospel makes mention of Mary, the wife of
Clopas, <span id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) who was the father of
Symeon, as has been already shown. <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p20"></span>5. The same historian says that
there were also others, descended from one of the so-called brothers of
the Saviour, whose name was Judas, who, after they had borne testimony
before Domitian, as has been already recorded, <span
id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) in behalf of faith in Christ, lived
until the same reign.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p22"></span>6. He writes as follows: “They
came, therefore, and took the lead of every church <span
id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) as witnesses <span
id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) and as relatives of the Lord. And
profound peace being established in every church, they remained until
the reign of the Emperor Trajan, <span id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885)
and until the above-mentioned Symeon, son of Clopas, an uncle of the
Lord, was informed against by the heretics, and was himself in like
manner accused for the same cause <span
id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) before the governor Atticus. <span
id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887) And after being tortured for many days
he suffered martyrdom, and all, including even the proconsul, marveled
that, at the age of one hundred and twenty years, he could endure so
much. And orders were given that he should be crucified.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p28"></span>7. In addition to these things the
same man, while recounting the events of that period, records that the
Church up to that time had remained a pure and uncorrupted virgin,
since, if there were any that attempted to corrupt the sound norm of the
preaching of salvation, they lay until then concealed in obscure
darkness.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p29"></span>8. But when the sacred college of
apostles had suffered death in various forms, and the generation of
those that had been deemed worthy to hear the inspired wisdom with their
own ears had passed away, then the league of godless error took its rise
as a result of the folly of heretical teachers, <span
id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) who, because none of the apostles was
still living, attempted henceforth, with a bold face, to proclaim, in
opposition to the preaching of the truth, the ‘knowledge which is
falsely so-called.’ <span id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_869"></span>[163:870](2010101.htm#fr_869) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p3"></span> Trajan, who reigned from 98 to 117
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_870"></span>[163:871](2010101.htm#fr_870) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p4"></span> Upon the state of the Christians
under Trajan, see the next chapter, with the notes.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[163:872](2010101.htm#fr_871) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p5"></span> See chap. 11.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[163:873](2010101.htm#fr_872) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p7"></span> Quoted in Bk. II. chap. 23, and in
Bk. III. chap. 20, and mentioned in Bk. III. chap. 11. Upon his life and
writings, see Bk. IV. chap. 8, note 1.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[163:874](2010101.htm#fr_873) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p8"></span> In the passage quoted in Bk. IV.
chap. 22, §4, Hegesippus speaks of various heretics, and it looks as if
the passage quoted there directly preceded the present one in the work
of Hegesippus.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[163:875](2010101.htm#fr_874) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p9"></span> That is, by crucifixion, as stated
in §6.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[163:876](2010101.htm#fr_875) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p11"></span> It is noticeable that Symeon was
not sought out by the imperial authorities, but was accused to them as a
descendant of David and as a Christian. The former accusation shows with
what suspicion all members of the Jewish royal family were still viewed,
as possible instigators of a revolution (cf. chap. 20, note 2); the
latter shows that in the eyes of the State Christianity was in itself a
crime (see the next chapter, note 6). In the next paragraph it is stated
that search was made by the officials for members of the Jewish royal
family. This was quite natural, after the attention of the government
had been officially drawn to the family by the arrest of Symeon.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[164:877](2010101.htm#fr_876) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p12"></span> The date of the martyrdom of
Symeon is quite uncertain. It has been commonly ascribed (together with
the martyrdom of Ignatius) to the year 106 or 107, upon the authority of
Eusebius’ *Chron.,* which is supposed to connect these events with the
ninth or tenth year of Trajan’s reign. But an examination of the passage
in the *Chron.,* where Eusebius groups together these two events and the
persecutions in Bithynia, shows that he did not pretend to know the
exact date of any of them, and simply put them together as three similar
events known to have occurred during the reign of Trajan (cf.
Lightfoot’s *Ignatius, II.* p. 447 sqq.). The year of Atticus’
proconsulship we unfortunately do not know, although Wieseler, in his
*Christen-Verfolgungen der Cæsaren,* p. 126, cites Waddington as his
authority for the statement that Herodes Atticus was proconsul of
Palestine from 105 to 107; but all that Waddington says (*Fastes des
prov. Asiat.,* p. 720) is, that since the proconsul for the years 105 to
107 is not known, and Eusebius puts the death of Symeon in the ninth or
tenth year of Trajan, we may assume that this was the date of Atticus’
proconsulship. This, of course, furnishes no support for the common
opinion. Lightfoot, on account of the fact that Symeon was the son of
Clopas, wishes to put the martyrdom earlier in Trajan’s reign, and it is
probable that it occurred earlier rather than later; more cannot be
said. The great age of Symeon and his martyrdom under Trajan are too
well authenticated to admit of doubt; at the same time, the figure 120
may well be an exaggeration, as Lightfoot thinks. Renan (*Les
Evangiles,* p. 466) considers it very improbable that Symeon could have
had so long a life and episcopate, and therefore invents a second
Symeon, a great-grandson of Clopas, as fourth bishop of Jerusalem, and
makes him the martyr mentioned here. But there is nothing improbable in
the survival of a contemporary of Jesus to the time of Trajan, and there
is no warrant for rejecting the tradition, which is unanimous in calling
Symeon the son of Clopas, and also in emphasizing his great age.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[164:878](2010101.htm#fr_877) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p13.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p13.2"></span>πὶ Τραϊανοῦ καίσαρος καὶ ὑπατικοῦ
᾽Αττικοῦ</span>. The nouns being without the article, the phrase is to
be translated, “while Trajan was emperor, and Atticus governor.” In §6,
below, where the article is used, we must translate, “before Atticus the
governor” (see Lightfoot’s *Ignatius,* I. p. 59).

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p14"></span>The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p14.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p14.2"></span>πατικός</span> is an adjective
signifying “consular, pertaining to a consul.” It “came to be used in
the second century especially of provincial governors who had held the
consulship, and at a later date of such governors even though they might
not have been consuls” (Lightfoot, p. 59, who refers to Marquardt,
*Römische Staatsverwaltung,* I. 409).

<span id="fn_878"></span>[164:879](2010101.htm#fr_878) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p16"></span> This is a peculiar statement.
Members of the house of David would hardly have ventured to accuse
Symeon on the ground that he belonged to that house. The statement is,
however, quite indefinite. We are not told what happened to these
accusers, nor indeed that they really were of David’s line, although the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p16.1"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p16.2"></span>σ€ν</span> with
which Eusebius introduces the charge does not imply any doubt in his own
mind, as Lightfoot quite rightly remarks. It is possible that some who
were of the line of David may have accused Symeon, not of being a member
of that family, but only of being a Christian, and that the report of
the occurrence may have become afterward confused.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[164:880](2010101.htm#fr_879) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p17"></span> This is certainly a reasonable
supposition, and the unanimous election of Symeon as successor of James
at a time when there must have been many living who had seen the Lord,
confirms the conclusion.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[164:881](2010101.htm#fr_880) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p18"></span> Mary, the wife of Clopas, is
mentioned in [John xix. 25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[164:882](2010101.htm#fr_881) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p19"></span> See above, chap. 11.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[164:883](2010101.htm#fr_882) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p21"></span> See above, chap. 20.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[164:884](2010101.htm#fr_883) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p23"></span> See p. 389, note.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[164:885](2010101.htm#fr_884) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p24.1"></span>μ€ρτυρες</span>. The word is evidently
used here in its earlier sense of “witnesses,” referring to those who
testified to Christ even if they did not seal their testimony with
death. This was the original use of the word, and continued very common
during the first two centuries, after which it became the technical term
for persons actually martyred and was confined to them, while <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p24.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p24.3"></span>μολογητής</span>,
“confessor,” gradually came into use as the technical term for those who
had borne testimony in the midst of persecution, but had not suffered
death. As early as the first century (cf. [Acts
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#020), [Rev.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p24.4"></span>[Acts xxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#020)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p24.5"></span> and [Rev. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p24.6"></span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p24.7"></span>μ€ρτυς</span> was used of martyrs, but
not as distinguishing them from other witnesses to the truth. See the
remarks of Lightfoot, in his edition of Clement of Rome, p. 46.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[164:886](2010101.htm#fr_885) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p24.8"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p25"></span> This part of the quotation has
already been given in Eusebius’ own words in chap. 20, §8. See note 5 on
that chapter.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[164:887](2010101.htm#fr_886) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p26.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p26.2"></span>πὶ τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ</span>, that is, was
accused for the same reason that the grandsons of Judas (whom Hegesippus
had mentioned just before) were; namely, because he belonged to the line
of David. See chap. 20; but compare also the remarks made in note 10,
above.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[164:888](2010101.htm#fr_887) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p27.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p27.2"></span>πὶ ᾽Αττικοῦ τοῦ ὑπατικοῦ</span>. See
above, note 9.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[164:889](2010101.htm#fr_888) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p30"></span> On the heretics mentioned by
Hegesippus, see Bk. IV. chap. 22.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[164:890](2010101.htm#fr_889) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p31.1"></span>τὴν ψευδόνυμον γνῶσιν</span>; <span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p31.2"></span>[1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p31.3"></span>. A few <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p31.4"></span>mss.</span>, followed by Stephanus,
Valesius (in his text), Closs, and Crusè, add the words (in substance):
“Such is the statement of Hegesippus. But let us proceed with the course
of our history.” The majority of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxii-p31.5"></span>mss.</span>, however, endorsed by
Valesius in his notes, and followed by Burton, Heinichen, and most of
the editors, omit the words, which are clearly an interpolation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII](2010102)
