[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010061)  [Next](2010063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX.—</span>*The Events which took
Place in Jerusalem during the Reign of Nero.*

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p2.1"></span>Josephus</span> again, in the twentieth
book of his Antiquities, relates the quarrel which arose among the
priests during the reign of Nero, while Felix was procurator of Judea.

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p3"></span>2. His words are as follows <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) : “There arose a quarrel between the
high priests on the one hand and the priests and leaders of the people
of Jerusalem on the other. <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) And
each of them collected a body of the boldest and most restless men, and
put himself at their head, and whenever they met they hurled invectives
and stones at each other. And there was no one that would interpose; but
these things were done at will as if in a city destitute of a ruler.

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p6"></span>3. And so great was the shamelessness
and audacity of the high priests that they dared to send their servants
to the threshing-floors to seize the tithes due to the priests; and thus
those of the priests that were poor were seen to be perishing of want.
In this way did the violence of the factions prevail over all justice.”

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p7"></span>4. And the same author again relates
that about the same time there sprang up in Jerusalem a certain kind of
robbers, <span id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) “who by day,” as he
says, “and in the middle of the city slew those who met them.”

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p9"></span>5. For, especially at the feasts, they
mingled with the multitude, and with short swords, which they concealed
under their garments, they stabbed the most distinguished men. And when
they fell, the murderers themselves were among those who expressed their
indignation. And thus on account of the con<span id="page_123">p.
123</span> <span id="iii.vii.xxi-Page_123"></span>fidence which was
reposed in them by all, they remained undiscovered.

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p10"></span>6. The first that was slain by them
was Jonathan the high priest; <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462)
and after him many were killed every day, until the fear became worse
than the evil itself, each one, as in battle, hourly expecting death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_459"></span>[122:460](2010062.htm#fr_459) <span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p4"></span> Jos. *Ant.* XX. 8. 8. Felix showed
himself throughout very mean and cruel, and his procuratorship was
marked with continual disturbances.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[122:461](2010062.htm#fr_460) <span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p5"></span> This disturbance arose toward the end
of Felix’s term, under the high priest Ishmael, who had been appointed
by Agrippa but a short time before. No cause is given by Josephus for
the quarrel.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[122:462](2010062.htm#fr_461) <span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p8"></span> *B. J.*II. 13. 3. These open robberies
and murders, which took place in Jerusalem at this period, were in part
a result of the conduct of Felix himself in the murder of Jonathan (see
the next note). At least his conduct in this case started the practice,
which was kept up with zeal by the ruffians who were so numerous at that
time.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[123:463](2010062.htm#fr_462) <span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p11"></span> This high priest, Jonathan, had used
his influence in procuring the appointment of Felix as procurator, and
was therefore upon intimate terms with him, and took the liberty of
advising and rebuking him at pleasure; until at last he became so
burdensome to Felix that he bribed a trusted friend of Jonathan to bring
about his murder. The friend accomplished it by introducing a number of
robbers into the city, who, being unknown, mingled freely with the
people and slew Jonathan and many others with him, in order to turn away
suspicion as to the object of the crime. See Jos. *Ant.* XX. 8. 5.
Josephus has omitted to mention Jonathan’s appointment to the high
priesthood, and this has led Valesius to conclude that he was not really
a high priest, but simply one of the upper class of priests. But this
conclusion is unwarranted, as Josephus expressly calls him the high
priest in the passage referred to (cf. also the remarks of Reland,
quoted in Havercamp’s ed. of Josephus, p. 912). Wieseler (p. 77, note)
thinks that Jonathan was not high priest at this time, but that he had
been high priest and was called so on that account. He makes Ananias
high priest from 48 to 57, quoting Anger, *De temporum in Act. Ap.
ratione.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](2010063)
