[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010130)  [Next](2010132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—</span>*Hegesippus and the
Events which he mentions.*

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p2.1"></span>Hegesippus</span> in the five books of
Memoirs <span id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226) which have come down
to us has left a most complete record of his own views. In them he
states that on a journey to Rome he met a great many bishops, and that
he received the same doctrine from all. It is fitting to hear what he
says after making some remarks about the epistle of Clement to the
Corinthians.

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p4"></span>2. His words are as follows: “And the
church of Corinth continued in the true faith until Primus <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227) was bishop in Corinth. I conversed
with them on my way to Rome, and abode with the Corinthians many days,
during which we were mutually refreshed in the true doctrine.

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p6"></span>3. And when I had come to Rome I
remained there until Anicetus, <span
id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228) whose deacon was <span
id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-Page_199"></span>Eleutherus. And Anicetus was succeeded
by Soter, and he by Eleutherus. In every succession, and in every city
that is held which is preached by the law and the prophets and the
Lord.”

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p10"></span>4. The same author also describes the
beginnings of the heresies which arose in his time, in the following
words: “And after James the Just had suffered martyrdom, as the Lord had
also on the same account, Symeon, the son of the Lord’s uncle,
Clopas, <span id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229) was appointed the
next bishop. All proposed him as second bishop because he was a cousin
of the Lord.

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p12"></span>“Therefore, <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230) they called the Church a virgin,
for it was not yet corrupted by vain discourses.

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p14"></span>5. But Thebuthis, <span
id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231) because he was not made bishop,
began to corrupt it. He also was sprung from the seven sects <span
id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232) among the people, like Simon, <span
id="fr_1233"></span>[1234](#fn_1233) from whom came the Simonians, and
Cleobius, <span id="fr_1234"></span>[1235](#fn_1234) from whom came the
Cleobians, and Dositheus, <span id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235)
from whom came the Dositheans, and Gorthæus, <span
id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236) from whom came the Goratheni, and
Masbotheus, <span id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237) from whom came
the Masbothæans. From them sprang the Menandrianists, <span
id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238) and Marcionists, <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239) and Carpocratians, and
Valentinians, and Basilidians, and Saturnilians. Each introduced
privately and separately his own peculiar opinion. From them came false
Christs, false prophets, false apostles, who divided the unity of the
Church by corrupt doctrines uttered against God and against his Christ.”

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p24"></span>6. The same writer also records the
ancient heresies which arose among the Jews, in the following words:
“There were, moreover, various opinions in the circumcision, among the
children of Israel. The following were those that were opposed to the
tribe of Judah and the Christ: Essenes, Galileans, Hemerobap<span
id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-Page_200"></span>tists, Masbothæans, Samaritans,
Sadducees, Pharisees.” <span id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240)

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p26"></span>7. And he wrote of many other matters,
which we have in part already mentioned, introducing the accounts in
their appropriate places. And from the Syriac Gospel according to the
Hebrews he quotes some passages in the Hebrew tongue, <span
id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241) showing that he was a convert from
the Hebrews, <span id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242) and he mentions
other matters as taken from the unwritten tradition of the Jews.

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p29"></span>8. And not only he, but also Irenæus
and the whole company of the ancients, called the Proverbs of Solomon
All-virtuous Wisdom. <span id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243) And when
speaking of the books called Apocrypha, he records that some of them
were composed in his day by certain heretics. But let us now pass on to
another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[198:1227](2010131.htm#fr_1226) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p3"></span> The five books of Hegesippus, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p3.1"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p3.2"></span>πομνήματα</span> or
*Memoirs,* are unfortunately lost; but a few fragments are preserved by
Eusebius, and one by Photius, which have been collected by Routh, *Rel.
Sac.* I. 205–219, and by Grabe, *Spicilegium,* II. 203–214. This work
has procured for him from some sources the title of the “Father of
Church History,” but the title is misplaced, for the work appears to
have been nothing more than a collection of reminiscences covering the
apostolic and post-apostolic ages, and drawn partly from written, partly
from oral sources, and in part from his own observation, and quite
without chronological order and historical completeness. We know of no
other works of his. Of Hegesippus himself we know very little. He
apparently wrote his work during the episcopate of Eleutherus (175–189
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span>), for
he does not name his successor. How old he was at that time we do not
know, but he was very likely a man past middle life, and hence was
probably born early in the second century. With this, his own statement
in the passage quoted by Eusebius, in chap. 8, that the deification of
Antinoüs took place in his own day is quite consistent. The words of
Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 22), who calls him a *vicinus apostolicorum
temporum,* are too indefinite to give us any light, even if they rest
upon any authority, as they probably do not. The journey which is
mentioned in this chapter shows that his home must have been somewhere
in the East, and there is no reason to doubt that he was a Hebrew
Christian (see below, note 16).

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[198:1228](2010131.htm#fr_1227) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p5"></span> Of this Primus we know only what
Hegesippus tells us here. We do not know the exact date of his
episcopate, but it must have been at least in part synchronous with the
episcopate of Pius of Rome (see chap. 11, note 14), for it was while
Hegesippus was on his way to Rome that he saw Primus; and since he
remained in Rome until the accession of Anicetus he must have arrived
there while Pius, Anicetus’ predecessor, was bishop, for having gone to
Rome on a visit, he can hardly have remained there a number of years.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[198:1229](2010131.htm#fr_1228) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p7"></span> The interpretation of this sentence is
greatly disputed. The Greek reads in all the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.2"></span>γενόμενος δὲ ἐν ῾Ρώμῃ διαδοχὴν ἐποιησ€μν
μέχρις ᾽Ανικήτου</span>, and this reading is confirmed by the Syriac
version (according to Lightfoot). If these words be accepted as
authentic, the only possible rendering seems to be the one which has
been adopted by many scholars: “Being in Rome, I composed a catalogue of
bishops down to Anicetus.” This rendering is adopted also by Lightfoot,
who holds that the list of Hegesippus is reproduced by Epiphanius in his
*Panarium* XXVII. 6 (see his essay in *The Academy,* May 27, 1887, where
this theory is broached, and compare the writer’s notice of it in
Harnack’s *Theol. Lit. Zeitung* 1887, No. 18). But against this
rendering it must be said, first, that it is very difficult to translate
the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.3"></span>διαδοχὴν ἐποιησ€μην</span>, “I composed a
catalogue of bishops,” for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.4"></span>διαδοχή</span> nowhere else, so far as I am
aware, means “catalogue,” and nowhere else does the expression <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.5"></span>διαδοχὴν
ποιεῖσθαι</span> occur. Just below, the same word signifies
“succession,” and this is its common meaning. Certainly, if Hegesippus
wished to say that he had composed a catalogue of bishops, he could not
have expressed himself more obscurely. In the second place, if
Hegesippus had really composed a catalogue of bishops and referred to it
here, how does it happen that Eusebius, who is so concerned to ascertain
the succession of bishops in all the leading sees nowhere gives that
catalogue, and nowhere even refers to it. He does give Irenæus’
catalogue of the Roman bishops in Bk. V. chap. 6, but gives no hint
there that he knows anything of a similar list composed by Hegesippus.
In fact, it is very difficult to think that Hegesippus, in this passage,
can have meant to say that he had composed a catalogue of bishops, and
it is practically impossible to believe that Eusebius can have
understood him to mean that. But the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.6"></span>διαδοχήν ἐποιησ€μην</span>, if they can be
made to mean anything at all, can certainly be made to mean nothing else
than the composition of a catalogue, and hence it seems necessary to
make some correction in the text. It is significant that Rufinus at this
point reads *permansi ibi,* which shows that he at least did not
understand Hegesippus to be speaking of a list of bishops. Rufinus’
rendering gives us a hint of what must have stood in the original from
which he drew, and so Savilius, upon the margin of his <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.7"></span>ms.</span>, substituted
for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.8"></span>διαδοχὴν</span> the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.9"></span>διατριβήν</span>,
probably simply as a conjecture, but possibly upon the authority of some
other <span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.10"></span>ms.</span>
now lost. He has been followed by some editors, including Heinichen, who
prints the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.11"></span>διατριβήν</span> in the text. Val. retains
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.12"></span>διαδοχὴν</span>
in his text, but accepts <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.13"></span>διατριβήν</span> as the true reading, and
so translates. This reading is now very widely adopted; and it, or some
other word with the same meaning, in all probability stood in the
original text. In my notice of Lightfoot’s article, I suggested the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.14"></span>διαγωγήν</span>,
which, while not so common as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.15"></span>διατριβήν</span>, is yet used with <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.16"></span>ποιεῖσθαι</span> in
the same sense, and its very uncommonness would account more easily for
the change to the much commoner <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p7.17"></span>διαδοχὴν</span>, which is epigraphically
so like it.

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p8"></span>The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p8.1"></span>μέχρι</span> is incorrectly translated
*apud* by Valesius, who reads, *mansi apud Anicetum.* He is followed by
Crusè, who translates “I made my stay with Anicetus”; but <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p8.2"></span>μέχρι</span> can mean
only “until.” Hegesippus therefore, according to his own statement, came
to Rome before the accession of Anicetus and remained there until the
latter became bishop. See chap. 11, note 19, for the relation of this
statement to that of Eusebius.

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p9"></span>For particulars in regard to Anicetus,
see chap. 11, note 18; on Soter, see chap. 19, note 2, and on
Eleutherus, Bk. V. Preface, note 2.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[199:1230](2010131.htm#fr_1229) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p11"></span> See Bk. III. chap. 11, note 4.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[199:1231](2010131.htm#fr_1230) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p13.1"></span>Διὰ τοῦτο</span>. Valesius proposes to
read <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p13.2"></span>μέχρι
τούτου</span>, which certainly makes better sense and which finds some
support in the statement made by Eusebius in Bk. III. chap. 32, §7. But
all the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p13.3"></span>mss.</span> have <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p13.4"></span>διὰ τοῦτο</span>, and, as Stroth remarks,
the illogical use of “therefore” at this point need not greatly surprise
us in view of the general looseness of Hegesippus’ style. The phrase is
perhaps used proleptically, with a reference to what follows.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[199:1232](2010131.htm#fr_1231) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p15"></span> Of Thebuthis we know only what is
told us here. The statement that he became a heretic because he was not
chosen bishop has about as much foundation as most reports of the kind.
It was quite common for the Fathers to trace back the origin of schisms
to this cause (compare e.g. Tertullian’s *Adv. Val.* 4, and *De Bapt.*
17).

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[199:1233](2010131.htm#fr_1232) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p16"></span> The seven sects are mentioned by
Hegesippus just below. Harnack maintains that Hegesippus in his
treatment of heresies used two sources, one of them being the lost
*Syntagma* of Justin (see his *Quellenkritik des Gnosticismus,* p. 37
sqq.). Lipsius, who in his *Quellen der Ketzergesch.* combats many of
Harnack’s positions, thinks it possible that Hegesippus *may* have had
Justin’s *Syntagma* before him.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[199:1234](2010131.htm#fr_1233) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p17"></span> Simon Magus (see Bk. II. chap. 13,
note 3).

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[199:1235](2010131.htm#fr_1234) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p18"></span> Cleobius is occasionally mentioned as
a heretic by ecclesiastical writers, but none of them seems to know
anything more about him than is told here by Hegesippus (see the article
*Cleobius* in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*).

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[199:1236](2010131.htm#fr_1235) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p19"></span> Trustworthy information in regard to
Dositheus is very scanty, but it is probable that he was one of the
numerous Samaritan false messiahs, and lived at about the time of, or
possibly before, Christ. “It seems likely that the Dositheans were a
Jewish or Samaritan ascetic sect, something akin to the Essenes,
existing from before our Lord’s time, and that the stories connecting
their founder with Simon Magus and with John the Baptist \[see the
*Clementine Recognitions,* II. 8 and *Homilies,* II. 24\], may be
dismissed as merely mythical” (Salmon, in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*
art. *Dositheus*).

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[199:1237](2010131.htm#fr_1236) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p20"></span> Epiphanius and Theodoret also mention
the Goratheni, but apparently knew no more about them than Hegesippus
tells us here, Epiphanius classing them among the Samaritans, and
Theodoret deriving them from Simon Magus.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[199:1238](2010131.htm#fr_1237) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p21"></span> The name Masbotheus is supported by
no <span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p21.1"></span>ms.</span>
authority, but is given by Rufinus and by Nicephorus, and is adopted by
most editors. The majority of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p21.2"></span>mss.</span> read simply <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p21.3"></span>Μασβωθαῖοι</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p21.4"></span>Μασβώθεοι</span>. Just below, Hegesippus
gives the Masbotheans as one of the seven Jewish sects, while here he
says they were derived from them. This contradiction Harnack explains by
Hegesippus’ use of two different sources, an unknown oral or written
one, and Justin’s *Syntagma.* The list of heresies given here he
maintains stood in Justin’s *Syntagma,* but the derivation of them from
the seven Jewish sects cannot have been Justin’s work, nor can the list
of the seven sects have been made by Justin, for he gives quite a
different list in his *Dialogue,* chap. 80. Lipsius, p. 25, thinks the
repetition of the “Masbotheans” is more easily explained as a mere
oversight or accident. The *Apostolic Const.* VI. 6 name the Masbotheans
among Jewish sects, describing them as follows: “The Basmotheans, who
deny providence, and say that the world is ruled by spontaneous motion,
and take away the immortality of the soul.” From what source this
description was taken we do not know, and cannot decide as to its
reliability. Salmon (in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*) remarks that “our
real knowledge is limited to the occurrence of the name in Hegesippus,
and there is no reason to think that any of these who have undertaken to
explain it knew any more about the matter than ourselves.”

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[199:1239](2010131.htm#fr_1238) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p21.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p22"></span> On Menander and the Menandrianists,
see Bk. II. chap. 26; on the Carpocratians, chap. 7, note 17; on the
Valentinians, see chap. 11, note 1; on the Basilidæans, chap. 7, note 7;
on the Saturnilians, chap. 7, note 6.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[199:1240](2010131.htm#fr_1239) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p23"></span> There is some dispute about this
word. The Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p23.1"></span>Μαρκιανισταί</span>, which Harnack regards
as equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p23.2"></span>Μαρκιωνισταί</span>, or “followers of
Marcion,” but which Lipsius takes to mean “followers of Marcus.” The
latter is clearly epigraphically more correct, but the reasons for
reading in this place Marcionites, or followers of Marcion, are strong
enough to outweigh other considerations (see Harnack, p. 31 ff. and
Lipsius, p. 29 ff.).

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[200:1241](2010131.htm#fr_1240) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p25"></span> These are the seven Jewish heresies
mentioned above by Hegesippus. Justin (*Dial.* chap. 80) and Epiphanius
(*Anaceph.*) also name seven Jewish sects, but they are not the same as
those mentioned here (those of Justin: Sadducees, Genistæ, Meristæ,
Galileans, Hellenianians, Pharisees, Baptists). Epiphanius (Vol. I. p.
230, Dindorf’s ed.,—Samaritan sects 4: Gorothenes, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p25.1"></span>Σεβουαῖοι</span>,
Essenes, Dositheans; Jewish 7: Scribes, Pharisees, Sadducees,
Hemerobaptists, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p25.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p25.3"></span>Οσσαῖοι</span>, Nazarenes, Herodians). See
Jess, in the *Zeitschr. für hist. Theol.* 1865, p. 45. sq.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[200:1242](2010131.htm#fr_1241) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p27"></span> The exact meaning of this sentence is
very difficult to determine. The Greek reads: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.1"></span>ž</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.2"></span>κ τε τοῦ καθ᾽ ᾽Εβραίους εὐαγγελίου καὶ τοῦ
Συριακοῦ καὶ ἰδίως ἐκ τῆς ῾Εβραΐδος διαλέκτου τινὰ τίθησιν</span>. It is
grammatically necessary to supply <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.3"></span>εὐαγγελίου</span> after <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.4"></span>Συριακοῦ</span>, and
this gives us a Syriac gospel in addition to the Hebrew. Some have
concluded that Tatian’s *Diatessaron* is meant by it, but this will not
do; for, as Handmann remarks, the fact that Hegesippus quotes from the
work or works referred to is cited as evidence that he was a Hebrew.
Hilgenfeld supposes that the *Chaldæo syroque scriptum evangelium
secundum Hebræos,* which Jerome mentions, is referred to, and that the
first-named <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.5"></span>εὐαγγέλιον καθ᾽ ῾Εβραίους</span> is a
Greek translation, while the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.6"></span>τὸ Συριακόν</span> represents the
original; so that Hegesippus is said to have used both the original and
the translation. Eusebius, however, could not have made the discovery
that he used both, unless the original and the translation differed in
their contents, of which we have no hint, and which in itself is quite
improbable. As the Greek reads, however, there is no other explanation
possible, unless the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.7"></span>τὸ Συριακὸν εὐαγγέλιον</span> be taken to
represent some other unknown Hebrew gospel, in which case the following
clause refers to the citations from both of the gospels. That such a
gospel existed, however, and was referred to by Eusebius so casually, as
if it were a well-known work, is not conceivable. The only resource
left, so far as the writer can discover, is to amend the text, with
Eichhorn, Nicholson, and Handmann, by striking out the first <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.8"></span>καί</span>. The <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.9"></span>τοῦ Συριακοῦ</span>
then becomes a description of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.10"></span>εὐαγγέλιον καθ᾽ ῾Εβραίους</span>, “The
Syriac Gospel according to the Hebrews.” By the Syriac we are to
understand, of course, the vulgar dialect, which had before the time of
Christ taken the place of the Hebrew, and which is ordinarily called
Aramaic. Eusebius then, on this interpretation, first qualifies the
Gospel of the Hebrews more exactly, and then adds that Hegesippus quotes
from the Hebrew original of it (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.11"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.12"></span>κ τῆς ῾Εβραΐδος διαλέκτου</span>), and
not from a translation; e.g. from the Greek translation, which we know
existed early. There is, to be sure, no <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.13"></span>ms.</span> authority for the alteration
of the text, and yet the sense of the passage seems to demand it, and I
have consequently omitted the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.14"></span>καί</span> in my translation. Upon the
interpretation of the passage, see Handmann’s *Hebräer-Evangelium,* p.
32 ff., and upon the Gospel according to the Hebrews, see above, Bk.
III. chap. 25, note 24, and chap. 27, note 8.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[200:1243](2010131.htm#fr_1242) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p27.15"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p28"></span> Eusebius had abundant opportunity to
learn from Hegesippus’ works whether or not he was a Hebrew Christian,
and hence we cannot doubt that his conclusion in regard to Hegesippus’
nationality (whether based merely upon the premises given here, or
partly upon other facts unknown to us) is correct. His nationality
explains the fact that he deduces the Christian heresies from Jewish,
and not, like other writers, from heathen roots. There is, however, no
reason, with Baur and others, to suppose that Hegesippus was a Judaizer.
In fact, Eusebius’ respectful treatment of him is in itself conclusive
proof that his writings cannot have revealed heretical notions.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[200:1244](2010131.htm#fr_1243) <span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxii-p30"></span> This phrase (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p30.1"></span>παν€ρετος
σοφία</span>) was very frequently employed among the Fathers as a title
of the Book of Proverbs. Clement of Rome (1 Cor. lvii<span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p30.2"></span>.) is, so far as I know, the first so to
use it. The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxii-p30.3"></span>παν€ρετος</span> is applied also to the
apocryphal Wisdom of Solomon, by Epiphanius (*de mens. et pond.* §4) and
others. Among the Fathers the Book of Sirach, the Solomonic Apocrypha,
and the Book of Proverbs all bore the common title <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxii-p30.4"></span>σοφία</span>,
“Wisdom,” which well defines the character of each of them; and this
simple title is commoner than the compound phrase which occurs in this
passage (cf. e.g. Justin Martyr’s *Dial.* c. 129, and Melito, quoted by
Eusebius in chap. 26, below). For further particulars, see especially
Lightfoot’s edition of the epistles of Clement of Rome, p. 164.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](2010132)
