[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010161)  [Next](2010163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—</span>*How Appolonius suffered
Martyrdom at Rome.*

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxii-p2.1"></span>About</span> the same time, in the reign of
Commodus, our condition became more favorable, and through the grace of
God the churches throughout the entire world enjoyed peace, <span
id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671) and the word of salvation was
leading every soul, from every race of man to the devout worship of the
God of the universe. So that now at Rome many who were highly
distinguished for wealth and family turned with all their household and
relatives unto their salvation.

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p4"></span>2. But the demon who hates what is good,
being malignant in his nature, could not endure this, but prepared
himself again for conflict, contriving many devices against us. And he
brought to the judgment seat Apollonius, <span
id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672) of the city of Rome, a man renowned
among the faithful for learning and philosophy, having stirred up one of
his servants, who was well fitted for such a purpose, to accuse
him. <span id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673)

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p7"></span>3. But this wretched man made the charge
unseasonably, because by a royal decree it was unlawful that informers
of such things should live. And his legs were broken immediately,
Perennius the judge having pronounced this sentence upon him. <span
id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674)

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p9"></span>4. But the martyr, highly beloved of
God, being ear<span id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span
id="iii.x.xxii-Page_240"></span>nestly entreated and requested by the
judge to give an account of himself before the Senate, made in the
presence of all an eloquent defense of the faith for which he was
witnessing. And as if by decree of the Senate he was put to death by
decapitation; an ancient law requiring that those who were brought to
the judgment seat and refused to recant should not be liberated. <span
id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675) Whoever desires to know his
arguments before the judge and his answers to the questions of
Perennius, and his entire defense before the Senate will find them in
the records of the ancient martyrdoms which we have collected. <span
id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[239:1672](2010162.htm#fr_1671) <span
id="iii.x.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p3"></span> Marcia, concubine of Commodus, and
possessed of great influence over him, favored the Christians (according
to Dion Cassius, LXII. 4), and as a consequence they enjoyed comparative
peace during his reign.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[239:1673](2010162.htm#fr_1672) <span
id="iii.x.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p5"></span> Jerome (*de vir. ill.* chap. 42, and
*Epist. ad Magnum,* 4) calls Apollonius a Roman senator. It is possible
that this is only a natural conclusion drawn by Jerome from Eusebius’
statement that he defended himself before the Senate; and this
possibility might seem to be strengthened by the fact that Eusebius does
not call him a senator here, as we should expect him to do if he knew
him to be one. On the other hand, it is highly probable (as shown in the
next note) that Jerome had read the fuller account of Apollonius’
martyrdom included by Eusebius in his *Collection of Martyrdoms,* and
hence it seems likely that that account contained the statement that
Apollonius was a senator. Jerome makes Apollonius the author of an
*insigne volumen,* which he read in the Senate in defense of his faith;
but there seems to be no foundation for such a report. It is apparently
the result simply of a misunderstanding of the words of Eusebius, who
states that Apollonius delivered before the Senate a most eloquent
defense of the faith, but does not imply that he wrote an apology. The
words that Eusebius uses at the close of this chapter imply rather that
the defense made by Apollonius was recorded after its delivery, and that
it is this report of it which can be read in his *Collection of
Martyrdoms.*

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[239:1674](2010162.htm#fr_1673) <span
id="iii.x.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p6"></span> Jerome, followed by Sophronius, reports
that the accusation against Apollonius was brought by a slave. Jerome
gives the slave’s name as Severus (*a servo Severo proditus*); while
Sophronius makes Severus the name of the judge (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxii-p6.1"></span>παρὰ τοῦ δούλου παρὰ
Σεβήρῳ προδοθεὶς χριστιανὸς εἶναι</span>). The latter is impossible,
however, as the name of the judge was Perennius according to Eusebius.
Vallarsi states that some <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxii-p6.2"></span>mss.</span> of Jerome read *sub Commodo
principe ac Severo proditus,* and supposes that *ac Severo* is a
corruption for the words *a servo* (which he thinks may have stood alone
in the original text), and that some student, perceiving the error,
wrote upon the margin of his copy the words *a servo,* and that
subsequently the note crept into the text, while the word *Severo* was
still retained, thus producing our present reading *a servo Severo.*
This is an ingenious suggestion, but the fact is overlooked that
Sophronius undoubtedly read in the original translated by him the words
*a servo Severo,* for we can explain his rendering only by supposing
that he read thus, but understood the word *Severo* as the dative of the
indirect object after *proditus,* instead of the ablative in apposition
with *servo.* In the face of Sophronius’ testimony to the original form
of the text, no alteration of the common reading can be accepted. As to
the source of Jerome’s *Severus,* since there is nothing in the present
chapter of Eusebius to suggest such an addition, and no reason can be
imagined for the independent insertion of the name, the only legitimate
conclusion seems to be, that the name occurred in the account of
Apollonius’ martyrdom referred to by Eusebius just below, and that
Jerome took it thence. If this be so, then that martyrology must have
been the authority also for Jerome’s statement that Apollonius was
accused by a slave; and hence the statement may be accepted as true, and
not as the result of a misinterpretation of the reference of Eusebius’
words (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxii-p6.3"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxii-p6.4"></span>να γέ τινα τῶν εἰς ταῦτα ἐπιτηδείων
αὐτῷ</span>), as supposed by some. Since it is thus almost certain that
Jerome had himself examined the fuller account of Apollonius’ martyrdom
referred to by Eusebius, a favorable light is thrown back upon his
report that Apollonius was a senator, and it becomes probable that he
obtained this statement from the same source (see the previous note).

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[239:1675](2010162.htm#fr_1674) <span
id="iii.x.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p8"></span> M. de Mandajors, in his *Histoire de
l’Acad. des Inscript.* tom. 18, p. 226 (according to Gieseler’s *Ch.
Hist.,* Harper’s edition, I. p. 127), “thinks that the slave was put to
death as the betrayer of his master, according to an old law renewed by
Trajan; but that the occurrence had been misunderstood by the
Christians, and had given rise to the tradition, which is found in
Tertullian and in the *Edictum ad Comm. Asiæ,* that an emperor at this
period had decreed the punishment of death for denouncing a Christian.”
Such a law against the denunciation of masters by slaves was passed
under Nerva; but Gieseler remarks that, in accordance with the
principles of the laws upon this subject, “either Apollonius only, or
his slave only, could have been put to death, but in no case both.
Jerome does not say either that Severus was the slave of Apollonius, or
that he was executed; and since Eusebius grounds this execution
expressly on a supposititious law, it may have belonged only to the
Oriental tradition, which may have adduced this instance in support of
the alleged law.” It is possible that Gieseler is right in this
conclusion; but it is also quite possible that Eusebius’ statement that
the slave was executed is correct. The ground of the execution was, of
course, not, as Eusebius thinks, the fact that he brought an accusation
against a Christian, but, as remarked by de Mandajors, the fact that,
being a slave, he betrayed his master. Had the informant been executed
because he brought an accusation against a Christian, the subsequent
execution of the latter would be inexplicable. But it is conceivable
that the prefect Perennius may have sentenced the informant to death, in
accordance with the old law mentioned by de Mandajors, and that then,
Apollonius being a senator, he may have requested him to appear before
that body, and make his defense to them, in order that he might pass
judgment upon him in accordance with the decision of the Senate. It is
quite conceivable that, the emperor being inclined to favor the
Christians, Perennius may not have cared to pass judgment against
Apollonius until he had learned the opinion of the Senate on the matter
(cf. what Neander has to say on the subject, in his *Ch. Hist.*). As
remarked by Valesius, the Senate was not a judicial court, and hence
could not itself sentence Apollonius; but it could, of course,
communicate to the prefect its opinion, and he could then pass judgment
accordingly. It is significant that the Greek reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxii-p8.1"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxii-p8.2"></span>σὰν ἀπὸ δόγματος
συγκλήτου</span>, inserting the particle <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxii-p8.3"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxii-p8.4"></span>σ€ν</span>, “as if”; i.e. “*as if* by decree
of the Senate.”

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[240:1676](2010162.htm#fr_1675) <span
id="iii.x.xxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p10"></span> Valesius thinks the reference here is
to Pliny’s rescript to Trajan (see above, Bk. III. chap. 33). This is
possible, though the language of Eusebius seems to imply a more general
reference to all kinds of cases, not simply to the cases of Christians.

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[240:1677](2010162.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="iii.x.xxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p11"></span> On Eusebius’ great *Collection of
Martyrdoms,* which is now lost, see above, p. 30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](2010163)
