[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010224)  [Next](2010226) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—</span>*The Abominable Error
of the Heretics; the Divine Vision of Dionysius; and the Ecclesiastical
Canon which he received.*

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p2.1"></span>In</span> the third epistle on baptism
which this same Dionysius wrote to Philemon, <span
id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185) the Roman presbyter, he relates the
following: “But I examined the works and traditions of the heretics,
defiling my mind for a little time with their abominable opinions, but
receiving this benefit from them, that I refuted them by myself, and
detested them all the more.

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p4"></span>2. And when a certain brother among
the presbyters restrained me, fearing that I should be carried away with
the filth of their wickedness (for it would defile my soul),—in which
also, as I perceived, he spoke the truth,<span id="page_296">p.
296</span> <span id="iii.xii.viii-Page_296"></span>—a vision sent from
God came and strengthened me.

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p5"></span>3. And the word which came to me
commanded me, saying distinctly, ‘Read everything which thou canst take
in hand, <span id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186) for thou art able to
correct and prove all; and this has been to thee from the beginning the
cause of thy faith.’ I received the vision as agreeing with the
apostolic word, which says to them that are stronger, ‘Be skillful
money-changers.’” <span id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187)

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p8"></span>4. Then after saying some things
concerning all the heresies he adds: “I received this rule and ordinance
from our blessed father, <span id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188)
Heraclas. <span id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189) For those who came
over from heresies, although they had apostatized from the Church,—or
rather had not apostatized, but seemed to meet with them, yet were
charged with resorting to some false teacher,—when he had expelled them
from the Church he did not receive them back, though they entreated for
it, until they had publicly reported all things which they had heard
from their adversaries; but then he received them without requiring of
them another baptism. <span id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190) For
they had formerly received the Holy Spirit from him.”

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p12"></span>5. Again, after treating the question
thoroughly, he adds: “I have learned also that this <span
id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191) is not a novel practice introduced
in Africa alone, but that even long ago in the times of the bishops
before us this opinion has been adopted in the most populous churches,
and in synods of the brethren in Iconium and Synnada, <span
id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192) and by many others. To overturn
their counsels and throw them into strife and contention, I cannot
endure. For it is said, <span id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193) ‘Thou
shalt not remove thy neighbor’s landmark, which thy fathers have
set.’” <span id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194)

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p17"></span>6. His fourth epistle on
baptism <span id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195) was written to
Dionysius <span id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196) of Rome, who was
then a presbyter, but not long after received the episcopate of that
church. It is evident from what is stated of him by Dionysius of
Alexandria, that he also was a learned and admirable man. Among other
things he writes to him as follows concerning Novatus:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[295:2186](2010225.htm#fr_2185) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p3"></span> Of this Philemon we know no more than
we can gather from this chapter. Upon Dionysius’ position on the
re-baptism of heretics, see above, chap. 2, note 4, and upon his other
epistles on that subject, see chap. 5, note 6.

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[296:2187](2010225.htm#fr_2186) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p6"></span> Dionysius, in following this vision,
was but showing himself a genuine disciple of his master Origen, and
exhibiting the true spirit of the earlier Alexandrian school.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[296:2188](2010225.htm#fr_2187) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.3"></span>ἀποστολικῇ φωνῇ συντρέχον</span>…<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.viii-p7.4"></span>γίνεσθε δόκιμοι
τραπεζιται</span>. This saying, sometimes in the brief form given here,
sometimes as part of a longer sentence (e.g. in Clement of Alex.
*Strom.* I. 28, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.5"></span>γίνεσθε δὲ δόκιμοι τραπεζιται, τὰ μὲν
ἀποδοκιμ€ζοντες, τὸ δὲ καλὸν κατέχοντες</span>), appears very frequently
in the writings of the Fathers. In some cases it is cited (in connection
with <span id="iii.xii.viii-p7.6"></span>[1 Thess.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.7"></span>) on the authority of Paul (in the present
case as an “apostolic word”), in other cases on the authority of
“Scripture” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.8"></span>ᾑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.9"></span>γραφή</span>, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.10"></span>γέγραπται</span>, or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.viii-p7.11"></span>θεῖος λόγος</span>),
in still more cases as an utterance of Christ himself. There can be
little doubt that Christ really did utter these words, and that the
words used by Paul in <span id="iii.xii.viii-p7.12"></span>[1 Thess.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.13"></span>, were likewise spoken by Christ in the
same connection. We may, in fact, with considerable confidence recognize
in these words part of a genuine extra-canonical saying of Christ, which
was widely current in the early Church. We are to explain the words then
not as so many have done, as merely based upon the words of Christ,
reported in [Matt. xxv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)<span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.14"></span> sq., or upon the words of Paul already
referred to, but as an actual utterance of the Master. Moreover, we may,
since Resch’s careful discussion of the whole subject of the *Agrapha*
(or extra-canonical sayings of Christ), with considerable confidence
assume that these words were handed down to post-apostolic times not in
an apocryphal gospel, nor by mere oral tradition, but in the original
Hebrew Matthew, of which Papias and many others tell us, and which is
probably to be looked upon as a pre-canonical gospel, *with* the
“Ur-Marcus” the main source of our present gospels of Matthew and Luke,
and *through* the “Ur-Marcus” one of the sources of our present Gospel
of Mark. Looked upon in this light these words quoted by Dionysius
become of great interest to us. They (or a part of the same saying) are
quoted more frequently by the Fathers than any other of the *Agrapha*
(Resch, on p. 116 sq. gives 69 instances). Their interpretation, in
connection with the words of Paul in <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.15"></span>[1 Thess.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.16"></span>, has been very satisfactorily discussed
by Hänsel in the *Studien und Kritiken,* 1836, p. 170 sq. They
undoubtedly mean that we are to test and to distinguish between the true
and the false, the good and the bad, as a skillful money-changer
distinguishes good and bad coins. For a full discussion of this
utterance, and for an exhibition of the many other patristic passages in
which it occurs, see the magnificent work of Alfred Resch, *Agrapha:
Aussercanonische Evangelienfragmente,* in Gebhardt and Harnack’s *Texte
und Untersuchungen,* Bd. V. Heft 4, Leipzig, 1889; the most complete and
satisfactory discussion of the whole subject of the Agrapha which we
have.

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[296:2189](2010225.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p9.1"></span>π€πα</span>. According to Suicer
(*Thesaurus*) all bishops in the Occident as late as the fifth century
were called *Papæ* as a mark of honor and though the term by that time
had begun to be used in a distinctive sense of the bishop of Rome, the
older usage continued in parts of the West outside of Italy, until
Gregory VII. (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p9.2"></span>a.d.</span> 1075) forbade the use of the
name for any other than the pope. In the East the word was used for a
long time as the especial title of the bishops of Alexandria and of Rome
(see Suicer’s *Thesaurus* and Gieseler’s *Church Hist.* Harper’s
edition, I. p. 499).

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[296:2190](2010225.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p10"></span> On Heraclas, see Bk. VI. chap. 3,
note 2.

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[296:2191](2010225.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p11"></span> Compare Cyprian’s epistle to Quintus
concerning the baptism of heretics (*Ep.* 70, *al.* 71). Cyprian there
takes the position stated here, that those who have been baptized in the
Church and have afterward gone over to heresy and then returned again to
the Church are not to be re-baptized, but to be received with the laying
on of hands only. This of course does not at all invalidate the position
of Cyprian and the others who re-baptized heretics, for they baptized
heretics not because they had been heretics, but because they had not
received true baptism, nor indeed any baptism at all, which it was
impossible, in their view, for a heretic to give. They therefore
repudiated (as Cyprian does in the epistle referred to) the term
re-baptism, denying that they *re*-baptized anybody.

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[296:2192](2010225.htm#fr_2191) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p13"></span> Namely the re-baptism (or, as they
would say, the *baptism*) of those who had received baptism only at the
hands of heretics standing without the communion of the Church.

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[296:2193](2010225.htm#fr_2192) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p14"></span> Iconium was the principal city of
Lycaonia, and Synnada a city of Phrygia. The synod of Iconium referred
to here is mentioned also by Firmilian in his epistle to Cyprian, §§7
and 19 (*Cypriani Ep.* 74, *al.* 75). From that epistle we learn that
the synod was attended by bishops from Phrygia, Cilicia, Galatia, and
other countries, and that heretical baptism was entirely rejected by it.
Moreover, we learn that Firmilian himself was present at the synod, and
that it was held a considerable time before the writing of his epistle.
This leads us to place the synod between 230 (on Firmilian’s dates, see
above, Bk. VI. chap. 26, note 3) and 240 or 250. Since it took place a
considerable time before Firmilian wrote, it can hardly have been held
much later than 240. Of the synod of Synnada, we know nothing. It very
likely took place about the same time. See Hefele’s *Conciliengesch.* I.
p. 107 sq. Dionysius was undoubtedly correct in appealing to ancient
custom for the practice which he supported (see above, chap. 2, note 3).

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[296:2194](2010225.htm#fr_2193) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p15.1"></span>φησί</span>, i.e. “The Scripture saith.”

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[296:2195](2010225.htm#fr_2194) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p16"></span> [Deut. xix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014)<span
id="iii.xii.viii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[296:2196](2010225.htm#fr_2195) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p18"></span> On Dionysius’ other epistles on
baptism, see above, chap. 5, note 6.

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[296:2197](2010225.htm#fr_2196) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p19"></span> On Dionysius of Rome, see below,
chap. 27, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](2010226)
