[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010314)  [Next](2010316) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii.viii-p1"></span> On Bk. III. chap. 39, § 1 (note 1,
continued).

<span id="iii.xvii.viii-p2"></span>Since the above note was in type
Resch’s important work on the *<span
id="iii.xvii.viii-p2.1"></span>Agrapha*(von Gebhardt and Harnack’s
*<span id="iii.xvii.viii-p2.2"></span>Texte und Untersuchungen*, Bd. V.
Heft 4) has come to hand. On p. 27 sq. he discusses at considerable
length the sources of the Synoptic Gospels. He accepts the theory which
is most widely adopted by New-Testament critics, that the synoptic
tradition as contained in our Synoptic Gospels rests upon an original
Gospel of Mark (nearly if not quite identical with our present Gospel of
Mark) and a pre-canonical Hebrew Gospel. In agreement with such critics
he draws a sharp distinction between this original Hebrew Gospel and our
canonical Greek Matthew, while at the same time recognizing that the
latter reproduces that original more fully <span id="page_390">p.
390</span> <span id="iii.xvii.viii-Page_390"></span>than either of the
other Gospels does. This original Hebrew he then identifies with the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xvii.viii-p2.3"></span>λόγια</span>
referred to by Papias as composed by Matthew in the Hebrew tongue (see
Bk. III. chap. 39, § 16); that is, with the traditional Hebrew Gospel of
Matthew (see *ibid*. chap. 24, note 5). The arguments which he urges in
support of this position are very strong. Handmann regards the Gospel
according to the Hebrews as the second original source of the synoptic
tradition, alongside of the Ur-Marcus, and even suggests its
identification with the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xvii.viii-p2.4"></span>λόγια</span> of Papias, and yet denies
its identity with the Hebrew Matthew. On the other hand, Resch regards
the Hebrew Matthew, which he identifies with the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xvii.viii-p2.5"></span>λόγια</span> of
Papias, as the second original source of the synoptic tradition,
alongside of Mark or the Ur-Marcus, and yet, like Handmann, though on
entirely different grounds, denies the identity of the Gospel according
to the Hebrews with the Hebrew Matthew. Their positions certainly tend
to confirm my suggestion that the Hebrew Matthew and the Gospel
according to the Hebrews were originally identical (see above, Bk. III.
chap. 27, note 8).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note 9](2010316)
