[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010106)  [Next](2010108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII</span>.—*The Epistle
of Clement and the Writings falsely ascribed to him.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>Thus</span> Ignatius has done in the
epistles which we have mentioned, <span
id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932) and Clement in his epistle which is
accepted by all, and which he wrote in the name of the church of Rome to
the church of Corinth. <span id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933) In this
epistle he gives many thoughts drawn from the Epistle to the Hebrews,
and also quotes verbally some of its expressions, thus showing most
plainly that it is not a recent production.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p5"></span>2. Wherefore it has seemed
reasonable to reckon it with the other writings of the apostle. For as
Paul had written to the Hebrews in his native tongue, some say that the
evangelist Luke, others that this Clement himself, translated the
epistle.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p6"></span>3. The latter seems more probable,
because the epistle of Clement and that to the Hebrews have a similar
character in regard to style, and still further because the thoughts
contained in the two works are not very different. <span
id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p8"></span>4. But it must be observed also
that there is said to be a second epistle of Clement. But we do not know
that this is recognized like the former, for we do not find that the
ancients have made any use of it. <span
id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p10"></span>5. And certain men have lately
brought forward other wordy and <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-Page_170"></span>lengthy writings under his name,
containing dialogues of Peter and Apion. <span
id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936) But no mention has been made of these
by the ancients; for they do not even preserve the pure stamp of
apostolic orthodoxy. The acknowledged writing of Clement is well known.
We have spoken also of the works of Ignatius and Polycarp. <span
id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_932"></span>[169:933](2010107.htm#fr_932) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p3"></span> In chap. 36, above.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[169:934](2010107.htm#fr_933) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p4"></span> See above, chap. 16.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[169:935](2010107.htm#fr_934) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p7"></span> On the Epistle to the Hebrews and
the various traditions as to its authorship, see above, chap. 3, note
17.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[169:936](2010107.htm#fr_935) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p9"></span> Eusebius is the first one to
mention the ascription of a second epistle to Clement, but after the
fifth century such an epistle (whether the one to which Eusebius here
refers we cannot tell) was in common circulation and was quite widely
accepted as genuine. This epistle is still extant, in a mutilated form
in the Alexandrian <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>ms.</span>, complete in the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p9.2"></span>ms.</span>
discovered by Bryennios in Constantinople in 1875. The publication of
the complete work proves, what had long been suspected, that it is not
an epistle at all, but a homily. It cannot have been written by the
author of the first epistle of Clement, nor can it belong to the first
century. It was probably written in Rome about the middle of the second
century (see Harnack’s articles in the *Zeitschrift für
Kirchengeschichte,* Vol. I. p. 264–283 and 329–364), and is the oldest
extant homily, and as such possesses considerable interest. It has
always gone by the name of the Second Epistle of Clement, and hence
continues to be so called although the title is a misnomer, for neither
is it an epistle, nor is it by Clement. It is published in all the
editions of the apostolic Fathers, but only those editions that have
appeared since the discovery of the complete homily by Bryennios are now
of value. Of these, it is necessary to mention only Gebhardt, Harnack,
and Zahn’s *Patrum Apost. Opera,* 2d ed., 1876, in which Harnack’s
prolegomena and notes are especially valuable, and the appendix to
Lightfoot’s edition of Clement (1877), which contains the full text,
notes, and an English translation. English translation also in the
*Ante-Nicene Fathers* (Am. ed.), Vol. VII. p. 509 sq. Compare the
article by Salmon in the *Dict. of Christian Biography* and Harnack’s
articles in the *Zeitschr. f. Kirchengesch.* referred to above.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[170:937](2010107.htm#fr_936) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p11"></span> There are extant a number of
Pseudo-Clementine writings of the third and following centuries, the
chief among which purports to contain a record made by Clement of
discourses of the apostle Peter, and an account of Clement’s family
history and of his travels with Peter, constituting, in fact, a sort of
didactico-historical romance. This exists now in three forms (the
*Homilies,* *Recognitions,* and *Epitome*), all of which are closely
related; though whether the first two (the last is simply an abridgment
of the first) are drawn from a common original, or whether one of them
is the original of the other, is not certain. The works are more or less
Ebionitic in character, and play an important part in the history of
early Christian literature. For a careful discussion of them, see
Salmon’s article *Clementine Literature,* in the *Dict. of Christian
Biography;* and for the literature of the subject, which is very
extensive, see especially Schaff’s *Church History,* II. p. 435 sq.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p12"></span>The fourth, fifth, and sixth
books of the *Homilies* contain extended conversations purporting to
have been held between Clement and Apion, the famous antagonist of the
Jews (see Bk. II. chap. 5, note 5). It is quite possible that the “wordy
and lengthy writings, containing dialogues of Peter and Apion,” which
Eusebius refers to here may be identical with the *Homilies,* in which
case we must suppose Eusebius’ language to be somewhat inexact; for the
dialogues in the *Homilies* are between Clement and Apion, not between
Peter and Apion. It seems more probable, however, when we realize the
vast number of works of a similar character which were in circulation
during the third and subsequent centuries, that Eusebius refers here to
another work, belonging to the same general class, which is now lost. If
such a work existed, it may well have formed a basis for the dialogues
between Clement and Apion given in the *Homilies.* In the absence of all
further evidence of such a work, we must leave the matter quite
undecided. It is not necessary here to enumerate the other
Pseudo-Clementine works which are still extant. Compare Schaff’s *Church
History,* II. 648 sq. Clement’s name was a favorite one with
pseudographers of the early Church, and works of all kinds were
published under his name. The most complete collection of these spurious
works is found in Migne’s *Patr. Græc.* Vols. I. and II.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[170:938](2010107.htm#fr_937) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxviii-p13"></span> In chap. 36, above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX](2010108)
