[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010097)  [Next](2010099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.—</span>*Nicolaus and the
Sect named after him.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time the so-called sect of
the Nicolaitans made its appearance and lasted for a very short time.
Mention is made of it in the Apocalypse of John. <span
id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) They boasted that the author of their
sect was Nicolaus, one of the deacons who, with Stephen, were appointed
by the apostles for the purpose of ministering to the poor. <span
id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) Clement of Alexandria, in the third
book of his Stromata, relates the following things concerning him. <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843)

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p6"></span>2. “They say that he had a beautiful
wife, and after the ascension of the Saviour, being accused by the
apostles of jealousy, he led her into their midst and gave permission to
any one that wished to marry her. For they say that this was in accord
with that saying of his, that one ought to abuse the flesh. And those
that have followed his heresy, imitating blindly and foolishly that
which was done and said, commit fornication without shame.

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p7"></span>3. But I understand that Nicolaus had
to do with no other woman than her to whom he was married, and that, so
far as his children are concerned, his daughters continued in a state of
virginity until old age, and his son remained uncorrupt. If this is so,
when he brought his wife, whom he jealously loved, into the midst of the
apostles, he was evidently renouncing his passion; and when he used the
expression, ‘to abuse the flesh,’ he was inculcating self-control in the
face of those pleasures that are eagerly pursued. For I suppose that, in
accordance with the command of the Saviour, he did not wish to serve two
masters, pleasure and the Lord. <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844)

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p9"></span>4. But they say that Matthias also
taught in the same manner that we ought to fight against and abuse the
flesh, and not give way to it for the sake of pleasure, but strengthen
the soul by faith and knowledge.” <span
id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) So much concerning those who then
attempted to pervert the truth, but in less time than it has taken to
tell it became entirely extinct.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_841"></span>[161:842](2010098.htm#fr_841) <span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p3.1"></span>[Rev.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015)<span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p3.2"></span>. Salmon, in his article *Nicolaitans,*
in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*, states, as I think, quite correctly,
that “there really is no trustworthy evidence of the continuance of a
sect so called after the death of the apostle John”; and in this he is
in agreement with many modern scholars. An examination of extant
accounts of this sect seems to show that nothing more was known of the
Nicolaitans by any of the Fathers than what is told in the Apocalypse.
Justin, whose lost work against heretics Irenæus follows in his
description of heresies, seems to have made no mention of the
Nicolaitans, for they are dragged in by Irenæus at the close of the
text, quite out of their chronological place. Irenæus (I. 26. 3; III.
11. 1) seems to have made up his account from the Apocalypse, and to
have been the sole source for later writers upon this subject. That the
sect was licentious is told us by the Apocalypse. That Nicolas, one of
the Seven, was their founder is stated by Irenæus (I. 26. 3), Hippolytus
(VII. 24), Pseudo-Tertullian (*Adv. omnes Hær.* chap. 1), and Epiphanius
(*Hær.* 25), the last two undoubtedly drawing their account from
Hippolytus, and he in turn from Irenæus. Jerome and the writers of his
time and later accept this view, believing that Nicolas became
licentious and fell into the greatest wickedness. Whether the sect
really claimed Nicolas as their founder, or whether the combination was
made by Irenæus in consequence of the identity of his name with the name
of a sect mentioned in the Apocalypse, we cannot tell; nor have we any
idea, in the latter case, where the sect got the name which they bore.
Clement of Alexandria, in the passage quoted just below, gives us quite
a different account of the character of Nicolas; and as he is a more
reliable writer than the ones above quoted, and as his statement
explains excellently the appeal of the sect to Nicolas’ authority,
without impeaching his character, which certainly his position among the
Seven would lead us to expect was good, and good enough to warrant
permanence, we feel safe in accepting his account as the true one, and
denying that Nicolas himself bore the character which marked the sect of
the Nicolaitans; though the latter may, as Clement says, have arisen
from abusing a saying of Nicolas which had been uttered with a good
motive.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[161:843](2010098.htm#fr_842) <span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p4"></span> See [Acts
vi](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#000)<span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_843"></span>[161:844](2010098.htm#fr_843) <span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p5"></span> *Stromata,* III. 4.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[161:845](2010098.htm#fr_844) <span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p8"></span> Compare [Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[161:846](2010098.htm#fr_845) <span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxix-p10"></span> This teaching was found in the
Gospel of Matthias, or the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxix-p10.1"></span>παραδόσεις Ματθίου</span>, mentioned in
chap. 25 (see note 30 on that chapter).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX](2010099)
