[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010669)  [Next](2010671) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p1"></span> <span id="page_566">p. 566</span>
<span id="iv.vii.viii-Page_566"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*That God bestows an
Abundant Supply of whatever is suited to the Wants of Man, and ministers
but sparingly to his Pleasures; in Both Cases with a View to his
Advantage.*

<span id="iv.vii.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.viii-p2.1"></span>Let</span> what has been said suffice to
prove that nothing exists without reason and intelligence, and that
reason itself and providence are of God. It is he who has also
distributed the metals, as gold, silver, copper, and the rest, in due
proportion; ordaining an abundant supply of those which would be most
needed and generally employed, while he dispensed those which serve the
purposes merely of pleasure in adornment of luxury with a liberal and
yet a sparing hand, holding a mean between parsimony and profusion. For
the searchers for metals, were those which are employed for ornament
procured in equal abundance with the rest, would be impelled by avarice
to despise and neglect to gather those which, like iron or copper, are
serviceable for husbandry, or house-building, or the equipment of ships;
and would care for those only which conduce to luxury and a superfluous
excess of wealth. Hence it is, as they say, that the search for gold and
silver is far more difficult and laborious than that for any other
metals, the violence of the toil thus acting as a counterpoise to the
violence of the desire. And how many instances might still further be
enumerated of the workings of that Divine Providence which, in all the
gifts which it has so unsparingly conferred upon us, plainly urges us to
the practice of self-control and all other virtues, and leads us away
from unbefitting covetousness! To trace the secret reasons of all these
things is indeed a task which exceeds the power of human faculties. For
how can the intellect of a frail and perishable being arrive at the
knowledge of perfect truth, or apprehend in its purity the counsel of
God from the beginning?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](2010671)
