[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010257)  [Next](2010259) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—</span>*Those in the Palace.*

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p2.1"></span>This</span> period produced divine and
illustrious martyrs, above all whose praises have ever been sung and who
have been celebrated for courage, whether among Greeks or barbarians, in
the person of Dorotheus <span id="fr_2518"></span>[2519](#fn_2518) and
the servants that were with him in the palace. Although they received
the highest honors from their masters, and were treated by them as their
own children, they esteemed reproaches and trials for religion, and the
many forms of death that were invented against them, as, in truth,
greater riches than the glory and luxury of this life.

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p4"></span>2. We will describe the manner in
which one of them ended his life, and leave our readers to infer from
his case the sufferings of the others. A certain man was brought forward
in the above-mentioned city, before the rulers of whom we have
spoken. <span id="fr_2519"></span>[2520](#fn_2519) He was then commanded
to sacrifice, but as he refused, he was ordered to be stripped and
raised on high and beaten with rods over his entire body, until, being
conquered, he should, even against his will, do what was commanded.

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p6"></span>3. But as he was unmoved by these
sufferings, and his bones were already appearing, they mixed vinegar
with salt and poured it upon the mangled parts of his body. As he
scorned these agonies, a gridiron and fire were brought forward. And the
remnants of his body, like flesh intended for eating, were placed on the
fire, not at once, lest he should expire instantly, but a little at a
time. And those who placed him on the pyre were not permitted to desist
until, after such sufferings, he should assent to the things commanded.

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p7"></span>4. But he held his purpose firmly, and
victoriously gave up his life while the tortures were still going on.
Such was the martyrdom of one of the servants of the palace, who was
indeed well worthy of his name, for he was called Peter. <span
id="fr_2520"></span>[2521](#fn_2520)

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p9"></span>5. The martyrdoms of the rest, though
they were not inferior to his, we will pass by for the sake of brevity,
recording only that Dorotheus and Gorgonius, <span
id="fr_2521"></span>[2522](#fn_2521) with many others of the royal
household, after varied sufferings, ended their lives by strangling, and
bore away the trophies of God-given victory.

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p11"></span>6. At this time Anthimus, <span
id="fr_2522"></span>[2523](#fn_2522) who then presided over the church
in Nicomedia, was beheaded for his testimony to Christ. A great
multitude of martyrs were added to him, a conflagration having broken
out in those very days in the palace at Nicomedia, I know not how, which
through a false suspicion was laid to our <span id="page_328">p.
328</span> <span id="iii.xiii.vii-Page_328"></span>people. <span
id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523) Entire families of the pious in
that place were put to death in masses at the royal command, some by the
sword, and others by fire. It is reported that with a certain divine and
indescribable eagerness men and women rushed into the fire. And the
executioners bound a large number of others and put them on boats <span
id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524) and threw them into the depths of
the sea.

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p17"></span>7. And those who had been esteemed
their masters considered it necessary to dig up the bodies of the
imperial servants, who had been committed to the earth with suitable
burial and cast them into the sea, lest any, as they thought, regarding
them as gods, might worship them lying in their sepulchers. <span
id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525)

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p19"></span>8. Such things occurred in Nicomedia
at the beginning of the persecution. <span
id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526) But not long after, as persons in
the country called Melitene, <span id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527)
and others throughout Syria, <span id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528)
attempted to usurp the government, a royal edict directed that the
rulers of the churches everywhere <span
id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529) should be thrown into prison and
bonds.

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p24"></span>9. What was to be seen after this
exceeds all description. A vast multitude were imprisoned in every
place; and the prisons everywhere, which had long before been prepared
for murderers and robbers of graves, were filled with bishops,
presbyters and deacons, readers and exorcists, <span
id="fr_2530"></span>[2531](#fn_2530) so that room was no longer left in
them for those condemned for crimes.

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p26"></span>10. And as other decrees followed the
first, directing that those in prison if they would sacrifice should be
permitted to depart in freedom, but that those who refused should be
harassed with many tortures, <span id="fr_2531"></span>[2532](#fn_2531)
how could any one, again, number the multitude of martyrs in every
province, <span id="fr_2532"></span>[2533](#fn_2532) and especially of
those in Africa, and Mauritania, and Thebais, and Egypt? From this last
country many went into other cities and provinces, and became
illustrious through martyrdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2518"></span>[327:2519](2010258.htm#fr_2518) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p3"></span> On Dorotheus, see above, chap. 1,
note 3.

<span id="fn_2519"></span>[327:2520](2010258.htm#fr_2519) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p5"></span> i.e. in Nicomedia, before Diocletian
and Galerius.

<span id="fn_2520"></span>[327:2521](2010258.htm#fr_2520) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p8.1"></span>πέτρος</span>, “a rock.” It is clear from
the account of Lactantius (chap. 15) that this man, and the others
mentioned in this connection, suffered after the second conflagration in
the palace and in consequence of it (see below, p. 400). The two
conflagrations led Diocletian to resort to torture in order to ascertain
the guilty parties, or to obtain information in regard to the plots of
the Christians. Examination by torture was the common mode of procedure
under such circumstances, and hence implies no unusual cruelty in the
present case. The death even of these men, therefore, cannot be looked
upon as due to persecution. Their offense was purely a civil one. They
were suspected of being implicated in a treasonable plot, and of twice
setting fire to the palace. Their refusal to sacrifice under such
circumstances, and thus evince their loyalty at so critical a time, was
naturally looked upon as practically a confession of guilt,—at any rate
as insubordination on a most grave occasion, and as such fitly
punishable by death. Compare Pliny’s epistle to Trajan, in which he
expresses the opinion that “pertinacious and inflexible obstinacy” ought
at any rate to be punished, whatever might be thought of Christianity as
such (see above, Bk. III. chap. 33, note 1); and at such a time as this
Diocletian must have felt that the first duty of all his subjects was to
place their loyalty beyond suspicion by doing readily that which was
demanded. His impatience with the Christians must have been increasing
under all these provocations, and thus the regular persecution was
becoming ever more imminent.

<span id="fn_2521"></span>[327:2522](2010258.htm#fr_2521) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p10"></span> Gorgonius has been already mentioned
in chap. 1, above. See note 4 on that chapter.

<span id="fn_2522"></span>[327:2523](2010258.htm#fr_2522) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p12"></span> In a fragment preserved by the
*Chron. Paschale,* and purporting to be a part of an epistle written
from prison, shortly before his death, by the presbyter Lucian of
Antioch to the church of that city, Anthimus, bishop of Nicomedia, is
mentioned as having just suffered martyrdom (see Routh’s *Rel. Sac.* IV.
p. 5). Lucian, however, was imprisoned and put to death during the
persecution of Maximinus (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span> 311 or 312). See below, Bk.
IX. chap. 6, and Jerome’s *de vir. ill.* chap. 77. It would seem,
therefore, if the fragment given in the *Chron. Paschale* be genuine,
and there seems no good reason to doubt it, that Anthimus suffered
martyrdom not under Diocletian, but under Maximinus, in 311 or 312. In
that case Eusebius is mistaken in putting his death at this early date,
in connection with the members of the imperial household. Indeed, we see
no reason for his execution at this time, and should find it difficult
to explain if we were to accept it. In the time of Maximinus, however,
it is perfectly natural, and of a piece with the execution of Peter of
Alexandria and other notable prelates. Eusebius, as we have already
seen, pays no attention to chronology in this Eighth Book, and hence
there is no great weight to be placed upon his mention of the death of
Anthimus at this particular place. Mason (p. 324) says that Hunziker (p.
281) has conclusively shown Eusebius’ mistake at this point. I have not
seen Hunziker, and therefore cannot judge of the validity of his
arguments, but, on the grounds already stated, have no hesitation in
expressing my agreement with his conclusion. Of Anthimus himself, we
know nothing beyond what has been already intimated. In chap. 13, §1,
below, he is mentioned again, but nothing additional is told us in
regard to him.

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p13"></span>Having observed Eusebius’ mistake in
regard to Anthimus, we realize that there is no reason to consider him
any more accurate in respect to the other martyrdoms referred to in this
paragraph. In fact, it is clear enough that, in so far as his account is
not merely rhetorical, it relates to events that took place not at this
early date, but during a later time after the regular religious
persecution had begun. No such “multitude” suffered in consequence of
the conflagration as Eusebius thinks. The martyrdoms of which he has
heard belong rather to the time after the Fourth Edict (see below,
*Mart. Pal.* chap. 3, note 2), or possibly to the still later time when
Maximinus was at Nicomedia, and was in the midst of his bloody career of
persecution.

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[328:2524](2010258.htm#fr_2523) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p14"></span> Eusebius does not accuse Galerius of
being the author of the conflagration, as Lactantius does. In fact, he
seems to have known very little about the matter. He mentions only one
fire, whereas Lactantius distinctly tells us there were two, fifteen
days apart (chap. 14). Eusebius evidently has only the very vaguest
information in regard to the progress of affairs at Nicomedia, and has
no knowledge of the actual order and connection of events. In regard to
the effects of the fire upon Diocletian’s attitude toward the
Christians, see above, note 3, and below, p. 400. Constantine (*Orat. ad
Sanct. Coet.* XXV. 2) many years afterwards referred to the fire as
caused by lightning, which is clearly only a makeshift, for, as
Burckhardt remarks, there could have been no doubt in that case how the
fire originated. And, moreover, such an explanation at best could
account for only one of the fires. The fact that Constantine feels it
necessary to invent such an explanation gives the occurrence a still
more auspicious look, and one not altogether favorable to the
Christians. In fact, it must be acknowledged that the case against them
is pretty strong.

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[328:2525](2010258.htm#fr_2524) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p15"></span> Literally, “The executioners, having
bound a large number of others on boats, threw them into the depths of
the sea” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p15.1"></span>δήσαντες δὲ οἱ δήμιοι ἄλλο τι πλῆθος ἐπὶ
σκ€φαις, τοῖς θαλαττίοις ἐναπέ& 207·ῥιπτον βυθοῖς</span>). The
construction is evidently a pregnant one, for it cannot be supposed that
boats and all were thrown into the depths of the sea. They seem to have
bound the prisoners, and carried them out to sea on boats, and then
thrown them overboard. Compare the *Passion of St. Theodotus* (Mason, p.
362), where we are told that the “President then bade them hang stones
about their necks, and embark them on a small shallop and row them out
to a spot where the lake was deeper; and so they were cast into the
water at the distance of four or five hundred feet from the shore.”
Crusè translates, “binding another number upon planks,” but <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.vii-p15.2"></span>σκ€φη</span> will
hardly bear that meaning; and even if it could, we should scarcely
expect men to be bound to *planks* if the desire was to “cast them into
the depths of the sea.” Lactantius (chap. 15), in speaking of these same
general occurrences, says, “Servants, having millstones tied about their
necks, were cast into the sea.”

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p16"></span>Closs remarks that drowning was
looked upon in ancient times as the most disgraceful punishment, because
it implied that the criminals were not worthy to receive burial.

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[328:2526](2010258.htm#fr_2525) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p18"></span> Compare Bk. IV. chap. 15, §41,
above, and Lactantius, *Div. Inst.* V. 11. That in the present case the
suspicion that the Christians would worship the remains of these
so-called martyrs was not founded merely upon knowledge of the conduct
of Christians in general in relation to the relics of their martyrs, but
upon actual experience of their conduct in connection with these
particular martyrs, is shown by the fact that the emperor first buried
them, and afterward had them dug up. Evidently Christians showed them
such honor, and collected in such numbers about their tombs, that he
believed it was necessary to take some such step in order to prevent the
growth of a spirit of rebellion, which was constantly fostered by such
demonstrations. Compare the remarks of Mason on p. 135.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[328:2527](2010258.htm#fr_2526) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p20"></span> Part of the events mentioned in this
chapter occurred at the beginning; others, a considerable time later.
See note 5, above.

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[328:2528](2010258.htm#fr_2527) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p21"></span> Melitene was the name of a district
and a city in Eastern Cappadocia. Upon the outbreak there we know only
what can be gathered from this passage, although Mason (p. 126 sq.)
connects it with a rebellion, of which an account is given in Simeon
Metaphrastes. It is possible that the account of the Metaphrast is
authentic, and that the uprising referred to here is to be identified
with it, but more than that cannot be said. There can be no doubt that
the outbreak was one of the causes of the promulgation of the Second
Edict, in which case of course it is clear that the Christians, whether
rightly or wrongly, were held responsible for it. See above, chap. 2,
note 7.

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[328:2529](2010258.htm#fr_2528) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p22"></span> Valesius identifies this usurpation
in Syria with that of Eugenius in Antioch, of which we are told by
Libanius (in his *Oratio ad Theodosium post reconciliationem,* and in
his *Oratio ad Theod. de seditione Antioch.,* according to Valesius).
The latter was but a small affair, involving only a band of some five
hundred soldiers, who compelled their commander Eugenius, to assume the
purple, but were entirely destroyed by the people of the city within
twenty-four hours. See the note of Valesius *ad locum,* Tillemont’s
*Hist. des Emp.* IX. 73 sq., and Mason, p. 124 sq. This rebellion took
place in the time of Diocletian, but there is no reason for connecting
it with the uprising mentioned here by Eusebius. The words of Eusebius
would seem to imply that he was thinking, not of a single rebellion, but
of a number which took place in various parts of Syria. In that case,
the Antiochian affair may have been one of them.

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[328:2530](2010258.htm#fr_2529) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p23.1"></span>τοὺς πανταχόσε τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν
προεστῶτας</span>. Upon this second edict, see above, chap. 2, note 7.

<span id="fn_2530"></span>[328:2531](2010258.htm#fr_2530) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p25"></span> It is evident enough from this
clause alone that the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p25.1"></span>προεστῶτας</span>, “rulers,” is to be
taken in a broad sense. See the note just referred to.

<span id="fn_2531"></span>[328:2532](2010258.htm#fr_2531) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p27"></span> The Third Edict of Diocletian.
Eusebius evidently looks upon the edict as a sharpening of the
persecution, but is mistaken in his view. The idea was not that those
who refused to sacrifice should be punished by torture for not
sacrificing, but that torture should be applied in order to induce them
to sacrifice, and thus render it possible to release them. The end
sought was their release, not their punishment. Upon the date and
interpretation of this edict, see chap. 2, note 8.

<span id="fn_2532"></span>[328:2533](2010258.htm#fr_2532) <span
id="iii.xiii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.vii-p28"></span> Eusebius is probably again in error,
as so often in this book, in connecting a “multitude of martyrs in every
province” with this Third Edict. Wholesale persecution and persecution
as such—aimed directly at the destruction of all Christians—did not
begin until the issue of the Fourth Edict (see below, *Mart. Pal.* chap.
3, note 2). These numerous martyrdoms referred to here doubtless belong
to the period after the issue of that edict, although in Africa and
Mauritania, which were under Maximian, considerable blood was probably
shed even before that time. For it was possible, of course, for a cruel
and irresponsible ruler like Maximian to fix the death penalty for
refusal to deliver up the Christian books, or for other acts of
obstinacy which the Christian would quite commonly commit. These cases,
however, must be looked upon as exceptional at this stage of affairs,
and certainly rare.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](2010259)
