[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010193)  [Next](2010195) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—</span>*The Commentaries
which he prepared at Alexandria.*

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p2.1"></span>It</span> may be well to add that in the
sixth book of his exposition of the Gospel of John <span
id="fr_1962"></span>[1963](#fn_1962) he states that he prepared the
first five while in Alexandria. Of his work on the entire Gospel only
twenty-two volumes have come down to us.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p4"></span>2. In the ninth of those on
Genesis, <span id="fr_1963"></span>[1964](#fn_1963) of which there are
twelve in all, he <span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-Page_272"></span>states that not only the preceding
eight had been composed at Alexandria, but also those on the first
twenty-five Psalms <span id="fr_1964"></span>[1965](#fn_1964) and on
Lamentations. <span id="fr_1965"></span>[1966](#fn_1965) Of these last
five volumes have reached us.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p8"></span>3. In them he mentions also his books
On the Resurrection, <span id="fr_1966"></span>[1967](#fn_1966) of which
there are two. He wrote also the books De Principiis <span
id="fr_1967"></span>[1968](#fn_1967) before leaving Alexandria; and the
discourses entitled Stromata, <span id="fr_1968"></span>[1969](#fn_1968)
ten in number, he composed in the same city during the reign of
Alexander, as the notes by his own hand preceding the volumes indicate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1962"></span>[271:1963](2010194.htm#fr_1962) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p3"></span> Origen’s commentary upon the Gospel of
John was the “first fruits of his labors at Alexandria,” as he informs
us in Tom. I. §4. It must have been commenced, therefore, soon after he
formed the connection with Ambrose mentioned in the previous chapter,
and that it was one of the fruits of this connection is proved by the
way in which Ambrose is addressed in the commentary itself (Tom. I. §3).
The date at which the work was begun cannot be determined; but if
Eusebius follows the chronological order of events, it cannot have been
before 218 (see chap. 21, note 8). Eusebius speaks as if Origen had
expounded the entire Gospel (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p3.1"></span>τῆς δ᾽ εἰς τὸ πᾶν εὐαγγέλιον αὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο
πραγματείας</span>), but Jerome, in his catalogue of Origen’s works
given in his epistle to Paula (in a fragmentary form in Migne’s ed.,
*Ep.* 33, complete in the *Zeitschrift für Hist. Theol.* 1851, p. 75
sq.), reports that the commentary consisted of thirty-two books and some
notes (cf. his prologue to his translation of Origen’s homilies on Luke,
Migne’s ed., VII. 219), and Rufinus likewise (*Apol.* II. 22) speaks of
thirty-two books only. But in the thirty-second book, which is still
extant, Origen discusses the thirteenth chapter of John, and does not
promise to continue the commentary, as he does at the close of some of
the other books. We may therefore conclude that Eusebius’ rather
indefinite statement (which was probably not based upon personal
knowledge, for he says that he had seen only twenty-two books), is
incorrect, and that the commentary extended no further than the
thirteenth chapter. We learn from the preface to the sixth book that the
first five were composed while the author was still in Alexandria, the
remaining books after his removal to Cæsarea, and at least part of them
after the persecution of Maximinus (235–238), to which reference was
made in the twenty-second book, according to Eusebius, chap. 28, below.
There are still extant Books I., II., VI., X., XIII., XX., XXVIII.,
XXXII., small fragments of IV. and V., and the greater part of XIX.
(printed in Lommatzsch’s ed., Vols. I and II.). The production of this
commentary marked an epoch in the history of theological thought, and it
remains in many respects the most important of Origen’s exegetical
works. It is full of original and suggestive thought, and reveals
Origen’s genius perhaps in the clearest and best light, though the
exegesis is everywhere marred by the allegorizing method and by neglect
of the grammatical and historical sense.

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[271:1964](2010194.htm#fr_1963) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p5"></span> Of the commentary on Genesis, only
some fragments from the first and third books are extant, together with
some *extracts* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p5.2"></span>κλογαί</span>), and seventeen homilies
(nearly complete) in the Latin translation of Rufinus (see Lommatzsch’s
ed., Vol. VIII.). Eight of the books, Eusebius tells us, were written in
Alexandria, and they must, of course, have been begun after the
commencement of the commentary on John. Jerome (according to Rufinus,
*Apol.* II. 20) gave the number of the book as thirteen (though in his
catalogue mentioned in the previous note, he speaks of fourteen), and
said that the thirteenth discussed [Gen. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#015)<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p5.3"></span>;
and in his *Contra Cels.* VI. 49 Origen speaks of his work upon Genesis
“from the beginning of the book up to” V. 1. We may therefore conclude
that the commentary covered only the early chapters of Genesis. The
homilies, however, discuss brief passages taken from various parts of
the book.

<span id="fn_1964"></span>[272:1965](2010194.htm#fr_1964) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p6"></span> Origen’s writings on the Psalms
comprised a complete commentary (cf. Jerome’s *Ep. ad Augustinum,* §20;
Migne’s ed.; *Ep.* 112), brief notes (“quod *Enchiridion* ille vocabat,”
see Migne’s edition of Jerome’s works, Vol. VIII. 821, and compare the
entire *Breviarium in Psalmos* which follows, and which doubtless
contains much of Origen’s work; see Smith and Wace, IV. p. 108) and
homilies. Of these there are still extant numerous fragments in Greek,
and nine complete homilies in the Latin version of Rufinus (printed by
Lommatzsch in Vols. XI.–XIII.). The catalogue of Jerome mentions
forty-six books of notes on the Psalms and 118 homilies. The commentary
on the 26th and following Psalms seem to have been written after leaving
Alexandria (to judge from Eusebius’ statement here).

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[272:1966](2010194.htm#fr_1965) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p7"></span> There are extant some extracts (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p7.2"></span>κλογαί</span>) of
Origen’s expositions of the book of Lamentations, which are printed by
Lommatzsch, XIII. 167–218. They are probably from the commentary which
Eusebius tells us was written before Origen left Alexandria, and five
books of which were extant in his time. The catalogue of Jerome also
mentions five books.

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[272:1967](2010194.htm#fr_1966) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p9"></span> Jerome (in the catalogue and in the
passage quoted by Rufinus, *Apol.* II. 20) mentions two books and two
dialogues on the Resurrection (*De Resurrectione libros duos. Et alios
de Resurrectione dialogos duos*). Whether the dialogues formed an
independent work we do not know. We hear of them from no other source.
The work was bitterly attacked by Methodius, but there are no traces of
heresy in the extant fragments.

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[272:1968](2010194.htm#fr_1967) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p10"></span> Of Origen’s *De Principiis* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p10.1"></span>περὶ ἀρχῶν</span>),
which was written before he left Alexandria, there are still extant some
fragments in Greek, together with brief portions of a translation by
Jerome (in his epistle to Avitus; Migne’s ed.; *Ep.* 124), and a
complete but greatly altered translation by Rufinus. The latter,
together with the extant fragments, is printed by Lommatzsch, Vol. XXI.;
and also separately by Redepenning (Lips. 1836); Engl. trans. by
Crombie, in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers.* The work is the most important of
all Origen’s writings, and from it we gather our fullest knowledge as to
his opinions, philosophical and theological; though unfortunately
Rufinus’ alterations have made it doubtful in many cases what Origen’s
original meaning was. The work constitutes the first attempt to form a
system of Christian doctrine. It contains a great many peculiar, often
startling errors, and was the chief source of the attacks made upon
Origen for heterodoxy; and yet the author’s object was only to set forth
the doctrines accepted by the Church, and to show how they could be
systematized by the aid of Scripture or of reason. He did not intend to
bring forward doctrines inconsistent with the received faith of the
Church. The work consists of four books. To quote from Westcott: “The
composition is not strictly methodical. Digressions and repetitions
interfere with the symmetry of the plan. But to speak generally, the
first book deals with God and creation (religious statics); the second
and third books with creation and providence, with man and redemption
(religious dynamics); and the fourth book with Holy Scripture.”

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p11"></span>Intellectually the work is of a very
high order, abounding in deep and original thought as well as in grand
and lofty sentiments.

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[272:1969](2010194.htm#fr_1968) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiv-p12"></span> In his catalogue, Jerome gives among
the commentaries on the Old Testament the simple title *Stromatum,*
without any description of the work. But in his *Ep. ad Magnum,* §4
(Migne’s ed., *Ep.* 70), he says that Origen wrote ten books of
*Stromata* in imitation of Clement’s work, and in it compared the
opinions of Christians and philosophers, and confirmed the dogmas of
Christianity by appeals to Plato and other Greek philosophers (*Hunc
imitatus Origines, decem scripsit Stromateas, Christianorum et
philosophorum inter se sententias comparans: et omnia nostræ religionis
dogmata de Platone et Aristotele, Numenio, Cornutoque confirmans*). Only
three brief fragments of a Latin translation of the work are now extant
(printed in Lommatzsch’s ed., XVII. 69–78). These fragments are
sufficient to show us that the work was exegetical as well as doctrinal,
and discussed topics of various kinds in the light of Scripture as well
as in the light of philosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](2010195)
