[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010262)  [Next](2010264) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—</span>*Those in Phrygia.*

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p2.1"></span>A small</span> town <span
id="fr_2546"></span>[2547](#fn_2546)  <span
id="fr_2547"></span>[2548](#fn_2547) of Phrygia, inhabited solely by
Christians, was completely sur<span id="page_332">p. 332</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.xii-Page_332"></span>rounded by soldiers while the men were
in it. Throwing fire into it, they consumed them with the women and
children while they were calling upon Christ. This they did because all
the inhabitants of the city, and the curator himself, and the governor,
with all who held office, and the entire populace, confessed themselves
Christians, and would not in the least obey those who commanded them to
worship idols.

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p5"></span>2. There was another man of Roman
dignity named Adauctus, <span id="fr_2548"></span>[2549](#fn_2548) of a
noble Italian family, who had advanced through every honor under the
emperors, so that he had blamelessly filled even the general offices of
magistrate, as they call it, and of finance minister. <span
id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549) Besides all this he excelled in
deeds of piety and in the confession of the Christ of God, and was
adorned with the diadem of martyrdom. He endured the conflict for
religion while still holding the office of finance minister.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2546"></span>[331:2547](2010263.htm#fr_2546) <span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p3"></span> I read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p3.1"></span>πολίχνην</span> with the majority of <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xiii.xii-p3.2"></span>mss.</span> and editors.
A number of <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p3.3"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p3.4"></span>πόλιν</span>, which is supported by
Rufinus (*urbem quandam*) and Nicephorus, and is adopted by Laemmer and
Heinichen; but it would certainty be more natural for a copyist to
exaggerate than to understate his original.

<span id="fn_2547"></span>[331:2548](2010263.htm#fr_2547) <span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p4"></span> Lactantius (*Dio inst*. V. 11), in
speaking of persecutions in general, says, “Some were swift to
slaughter, as an individual in Phyrgia who burnt an entire people,
together with their place of meeting (*universum populum cum ipso
pariter conventiculo*).” This apparently refers to the same incident
which Eusebius records in this chapter. Gibbon contends that not the
city, but only the church with the people in it was burned; and so
Fletcher, the translator of Lactantius in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers*,
understands the passage (“who burnt a whole assembly of people, together
with their place of meeting”). Mason, on the other hand, contends that
the population of the entire city is meant. The Latin would seem,
however, to support Gibbon’s interpretation rather than Mason’s; but in
view of the account in Eusebius, the latter has perhaps most in its
favor. If the two passages be interpreted differently, we can hardly
determine which is the true version of the incident. Mason has “no
hesitation” in referring this episode to the period immediately
following the First Edict of Diocletian, at the time when the rebellions
in Melitene and Syria were taking place. It may have occurred at that
time, but I should myself have *considerable* hesitation in referring it
definitely to any particular period of the persecution. If Eusebius’
statement at the close of this paragraph could be relied upon, we should
be obliged to put the event after the issue of the fourth edict, for not
until that time were Christians in general called upon to offer
sacrifices. But the statement may be merely a conclusion of Eusebius’
own; and since he does not draw a clear distinction between the various
steps in the persecution, little weight can be laid upon it.

<span id="fn_2548"></span>[332:2549](2010263.htm#fr_2548) <span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p6"></span> Rufinus connects this man with the
town of Phrygia just referred to, and makes him one of the victims of
that catastrophe. But Eusebius does not intimate any such connection,
and indeed seems to separate him from the inhabitants of that city by
the special mention of him as a martyr. Moreover, the official titles
given to him are hardly such as we should expect the citizen of an
insignificant Phrygian town to bear. He is said, in fact, to have held
the highest imperial—not merely municipal—offices. We know nothing more
about the man than is told us here; nor do we know when and where he
suffered.

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[332:2550](2010263.htm#fr_2549) <span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p7.1"></span>τὰς καθόλου διοικήσεις τῆς ταρ᾽ αὐτοῖς
καλουμένης μαγιστρότητος τε καὶ καθολικότητος</span>. The second office
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p7.2"></span>καθολικότης</span>) is apparently to be
identified with that mentioned in Bk. VII. chap. 10, §5 (see note 8 on
that chapter). We can hardly believe, however, that Adauctus (of whom we
hear nowhere else) can have held so high a position as is meant there,
and therefore are forced to conclude that he was but one of a number of
such finance ministers, and had the administration of the funds only of
a particular district in his hands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](2010264)
