[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010012)  [Next](2010014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.i.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i.vii-p1"></span> §7. *Continuance of the Arian
Controversy. Eusebius’ Relations to the Two Parties.*

<span id="iii.iii.i.vii-p2"></span>The Council of Nicæa did not bring
the Arian controversy to an end. The orthodox party was victorious, it
is true, but the Arians were still determined, and could not give up
their enmity against the opponents of Arius, and their hope that they
might in the end turn the tables on their antagonists. Meanwhile, within
a few years after the Council, a quarrel broke out between our Eusebius
and Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, a resolute supporter of Nicene
orthodoxy. According to Socrates (*H. E.* I. 23) and Sozomen (*H. E*.
II. 18) Eustathius accused Eusebius of perverting the Nicene doctrines,
while Eusebius denied the charge, and in turn taxed Eustathius with
Sabellianism. The quarrel finally became so serious that it was deemed
necessary to summon a Council for the investigation of Eustathius’
orthodoxy and the settlement of the dispute. This Council met in Antioch
in 330 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.i.vii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> (see Tillemont, VII. p. 651
sq., for a discussion of the date), and was made up chiefly of bishops
of Arian or semi-Arian tendencies. This fact, however, brings no
discredit upon Eusebius. The Council was held in another province, and
he can have had nothing to do with its composition. In fact, convened,
as it was, in Eustathius’ own city, it must have been legally organized;
and indeed Eustathius himself acknowledged its jurisdiction by appearing
before it to answer the charges made against him. Theodoret’s absurd
account of the origin of the synod and of the accusations brought
against Eustathius (*H. E.* I. 21) bears upon its face the stamp of
falsehood, and is, as Hefele has shown (*Conciliengeschichte*, I. 451),
hopelessly in error in its chronology. It is therefore to be rejected as
quite worthless. The decision of the Council doubtless fairly
represented the views of the majority of the bishops of that section,
for we know that Arianism had a very strong hold there. To think of a
packed Council and of illegal methods of procedure in procuring the
verdict against Eustathius is both unnecessary and unwarrantable. The
result of the Council was the deposition of Eustathius from his
bishopric and his banishment by the Emperor to Illyria, where he
afterward died. There is a division of opinion among our sources in
regard to the immediate successor of Eustathius. All of them agree that
Eusebius was asked to become bishop of Antioch, but that he refused the
honor, and that Euphronius was chosen in his stead. Socrates and
Sozomen, however, inform us that the election of Eusebius took place
immediately after the deposition of Eustathius, while Theodoret (*H. E.*
I. 22) names Eulalius as Eustathius’ immediate successor, and states
that he lived but a short time, and that Eusebius was then asked to
succeed him. Theodoret is supported by Jerome (*Chron*., year of Abr.
2345) and by Philostorgius (*H. E*. III. 15), both of whom insert a
bishop Eulalius between Eustathius and Euphronius. It is easier to
suppose that Socrates and Sozomen may have omitted so unimportant a name
at this point than that the other three witnesses inserted it without
warrant. Socrates indeed implies in the same chapter that his knowledge
of these affairs is limited, and it is not surprising that Eusebius’
election, which caused a great stir, should have been connected in the
mind of later writers immediately with Eustathius’ deposition, and the
intermediate steps forgotten. It seems probable, therefore, that
immediately after the condemnation of Eustathius, Eulalius was appointed
in his place, perhaps by the same Council, and that after his death, a
few months later, Eusebius, who had meanwhile gone back to Cæsarea, was
elected in due order by another Council of neighboring bishops summoned
for the purpose, and that he was supported by a large party of citizens.
It is noticeable that the letter written by the Emperor to the Council,
which wished to transfer Eusebius to Antioch (see *Vita Const*. III.
62), mentions in its salutation the names of five bishops, but among
them is only one (Theodotus) who is elsewhere named as present at the
Council which deposed Eusta<span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i.vii-Page_22"></span>thius, while Eusebius of Nicomedia,
and Theognis of Nicæa, as well as others whom we know to have been on
hand on that occasion, are not referred to by the Emperor. This fact
certainly seems to point to a different council.

<span id="iii.iii.i.vii-p3"></span>It is greatly to Eusebius’ credit
that he refused the call extended to him. Had he been governed simply by
selfish ambition he would certainly have accepted it, for the
patriarchate of Antioch stood at that time next to Alexandria in point
of honor in the Eastern Church. The Emperor commended him very highly
for his decision, in his epistles to the people of Antioch and to the
Council (*Vita Const*. III. 60, 62), and in that to Eusebius himself
(*ib*. III. 61). He saw in it a desire on Eusebius’ part to observe the
ancient canon of the Church, which forbade the transfer of a bishop from
one see to another. But that in itself can hardly have been sufficient
to deter the latter from accepting the high honor offered him, for it
was broken without scruple on all sides. It is more probable that he saw
that the schism of the Antiochenes would be embittered by the induction
into the bishopric of that church of Eustathius’ chief opponent, and
that he did not feel that he had a right so to divide the Church of God.
Eusebius’ general character, as known to us, justifies us in supposing
that this high motive had much to do with his decision. We may suppose
also that so difficult a place can have had no very great attractions
for a man of his age and of his peace-loving disposition and scholarly
tastes. In Cæsarea he had spent his life; there he had the great library
of Pamphilus at his disposal, and leisure to pursue his literary work.
In Antioch he would have found himself compelled to plunge into the
midst of quarrels and seditions of all kinds, and would have been
obliged to devote his entire attention to the performance of his
official duties. His own tastes therefore must have conspired with his
sense of duty to lead him to reject the proffered call and to remain in
the somewhat humbler station which he already occupied.

<span id="iii.iii.i.vii-p4"></span>Not long after the deposition of
Eustathius, the Arians and their sympathizers began to work more
energetically to accomplish the ruin of Athanasius, their greatest foe.
He had become Alexander’s successor as bishop of Alexandria in the year
326, and was the acknowledged head of the orthodox party. If he could be
brought into discredit, there might be hopes of restoring Arius to his
position in Alexandria, and of securing for Arianism a recognition, and
finally a dominating influence in the church at large. To the overthrow
of Athanasius therefore all good Arians bent their energies. They found
ready accomplices in the schismatical Meletians of Egypt, who were
bitter enemies of the orthodox church of Alexandria. It was useless to
accuse Athanasius of heterodoxy; he was too widely known as the pillar
of the orthodox faith. Charges must be framed of another sort, and of a
sort to stir up the anger of the Emperor against him. The Arians
therefore and the Meletians began to spread the most vile and at the
same time absurd stories about Athanasius (see especially the latter’s
*Apol. c. Arian*. §59 sq.). These at last became so notorious that the
Emperor summoned Athanasius to appear and make his defense before a
council of bishops to be held in Cæsarea (Sozomen, *H. E*. II. 25;
Theodoret, *H. E*. I. 28). Athanasius, however, fearing that the Council
would be composed wholly of his enemies, and that it would therefore be
impossible to secure fair play, excused himself and remained away. But
in the following year (see Sozomen, *H. E*. II. 25) he received from the
Emperor a summons to appear before a council at Tyre. The summons was
too peremptory to admit of a refusal, and Athanasius therefore attended,
accompanied by many of his devoted adherents (see Sozomen, *ib*.;
Theodoret, *H. E*. I. 30; Socrates, *H. E*. I. 28; Athanasius, *Apol. c.
Arian*. §71 sq.; Eusebius, *Vita Const*. IV. 41 sq., and Epiphanius,
*Hær*. LXVIII. 8). After a time, perceiving that he had no chance of
receiving fair play, he suddenly withdrew from the Council and proceeded
directly to Constantinople, in order to lay his case before the Emperor
himself, and to induce the latter to allow him to meet his accusers in
his presence, and plead his cause before him. There was nothing for the
Synod to do after his flight but to sustain the charges brought against
him, some of which he had not stayed to refute, and to pass condemnation
upon him. Besides various immoral and sacrilegious deeds of which he was
accused, his refusal to appear before the Council of <span
id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i.vii-Page_23"></span>Cæsarea the previous year was made an
important item of the prosecution. It was during this Council that
Potamo flung at Eusebius the taunt of cowardice, to which reference was
made above, and which doubtless did much to confirm Eusebius’ distrust
of and hostility to the Athanasian party. Whether Eusebius of Cæsarea,
as is commonly supposed, or Eusebius of Nicomedia, or some other bishop,
presided at this Council we are not able to determine. The account of
Epiphanius seems to imply that the former was presiding at the time that
Potamo made his untimely accusation. Our sources are, most of them,
silent on the matter, but according to Valesius, Eusebius of Nicomedia
is named by some of them, but which they are I have not been able to
discover. We learn from Socrates (*H. E*. I. 28), as well as from other
sources, that this Synod of Tyre was held in the thirtieth year of
Constantine’s reign, that is, between July, 334, and July, 335. As the
Council was closed only in time for the bishops to reach Jerusalem by
July, 335, it is probable that it was convened in 335 rather than in
334. From Sozomen (*H. E*. II. 25) we learn also that the Synod of
Cæsarea had been held the preceding year, therefore in 333 or 334 (the
latter being the date commonly given by historians). While the Council
of Tyre was still in session, the bishops were commanded by Constantine
to proceed immediately to Jerusalem to take part in the approaching
festival to be held there on the occasion of his *tricennalia*. The
scene was one of great splendor. Bishops were present from all parts of
the world, and the occasion was marked by the dedication of the new and
magnificent basilica which Constantine had erected upon the site of
Calvary (Theodoret, I. 31; Socrates, I. 28 and 33; Sozomen, II. 26;
Eusebius, *Vita Const*. IV. 41 and 43). The bishops gathered in
Jerusalem at this time held another synod before separating. In this
they completed the work begun at Tyre, by re-admitting Arius and his
adherents to the communion of the Church (see Socrates, I. 33, and
Sozomen, II. 27). According to Sozomen the Emperor, having been induced
to recall Arius from banishment in order to reconsider his case, was
presented by the latter with a confession of faith, which was so worded
as to convince Constantine of his orthodoxy. He therefore sent Arius and
his companion Euzoius to the bishops assembled in Jerusalem with the
request that they would examine the confession, and if they were
satisfied with its orthodoxy would re-admit them to communion. The
Council, which was composed largely of Arius’ friends and sympathizers,
was only too glad to accede to the Emperor’s request.

<span id="iii.iii.i.vii-p5"></span>Meanwhile Athanasius had induced
Constantine, out of a sense of justice, to summon the bishops that had
condemned him at Tyre to give an account of their proceedings before the
Emperor himself at Constantinople. This unexpected, and, doubtless, not
altogether welcome summons came while the bishops were at Jerusalem, and
the majority of them at once returned home in alarm, while only a few
answered the call and repaired to Constantinople. Among these were
Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theognis of Nicæa, Patrophilus of Scythopolis,
and other prominent Arians, and with them our Eusebius (Athanasius,
*Apol. c. Arian*. §§86 and 87; Socrates, I. 33–35; Sozomen, II. 28). The
accusers of Athanasius said nothing on this occasion in regard to his
alleged immoralities, for which he had been condemned at Tyre, but made
another equally trivial accusation against him, and the result was his
banishment to Gaul. Whether Constantine banished him because he believed
the charge brought against him, or because he wished to preserve him
from the machinations of his enemies (as asserted by his son
Constantine, and apparently believed by Athanasius himself; see his
*Apol. c. Arian*. §87), or because he thought that Athanasius’ absence
would allay the troubles in the Alexandrian church we do not know. The
latter supposition seems most probable. In any case he was not recalled
from banishment until after Constantine’s death. Our Eusebius has been
severely condemned by many historians for the part taken by him in the
Eustathian controversy and especially in the war against Athanasius. In
justice to him a word or two must be spoken in his defense. So far as
his relations to Eustathius are concerned, it is to be noticed that the
latter commenced the controversy by accusing Eusebius of heterodoxy.
Eusebius himself did not begin the quarrel, and very likely had no
desire to engage in any such doctrinal strife; but he was compelled to
defend him<span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i.vii-Page_24"></span>self, and in doing so he could not do
otherwise than accuse Eustathius of Sabellianism; for if the latter was
not satisfied with Eusebius’ orthodoxy, which Eusebius himself believed
to be truly Nicene, then he must be leaning too far toward the other
extreme; that is, toward Sabellianism. There is no reason to doubt that
Eusebius was perfectly straightforward and honorable throughout the
whole controversy, and at the Council of Antioch itself. That he was not
actuated by unworthy motives, or by a desire for revenge, is evinced by
his rejection of the proffered call to Antioch, the acceptance of which
would have given him so good an opportunity to triumph over his fallen
enemy. It must be admitted, in fact, that Eusebius comes out of this
controversy without a stain of any kind upon his character. He honestly
believed Eustathius to be a Sabellian, and he acted accordingly.

<span id="iii.iii.i.vii-p6"></span>Eusebius has been blamed still more
severely for his treatment of Athanasius. But again the facts must be
looked at impartially. It is necessary always to remember that
Sabellianism was in the beginning and remained throughout his life the
heresy which he most dreaded, and which he had perhaps most reason to
dread. He must, even at the Council of Nicæa, have suspected Athanasius,
who laid so much stress upon the unity of essence on the part of Father
and Son, of a leaning toward Sabellianistic principles; and this
suspicion must have been increased when he discovered, as he believed,
that Athanasius’ most staunch supporter, Eustathius, was a genuine
Sabellian. Moreover, on the other side, it is to be remembered that
Eusebius of Nicomedia, and all the other leading Arians, had signed the
Nicene creed and had proclaimed themselves thoroughly in sympathy with
its teaching. Our Eusebius, knowing the change that had taken place in
his own mind upon the controverted points, may well have believed that
their views had undergone even a greater change, and that they were
perfectly honest in their protestations of orthodoxy. And finally, when
Arius himself presented a confession of faith which led the Emperor, who
had had a personal interview with him, to believe that he had altered
his views and was in complete harmony with the Nicene faith, it is not
surprising that our Eusebius, who was naturally unsuspicious,
conciliatory and peace-loving, should think the same thing, and be glad
to receive Arius back into communion, while at the same time remaining
perfectly loyal to the orthodoxy of the Nicene creed which he had
subscribed. Meanwhile his suspicions of the Arian party being in large
measure allayed, and his distrust of the orthodoxy of Athanasius and of
his adherents being increased by the course of events, it was only
natural that he should lend more or less credence to the calumnies which
were so industriously circulated against Athanasius. To charge him with
dishonesty for being influenced by these reports, which seem to us so
absurd and palpably calumnious, is quite unwarranted. Constantine, who
was, if not a theologian, at least a clear-headed and sharp-sighted man,
believed them, and why should Eusebius not have done the same? The
incident which took place at the Council of Tyre in connection with
Potamo and himself was important; for whatever doubts he may have had up
to that time as to the truth of the accusations made against Athanasius
and his adherents, Potamo’s conduct convinced him that the charges of
tyranny and high-handed dealing brought against the whole party were
quite true. It could not be otherwise than that he should believe that
the good of the Alexandrian church, and therefore of the Church at
large, demanded the deposition of the seditious and tyrannous
archbishop, who was at the same time quite probably Sabellianistic in
his tendencies. It must in justice be noted that there is not the
slightest reason to suppose that our Eusebius had anything to do with
the dishonorable intrigues of the Arian party throughout this
controversy. Athanasius, who cannot say enough in condemnation of the
tactics of Eusebius of Nicomedia and his supporters, never mentions
Eusebius of Cæsarea in a tone of bitterness. He refers to him
occasionally as a member of the opposite party, but he has no complaints
to utter against him, as he has against the others. This is very
significant, and should put an end to all suspicions of unworthy conduct
on Eusebius’ part. It is to be observed that the latter, though having
good cause as he believed to condemn Athanasius and his adherents, never
acted as a leader in the war against them. His name, if mentioned at
all, occurs always toward the end of the list as one of <span
id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span id="iii.iii.i.vii-Page_25"></span>the
minor combatants, although his position and his learning would have
entitled him to take the most prominent position in the whole affair, if
he had cared to. He was but true to his general character in shrinking
from such a controversy, and in taking part in it only in so far as his
conscience compelled him to. We may suspect indeed that he would not
have made one of the small party that repaired to Constantinople in
response to the Emperor’s imperious summons had it not been for the
celebration of Constantine’s *tricennalia*, which was taking place there
at the time, and at which he delivered, on the special invitation of the
Emperor and in his presence, one of his greatest orations. Certain it
is, from the account which he gives in his *Vita Constantini*, that both
in Constantinople and in Jerusalem the festival of the *tricennalia*,
with its attendant ceremonies, interested him much more than did the
condemnation of Athanasius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](2010014)
