[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010260)  [Next](2010262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Those in Thebais.* <span
id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535)

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.x-p3.1"></span>It</span> would be impossible to describe
the outrages and tortures which the martyrs in Thebais endured. They
were scraped over the entire body with shells instead of hooks until
they died. Women were bound by one foot and raised aloft in the air by
machines, and with their bodies altogether bare and uncovered, presented
to all beholders this most shameful, cruel, and inhuman spectacle.

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p4"></span>2. Others being bound to the branches
and trunks of trees perished. For they drew the stoutest branches <span
id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.x-Page_330"></span>together with machines, and bound the
limbs of the martyrs to them; and then, allowing the branches to assume
their natural position, they tore asunder instantly the limbs of those
for whom they contrived this.

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p5"></span>3. All these things were done, not for a
few days or a short time, but for a long series of years. Sometimes more
than ten, at other times above twenty were put to death. Again not less
than thirty, then about sixty, and yet again a hundred men with young
children and women, were slain in one day, being condemned to various
and diverse torments.

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p6"></span>4. We, also being on the spot ourselves,
have observed large crowds in one day; some suffering decapitation,
others torture by fire; so that the murderous sword was blunted, and
becoming weak, was broken, and the very executioners grew weary and
relieved each other.

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p7"></span>5. And we beheld the most wonderful
ardor, and the truly divine energy and zeal of those who believed in the
Christ of God. For as soon as sentence was pronounced against the first,
one after another rushed to the judgment seat, and confessed themselves
Christians. And regarding with indifference the terrible things and the
multiform tortures, they declared themselves boldly and undauntedly for
the religion of the God of the universe. And they received the final
sentence of death with joy and laughter and cheerfulness; so that they
sang and offered up hymns and thanksgivings to the God of the universe
till their very last breath.

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p8"></span>6. These indeed were wonderful; but yet
more wonderful were those who, being distinguished for wealth, noble
birth, and honor, and for learning and philosophy, held everything
secondary to the true religion and to faith in our Saviour and Lord
Jesus Christ.

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p9"></span>7. Such an one was Philoromus, who held
a high office under the imperial government at Alexandria, <span
id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536) and who administered justice every
day, attended by a military guard corresponding to his rank and Roman
dignity. Such also was Phileas, <span
id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537) bishop of the church of Thmuis, a
man eminent on account of his patriotism and the services rendered by
him to his country, and also on account of his philosophical learning.

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p13"></span>8. These persons, although a multitude
of relatives and other friends besought them, and many in high position,
and even the judge himself entreated them, that they would have
compassion on themselves and show mercy to their children and wives, yet
were not in the least induced by these things to choose the love of
life, and to despise the ordinances of our Saviour concerning confession
and denial. But with manly and philosophic minds, or rather with pious
and God-loving souls, they persevered against all the threats and
insults of the judge; and both of them were beheaded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[329:2536](2010261.htm#fr_2535) <span
id="iii.xiii.x-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p2"></span> Thebais, or the territory of Thebes,
was one of the three great divisions of Egypt, lying between lower Egypt
on the north and Æthiopia on the south. From §4, below, we learn that
Eusebius was himself an eye-witness of at least some of the martyrdoms
to which he refers in the present chapter. Reasons have been given on p.
10, above, for supposing that he did not visit Egypt until the later
years of the persecution, indeed not until toward the very end of it;
and it is therefore to this period that the events described in this
chapter are to be ascribed.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[330:2537](2010261.htm#fr_2536) <span
id="iii.xiii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.x-p10.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.x-p10.2"></span>ρχήν τινα οὐ τὴν τυχοῦσαν τῆς κατ᾽
᾽Αλεξ€νδρειαν βασιλικῆς διοικήσεως ἐγκεχειρισμένος</span>. Valesius says
that Philoromus was the *Rationalis, seu procurator summarum Ægypti,*
i.e. the general finance minister of Egypt (see above, Bk. VII. chap.
10, note 8). But the truth is, that the use of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.x-p10.3"></span>τινα</span> implies
that Eusebius is not intending to state the particular office which he
held, but simply to indicate that he held some high office, and this is
all that we can claim for Philoromus. We know no more of him than is
told us here, though *Acts of St. Phileas and St. Philoromus* are
extant, which contain an account of his martyrdom, and are printed by
the Bollandists and by Ruinart (interesting extracts given by Tillemont,
*H. E.* V. p. 486 sq., and by Mason, p. 290 sq.). Tillemont (*ibid.* p.
777) and others defend their genuineness, but Lardner doubts it
(*Credibility,* chap. 60). I have examined only the extracts printed by
Tillemont and Mason, and am not prepared to express an opinion in the
matter.

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[330:2538](2010261.htm#fr_2537) <span
id="iii.xiii.x-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p11"></span> Phileas, bishop of Thmuis (an
important town in lower Egypt, situated between the Tanite and Mendeaian
branches of the Nile), occupies an important place among the Diocletian
martyrs. The extant *Acts* of his martyrdom have been referred to in the
previous note. He is mentioned again by Eusebius in chaps. 10 and 13,
and in the former a considerable part of his epistle to the people of
his diocese is quoted. Jerome mentions him in his *de vir. ill.* chap.
78, where he says: *elegantissimum librum de martyrum laude composuit,
et disputatione actorum habita adversum judicem, qui eum sacrificare
cogebat, pro Christo capite truncatur.* The book referred to by Jerome
seems to be identical with the epistle quoted by Eusebius in the next
chapter, for we have no record of another work on this subject written
by him. There is extant, however, the Latin version of an epistle
purporting to have been written by the imprisoned bishops Hesychius,
Pachymius, Theodorus, and Phileas, to Meletius, author of the Meletian
schism. There seems to be nothing in the epistle to disprove its
genuineness, and it is accepted by Routh and others. The authorship of
the epistle is commonly ascribed to Phileas, both because he is known to
us as a writer, and also because his name stands last in the opening of
the epistle. Eusebius says nothing of such an epistle (though the names
of all four of the bishops are mentioned in chap. 13, below). Jerome’s
silence in regard to it signifies nothing, for he only follows Eusebius.
This epistle, and also the fragment of the one quoted in the next
chapter by Eusebius, are given by Routh, *Rel. Sac.* IV. p. 87 sq., and
an English translation in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* VI. p. 161 sq.

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p12"></span>Phileas’ learning is praised very
highly by Eusebius and Jerome, and his scholarly character is emphasized
in his *Acts.* The date of his death cannot be determined with
exactness, but we may be confident that it did not, at any rate, take
place before 306, and very likely not before 307. The epistle quoted in
the next chapter was written shortly before his martyrdom, as we learn
from §11 of that chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](2010262)
