[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010621)  [Next](2010623) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI</span>.—*Constantine’s
Letter to Eusebius on the Preparation of Copies of the Holy Scriptures.*

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>Victor Constantinus, Maximus
Augustus,</span> to Eusebius.

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p3"></span>“It happens, through the favoring
providence of God our Saviour, that great numbers have united themselves
to the most holy church in the city which is called by my name. It
seems, therefore, highly requisite, since that city is rapidly advancing
in prosperity in all other respects, that the number of churches should
also be increased. Do you, therefore, receive with all readiness my
determination on this behalf. I have thought it expedient to instruct
your Prudence to order fifty copies of the sacred Scriptures, the
provision and use of which you know to be most needful for the
instruction of the Church, to be written on prepared parchment in a
legible manner, and in a convenient, portable form, by professional
transcribers thoroughly practiced in their art. <span
id="fr_3332"></span>[3333](#fn_3332) The catholicus <span
id="fr_3333"></span>[3334](#fn_3333) of the diocese has also received
instructions by letter from our Clemency to be careful to furnish all
things necessary for the preparation of such copies; and it will be for
you to take special care that they be completed with as little delay as
possible. <span id="fr_3334"></span>[3335](#fn_3334) You have authority
also, in virtue of this letter, to use two of the public carriages for
their conveyance, by which arrangement the copies when fairly written
will most easily be forwarded for my personal inspection; and one of the
deacons of your church may be intrusted with this service, who, on his
arrival here, shall experience my liberality. God preserve you, beloved
brother!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3332"></span>[549:3333](2010622.htm#fr_3332) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p4"></span> *Molz.*in a note regards these as
lectionaries, but they are usually thought to have been regular copies
of the Scriptures in Greek—Septuagint and N.T., and the Codex Sinaiticus
has been thought to be one of them. It dates from not earlier than the
time of Eusebius, as it contains the Eusebian Canons, but yet from the
fourth century. Altogether it is not impossible that it was one of
these, and at all events a description of it, extracted from Scriveners
(*Introduction,* 1883, p. 88 sq.), will be a fair illustration. “13½
inches in length by 14-7/8 inches high.” “Beautiful vellum.” “Each page
comprises four columns, with 48 lines in each column.” “Continuous noble
uncials.” “Arranged in quires of four or three sheets.” It is evident
from comparison of several quotations of Eusebius that the copy of the
New Testament which he himself used was not closely related with the
Sinaitic text, unless the various readings headed by this <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>ms.</span> are all
mistakes originating with it. Compare allusions in the notes to such
different readings. The last clause, although in the text of Heinichen,
is of doubtful authority.

<span id="fn_3333"></span>[549:3334](2010622.htm#fr_3333) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p5"></span> This word is a transcription,
rendered “Procurator” by *Bag.,* and is perhaps corresponding to that
official (cf. Long. article *Fiscus,* in Smith, *Dict. Gr. and R.
Ant.*). But this transcription is recognized (cf. Ffoulkes,
*Catholicus,* in Smith and Cheetham, *Dict.*).

<span id="fn_3334"></span>[549:3335](2010622.htm#fr_3334) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxvi-p6"></span> The fact that the Sinaiticus
exhibits two or three hands suggests that it was prepared with rapidity,
and the having various scribes was a way to speed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII](2010623)
