[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010268)  [Next](2010270) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_339">p. 339</span>
<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-Page_339"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—</span>*The Revocation of
the Rulers.*

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p2.1"></span>Wrestling</span> with so many evils, he
thought of the cruelties which he had committed against the pious.
Turning, therefore, his thoughts toward himself, he first openly
confessed to the God of the universe, and then summoning his attendants,
he commanded that without delay they should stop the persecution of the
Christians, and should by law and royal decree, urge them forward to
build their churches and to perform their customary worship, offering
prayers in behalf of the emperor. Immediately the deed followed the
word.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p3"></span>2. The imperial decrees were
published in the cities, containing the revocation of the acts against
us in the following form:

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p4"></span>3. “The Emperor Cæsar Galerius
Valerius Maximinus, Invictus, Augustus, Pontifex Maximus, conqueror of
the Germans, conqueror of the Egyptians, conqueror of the Thebans, five
times conqueror of the Sarmatians, conqueror of the Persians, twice
conqueror of the Carpathians, six times conqueror of the Armenians,
conqueror of the Medes, conqueror of the Adiabeni, Tribune of the people
the twentieth time, Emperor the nineteenth time, Consul the eighth time,
Father of his country, Proconsul;

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p5"></span>4. and the Emperor Cæsar Flavius
Valerius Constantinus, Pius, Felix, Invictus, Augustus, Pontifex
Maximus, Tribune of the people, Emperor the fifth time, Consul, Father
of his country, Proconsul;

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p6"></span>5. and the Emperor Cæsar Valerius
Licinius, Pius, Felix, Invictus, Augustus, Pontifex Maximus, Tribune of
the people the fourth time, Emperor the third time, Consul, Father of
his country, Proconsul; to the people of their provinces,
greeting: <span id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591)

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p8"></span>6. “Among the other things which we
have ordained for the public advantage and profit, we formerly wished to
restore everything to conformity with the ancient laws and public
discipline <span id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592) of the Romans, and
to provide that the Christians also, who have forsaken the religion of
their ancestors, <span id="fr_2593"></span>[2594](#fn_2593) should
return to a good <span id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-Page_340"></span>disposition.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p12"></span>7. For in some way such arrogance
had seized them and such stupidity had overtaken them, that they did not
follow the ancient institutions which possibly their own ancestors had
formerly established, but made for themselves laws according to their
own purpose, as each one desired, and observed them, and thus assembled
as separate congregations in various places.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p13"></span>8. When we had issued this decree
that they should return to the institutions established by the
ancients, <span id="fr_2594"></span>[2595](#fn_2594) a great many <span
id="fr_2595"></span>[2596](#fn_2595) submitted under danger, but a great
many being harassed endured all kinds of death. <span
id="fr_2596"></span>[2597](#fn_2596)

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p17"></span>9. And since many continue in the
same folly, <span id="fr_2597"></span>[2598](#fn_2597) and we perceive
that they neither offer to the heavenly gods the worship which is due,
nor pay regard to the God of the Christians, in consideration of our
philanthropy and our invariable custom, by which we are wont to extend
pardon to all, we have determined that we ought most cheerfully to
extend our indulgence in this matter also; that they may again be
Christians, and may rebuild the conventicles in which they were
accustomed to assemble, <span id="fr_2598"></span>[2599](#fn_2598) on
condition that nothing be done by them contrary to discipline. <span
id="fr_2599"></span>[2600](#fn_2599) In another letter we shall indicate
to the magistrates what they have to observe.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p21"></span>10. Wherefore, on account of this
indulgence of ours, they ought to supplicate their God for our safety,
and that of the people, and their own, that the public welfare may be
preserved in every place, <span id="fr_2600"></span>[2601](#fn_2600) and
that they may live securely in their several homes.”

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p23"></span>11. Such is the tenor of this
edict, translated, as well as possible, from the Roman tongue into the
Greek. <span id="fr_2601"></span>[2602](#fn_2601) It is time to consider
what took place after these events.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p25"></span>*That which follows is found in
Some Copies in the Eighth Book.* <span
id="fr_2602"></span>[2603](#fn_2602)

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p27"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p27.1"></span>The</span> author of the edict very
shortly after this confession was released from his pains and died. He
is reported to have been the original author of the misery of the
persecution, having endeavored, long before the movement of the other
emperors, to turn from the faith the Christians in the army, and first
of all those in his own house, degrading some from the military rank,
and abusing others most shamefully, and threatening still others with
death, and finally inciting his partners in the empire to the general
persecution. It is not proper to pass over the death of these emperors
in silence.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p28"></span>2. As four of them held the supreme
authority, those who were advanced in age and honor, after the
persecution had continued not quite two years, abdicated the government,
as we have already stated, <span id="fr_2603"></span>[2604](#fn_2603)
and passed the remainder of their lives in a common and private station.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p30"></span>3. The end of their lives was as
follows. He who was first in honor and age perished through a long and
most grievous physical infirmity. <span
id="fr_2604"></span>[2605](#fn_2604) He who held the second place ended
his life by strangling, <span id="fr_2605"></span>[2606](#fn_2605)
suffering <span id="page_341">p. 341</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-Page_341"></span>thus according to a certain
demoniacal prediction, on account of his many daring crimes.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p33"></span>4. Of those after them, the
last, <span id="fr_2606"></span>[2607](#fn_2606) of whom we have spoken
as the originator of the entire persecution, suffered such things as we
have related. But he who preceded him, the most merciful and kindly
emperor Constantius, <span id="fr_2607"></span>[2608](#fn_2607) passed
all the time of his government in a manner worthy of his office. <span
id="fr_2608"></span>[2609](#fn_2608) Moreover, he conducted himself
towards all most favorably and beneficently. He took not the smallest
part in the war against us, and preserved the pious that were under him
unharmed and unabused. Neither did he throw down the church buildings,
nor devise anything else against us. The end of his life was happy and
thrice blessed. He alone at death left his empire happily and gloriously
to his own son <span id="fr_2609"></span>[2610](#fn_2609) as his
successor, one who was in all respects most prudent and pious. He
entered on the government at once, being proclaimed supreme emperor and
Augustus by the soldiers;

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p38"></span>5. and he showed himself an
emulator of his father’s piety toward our doctrine. Such were the deaths
of the four of whom we have written, which took place at different
times.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p39"></span>6. Of these, moreover, only the one
referred to a little above by us, <span
id="fr_2610"></span>[2611](#fn_2610) with those who afterward shared in
the government, finally <span id="fr_2611"></span>[2612](#fn_2611)
published openly to all the above-mentioned confession, in the written
edict which he issued.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[339:2592](2010269.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p7"></span> This edict was issued in April, 311
(see the previous chapter, note 1). There has been considerable
discussion as to the reason for the omission of Maximin’s name from the
heading of the edict. The simplest explanation is that he did not wish
to have his name appear in a document which was utterly distasteful to
him and which he never fully sanctioned, as we learn from Bk. IX. chaps.
1 and 2, below. It is possible, as Mason suggests, that in the copies of
the edict which were designed for other parts of the empire than his own
the names of all four emperors appeared. Eusebius gives a Greek
translation of the edict. The original Latin is found in Lactantius’ *De
mort. pers.* chap. 34. The translation in the present case is in the
main accurate though somewhat free. The edict is an acknowledgment of
defeat on Galerius’ part, and was undoubtedly caused in large part by a
superstitious desire, brought on by his sickness, to propitiate the God
of the Christians whom he had been unable to conquer. And yet, in my
opinion, it is not as Mason calls it, “one of the most bizarre state
documents ever penned,” “couched in language treacherous, contradictory,
and sown with the most virulent hatred”; neither does it “lay the blame
upon the Christians because they had *forsaken Christ,*” nor aim to
“dupe and outwit the angry Christ, by pretending to be not a persecutor,
but a reformer.” As will be seen from note 3, below, I interpret the
document in quite another way, and regard it as a not inconsistent
statement of the whole matter from Galerius’ own point of view.

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[339:2593](2010269.htm#fr_2592) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p9.1"></span>τὴν δημοσίαν ἐπιστήμην</span>. Latin:
*publicam disciplinam.*

<span id="fn_2593"></span>[339:2594](2010269.htm#fr_2593) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p10.1"></span>τῶν γονέων τῶν ἑαυτῶν τὴν
αἵρεσιν</span>. Latin: *parentum suorum sectam.* There has been some
discussion as to whether Galerius here refers to primitive Christianity
or to paganism, but the almost unanimous opinion of scholars (so far as
I am aware) is that he means the former (cf. among others, Mason, p. 298
sq.). I confess myself, however, unable, after careful study of the
document, to accept this interpretation. Not that I think it impossible
that Galerius should pretend that the cause of the persecution had been
the departure of the Christians from primitive Christianity, and its
object the reform of the Church, because, although that was certainly
not his object, he may nevertheless, when conquered, have wished to make
it appear so to the Christians at least (see Mason, p. 302 sq.). My
reason for not accepting the interpretation is that I cannot see that
the language of the edict warrants it; and certainly, inasmuch as it is
not what we should *a priori* expect Galerius to say, we are hardly
justified in adopting it except upon very clear grounds. But in my
opinion such grounds do not exist, and in fact the interpretation seems
to me to do violence to at least a part of the decree. In the present
sentence it is certainly not *necessarily* implied that the ancestors of
the Christians held a different religion from the ancestors of the
heathen; in fact, it seems on the face of it more natural to suppose
that Galerius is referring to the earlier ancestors of both Christians
and heathen, who were alike pagans. This is confirmed by the last clause
of the sentence: *ad bonas mentes redirent* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p10.2"></span>εἰς ἀγαθήν πρόθεσιν
ἐπανέλθοιεν</span>), which in the mouth of Galerius, and indeed of any
heathen, would naturally mean “return to the worship of our gods.” This
in itself, however, proves nothing, for Galerius may, as is claimed,
have used the words hypocritically; but in the next sentence, which is
looked upon as the main support of the interpretation which I am
combating, it is not said that they have deserted *their* ancient
institutions in distinction from the institutions of the rest of the
world, but *illa veterum instituta* (a term which he could hardly employ
in this unqualified way to indicate the originators of Christianity
without gross and gratuitous insult to his heathen subjects) *quæ
forsitan primum parentes eorumdem constituerant,* “those institutions of
the ancients which *perchance* their own fathers had first established”
(the Greek is not quite accurate, omitting the demonstrative, and
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p10.3"></span>πρότερον</span> for *primum*). There
can hardly have been a “perchance” about the fact that the Christians’
ancestors had first established Christian institutions, whatever they
were—certainly Galerius would never have thought of implying that his
ancestors, or the ancestors of his brother-pagans, had established them.
His aim seems to be to suggest, as food for reflection, not only that
the ancestors of the Christians had certainly, with the ancestors of the
heathen, originally observed pagan institutions, but that perhaps they
had themselves been the very ones to establish those institutions, which
would make the guilt of the Christians in departing from them all the
worse. In the next clause, the reference to the Christians as making
laws for themselves and assembling in various places may as easily be a
rebuke to the Christians for their separation from their heathen
fellow-citizens in matters of life and worship as a rebuke to them for
their departure from the original unity of the Christian Church. Again,
in the next sentence the “institutions of the ancients” (*veterum
instituta*) are referred to in the most general way, without any such
qualification as could possibly lead the Christians or any one else to
think that the institutions of the Christian religion were meant.
Conformity to “the ancient laws and public discipline of the Romans” is
announced in the beginning of the edict as the object which Galerius had
in view. Could he admit, even for the sake of propitiating his Christian
subjects, that those laws and that discipline were Christian? *Veterum
instituta* in fact could mean to the reader nothing else, as thus
absolutely used, than the institutions of the old Romans.

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p11"></span>Still further it is to be noticed
that in §9 Galerius does not say “*but although* many persevere in their
purpose…*nevertheless,* in consideration of our philanthropy, we have
determined that we ought to extend our indulgence,” &c., but rather
“*and since* (*atque cum*) many persevere in their purpose,” &c. The
significance of this has apparently been hitherto quite overlooked. Does
he mean to say that he feels that he ought to extend indulgence just
because they do exactly what they did before—worship neither the gods of
the heathen nor the God of the Christians? I can hardly think so. He
seems to me to say rather, “Since many, in spite of my severe measures,
still persevere in their purpose (*in proposito perseverarent*) and
refuse to worship our gods, while at the same time they cease under the
pressure to worship their own God as they have been accustomed to do, I
have decided to permit them to return to their own worship, thinking it
better that they worship the God of the Christians than that they
worship no God; provided in worshiping him they do nothing contrary to
discipline (*contra disciplinam*), i.e. contrary to Roman law.” Thus
interpreted, the entire edict seems to me consistent and at the same
time perfectly natural. It is intended to propitiate the Christians and
to have them pray for the good of the emperor to their own God, rather
than refuse to pray for him altogether. It is not an acknowledgment even
to the Christians that their God is the supreme and only true God, but
it is an acknowledgment that their God is probably better than no god,
and that the empire will be better off if they become loyal, peaceable,
prayerful citizens again (even if their prayers are not directed to the
highest gods), than if they continue disaffected and disloyal and serve
and worship no superior being. That the edict becomes, when thus
interpreted, much more dignified and much more worthy of an emperor
cannot be denied; and, little respect as we may have for Galerius, we
should not accuse him of playing the hypocrite and the fool in this
matter, except on better grounds than are offered by the extant text of
this edict.

<span id="fn_2594"></span>[340:2595](2010269.htm#fr_2594) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p14.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p14.2"></span>πὶ τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν ἀρχαὶων
καταστ€θεντα</span>. Latin: *ad veterum instituta.*

<span id="fn_2595"></span>[340:2596](2010269.htm#fr_2595) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p15.1"></span>πλεῖστοι</span>. Latin: *multi.*

<span id="fn_2596"></span>[340:2597](2010269.htm#fr_2596) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p16.1"></span>παντοίους θαν€τους ὑπέφερον</span>.
Latin: *deturbati sunt.*

<span id="fn_2597"></span>[340:2598](2010269.htm#fr_2597) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p18.1"></span>τῇ αὐτῇ ἀπονοί& 139·
διαμενόντων</span>. Latin: *in proposito perseverarent.*

<span id="fn_2598"></span>[340:2599](2010269.htm#fr_2598) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p19.1"></span>τοὺς οἰκοὺς, ἐν οἷς συνήγοντο,
συνθῶσιν</span>. Latin: *conventicula sua componant.*

<span id="fn_2599"></span>[340:2600](2010269.htm#fr_2599) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p20"></span> *contra disciplinam,* i.e.
“against the discipline or laws of the Romans.” Galerius does not tell
us just what this indefinite phrase is meant to cover, and the letter to
the magistrates, in which he doubtless explained himself and laid down
the conditions, is unfortunately lost. The edict of Milan, as Mason
conclusively shows, refers to this edict of Galerius and to these
accompanying conditions; and from that edict some light is thrown upon
the nature of these conditions imposed by Galerius. It has been
conjectured that in Galerius’ edict, Christianity was forbidden to all
but certain classes: “that if a man chose to declare himself a
Christian, he would incur no danger, but might no longer take his seat
as a decurion in his native town, or the like”; that Galerius had
endeavored to make money out of the transaction whereby Christians
received their church property back again; that proselytizing was
forbidden; that possibly the toleration of Christianity was made a
matter of local option, and that any town or district by a majority vote
could prohibit its exercise within its own limits (see Mason p. 330
sq.). These conjectures are plausible, though of course precarious.

<span id="fn_2600"></span>[340:2601](2010269.htm#fr_2600) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p22"></span> The Greek reads, in all our <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p22.1"></span>mss.</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p22.2"></span>κατὰ π€ντα
τρόπον</span>, “in every manner.” The Latin original, however, reads
*undique versum.* In view of that fact, I feel confident that the Greek
translator must have written <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p22.3"></span>τόπον</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p22.4"></span>τρόπον</span>. If,
therefore, that translator was Eusebius, we must suppose that the change
to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p22.5"></span>τρόπον</span> is due to the error of
some scribe. If, on the other hand, Eusebius simply copied the Greek
translation from some one else, he may himself have carelessly written
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p22.6"></span>τρόπον</span>. In either case, however,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p22.7"></span>τόπον</span>
must have been the original translation, and I have therefore
substituted it for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p22.8"></span>τρόπον</span>, and have rendered
accordingly. I find that Crusè has done likewise, whether for the same
reason I do not know.

<span id="fn_2601"></span>[340:2602](2010269.htm#fr_2601) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p24"></span> Eusebius does not say whether the
translating was done by himself or by some one else. The epistle of
Hadrian to Minucius Fundanus, quoted in Bk. IV. chap. 9, above, was
translated by himself, as he directly informs us (see *ibid.* chap. 8,
note 17). This might lead us to suppose him the translator in the
present case; but, on the other hand, in that case he directly says that
the translation was his work, in the present he does not. It is possible
that Greek copies of the edict were in common circulation, and that
Eusebius used one of them. At the same time, the words “translated as
well as possible” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p24.1"></span>κατὰ τὸ δυνατόν</span>) would seem to
indicate that Eusebius had supervised the present translation, if he had
not made it himself. Upon his knowledge of Latin, see the note just
referred to.

<span id="fn_2602"></span>[340:2603](2010269.htm#fr_2602) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p26"></span> The words of this title, together
with the section which follows, are found in the majority of our <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p26.1"></span>mss.</span> at the
close of the eighth book, and are given by all the editors. The
existence of the passage would seem to imply that the work in only eight
books came into the hands of some scribe, who added the appendix to make
the work more complete. (Cf. chap. 13, note 15, above.) Whoever he was,
he was not venturesome in his additions, for, except the notice of
Diocletian’s death and the statement of the manner of the death of
Maximinus, he adds nothing that has not been already said in substance
by Eusebius himself. The appendix must have been added in any case as
late as 313, for Diocletian died in that year.

<span id="fn_2603"></span>[340:2604](2010269.htm#fr_2603) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p29"></span> See above, chap. 13, §11.

<span id="fn_2604"></span>[340:2605](2010269.htm#fr_2604) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p31"></span> Diocletian died in 313, at the age
of sixty-seven. The final ruin of all his great plans for the permanent
prosperity of the empire, the terrible misfortunes of his daughter, and
the indignities heaped upon him by Maximin, Licinius, and Constantine,
wore him out and at length drove the spirit from the shattered body.
According to Lactantius (*De mort. pers.* 42), “having been treated in
the most contumelious manner, and compelled to abhor life, he became
incapable of receiving nourishment, and, worn out with anguish of mind,
expired.”

<span id="fn_2605"></span>[340:2606](2010269.htm#fr_2605) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p32"></span> Upon the death of Maximian, see
above, chap. 13, note 23.

<span id="fn_2606"></span>[341:2607](2010269.htm#fr_2606) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p34.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p34.2"></span>μὲν ὕστατος</span>, i.e. Galerius, who
was the second Cæsar and therefore the last, or lowest, of the four
rulers. Upon his illness and death, see chap. 16, above.

<span id="fn_2607"></span>[341:2608](2010269.htm#fr_2607) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p35"></span> Constantius was first Cæsar, and
thus held third rank in the government. The following passage in regard
to him is found also in chap. 13, §12–14, above.

<span id="fn_2608"></span>[341:2609](2010269.htm#fr_2608) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p36"></span> Constantius was first Cæsar, and
thus held third rank in the government. The following passage in regard
to him is found also in chap. 13, §12–14, above.

<span id="fn_2609"></span>[341:2610](2010269.htm#fr_2609) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p37"></span> i.e. Constantine.

<span id="fn_2610"></span>[341:2611](2010269.htm#fr_2610) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p40"></span> i.e. Galerius.

<span id="fn_2611"></span>[341:2612](2010269.htm#fr_2611) <span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p41"></span> I read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p41.1"></span>λοιπόν</span> which is found in some
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p41.2"></span>mss.</span> and
is adopted by Stephanus and Burton. Valesius, Schwegler, Laemmer and
Heinichen follow other <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p41.3"></span>mss.</span> in reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p41.4"></span>λιπών</span>, and
this is adopted by Stroth, Closs and Crusè in their translations. The
last, however, makes it govern “the above-mentioned confession,” which
is quite ungrammatical, while Stroth and Closs (apparently approved by
Heinichen) take it to mean “still alive” or “still remaining” (“Der
unter diesen allein noch Ueberlebende”; “Der unter diesen noch allein
uebrige”), a meaning which belongs to the middle but not properly to the
active voice of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p41.5"></span>λείπω</span>. The latter translation,
moreover, makes the writer involve himself in a mistake, for Diocletian
did not die until nearly two years after the publication of Galerius’
edict. In view of these considerations I feel compelled to adopt the
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p41.6"></span>λοιπόν</span> which is nearly, if not
quite, as well supported by <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.xviii-p41.7"></span>ms.</span> authority as <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.xviii-p41.8"></span>λιπών</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Martyrs of Palestine.](2010270)
