[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010141)  [Next](2010143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter I.—</span>*The Number of those who
fought for Religion in Gaul Under Verus and the Nature of their
Conflicts.*

<span id="iii.x.ii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p2.1"></span>The</span> country in which the arena was
prepared for them was Gaul, of which Lyons and Vienne <span
id="fr_1349"></span>[1350](#fn_1349) are the principal and most
celebrated cities. The Rhone passes through both of them, flowing in a
broad stream through the entire re<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>
<span id="iii.x.ii-Page_212"></span>gion.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p4"></span>2. The most celebrated churches in that
country sent an account of the witnesses <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[1351](#fn_1350) to the churches in Asia and
Phrygia, relating in the following manner what was done among them.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p6"></span>I will give their own words. <span
id="fr_1351"></span>[1352](#fn_1351)

<span id="iii.x.ii-p9"></span>3. “The servants of Christ residing at
Vienne and Lyons, in Gaul, to the brethren through out Asia and Phrygia,
who hold the same faith and hope of redemption, peace and grace and
glory from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.”

<span id="iii.x.ii-p10"></span>4. Then, having related some other
matters, they begin their account in this manner: “The greatness of the
tribulation in this region, and the fury of the heathen against the
saints, and the sufferings of the blessed witnesses, we cannot recount
accurately, nor indeed could they possibly be recorded.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p11"></span>5. For with all his might the adversary
fell upon us, giving us a foretaste of his unbridled activity at his
future coming. He endeavored in every manner to practice and exercise
his servants against the servants of God, not only shutting us out from
houses and baths and markets, but forbidding any of us to be seen in any
place whatever.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p12"></span>6. But the grace of God led the conflict
against him, and delivered the weak, and set them as firm pillars, able
through patience to endure all the wrath of the Evil One. And they
joined battle with him, undergoing all kinds of shame and injury; and
regarding their great sufferings as little, they hastened to Christ,
manifesting truly that ‘the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed to
us-ward.’ <span id="fr_1352"></span>[1353](#fn_1352)

<span id="iii.x.ii-p14"></span>7. First of all, they endured nobly the
injuries heaped upon them by the populace; clamors and blows and
draggings and robberies and stonings and imprisonments, <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353) and all things which an infuriated
mob delight in inflicting on enemies and adversaries.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p16"></span>8. Then, being taken to the forum by the
chiliarch <span id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354) and the authorities
of the city, they were examined in the presence of the whole multitude,
and having confessed, they were imprisoned until the arrival of the
governor.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p18"></span>9. When, afterwards, they were brought
before him, and he treated us with the utmost cruelty, Vettius
Epagathus, <span id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355) one of the
brethren, and a man filled with love for God and his neighbor,
interfered. His life was so consistent that, although young, he had
attained a reputation equal to that of the elder Zacharias: for he
‘walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
blameless,’ <span id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) and was
untir<span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="iii.x.ii-Page_213"></span>ing in every good work for his neighbor,
zealous for God and fervent in spirit. Such being his character, he
could not endure the unreasonable judgment against us, but was filled
with indignation, and asked to be permitted to testify in behalf of his
brethren, that there is among us nothing ungodly or impious.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p21"></span>10. But those about the judgment seat
cried out against him, for he was a man of distinction; and the governor
refused to grant his just request, and merely asked if he also were a
Christian. And he, confessing this with a loud voice, was himself taken
into the order <span id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) of the
witnesses, being called the Advocate of the Christians, but having the
Advocate <span id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358) in himself, the
Spirit <span id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359) more abundantly than
Zacharias. <span id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360) He showed this by
the fullness of his love, being well pleased even to lay down his
life <span id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361) in defense of the
brethren. For he was and is a true disciple of Christ, ‘following the
Lamb whithersoever he goeth.’ <span id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362)

<span id="iii.x.ii-p28"></span>11. “Then the others were divided, <span
id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363) and the proto-witnesses were
manifestly ready, and finished their confession with all eagerness. But
some appeared unprepared and untrained, weak as yet, and unable to
endure so great a conflict. About ten of these proved abortions, <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364) causing us great grief and sorrow
beyond measure, and impairing the zeal of the others who had not yet
been seized, but who, though suffering all kinds of affliction,
continued constantly with the witnesses and did not forsake them.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p31"></span>12. Then all of us feared greatly on
account of uncertainty as to their confession; not because we dreaded
the sufferings to be endured, but because we looked to the end, and were
afraid that some of them might fall away.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p32"></span>13. But those who were worthy were seized
day by day, filling up their number, so that all the zealous persons,
and those through whom especially our affairs had been established, were
collected together out of the two churches.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p33"></span>14. And some of our heathen servants also
were seized, as the governor had commanded that all of us should be
examined publicly. These, being ensnared by Satan, and fearing for
themselves the tortures which they beheld the saints endure, <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365) and being also urged on by the
soldiers, accused us falsely of Thyestean banquets and Œdipodean
intercourse, <span id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366) and of deeds
which are not only unlawful for us to speak of or to think, but which we
cannot believe were ever done by men.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p36"></span>15. When these accusations were reported,
all the people raged like wild beasts against us, so that even if any
had before been moderate on account of friendship, they were now
exceedingly furious and gnashed their teeth against us. And that which
was spoken by our Lord was fulfilled: ‘The time will come when whosoever
killeth you will think that he doeth God service.’ <span
id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367)

<span id="iii.x.ii-p38"></span>16. Then finally the holy witnesses
endured sufferings beyond description, Satan striving earnestly that
some of the slanders might be uttered by them also. <span
id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368)

<span id="iii.x.ii-p40"></span>17. “But the whole wrath of the populace,
and governor, and soldiers was aroused exceedingly against Sanctus, the
deacon from Vienne, <span id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369) and
Maturus, a late convert, yet a noble combatant, and against Attalus, a
native of Pergamos <span id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370) where he
had always been a pillar and foundation, and Blandina, through whom
Christ showed that things which appear mean and obscure and despicable
to men are with God of great glory, <span
id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371) through love toward him manifested
in power, and not boasting in appearance.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p44"></span>18. For while we all trembled, and her
earthly mistress, who was herself also one of the witnesses, feared that
on account of the weakness of her body, she would be unable to make bold
confession, Blandina was filled with such <span id="page_214">p.
214</span> <span id="iii.x.ii-Page_214"></span>power as to be delivered
and raised above those who were torturing her by turns from morning till
evening in every manner, so that they acknowledged that they were
conquered, and could do nothing more to her. And they were astonished at
her endurance, as her entire body was mangled and broken; and they
testified that one of these forms of torture was sufficient to destroy
life, not to speak of so many and so great sufferings.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p45"></span>19. But the blessed woman, like a noble
athlete, renewed her strength in her confession; and her comfort and
recreation and relief from the pain of her sufferings was in exclaiming,
‘I am a Christian, and there is nothing vile done by us.’

<span id="iii.x.ii-p46"></span>20. “But Sanctus also endured marvelously
and superhumanly <span id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372) all the
outrages which he suffered. While the wicked men hoped, by the
continuance and severity of his tortures to wring something from him
which he ought not to say, he girded himself against them with such
firmness that he would not even tell his name, or the nation or city to
which he belonged, or whether he was bond or free, but answered in the
Roman tongue to all their questions, ‘I am a Christian.’ He confessed
this instead of name and city and race and everything besides, and the
people heard from him no other word.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p48"></span>21. There arose therefore on the part of
the governor and his tormentors a great desire to conquer him; but
having nothing more that they could do to him, they finally fastened
red-hot brazen plates to the most tender parts of his body.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p49"></span>22. And these indeed were burned, but he
continued unbending and unyielding, firm in his confession, and
refreshed and strengthened by the heavenly fountain of the water of
life, flowing from the bowels of Christ.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p50"></span>23. And his body was a witness of his
sufferings, being one complete wound and bruise, drawn out of shape, and
altogether unlike a human form. Christ, suffering in him, manifested his
glory, delivering him from his adversary, and making him an ensample for
the others, showing that nothing is fearful where the love of the Father
is, and nothing painful where there is the glory of Christ.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p51"></span>24. For when the wicked men tortured him
a second time after some days, supposing that with his body swollen and
inflamed to such a degree that he could not bear the touch of a hand, if
they should again apply the same instruments, they would overcome him,
or at least by his death under his sufferings others would be made
afraid, not only did not this occur, but, contrary to all human
expectation, his body arose and stood erect in the midst of the
subsequent torments, and resumed its original appearance and the use of
its limbs, so that, through the grace of Christ, these second sufferings
became to him, not torture, but healing.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p52"></span>25. “But the devil, thinking that he had
already consumed Biblias, who was one of those who had denied Christ,
desiring to increase her condemnation through the utterance of
blasphemy, <span id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373) brought her again
to the torture, to compel her, as already feeble and weak, to report
impious things concerning us.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p54"></span>26. But she recovered herself under the
suffering, and as if awaking from a deep sleep, and reminded by the
present anguish of the eternal punishment in hell, she contradicted the
blasphemers. ‘How,’ she said, ‘could those eat children who do not think
it lawful to taste the blood even of irrational animals?’ And
thenceforward she confessed herself a Christian, and was given a place
in the order of the witnesses.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p55"></span>27. “But as the tyrannical tortures were
made by Christ of none effect through the patience of the blessed, the
devil invented other contrivances,—confinement in the dark and most
loathsome parts of the prison, stretching of the feet to the fifth hole
in the stocks, <span id="fr_1374"></span>[1375](#fn_1374) and the other
outrages which his servants are accustomed to inflict upon the prisoners
when furious and filled with the devil. A great many were suffocated in
prison, being chosen by the Lord for this manner of death, that he might
manifest in them his glory.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p57"></span>28. For some, though they had been
tortured so cruelly that it seemed impossible that they could live, even
with the most careful nursing, yet, destitute of human attention,
remained in the prison, being strengthened by the Lord, and invigorated
both in body and soul; and they exhorted and encouraged the rest. But
such as were young, and arrested recently, so that their bodies had not
become accustomed to torture, were unable to endure the severity of
their confinement, and died in prison.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p58"></span>29. “The blessed Pothinus, who had been
entrusted with the bishopric of Lyons, was dragged to the judgment seat.
He was more than ninety years of age, and very infirm, scarcely indeed
able to breathe because of physical weakness; but he was strengthened by
spiritual zeal through his earnest desire for martyrdom. Though his body
was worn out by old age and disease, his life was preserved that Christ
might triumph in it.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p59"></span>30. When he was brought by the soldiers
to the tribunal, accompanied by the civil magistrates and a multitude
who shouted against him in every manner as if he were Christ himself, he
bore noble witness.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p60"></span>31. Being asked <span id="page_215">p.
215</span> <span id="iii.x.ii-Page_215"></span>by the governor, Who was
the God of the Christians, he replied, ‘If thou art worthy, thou shalt
know.’ Then he was dragged away harshly, and received blows of every
kind. Those near him struck him with their hands and feet, regardless of
his age; and those at a distance hurled at him whatever they could
seize; all of them thinking that they would be guilty of great
wickedness and impiety if any possible abuse were omitted. For thus they
thought to avenge their own deities. Scarcely able to breathe, he was
cast into prison and died after two days.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p61"></span>32. “Then a certain great dispensation of
God occurred, and the compassion of Jesus appeared beyond measure, <span
id="fr_1375"></span>[1376](#fn_1375) in a manner rarely seen among the
brotherhood, but not beyond the power of Christ.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p63"></span>33. For those who had recanted at their
first arrest were imprisoned with the others, and endured terrible
sufferings, so that their denial was of no profit to them even for the
present. But those who confessed what they were were imprisoned as
Christians, no other accusation being brought against them. But the
first were treated afterwards as murderers and defiled, and were
punished twice as severely as the others.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p64"></span>34. For the joy of martyrdom, and the
hope of the promises, and love for Christ, and the Spirit of the Father
supported the latter; but their consciences so greatly distressed the
former that they were easily distinguishable from all the rest by their
very countenances when they were led forth.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p65"></span>35. For the first went out rejoicing,
glory and grace being blended in their faces, so that even their bonds
seemed like beautiful ornaments, as those of a bride adorned with
variegated golden fringes; and they were perfumed with the sweet savor
of Christ, <span id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376) so that some
supposed they had been anointed with earthly ointment. But the others
were downcast and humble and dejected and filled with every kind of
disgrace, and they were reproached by the heathen as ignoble and weak,
bearing the accusation of murderers, and having lost the one honorable
and glorious and life-giving Name. The rest, beholding this, were
strengthened, and when apprehended, they confessed without hesitation,
paying no attention to the persuasions of the devil.”

<span id="iii.x.ii-p67"></span>36. After certain other words they
continue:

<span id="iii.x.ii-p68"></span>“After these things, finally, their
martyrdoms were divided into every form. <span
id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377) For plaiting a crown of various
colors and of all kinds of flowers, they presented it to the Father. It
was proper therefore that the noble athletes, having endured a manifold
strife, and conquered grandly, should receive the crown, great and
incorruptible.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p70"></span>37. “Maturus, therefore, and Sanctus and
Blandina and Attalus were led to the amphitheater to be exposed to the
wild beasts, and to give to the heathen public a spectacle of cruelty, a
day for fighting with wild beasts being specially appointed on account
of our people.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p71"></span>38. Both Maturus and Sanctus passed again
through every torment in the amphitheater, as if they had suffered
nothing before, or rather, as if, having already conquered their
antagonist in many contests, <span id="fr_1378"></span>[1379](#fn_1378)
they were now striving for the crown itself. They endured again the
customary running of the gauntlet <span
id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379) and the violence of the wild
beasts, and everything which the furious people called for or desired,
and at last, the iron chair in which their bodies being roasted,
tormented them with the fumes.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p74"></span>39. And not with this did the persecutors
cease, but were yet more mad against them, determined to overcome their
patience. But even thus they did not hear a word from Sanctus except the
confession which he had uttered from the beginning.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p75"></span>40. These, then, after their life had
continued for a long time through the great conflict, were at last
sacrificed, having been made throughout that day a spectacle to the
world, in place of the usual variety of combats.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p76"></span>41. “But Blandina was suspended on a
stake, and exposed to be devoured by the wild beasts who should attack
her. <span id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380) And because she appeared
as if hanging on a cross, and because of her earnest prayers, she
inspired the combatants with great zeal. For they looked on her in her
conflict, and beheld with their outward eyes, in the form of their
sister, him who was crucified for them, that he might persuade those who
believe on him, that every one who suffers for the glory of Christ has
fellowship always with the living God.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p78"></span>42. As none of the wild beasts at that
time touched her, she was taken down from the stake, and cast again into
prison. She was preserved thus for another contest, that, being
victorious in more conflicts, she might make the punishment of the
crooked serpent irrevocable; <span id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381)
and, though small and weak and despised, yet clothed with Christ the
mighty and conquering Athlete, she <span id="page_216">p. 216</span>
<span id="iii.x.ii-Page_216"></span>might arouse the zeal of the
brethren, and, having overcome the adversary many times might receive,
through her conflict, the crown incorruptible.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p80"></span>43. “But Attalus was called for loudly by
the people, because he was a person of distinction. He entered the
contest readily on account of a good conscience and his genuine practice
in Christian discipline, and as he had always been a witness for the
truth among us.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p81"></span>44. He was led around the amphitheater, a
tablet being carried before him on which was written in the Roman
language ‘This is Attalus the Christian,’ and the people were filled
with indignation against him. But when the governor learned that he was
a Roman, he commanded him to be taken back with the rest of those who
were in prison concerning whom he had written to Cæsar, and whose answer
he was awaiting.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p82"></span>45. “But the intervening time was not
wasted nor fruitless to them; for by their patience the measureless
compassion of Christ was manifested. For through their continued life
the dead were made alive, and the witnesses showed favor to those who
had failed to witness. And the virgin mother had much joy in receiving
alive those whom she had brought forth as dead. <span
id="fr_1382"></span>[1383](#fn_1382)

<span id="iii.x.ii-p84"></span>46. For through their influence many who
had denied were restored, and re-begotten, and rekindled with life, and
learned to confess. And being made alive and strengthened, they went to
the judgment seat to be again interrogated by the governor; God, who
desires not the death of the sinner, <span
id="fr_1383"></span>[1384](#fn_1383) but mercifully invites to
repentance, treating them with kindness.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p86"></span>47. For Cæsar commanded that they should
be put to death, <span id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384) but that any
who might deny should be set free. Therefore, at the beginning of the
public festival <span id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385) which took
place there, and which was attended by crowds of men from all nations,
the governor brought the blessed ones to the judgment seat, to make of
them a show and spectacle for the multitude. Wherefore also he examined
them again, and beheaded those who appeared to possess Roman
citizenship, but he sent the others to the wild beasts.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p89"></span>48. “And Christ was glorified greatly in
those who had formerly denied him, for, contrary to the expectation of
the heathen, they confessed. For they were examined by themselves, as
about to be set free; but confessing, they were added to the order of
the witnesses. But some continued without, who had never possessed a
trace of faith, nor any apprehension of the wedding garment, <span
id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386) nor an understanding of the fear of
God; but, as sons of perdition, they blasphemed the Way through their
apostasy.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p91"></span>49. But all the others were added to the
Church. While these were being examined, a certain Alexander, a Phrygian
by birth, and physician by profession, who had resided in Gaul for many
years, and was well known to all on account of his love to God and
boldness of speech (for he was not without a share of apostolic grace),
standing before the judgment seat, and by signs encouraging them to
confess, appeared to those standing by as if in travail.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p92"></span>50. But the people being enraged because
those who formerly denied now confessed, cried out against Alexander as
if he were the cause of this. Then the governor summoned him and
inquired who he was. And when he answered that he was a Christian, being
very angry he condemned him to the wild beasts. And on the next day he
entered along with Attalus. For to please the people, the governor had
ordered Attalus again to the wild beasts.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p93"></span>51. And they were tortured in the
amphitheater with all the instruments contrived for that purpose, and
having endured a very great conflict, were at last sacrificed. Alexander
neither groaned nor murmured in any manner, but communed in his heart
with God.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p94"></span>52. But when Attalus was placed in the
iron seat, and the fumes arose from his burning body, he said to the
people in the Roman language: ‘Lo! this which ye do is devouring men;
but we do not devour men; nor do any other wicked thing.’ And being
asked, what name God has, he replied, ‘God has not a name as man has.’

<span id="iii.x.ii-p95"></span>53. “After all these, on the last day of
the contests, Blandina was again brought in, with Ponticus, a boy about
fifteen years old. They had been brought every day to witness the
sufferings of the others, and had been pressed to swear by the idols.
But because they remained steadfast and despised them, the multitude
became furious, so that they had no compassion for the youth of the boy
nor respect for the sex of the woman.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p96"></span>54. Therefore they exposed them to all
the terrible sufferings and took them through the entire round of
torture, repeatedly urging them to swear, but being unable to effect
this; for Ponticus, encouraged by his sister so that even the heathen
could see that she was confirming and strengthening him, having nobly
endured every torture, gave up the ghost.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p97"></span><span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="iii.x.ii-Page_217"></span>55. But the blessed Blandina, last of all,
having, as a noble mother, encouraged her children and sent them before
her victorious to the King, endured herself all their conflicts and
hastened after them, glad and rejoicing in her departure as if called to
a marriage supper, rather than cast to wild beasts.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p98"></span>56. And, after the scourging, after the
wild beasts, after the roasting seat, <span
id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387) she was finally enclosed in a net,
and thrown before a bull. And having been tossed about by the animal,
but feeling none of the things which were happening to her, on account
of her hope and firm hold upon what had been entrusted to her, and her
communion with Christ, she also was sacrificed. And the heathen
themselves confessed that never among them had a woman endured so many
and such terrible tortures.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p100"></span>57. “But not even thus was their madness
and cruelty toward the saints satisfied. For, incited by the Wild Beast,
wild and barbarous tribes were not easily appeased, and their violence
found another peculiar opportunity in the dead bodies. <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388)

<span id="iii.x.ii-p102"></span>58. For, through their lack of manly
reason, the fact that they had been conquered did not put them to shame,
but rather the more enkindled their wrath as that of a wild beast, and
aroused alike the hatred of governor and people to treat us unjustly;
that the Scripture might be fulfilled: ‘He that is lawless, let him be
lawless still, and he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still.’ <span id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389)

<span id="iii.x.ii-p104"></span>59. For they cast to the dogs those who
had died of suffocation in the prison, carefully guarding them by night
and day, lest any one should be buried by us. And they exposed the
remains left by the wild beasts and by fire, mangled and charred, and
placed the heads of the others by their bodies, and guarded them in like
manner from burial by a watch of soldiers for many days.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p105"></span>60. And some raged and gnashed their
teeth against them, desiring to execute more severe vengeance upon them;
but others laughed and mocked at them, magnifying their own idols, and
imputed to them the punishment of the Christians. Even the more
reasonable, and those who had seemed to sympathize somewhat, reproached
them often, saying, ‘Where is their God, and what has their religion,
which they have chosen rather than life, profited them?’

<span id="iii.x.ii-p106"></span>61. So various was their conduct toward
us; but we were in deep affliction because we could not bury the bodies.
For neither did night avail us for this purpose, nor did money persuade,
nor entreaty move to compassion; but they kept watch in every way, as if
the prevention of the burial would be of some great advantage to them.”

<span id="iii.x.ii-p107"></span>In addition, they say after other
things:

<span id="iii.x.ii-p108"></span>62 . “The bodies of the martyrs, having
thus in every manner been exhibited and exposed for six days, were
afterward burned and reduced to ashes, and swept into the Rhone by the
wicked men, so that no trace of them might appear on the earth.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p109"></span>63. And this they did, as if able to
conquer God, and prevent their new birth; ‘that,’ as they said, ‘they
may have no hope of a resurrection, <span
id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390) through trust in which they bring
to us this foreign and new religion, and despise terrible things, and
are ready even to go to death with joy. Now let us see if they will rise
again, and if their God is able to help them, and to deliver them out of
our hands.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[211:1350](2010142.htm#fr_1349) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p3.1"></span>Λούγδουνος καὶ Βίεννα</span>, the ancient
Lugdunum and Vienna, the modern Lyons and Vienne in southeastern France.

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[212:1351](2010142.htm#fr_1350) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p5.1"></span>μαρτύρων</span>. This word is used in this and
the following chapters of all those that suffered in the persecution,
whether they lost their lives or not, and therefore in a broader sense
than our word “martyr.” In order, therefore, to avoid all ambiguity I
have translated the word in every case “witness,” its original
significance. Upon the use of the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p5.2"></span>μ€ρτυρ</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p5.3"></span>μ€ρτυς</span> in the early Church, see Bk.
III. chap. 32, note 15.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[212:1352](2010142.htm#fr_1351) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p7"></span> The fragments of this epistle, preserved
by Eusebius in this and the next chapter, are printed with a commentary
by Routh, in his *Rel. Sacræ.* I. p. 285 sq., and an English translation
is given in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* VIII. p. 778 sq. There can be no
doubt as to the early date and reliability of the epistle. It bears no
traces of a later age, and contains little of the marvelous, which
entered so largely into the spurious martyrologies of a later day. Its
genuineness is in fact questioned by no one so far as I am aware. It is
one of the most beautiful works of the kind which we have, and well
deserves the place in his *History* which Eusebius has accorded it. We
may assume that we have the greater part of the epistle in so far as it
related to the martyrdoms. Ado, in his *Mart.,* asserts that forty-eight
suffered martyrdom, and even gives a list of their names. It is possible
that he gained his information from the epistle itself, as given in its
complete form in Eusebius’ *Collection of Martyrdoms;* but I am inclined
to think rather that Eusebius has mentioned if not all, at least the
majority of the martyrs referred to in the epistle, and that therefore
Ado’s list is largely imaginary. Eusebius’ statement, that a “multitude”
suffered signifies nothing, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p7.1"></span>μυρία</span> was a very indefinite word, and
might be used of a dozen or fifteen as easily as of forty-eight. To
speak of the persecution as “wholesale,” so that it was not safe for any
Christian to appear out of doors (Lightfoot, *Ignatius,* Vol. I. p.
499), is rather overstating the case. The persecution must, of course,
whatever its extent, appear terrible to the Christians of the region;
but a critical examination of the epistle itself will hardly justify the
extravagant statements which are commonly made in regard to the
magnitude and severity of the persecution. It may have been worse than
any single persecution that had preceded it, but sinks into
insignificance when compared with those which took place under Decius
and Diocletian.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p8"></span>It is interesting to notice that this
epistle was especially addressed to the Christians of Asia and Phrygia.
We know that Southern Gaul contained a great many Asia Minor people, and
that the intercourse between the two districts was very close. Irenæus,
and other prominent Christians of Gaul, in the second and following
centuries, were either natives of Asia Minor, or had pursued their
studies there; and so the Church of the country always bore a peculiarly
Greek character, and was for some centuries in sympathy and in constant
communication with the Eastern Church. Witness, for instance, the rise
and spread of semi-Pelagianism there in the fifth century,—a simple
reproduction in its main features of the anthropology of the Eastern
Church. Doubtless, at the time this epistle was written, there were many
Christians in Lyons and Vienne, who had friends and relations in the
East, and hence it was very natural that an epistle should be sent to
what might be called, in a sense, the mother churches. Valesius
expressed the opinion that Irenæus was the author of this epistle; and
he has been followed by many other scholars. It is possible that he was,
but there are no grounds upon which to base the opinion, except the fact
that Irenæus lived in Lyons, and was, or afterward became, a writer. On
the other hand, it is significant that no tradition has connected the
letter with Irenæus’ name, and that even Eusebius has no thought of such
a connection. In fact, Valesius’ opinion seems to me in the highest
degree improbable.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[212:1353](2010142.htm#fr_1352) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p13"></span> [Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="iii.x.ii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[212:1354](2010142.htm#fr_1353) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p15"></span> Of course official imprisonment cannot
be referred to here. It may be that the mob did actually shut Christians
up in one or another place, or it may mean simply that their treatment
was such that the Christians were obliged to avoid places of public
resort and were perhaps even compelled to remain somewhat closely at
home, and were thus in a sense “imprisoned.”

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[212:1355](2010142.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p17.1"></span>χιλιαρχής</span>, strictly the commander of a
thousand men, but commonly used also to translate the Latin *Tribunus
militum.*

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[212:1356](2010142.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p19"></span> Of the various witnesses mentioned in
this chapter (Vettius Epagathus, Sanctus, Attalus, Blandina, Biblias,
Pothinus, Maturus, Alexander, Ponticus) we know only what this epistle
tells us. The question has arisen whether Vettius Epagathus really was a
martyr. Renan (*Marc Auréle,* p. 307) thinks that he was not even
arrested, but that the words “taken into the number of martyrs” (§10,
below) imply simply that he enjoyed all the merit of martyrdom without
actually undergoing any suffering. He bases his opinion upon the fact
that Vettius is not mentioned again among the martyrs whose sufferings
are recorded, and also upon the use of the words, “He was *and is* a
true disciple” (§10, below). It is quite possible, however, that
Vettius, who is said to have been a man of high station, was simply
beheaded as a Roman citizen, and therefore there was no reason for
giving a description of his death; and still further the words, “taken
into the order of witnesses,” and also the words used in §10, “being
well pleased to lay down his life,” while they do not prove that he
suffered martyrdom, yet seem very strongly to imply that he did, and the
quotation from the Apocalypse in the same paragraph would seem to
indicate that he was dead, not alive, at the time the epistle was
written. On the whole, it may be regarded as probable, though not
certain, that Vettius was one of the martyrs. Valesius refers to Gregory
of Tours (*H. E.* chaps. 29, 31) as mentioning a certain senator who was
“of the lineage of Vettius Epagathus, who suffered for the name of
Christ at Lyons.” Gregory’s authority is not very great, and he may in
this case have known no more about the death of Vettius than is told in
the fragment which we still possess, so that his statement can hardly be
urged as proof that Vettius did suffer martyrdom. But it may be used as
indicating that the latter was of a noble family, a fact which is
confirmed in §10, below, where he is spoken of as a man of distinction.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[212:1357](2010142.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p20"></span> [Luke i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006)<span id="iii.x.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[213:1358](2010142.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p22.1"></span>κλῆρον</span>, employed in the sense of
“order,” “class,” “category.” Upon the significance of the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.ii-p22.2"></span>κλῆρος</span> in early
Christian literature, see Ritschl’s exhaustive discussion in his
*Entstehung der altkatholischen Kirche,* 2d ed., p. 388 sq.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[213:1359](2010142.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p23.1"></span>παρ€κλητον</span>; cf. <span
id="iii.x.ii-p23.2"></span>[John xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="iii.x.ii-p23.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[213:1360](2010142.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p24.1"></span>πνεῦμα</span> is omitted by three important
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.x.ii-p24.2"></span>mss.</span> followed
by Laemmer and Heinichen. Burton retains the word in his text, but
rejects it in a note. They are possibly correct, but I have preferred to
follow the majority of the codices, thinking it quite natural that
Eusebius should introduce the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p24.3"></span>πνεῦμα</span> in connection with Zacharias,
who is said to have been filled with the “Spirit,” not with the
“Advocate,” and thinking the omission of the word by a copyist, to whom
it might seem quite superfluous after <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p24.4"></span>παρ€κλητον</span>, much easier than its
insertion.

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[213:1361](2010142.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p24.5"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p25"></span> See [Luke i.
67](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#067)<span id="iii.x.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[213:1362](2010142.htm#fr_1361) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p26"></span> Compare <span
id="iii.x.ii-p26.1"></span>[John xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span id="iii.x.ii-p26.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[213:1363](2010142.htm#fr_1362) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p27"></span> [Rev. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)<span id="iii.x.ii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[213:1364](2010142.htm#fr_1363) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p29.1"></span>διεκρίνοντο</span>. Valesius finds in this
word a figure taken from the athletic combats; for before the contests
began the combatants were examined, and those found eligible were
admitted (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p29.2"></span>εἰσκρίνεσθαι</span>), while the others were
rejected (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p29.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p29.4"></span>κκρίνεσθαι</span>).

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[213:1365](2010142.htm#fr_1364) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p29.5"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p30.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p30.2"></span>ξέτρωσαν</span>, with Stroth, Zimmermann,
Schwegler, Burton, and Heinichen. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p30.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p30.4"></span>ξέπεσον</span> has perhaps a little stronger
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.x.ii-p30.5"></span>ms.</span> support,
and was read by Rufinus, but the former word, as Valesius remarks, being
more unusual than the latter, could much more easily be changed into the
latter by a copyist than the latter into the former.

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[213:1366](2010142.htm#fr_1365) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p34"></span> Gieseler (*Ecclesiastical History,*
Harper’s edition, I. p. 127) speaks of this as a violation of the
ancient law that slaves could not be compelled to testify against their
masters; but it is to be noticed that it is not said in the present case
that they were called upon to testify against their masters, but only
that through fear of what might come upon them they yielded to the
solicitation of the soldiers and uttered falsehoods against their
masters. It is not implied therefore that any illegal methods were
employed in this respect by the officials in connection with the trials.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[213:1367](2010142.htm#fr_1366) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p35"></span> i.e. of cannibalism and incest; for
according to classic legend Thyestes had unwittingly eaten his own sons
served to him at a banquet by an enemy, and Œdipus had unknowingly
married his own mother. Upon the terrible accusations brought against
the Christians by their heathen enemies, see above, Bk. IV. chap. 7,
note 20.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[213:1368](2010142.htm#fr_1367) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p37"></span> [John xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002)<span id="iii.x.ii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[213:1369](2010142.htm#fr_1368) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p39.1"></span>καὶ δι᾽ ἐκείνων ῥηθῆναί τι τῶν
βλασφήμων</span>. The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p39.2"></span>βλασφήμων</span> evidently refers here to the
slanderous reports against the Christians such as had been uttered by
those mentioned just above. This is made clear, as Valesius remarks, by
the <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.ii-p39.3"></span>καὶ δι᾽
ἐκείνων</span>, “by them *also.*”

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[213:1370](2010142.htm#fr_1369) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p41"></span> Valesius maintains that Sanctus was a
deacon of the church of Lyons, and that the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.ii-p41.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.ii-p41.2"></span>πὸ Βιέννης</span> signify
only that he was a native of Vienne, but it is certainly more natural to
understand the words as implying that he was a deacon of the church of
Vienne, and it is not at all difficult to account for his presence in
Lyons and his martyrdom there. Indeed, it is evident that the church of
Vienne was personally involved in the persecution as well as that of
Lyons. Cf. §13, above.

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[213:1371](2010142.htm#fr_1370) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p42"></span> Pergamos in Asia Minor (mentioned in
[Rev. ii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012)<span
id="iii.x.ii-p42.1"></span>, and the seat of a Christian church for a
number of centuries) is apparently meant here. As already remarked, the
connection between the inhabitants of Gaul and of Asia Minor was very
close.

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[213:1372](2010142.htm#fr_1371) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p43"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028)<span id="iii.x.ii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[214:1373](2010142.htm#fr_1372) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p47.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p47.2"></span>πὲρ π€ντα ἄνθρωπον</span>.

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[214:1374](2010142.htm#fr_1373) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p53"></span> Blasphemy against Christianity, not
against God or Christ; that is, slanders against the Christians (cf.
§14, above), as is indicated by the words that follow (so Valesius
also).

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[214:1375](2010142.htm#fr_1374) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p56"></span> See Bk. IV. chap. 16, note 9.

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[215:1376](2010142.htm#fr_1375) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p62"></span> The compassion of Jesus appeared not in
the fact that those who denied suffered such terrible punishments, but
that the difference between their misery in their sufferings and the joy
of the faithful in theirs became a means of strength and encouragement
to the other Christians. Compare the note of Heinichen (III. p. 180).

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[215:1377](2010142.htm#fr_1376) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p66"></span> Cf. [2 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015)<span id="iii.x.ii-p66.1"></span>.
Cf. also Bk. IV. chap. 15, §37, above.

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[215:1378](2010142.htm#fr_1377) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p69.1"></span>μετὰ ταῦτα δὴ λοιπὸν εἰς πᾶν εἶδος διῃρεῖτο
τὰ μαρτύρια τῆς ἐξόδου αὐτῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[215:1379](2010142.htm#fr_1378) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p72.1"></span>διὰ πλειόνων κλήρων</span>; undoubtedly a
reference to the athletic combats (see Valesius’ note *in loco*).

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[215:1380](2010142.htm#fr_1379) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p73.1"></span>τὰς διεξόδους τῶν μαστίγων τὰς ἐκεῖσε
εἰθισμένας</span>. It was the custom to compel the bestiarii before
fighting with wild beasts to run the gauntlet. Compare Shorting’s and
Valesius’ notes *in loco,* and Tertullian’s *ad Nationes,* 18, and *ad
Martyras,* 5, to which the latter refers.

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[215:1381](2010142.htm#fr_1380) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p77"></span> Among the Romans crucifixion was the
mode of punishment commonly inflicted upon slaves and the worst
criminals. Roman citizens were exempt from this indignity. See Lipsius’
*De Cruce* and the various commentaries upon the Gospel narratives of
the crucifixion of Christ.

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[215:1382](2010142.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p79"></span> Compare <span
id="iii.x.ii-p79.1"></span>[Isa. xxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)<span id="iii.x.ii-p79.2"></span>,
which is possibly referred to here.

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[216:1383](2010142.htm#fr_1382) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p83"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p83.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p83.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p83.3"></span>νεκροὺς ἐξέτρωσε</span>. Compare §11, above.

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[216:1384](2010142.htm#fr_1383) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p85"></span> <span id="iii.x.ii-p85.1"></span>[Ezek.
xxxiii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)<span
id="iii.x.ii-p85.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[216:1385](2010142.htm#fr_1384) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p87"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p87.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p87.2"></span>ποτυμπανισθῆναι</span>. The word means
literally “beaten to death,” but it is plain that it is used in a
general sense here, from the fact that some were beheaded and some sent
to the wild beasts, as we are told just below.

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[216:1386](2010142.htm#fr_1385) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p87.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p88"></span> Renan (*Marc Auréle,* p. 329) identifies
this with the meeting of the general assembly of the Gallic nations,
which took place annually in the month of August for the celebration of
the worship of Augustus, and was attended with imposing ceremonies,
games, contests, &c. The identification is not at all improbable.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[216:1387](2010142.htm#fr_1386) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p90"></span> Cf. [Matt. xxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#011)<span id="iii.x.ii-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[217:1388](2010142.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p99"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.ii-p99.1"></span>τήγανον</span>: literally, “frying-pan,” by
which, however, is evidently meant the instrument of torture spoken of
already more than once in this chapter as an iron seat or chair.

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[217:1389](2010142.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p101"></span> The Christians were very solicitous
about the bodies of the martyrs, and were especially anxious to give
them decent burial, and to preserve the memory of their graves as places
of peculiar religious interest and sanctity. They sometimes went even to
the length of bribing the officials to give them the dead bodies (cf.
§61, below).

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[217:1390](2010142.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p103"></span> [Rev. xxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011)<span id="iii.x.ii-p103.1"></span>.
The citation of the Apocalypse at this date as Scripture (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.ii-p103.2"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.ii-p103.3"></span>να ἡ γραφὴ
πληρωθῇ</span>) is noteworthy.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[217:1391](2010142.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="iii.x.ii-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p110"></span> These words show us how much emphasis
the Christians of that day must have laid upon the resurrection of the
body (an emphasis which is abundantly evident from other sources), and
in what a sensuous and material way they must have taught the doctrine,
or at least how unguarded their teaching must have been, which could
lead the heathen to think that they could in the slightest impede the
resurrection by such methods as they pursued. The Christians, in so far
as they laid so much emphasis as they did upon the material side of the
doctrine, and were so solicitous about the burial of their brethren,
undoubtedly were in large part responsible for this gross
misunderstanding on the part of the heathen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2010143)
