[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010667)  [Next](2010669) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*The Falsity of the
General Opinion respecting Fate* <span
id="fr_3388"></span>[3389](#fn_3388) *is proved by the Consideration of
Human Laws, and by the Works of Creation, the Course of which is not
Fortuitous, but according to an Orderly Arrangement which evinces the
Design of the Creator.*

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p3.1"></span>The</span> great majority, however, in their
folly, ascribe the regulation of the universe to nature, while some
imagine fate, or accident, <span id="fr_3389"></span>[3390](#fn_3389) to
be the cause. With regard to those who attribute the control of all
things to fate, they know not that in using this term they utter a mere
word, but designate no active power, nor anything which has real and
substantial existence. For what can this fate be, considered in itself,
if nature be the first cause of all things? Or what shall we suppose
nature itself to be, if the law of fate be inviolable? Indeed, the very
assertion that there is a law of fate implies that such law is the work
of a legislator: if, therefore, fate itself be a law, it must be a law
devised by God. All things, therefore, are subject to God, and nothing
is beyond the sphere of his power. If it be said that fate is the
will <span id="fr_3390"></span>[3391](#fn_3390) of God, and is so
considered, we admit the fact. But in what respect do justice, <span
id="fr_3391"></span>[3392](#fn_3391) or self-control, <span
id="fr_3392"></span>[3393](#fn_3392) or the other virtues, depend on
fate? From whence, if so, do their contraries, as injustice and
intemperance, proceed? For vice has its origin from nature, not from
fate; and virtue is the due regulation of natural character and
disposition. But, granting that the varied results of actions, whether
right or erroneous in themselves, depend on fortune or fate: in what
sense can the general principle of justice, <span
id="fr_3393"></span>[3394](#fn_3393) the principle of rendering to every
one his due, be ascribed to fate? <span
id="fr_3394"></span>[3395](#fn_3394) Or how can it be said that laws,
encouragements to virtue and dissuasives from what is evil, praise,
blame, punishment, in short whatever operates as a motive to virtue, and
deters from the practice of vice, derive their origin from fortune or
accident, and not rather from that of justice, <span
id="fr_3395"></span>[3396](#fn_3395) which is a characteristic attribute
of the God of providence? For the events which befall men are consequent
upon the tenor of their lives. Hence pestilence or sedition, famine and
plenty, succeed in turn, declaring plainly and emphatically that all
these things are regulated with reference to our course of life. For the
Divine Being delights in goodness, but turns with aversion from all
impiety; looks with acceptance on the humble spirit, but abhors
presumption, and that pride which exalts itself above what becomes a
creature. And though the proofs of these truths are clear and manifest
to our sight, they appear in a still stronger light, when we collect,
and as it were concentrate our thoughts within ourselves, and ponder
their causes with deep attention. I say, then, that it becomes us to
lead a life of modesty and gentleness, not suffering our thoughts to
rise proudly above our natural condition, and ever mindful that God is
near us, <span id="page_565">p. 565</span> <span
id="iv.vii.vi-Page_565"></span>and is the observer of all our actions.
But let us still farther test the truth of the proposition, that the
order of the universe depends on chance <span
id="fr_3396"></span>[3397](#fn_3396) or accident. <span
id="fr_3397"></span>[3398](#fn_3397) Are we then to suppose that the
stars and other heavenly bodies, the earth and sea, fire and wind, water
and air, the succession of the seasons, the recurrence of summer and
winter, that all these have an undesigned and fortuitous existence, and
not rather that they proceed from the creative hand of God? Some,
indeed, are so senseless as to say that most of these things have been
devised by mankind because of their need of them. Let it be admitted
that this opinion has a semblance of reason in regard to earthly and
corruptible things (though Nature herself supplies every good with a
lavish hand); yet can we believe that things which are immortal and
unchangeable are the inventions of men? These, indeed, and all things
else which are beyond the reach of our senses, and comprehended by the
intellect <span id="fr_3398"></span>[3399](#fn_3398) alone, receive
their being, not from the material life of man, but from the
intellectual and eternal essence of God. Again, the orderly arrangement
of these things is the work of his providence: for instance, that the
day, deriving radiance from the sun, is bright; that night succeeds his
setting, and the starry host <span id="fr_3399"></span>[3400](#fn_3399)
by which night itself is redeemed from total darkness. And what shall we
say of the moon, which when most distant from, and opposite to the sun,
is filled with light, but wanes in proportion to the nearness of her
approach to him? Do not these things manifestly evince the
intelligence <span id="fr_3400"></span>[3401](#fn_3400) and sagacious
wisdom of God? Add to this that needful warmth of the solar rays which
ripens the fruits of the earth; the currents of wind, so conducive to
the fertility of the seasons; the cool and refreshing showers; and the
harmony of all these things in accordance with which all are reasonably
and systematically conducted: lastly, the everlasting order of the
planets, which return to the self-same place at their appointed times:
are not all these, as well as the perfect ministry of the stars,
obedient to a divine law, evident proofs of the ordinance <span
id="fr_3401"></span>[3402](#fn_3401) of God? Again, do the mountain
heights, the deep and hollow valleys, the level and extensive plains,
useful as they are, as well as pleasing to the eye, appear to exist
independently of the will of God? Or do not the proportion and alternate
succession of land and water, serviceable, the one for husbandry, the
other for the transport of such foreign products as we need, afford a
clear demonstration of his exact and proportionate providential care?
For instance, the mountains contain a store of water, which the level
ground receives, and after imbibing sufficient for the renovation of the
soil, sends forth the residue into the sea, and the sea in turn passes
it onward to the ocean. And still we dare to say that all these things
happen by chance <span id="fr_3402"></span>[3403](#fn_3402) and
accident; unable though we be to show by what shape or form this chance
is characterized; a thing which has no foundation either in intellect or
sense existence; which rings in our ears as the mere sound of an
unsubstantial name!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3388"></span>[564:3389](2010668.htm#fr_3388) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p2"></span> For a full discussion of various
definitions and usage of the word Fate (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p2.2"></span>εἰριαρμένη</span>) in Greek philosophy,
compare Zeller, *Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics* (Lond. 1880), p.
170–171, notes.

<span id="fn_3389"></span>[564:3390](2010668.htm#fr_3389) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p4.1"></span>αὐτόματον</span>. The usual word for chance
or accident is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p4.2"></span>τύχη</span>. These may be here, as is often
the case, simple synonyms, but both words are used in the same phrase
later in such way as to suggest that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p4.3"></span>τύχη</span> is parallel with “fate” rather
than “chance” in the author’s mind. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p4.4"></span>αὐτόματον</span> seems to be used of
“self-originating,” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p4.5"></span>τύχη</span> of originating from some unknown
cause or without any cause. The former is the modern, self-energized,
“lift-yourselves-by-your-own-boot-straps” evolution. The latter is a
form of agnosticism. Aristotle (*Metaph.* 10. 8) defines chance (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi-p4.6"></span>τύχη</span>) as a “cause
by accident” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p4.7"></span>συμβέβηκος</span>), or more literally
“coincidence,” which is substantially what Janet (*Final Causes,* 1878,
p. 19) means by defining chance as the coincidence of causes. At the end
of the same chapter Aristotle uses <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p4.8"></span>αὐτόματον</span> in contrast with <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi-p4.9"></span>τύχη</span>—“<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi-p4.10"></span>τύχη</span> or even
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi-p4.11"></span>αὐτόματον</span>,”
which has been rendered (M’Mahon) “chance or even spontaneity.” In
modern phrase those who hold these three various views of the universe
might be characterized as “material evolutionists,” “transcendental
idealists,” and “philosophical (or perhaps ‘agnostic’) evolutionists.”

<span id="fn_3390"></span>[564:3391](2010668.htm#fr_3390) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p4.12"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p5"></span> i.e. “plan.”

<span id="fn_3391"></span>[564:3392](2010668.htm#fr_3391) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p6.1"></span>δικαιοσύνη</span>, better “righteousness,”
“correctness of thinking, feeling, and acting” (Thayer, *Lex.* p. 149).
So its opposite mentioned below (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p6.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p6.3"></span>δικία</span>) is better “unrighteousness,” as
generally in the revised English version of the N.T., “mammon of
unrighteousness” (<span id="iv.vii.vi-p6.4"></span>[Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="iv.vii.vi-p6.5"></span>,
e.g.). The word means more than our “just,” “more,” as Socrates said
(Plat. *Rep.* 1. 331), “than to speak the truth and pay your debts.”
Righteousness is the better translation, but we are met with the
difficulty that it has generally been rendered justice in translations
of the philosophers.

<span id="fn_3392"></span>[564:3393](2010668.htm#fr_3392) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p6.6"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p7.1"></span>σωφροσύνη</span>, temperance, *vs.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi-p7.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi-p7.3"></span>κολασία</span>,
intemperance, below; soundness of mind *vs.* insanity (cf. use in [Acts
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#025), [Mark
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#015), [Luke
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#035)<span
id="iv.vii.vi-p7.4"></span>[Acts xxvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#025)<span id="iv.vii.vi-p7.5"></span>,
and of verb in [Mark v. 15](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#015)<span
id="iv.vii.vi-p7.6"></span>; [Luke viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#035)<span id="iv.vii.vi-p7.7"></span>;
also use in Plato, *Rep.* 332, &c.); self-control *vs.* unbridled
desire. This same contrast of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p7.8"></span>σωφροσύνη</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi-p7.9"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi-p7.10"></span>κολασία</span> is found
in Aristotle, *Eth.* 2, vii. 3; 7, vii. I; and especially 7, ix. 5.

<span id="fn_3393"></span>[564:3394](2010668.htm#fr_3393) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p7.11"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p8.1"></span>τὶ δίκαιον</span>, *not* <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.vi-p8.2"></span>δικαιοσύνη</span>

<span id="fn_3394"></span>[564:3395](2010668.htm#fr_3394) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p9"></span> This is very free, and follows
translation of Valesius and *1709* text. *1709* marg. translates more
literally, “But either crimes, or, on the other hand, brave
performances, which are \[the property\] of a good and right purpose of
mind, if they happen sometimes one way, at others another,” and *Molz.*
somewhat similarly. It is possible that it should read: “Granted that
either evil actions proceeding from a good and upright will, or
contrariwise, good actions \[from an evil will\] which issue directly
contrary \[to their own nature or to just expectation\] may be ascribed
to chance or fate, how can the right,” &c.

<span id="fn_3395"></span>[564:3396](2010668.htm#fr_3395) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p10.1"></span>δικαιοσύνη</span>

<span id="fn_3396"></span>[565:3397](2010668.htm#fr_3396) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p11.1"></span>τύχη</span>.

<span id="fn_3397"></span>[565:3398](2010668.htm#fr_3397) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p12.1"></span>αὐτόματον</span>

<span id="fn_3398"></span>[565:3399](2010668.htm#fr_3398) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p13.1"></span>νόος</span> was not narrowed to the mere
intellectual functions. “Intellectual” is not to be taken of brain
function only, but of brain and heart,—real knowing, as against the
“intellectuation” which men nowadays try to force the word “know” to
mean.

<span id="fn_3399"></span>[565:3400](2010668.htm#fr_3399) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p14"></span> “Quire of the stars,” *1709.*

<span id="fn_3400"></span>[565:3401](2010668.htm#fr_3400) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p15"></span> The “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p15.1"></span>λόγος ἐνδι€θετος</span>” of Philo, frequent
in Alexandrian theologians. It is the unuttered thought *vs.* the
expressed word.

<span id="fn_3401"></span>[565:3402](2010668.htm#fr_3401) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p16"></span> Fore-ordination, or plan.

<span id="fn_3402"></span>[565:3403](2010668.htm#fr_3402) <span
id="iv.vii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi-p17.1"></span>αὐτόματον</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](2010669)
