[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010091)  [Next](2010093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_150">p. 150</span>
<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-Page_150"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—</span>*Narrative
Concerning John the Apostle.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>At</span> that time the apostle and
evangelist John, the one whom Jesus loved, was still living in Asia, and
governing the churches of that region, having returned after the death
of Domitian from his exile on the island. <span
id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p4"></span>2. And that he was still alive at
that time <span id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740) may be established by
the testimony of two witnesses. They should be trustworthy who have
maintained the orthodoxy of the Church; and such indeed were Irenæus and
Clement of Alexandria. <span id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p7"></span>3. The former in the second book of
his work Against Heresies, writes as follows: <span
id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742) “And all the elders that associated
with John the disciple of the Lord in Asia bear witness that John
delivered it to them. For he remained among them until the time of
Trajan.” <span id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p10"></span>4. And in the third book of the
same work he attests the same thing in the following words: <span
id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744) “But the church in Ephesus also, which
was founded by Paul, and where John remained until the time of Trajan,
is a faithful witness of the apostolic tradition.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p12"></span>5. Clement likewise in his book
entitled What Rich Man can be saved? <span
id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745) indicates the time, <span
id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746) and subjoins a narrative which is most
attractive to those that enjoy hearing what is beautiful and profitable.
Take and read the account which runs as follows: <span
id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747)

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p16"></span>6. “Listen to a tale, which is not
a mere tale, but a narrative <span id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748)
concerning John the apostle, which has been handed down and treasured up
in memory. For when, after the tyrant’s death, <span
id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749) he returned from the isle of Patmos to
Ephesus, he went away upon their invitation to the neighboring
territories of the Gentiles, to appoint bishops in some places, in other
places to set in order whole churches, elsewhere to choose to the
ministry some one <span id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750) of those that
were pointed out by the Spirit.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p20"></span>7. When he had come to one of the
cities not far away (the name of which is given by some <span
id="fr_751"></span>[752](#fn_751) ), and had consoled the brethren in
other matters, he finally turned to the bishop that had been appointed,
and seeing a youth of powerful physique, of pleasing appearance, and of
ardent temperament, he said, ‘This one I commit to thee in all
earnestness in the presence of the Church and with Christ as witness.’
And when the bishop had accepted the charge and had promised all, he
repeated the same injunction with an appeal to the same witnesses, and
then departed for Ephesus.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p22"></span>8. But the presbyter <span
id="fr_752"></span>[753](#fn_752) taking home the youth committed to
him, <span id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-Page_151"></span>reared, kept, cherished, and finally
baptized <span id="fr_753"></span>[754](#fn_753) him. After this he
relaxed his stricter care and watchfulness, with the idea that in
putting upon him the seal of the Lord <span
id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754) he had given him a perfect protection.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p26"></span>9. But some youths of his own age,
idle and dissolute, and accustomed to evil practices, corrupted him when
he was thus prematurely freed from restraint. At first they enticed him
by costly entertainments; then, when they went forth at night for
robbery, they took him with them, and finally they demanded that he
should unite with them in some greater crime.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p27"></span>10. He gradually became accustomed
to such practices, and on account of the positiveness of his
character, <span id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755) leaving the right
path, and taking the bit in his teeth like a hard-mouthed and powerful
horse, he rushed the more violently down into the depths.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p29"></span>11. And finally despairing of
salvation in God, he no longer meditated what was insignificant, but
having committed some great crime, since he was now lost once for all,
he expected to suffer a like fate with the rest. Taking them, therefore,
and forming a band of robbers, he became a bold bandit-chief, the most
violent, most bloody, most cruel of them all.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p30"></span>12. Time passed, and some necessity
having arisen, they sent for John. But he, when he had set in order the
other matters on account of which he had come, said, ‘Come, O bishop,
restore us the deposit which both I and Christ committed to thee, the
church, over which thou presidest, being witness.’

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p31"></span>13. But the bishop was at first
confounded, thinking that he was falsely charged in regard to money
which he had not received, and he could neither believe the accusation
respecting what he had not, nor could he disbelieve John. But when he
said, ‘I demand the young man and the soul of the brother,’ the old man,
groaning deeply and at the same time bursting into tears, said, ‘He is
dead.’ ‘How and what kind of death?’ ‘He is dead to God,’ he said; ‘for
he turned wicked and abandoned, and at last a robber. And now, instead
of the church, he haunts the mountain with a band like himself.’

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p32"></span>14. But the Apostle rent his
clothes, and beating his head with great lamentation, he said, ‘A fine
guard I left for a brother’s soul! But let a horse be brought me, and
let some one show me the way.’ He rode away from the church just as he
was, and coming to the place, he was taken prisoner by the robbers’
outpost.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p33"></span>15. He, however, neither fled nor
made entreaty, <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-Page_152"></span>but cried out, ‘For this did I come;
lead me to your captain.’

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p34"></span>16. The latter, meanwhile, was
waiting, armed as he was. But when he recognized John approaching, he
turned in shame to flee.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p35"></span>17. But John, forgetting his age,
pursued him with all his might, crying out, ‘Why, my son, dost thou flee
from me, thine own father, unarmed, aged? Pity me, my son; fear not;
thou hast still hope of life. I will give account to Christ for thee. If
need be, I will willingly endure thy death as the Lord suffered death
for us. For thee will I give up my life. Stand, believe; Christ hath
sent me.’

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p36"></span>18. And he, when he heard, first
stopped and looked down; then he threw away his arms, and then trembled
and wept bitterly. And when the old man approached, he embraced him,
making confession with lamentations as he was able, baptizing himself a
second time with tears, and concealing only his right hand.

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p37"></span>19. But John, pledging himself, and
assuring him on oath that he would find forgiveness with the Saviour,
besought him, fell upon his knees, kissed his right hand itself as if
now purified by repentance, and led him back to the church. And making
intercession for him with copious prayers, and struggling together with
him in continual fastings, and subduing his mind by various utterances,
he did not depart, as they say, until he had restored him to the church,
furnishing a great example of true repentance and a great proof of
regeneration, a trophy of a visible resurrection.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_739"></span>[150:740](2010092.htm#fr_739) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p3"></span> See chap. 1, note 6, and chap. 18,
note 1.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[150:741](2010092.htm#fr_740) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p5"></span> That is, at the beginning of the
reign of Trajan.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[150:742](2010092.htm#fr_741) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p6"></span> The test of a man’s trustworthiness
in Eusebius’ mind—and not in his alone—was his orthodoxy. Irenæus has
always been looked upon as orthodox, and so was Clement, in the early
Church, which reckoned him among the saints. His name, however, was
omitted in the Martyrology issued by Clement VIII., on the ground that
his orthodoxy was open to suspicion.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[150:743](2010092.htm#fr_742) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p8"></span> Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* II. 22. 5.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[150:744](2010092.htm#fr_743) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p9"></span> It is in this immediate connection
that Irenæus makes the extraordinary assertion, founding it upon the
testimony of those who were with John in Asia, that Christ lived to the
age of forty or fifty years. A statement occurring in connection with
such a palpably false report might well fall under suspicion; but the
fact of John’s continuance at Ephesus until the time of Trajan is
supported by other passages, and there is no reason to doubt it (cf.
chap. 1, note 6). Irenæus himself repeats the statement as a well-known
fact, in III. 3, 4 (quoted just below). It may also be said that the
opinion as to Christ’s age is founded upon subjective grounds (cf. the
preceding paragraph of Irenæus) and upon a mistaken interpretation of
[John 8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056),
[57](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#057)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>, rather than upon external testimony,
and that the testimony (which itself may have been only the result of a
subjective opinion) is dragged in only for the sake of confirming a view
already adopted. Such a fact as John’s own presence in Ephesus at a
certain period could hardly be subject to such uncertainty and to the
influence of dogmatic prepossessions. It is significant of Eusebius’
method that he omits entirely Irenæus’ statement as to the length of
Christ’s ministry, with which he did not agree (as shown by his account
in Bk. I. chap. 10), while extracting from his statement the single fact
which he wishes here to establish. The falsity of the context he must
have recognized, and yet, in his respect for Irenæus, the great
maintainer of sound doctrine, he nowhere refers to it. The information
which John is said, in this passage, to have conveyed to the “presbyters
of Asia” is that Christ lived to old age. The whole passage affords an
instance of how much of error may be contained in what, to all
appearances, should be a very trustworthy tradition. Internal evidence
must come to the support of external, and with all its alleged
uncertainty and subjectivity, must play a great part in the
determination of the truth of history.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[150:745](2010092.htm#fr_744) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p11"></span> *Adv. Hær.* III. 3, 4.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[150:746](2010092.htm#fr_745) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>τίς ὁ σωζόμενος πλούσιος</span>: *Quis
Dives salvetur.* This able and interesting little treatise upon the
proper use of wealth is still extant, and is found in the various
editions of Clement’s works; English translation in the *Ante-Nicene
Fathers* (Am. ed.), II. p. 591–604. The sound common sense of the book,
and its freedom from undue asceticism are conspicuous, and furnish a
pleasing contrast to most of the writings of that age.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[150:747](2010092.htm#fr_746) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p14"></span> He indicates the time only by
saying “after the tyrant was dead,” which might refer either to Domitian
or to Nero. But the mention of John a little below as “an aged man”
would seem to point to the end of the century rather than to Nero’s
time. At any rate, Eusebius understood Clement as referring to Domitian,
and in the presence of unanimous tradition for Domitian, and in the
absence of any counter-tradition, we can hardly understand him
otherwise.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[150:748](2010092.htm#fr_747) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p15"></span> *Quis Dives salvetur,* chap. 42.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[150:749](2010092.htm#fr_748) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p17.1"></span>μῦθον οὐ μῦθον, ἀλλὰ ὄντα λόγον</span>.
Clement in these words asserts the truth of the story which he relates.
We cannot regard it as very strongly corroborated, for no one else
records it, and yet we can hardly doubt that Clement gives it in good
faith. It may have been an invention of some early Christian, but it is
so fully in accord with what we know of John’s character that there
exists no reason for refusing to believe that at least a groundwork of
truth underlies it, even though the story may have gained in the telling
of it. It is certainly beautiful, and fully worthy of the “beloved
disciple.”

<span id="fn_749"></span>[150:750](2010092.htm#fr_749) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p18"></span> See note 8.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[150:751](2010092.htm#fr_750) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>κλήρῳ ἕνα γέ τινα κληρώσων</span>.
Compare the note of Heinichen in his edition of Eusebius, Vol. I. p.
122. Upon the use of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p19.2"></span>κλῆρος</span> in the early Church, see
Baur’s *Das Christenthum und die christliche Kirche der drei ersten
Jahrhunderte,* 2d ed., p. 266 sq., and especially Ritschl’s *Entstehung
der alt-kath. Kirche,* 2d ed., p. 388 sq. Ritschl shows that the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p19.3"></span>κλῆρος</span>
was originally used by the Fathers in the general sense of order or rank
(*Reihe, Rang*), and that from this arose its later use to denote church
officers as a class,—the clergy. As he remarks, the word is employed in
this later specific sense for the first time in this passage of
Clement’s *Quis Dives salvetur.* Tertullian, Hippolytus, and Cyprian are
the next ones to use it in the same sense. Ritschl remarks in connection
with this passage: “Da für eine Wahl der Gemeindebeamten durch das Loos
alle sonstigen Beweisen fehlen, und da in dem vorliegenden Satze die
Einsetzung von einer Mehrzahl von <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p19.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p19.5"></span>πίσκοποι</span> durch den Apostel ohne
jede Methode erwähnt wird, so fällt jeder Grund hinweg, dass bei der
Wahl einzelner Beamten das Mittel des Loosens angewandt sein sollte,
zumal bei dieser Deutung ein Pleonasmus vorausgesetzt würde. Es ist
vielmehr zu erklären, dass Johannes an einzelnen Orten mehrere Beamte
zugleich eingesetzt, an anderen Orten wo schon ein Collegium bestand,
dem Beamtenstande je ein Mitglied eingereiht habe.”

<span id="fn_751"></span>[150:752](2010092.htm#fr_751) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p21"></span> According to Stroth the *Chronicon
Paschale* gives Smyrna as the name of this city, and it has been
suggested that Clement withholds the name in order to spare the
reputation of Polycarp, who, according to tradition, was appointed
bishop of that city by John.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[150:753](2010092.htm#fr_752) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23"></span> The same man that is called a
bishop just above is here called a presbyter. It is such passages—and
they are not uncommon in the early Fathers—that have seemed to many to
demonstrate conclusively the original identity of presbyters and
bishops, an identity which is maintained by most Presbyterians, and is
admitted by many Episcopalians (e.g. by Lightfoot in his essay on the
Christian Ministry, printed in his Commentary on Philippians). On the
other hand, the passages which reveal a distinction between presbyters
and bishops are very early, and are adduced not merely by prelatists,
but by such disinterested scholars as Harnack (in his translation of
Hatch’s *Organization of the Early Christian Churches*) as proving that
there was from the beginning a difference of some sort between a bishop
and a presbyter. I cannot enter here into a discussion of the various
views in regard to the original relation between bishops and presbyters.
I desire simply to suggest a theory of my own, leaving the fuller
exposition of it for some future time. My theory is that the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>πρεσβύτερος</span>
was originally employed in the most general sense to indicate any church
officer, thus practically equivalent to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.2"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.3"></span>γούμενος</span> of <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.4"></span>[Heb. xiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.5"></span>, and the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.6"></span>ποιμήν</span> of <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.7"></span>[Eph. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.8"></span>. The terms <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.9"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.10"></span>πίσκοπος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.11"></span>δι€κονος</span>,
on the other hand, were employed to designate specific church officers
charged with the performance of specific duties. If this were so, we
should expect the general term to be used before the particular
designations, and this is just what we find in the New Testament. We
should expect further that the general term and the specific terms might
be used by the same person in the same context, according as he thought
of the officers in general or of a particular division of the officers;
on the other hand the general term and one of the specific terms could
never be coordinated (we could never find “presbyter *and* bishop,”
“presbyter *and* deacon”), but we should expect to find the specific
terms thus coordinated (“bishops *and* deacons”). An examination of the
Epistle to the Philippians, of the Pastoral Epistles, of Clement’s
Epistle to the Corinthians, and of the Didache will show that our
expectations are fully realized. This theory explains the fact that so
frequently presbyters and bishops seem to be identical (the general and
the specific term might of course in many cases be used
interchangeably), and also the fact that so frequently they seem to be
quite distinct. It explains still further the remarkable fact that while
in the first century we never find a distinction in official rank
between bishops and presbyters, that distinction appears early in the
second. In many churches it must early have become necessary to appoint
some of the officers as a special committee to take charge of the
economic affairs of the congregation. The members of such a committee
might very naturally be given the special name <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.12"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.13"></span>πίσκοποι</span> (see Hatch’s
discussion of the use of this word in his work already referred to). In
some churches the duties might be of such a character that the bishops
would need assistants (to whom it would be natural to give the name
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.14"></span>δι€κονος</span>), and such assistants
would of course be closely associated with the bishops, as we find them
actually associated with them in the second and following centuries (a
fact which Hatch has emphasized). Of course where the bishops
constituted a special and smaller committee of the general body,
entrusted with such important duties, they would naturally acquire
especial influence and power, and thus the chairman of the committee—the
chairman of the bishops as such, not of the presbyters, though he
*might* be that also—would in time, as a central authority was more and
more felt to be necessary, gradually assume the supremacy, retaining his
original name <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.15"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.16"></span>πίσκοπος</span>. As the power was thus
concentrated in his hands, the committee of bishops as such would cease
to be necessary, and he would require only the deacons, who should carry
out his directions in economic matters, as we find them doing in the
second century. The elevation of the bishop would of course separate him
from the other officers in such a way that although still a presbyter
(i.e. an officer), he would cease to be called longer by the general
name. In the same way the deacons obliged to devote themselves to their
specific duties, would cease to have much to do with the more general
functions of the other officers, to whom finally the name
presbyter—originally a general term—would be confined, and thus become a
distinctive name for part of the officers. In their hands would remain
the general disciplinary functions which had belonged from the beginning
to the entire body of officers as such, and their rank would naturally
be second only to that of the bishop, for the deacons as assistants
only, not independent officers, could not outrank them (though they
struggled hard in the third and fourth centuries to do so). It is of
course likely that in a great many churches the simple undivided office
would long remain, and that bishops and deacons as specific officers
distinguished from the general body would not exist. But after the
distinction between the three orders had been sharply drawn in one part
of Christendom, it must soon spread throughout the Church and become
established even in places where it had not been produced by a natural
process of evolution. The Church organization of the second century is
thus complete, and its further development need not concern us here, for
it is not matter of controversy. Nor is this the place to show how the
local church officers gradually assumed the spiritual functions which
belonged originally to apostles, prophets, and teachers. The Didache is
the document which has shed most light upon that process, and Hernack in
his edition of it has done most to make the matter clear.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[151:754](2010092.htm#fr_753) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p23.17"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p24.2"></span>φώτισε</span>: literally, “enlightened
him.” The verb <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p24.3"></span>φωτίζω</span> was very commonly used
among the Fathers, with the meaning “to baptize.” See Suicer’s
*Thesaurus,* where numerous examples of this use of the word by
Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzen, and others, are given.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[151:755](2010092.htm#fr_754) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>τὴν σφραγῖδα κυρίου</span>. The word
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p25.2"></span>σφραγίς</span> was very widely used in
the primitive Church to denote baptism. See Suicer’s *Thesaurus* for
examples. Gregory Nazianzen, in his *Orat.* XL., gives the reason for
this use of the word: “We call baptism a seal,” he says, “because it is
a preservative and a sign of ownership.” Chrysostom, in his third Homily
on 2 Cor. §7, says, “So also art thou thyself made king and priest and
prophet in the laver; a king, having dashed to earth all the deeds of
wickedness and slain thy sins; a priest, in that thou offerest thyself
to God, having sacrificed thy body and being thyself slain also; …a
prophet, knowing what shall be, and being inspired by God, and sealed.
For as upon soldiers a seal, so is also the Spirit put upon the
faithful. And if thou desert, thou art manifest to all. For the Jews had
circumcision for a seal, but we the earnest of the Spirit.” (*Nicene and
Post-Nicene Fathers,* First Series, Vol. XII. p. 293.)

<span id="fn_755"></span>[151:756](2010092.htm#fr_755) <span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxiii-p28"></span> Literally, “greatness of his
nature” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxiii-p28.1"></span>μέγεθος φύσεως</span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](2010093)
