[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010039)  [Next](2010041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_100">p. 100</span>
<span id="iii.vi.xiii-Page_100"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—</span>*Narrative concerning
the Prince of the Edessenes.*

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p2.1"></span>The</span> divinity of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ being noised abroad among all men on account of his
wonder-working power, he attracted countless numbers from foreign
countries lying far away from Judea, who had the hope of being cured of
their diseases and of all kinds of sufferings.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p3"></span>2. For instance the King Abgarus, <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) who ruled with great glory the nations
beyond the Euphrates, being afflicted with a terrible disease which it
was beyond the power of human skill to cure, when he heard of the name
of Jesus, and of his miracles, which were attested by all with one
accord sent a message to him by a courier and begged him to heal his
disease.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p5"></span>3. But he did not at that time comply
with his request; yet he deemed him worthy of a personal letter in which
he said that he would send one of his disciples to cure his disease, and
at the same time promised salvation to himself and all his house.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p6"></span>4. Not long afterward his promise was
fulfilled. For after his resurrection from the dead and his ascent into
heaven, Thomas, <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) one of the
twelve apostles, under divine impulse sent Thaddeus, who was also
numbered among the seventy disciples of Christ, <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) to Edessa, <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) as a preacher and evangelist of the
teaching of Christ.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p10"></span>5. And all that our Saviour had
promised received through him its fulfillment. You have written evidence
of these things taken from the archives of Edessa, <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) which was at that time a royal city.
For in the public registers there, which contain accounts of ancient
times and the acts of Abgarus, these things have been found preserved
down to the present time. But there is no better way than to hear the
epistles themselves which we have taken from the archives and have
literally translated from the Syriac language <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) in the following manner.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p13"></span>*Copy of an epistle written by Abgarus
the ruler to Jesus, and sent to him at Jerusalem by Ananias* <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) *the swift courier.*

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p15"></span>6. “Abgarus, ruler of Edessa, to Jesus
the excellent Saviour who has appeared in the country of Jerusalem,
greeting. I have heard the reports of thee and of thy cures as performed
by thee without medicines or herbs. For it is said that thou makest the
blind to see and the lame to walk, that thou cleansest lepers and
castest out impure spirits and demons, and that thou healest those
afflicted with lingering disease, and raisest the dead.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p16"></span>7. And having heard all these things
concerning thee, I have concluded that one of two things must be true:
either thou art God, and having come down from heaven thou doest these
things, or else thou, who doest these things, art the Son of God. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220)

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p18"></span>8. I have therefore written to thee to
ask thee that thou wouldest take the trouble to come to me and heal the
disease which I have. For I have heard that the Jews are murmuring
against thee and are plotting to injure thee. But I have a very small
yet noble city which is great enough for us both.”

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p19"></span><span id="page_101">p. 101</span>
<span id="iii.vi.xiii-Page_101"></span>*The answer of Jesus to the ruler
Abgarus by the courier Ananias.*

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p20"></span>9. “Blessed art thou who hast believed
in me without having seen me. <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221)
For it is written concerning me, that they who have seen me will not
believe in me, and that they who have not seen me will believe and be
saved. <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) But in regard to what
thou hast written me, that I should come to thee, it is necessary for me
to fulfill all things here for which I have been sent, and after I have
fulfilled them thus to be taken up again to him that sent me. But after
I have been taken up I will send to thee one of my disciples, that he
may heal thy disease and give life to thee and thine.”

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p23"></span>10. To these epistles there was added
the following account in the Syriac language. “After the ascension of
Jesus, Judas, <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) who was also
called Thomas, sent to him Thaddeus, an apostle, <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) one of the Seventy. When he was come
he lodged with Tobias, <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) the son
of Tobias. When the report of him got abroad, it was told Abgarus that
an apostle of Jesus was come, as he had written him.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p27"></span>11. Thaddeus began then in the power
of God to heal every disease and infirmity, insomuch that all wondered.
And when Abgarus heard of the great and wonderful things which he did
and of the cures which he performed, he began to suspect that he was the
one of whom Jesus had written him, saying, ‘After I have been taken up I
will send to thee one of my disciples who will heal thee.’

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p28"></span>12. Therefore, summoning Tobias, with
whom Thaddeus lodged, he said, I have heard that a certain man of power
has come and is lodging in thy house. Bring him to me. And Tobias coming
to Thaddeus said to him, The ruler Abgarus summoned me and told me to
bring thee to him that thou mightest heal him. And Thaddeus said, I will
go, for I have been sent to him with power.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p29"></span>13. Tobias therefore arose early on
the following day, and taking Thaddeus came to Abgarus. And when he
came, the nobles were present and stood about Abgarus. And immediately
upon his entrance a great vision appeared to Abgarus in the countenance
of the apostle Thaddeus. When Abgarus saw it he prostrated himself
before Thaddeus, while all those who stood about were astonished; for
they did not see the vision, which appeared to Abgarus alone.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p30"></span>14. He then asked Thaddeus if he were
in truth a disciple of Jesus the Son of God, who had said to him, ‘I
will send thee one of my disciples, who shall heal thee and give thee
life.’ And Thaddeus said, Because thou hast mightily believed in him
that sent me, therefore have I been sent unto thee. And still further,
if thou believest in him, the petitions of thy heart shall be granted
thee as thou believest.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p31"></span>15. And Abgarus said to him, So much
have I believed in him that I wished to take an army and destroy those
Jews who crucified him, had I not been deterred from it by reason of the
dominion of the Romans. And Thaddeus said, Our Lord has fulfilled the
will of his Father, and having fulfilled it has been taken up to his
Father. And Abgarus said to him, I too have believed in him and in his
Father.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p32"></span>16. And Thaddeus said to him,
Therefore I place my hand upon thee in his name. And when he had done
it, immediately Abgarus was cured of the disease and of the suffering
which he had.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p33"></span>17. And Abgarus marvelled, that as he
had heard concerning Jesus, so he had received in very deed through his
disciple Thaddeus, who healed him without medicines and herbs, and not
only him, but also Abdus <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) the son
of Abdus, who was afflicted with the gout; for he too came to him and
fell at his feet, and having received a benediction by the imposition of
his hands, he was healed. The same Thaddeus cured also many other
inhabitants of the city, and did wonders and marvelous works, and
preached <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-Page_102"></span>the word of God.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p35"></span>18. And afterward Abgarus said, Thou,
O Thaddeus, doest these things with the power of God, and we marvel.
But, in addition to these things, I pray thee to inform me in regard to
the coming of Jesus, how he was born; and in regard to his power, by
what power he performed those deeds of which I have heard.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p36"></span>19. And Thaddeus said, Now indeed will
I keep silence, since I have been sent to proclaim the word publicly.
But tomorrow assemble for me all thy citizens, and I will preach in
their presence and sow among them the word of God, concerning the coming
of Jesus, how he was born; and concerning his mission, for what purpose
he was sent by the Father; and concerning the power of his works, and
the mysteries which he proclaimed in the world, and by what power he did
these things; and concerning his new preaching, and his abasement and
humiliation, and how he humbled himself, and died and debased his
divinity and was crucified, and descended into Hades, <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) and burst the bars which from eternity
had not been broken, <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) and raised
the dead; for he descended alone, but rose with many, and thus ascended
to his Father. <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229)

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p41"></span>20. Abgarus therefore commanded the
citizens to assemble early in the morning to hear the preaching of
Thaddeus, and afterward he ordered gold and silver to be given him. But
he refused to take it, saying, If we have forsaken that which was our
own, how shall we take that which is another’s? These things were done
in the three hundred and fortieth year.” <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230)

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p43"></span>I have inserted them here in their
proper place, translated from the Syriac <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) literally, and I hope to good purpose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_213"></span>[100:214](2010040.htm#fr_213) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p4"></span> Abgarus was the name of several kings
of Edessa, who reigned at various periods from <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p4.1"></span>b.c.</span> 99 to <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 217. The Abgar contemporary
with Christ was called Abgar Ucomo, or “the Black.” He was the fifteenth
king, and reigned, according to Gutschmid, from <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p4.3"></span>a.d.</span> 13 to <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p4.4"></span>a.d.</span> 50. A great many ecclesiastical
fictions have grown up around his name, the story, contained in its
simplest form in the present chapter, being embellished with many
marvelous additions. A starting-point for this tradition of the
correspondence with Christ,—from which in turn grew all the later
legends,—may be found in the fact that in the latter part of the second
century there was a Christian Abgar, King of Edessa, at whose court
Bardesanes, the Syrian Gnostic, enjoyed high favor, and it is certain
that Christianity had found a foothold in this region at a much earlier
period. Soon after the time of this Abgar the pretended correspondence
was very likely forged, and foisted back upon the Abgar who was
contemporary with Christ. Compare Cureton’s *Anc. Syriac Documents
relative go the Earliest Establishment of Christianity in Edessa,*
London, 1864.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[100:215](2010040.htm#fr_214) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p7"></span> On the traditions in regard to Thomas,
see Bk. III. chap 1.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[100:216](2010040.htm#fr_215) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p8"></span> See chap. 12, note 11.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[100:217](2010040.htm#fr_216) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p9"></span> Edessa, the capital of Abgar’s
dominions, was a city of Northern Mesopotamia, near the river Euphrates.
History knows nothing of the city before the time of the Seleucidæ,
though tradition puts its origin back into distant antiquity, and some
even identify it with Abraham’s original home, Ur of the Chaldees. In
the history of the Christian Church it played an important part as a
centre of Syrian learning. Ephraem, the Syrian, founded a seminary there
in the fourth century, which after his death fell into the hands of the
Arians.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[100:218](2010040.htm#fr_217) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p11"></span> We have no reason to doubt that
Eusebius, who is the first to mention these apocryphal epistles, really
found them in the public archives at Edessa. Moses Chorenensis, the
celebrated Armenian historian of the fifth century, who studied a long
time in Edessa, is an independent witness to their existence in the
Edessene archives. Eusebius has been accused of forging this
correspondence himself; but this unworthy suspicion has been refuted by
the discovery and publication of the original Syriac (*The Doct. of
Addai the Apostle, with an English Translation and Notes,* by G.
Phillips, London, 1876; compare also *Contemp. Rev.,* May, 1877, p.
1137). The epistles were forged probably long before his day, and were
supposed by him to be genuine. His critical insight, but not his
honesty, was at fault. The apocryphal character of these letters is no
longer a matter of dispute, though Cave and Grabe defended their
genuineness (so that Eusebius is in good company), and even in the
present century Rinck (*Ueber die Echtheit des Briefwechsels des Königs
Abgars mit Jesu, Zeitschrift für Hist. Theol.,* 1843, II. p. 326) has
had the hardihood to enter the lists in their defense; but we know of no
one else who values his critical reputation so little as to venture upon
the task.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[100:219](2010040.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p12"></span> Eusebius does not say directly that
he translated these documents himself, but this seems to be the natural
conclusion to be drawn from his words. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p12.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p12.2"></span>Η</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p12.3"></span>μῖν</span> is used only with <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi.xiii-p12.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi.xiii-p12.5"></span>ναληφθεισῶν</span>,
and not with <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p12.6"></span>μεταβληθεισῶν</span>. It is impossible,
therefore, to decide with certainty; but the documents must have been in
Syriac in the Edessene archives, and Eusebius’ words imply that, if he
did not translate them himself, he at least employed some one else to do
it. At the end of this chapter he again uses an indefinite expression,
where perhaps it might be expected that he would tell us directly if he
had himself translated the documents.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[100:220](2010040.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p14"></span> In the greatly embellished narrative
of Cedrenus (*Hist. Compendium,* p. 176; according to Wright, in his
article on Abgar in the *Dict. of Christian Biog.*) this Ananias is
represented as an artist who endeavored to take the portrait of Christ,
but was dazzled by the splendor of his countenance; whereupon Christ,
having washed his face, wiped it with a towel, which miraculously
retained an image of his features. The picture thus secured was carried
back to Edessa, and acted as a charm for the preservation of the city
against its enemies. The marvelous fortunes of the miraculous picture
are traced by Cedrenus through some centuries (see also Evagrius, *H.
E.* IV. 27).

<span id="fn_220"></span>[100:221](2010040.htm#fr_220) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p17"></span> The expression “Son of God” could not
be used by a heathen prince as it is used here.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[101:222](2010040.htm#fr_221) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p21"></span> Compare <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p21.1"></span>[John xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)<span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p21.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[101:223](2010040.htm#fr_222) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p22.1"></span>γέγραπται</span>, as used by Christ and
his disciples, always referred to the Old Testament. The passage quoted
here does not occur in the Old Testament; but compare [Isa.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009), [Jer.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#021), [Ezek.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#002), [Matt.
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014), [Mark
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012), [Acts
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026), [Rom.
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007)<span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p22.2"></span>[Isa. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p22.3"></span>,
[Jer. v. 21](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#021)<span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p22.4"></span>, and [Ezek. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#002)<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p22.5"></span>;
and also Matt. xiii. 14, [Mark iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p22.6"></span>, and especially [Acts xxviii.
26-28](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026)<span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p22.7"></span> and [Rom. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007)<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p22.8"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[101:224](2010040.htm#fr_223) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p24"></span> Thomas is not commonly known by the
name of Judas, and it is possible that Eusebius, or the translator of
the document, made a mistake, and applied to Thomas a name which in the
original was given to Thaddeus. But Thomas is called Judas Thomas in the
Apocryphal Acts of Thomas, and in the Syriac *Doctrina Apostolorum,*
published by Cureton.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[101:225](2010040.htm#fr_224) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p25"></span> The word “apostle” is by no means
confined to the twelve apostles of Christ. The term was used very
commonly in a much wider sense, and yet the combination, “the apostle,
one of the Seventy,” in this passage, does not seem natural, and we
cannot avoid the conclusion that the original author of this account did
not thus describe Thaddeus. The designation, “one of the Seventy,”
carries the mind back to Christ’s own appointment of them, recorded by
Luke, and the term “apostle,” used in the same connection, would
naturally denote one of the Twelve appointed by Christ,—that is, an
apostle in the narrow sense. It might be suggested as possible that the
original Syriac connected the word “apostle” with Thomas, reading,
“Thomas the apostle sent Judas, who is also called Thaddeus, one of the
Seventy,” &c. Such a happy confusion is not beyond the power of an
ancient translator, for most of whom little can be said in the way of
praise. That this can have been the case in the present instance,
however, is rendered extremely improbable by the fact that throughout
this account Thaddeus is called an apostle, and we should therefore
expect the designation upon the first mention of him. It seems to me
much more probable that the words, “one of the Seventy,” are an addition
of Eusebius, who has already, in two places (§4, above, and chap. 12,
§3), told us that Thaddeus was one of them. It is probable that the
original Syriac preserved the correct tradition of Thaddeus as one of
the Twelve; while Eusebius, with his false tradition of him as one of
the Seventy, takes pains to characterize him as such, when he is first
introduced, but allows the word “apostle,” so common in its wider sense,
to stand throughout. He does not intend to correct the Syriac original;
he simply defines Thaddeus, as he understands him, more closely.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[101:226](2010040.htm#fr_225) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p26"></span> Tobias was very likely a Jew, or of
Jewish extraction, the name being a familiar one among the Hebrews. This
might have been the reason that Thaddeus (if he went to Edessa at all)
made his home with him.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[101:227](2010040.htm#fr_226) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p34"></span> Moses Chorenensis reads instead
(according to Rinck), “Potagrus, the son of Abdas.” Rinck thinks it
probable that Eusebius or the translator made a mistake, confusing the
Syrian name Potagrus with the Greek word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p34.1"></span>ποδ€γρα</span>, “a sort of gout,” and then
inserting a second Abdas. The word “Podagra” is Greek and could not have
occurred in the Armenian original, and therefore Eusebius is to be
corrected at this point by Moses Chorenensis (Rinck, *ibid.* p. 18). The
Greek reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p34.2"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p34.3"></span>Αβδον τὸν τοῦ ῎Αβδου ποδ€γραν
žχοντα</span>.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[102:228](2010040.htm#fr_227) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p37"></span> This is probably the earliest
distinct and formal statement of the descent into Hades; but no special
stress is laid upon it as a new doctrine, and it is stated so much as a
matter of course as to show that it was commonly accepted at Edessa at
the time of the writing of these records, that is certainly as early as
the third century. Justin, Irenæus, Clement of Alexandria, Origen,
Tertullian, &c., all witness to the belief of the Church in this
doctrine, though it did not form an article in any of the older creeds,
and appeared in the East first in certain Arian confessions at about 360
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.xiii-p37.1"></span>a.d.</span> In the
West it appeared first in the Aquileian creed, from which it was
transferred to the Apostles’ creed in the fifth century or later.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p38"></span>The doctrine is stated in a very
fantastic shape in the *Gospel of Nicodemus*, part II. (*Ante-Nicene
Fathers,* Am. ed. VIII. p. 435 sq.), which is based upon an apocryphal
gospel of the second century, according to Tischendorf. In it the
descent of Christ into Hades and his ascent with a great multitude are
dwelt upon at length. Compare Pearson, *On the Creed*, p. 340 sq.;
Schaff’s *Creeds of Christendom,* I. p. 46; and especially, Plumptre’s
*Spirits in Prison*, p. 77 sq.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[102:229](2010040.htm#fr_228) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p39"></span> Compare the *Gospel of Nicodemus*,
II. 5.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[102:230](2010040.htm#fr_229) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p40.1"></span>καταβὰς γὰρ μόνος συνήγειρεν πολλοὺς, ειθ᾽
οὕτως ἀνέβη πρὸς τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ</span>. Other <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p40.2"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p40.3"></span>κατέβη μόνος, ἀνέβη δὲ μετὰ πολλοῦ ὀχλοῦ
πρὸς τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ</span>. Rufinus translates *Qui descendit quidem
solus, ascendit autem cum grandi multitudine ad patrem suum*. Compare
the words of Cyril of Jerusalem (*Catech.* IV. 11): <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi.xiii-p40.4"></span>κατῆλθεν εἰς τὰ
καταχθόνια, ἱνα κακεῖθεν λυτρώσηται τοὺς δικαίους</span>, “He descended
into the depths, that he might ransom thence the just.”

<span id="fn_230"></span>[102:231](2010040.htm#fr_230) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p42"></span> According to the *Chronicle* of
Eusebius (ed. Schoene, II. p. 116) the Edessenes dated their era from
the year of Abraham 1706 (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p42.1"></span>b.c.</span> 310), which corresponded with
the second year of the one hundred and seventeenth Olympiad (or,
according to the Armenian, to the third year of the same Olympiad), the
time when Seleucus Nicanor began to rule in Syria. According to this
reckoning the 340th year of the Edessenes would correspond with the year
of Abraham 2046, the reign of Tiberius 16 (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p42.2"></span>a.d.</span> 30); that is, the second year
of the two hundred and second Olympiad (or, according to the Armenian,
the third year of the same). According to the *Chronicle* of Eusebius,
Jesus was crucified in the nineteenth year of Tiberius (year of Abraham
2048 = <span class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.xiii-p42.3"></span>a.d.</span>
32), according to Jerome’s version in the eighteenth year (year of
Abraham 2047 = <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p42.4"></span>a.d.</span> 31). Thus, as compared with
these authorities, the 340th year of the Edessenes falls too early. But
Tertullian, Lactantius, Augustine, and others put Christ’s death in 783
U.C., that is in 30 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p42.5"></span>a.d.</span>, and this corresponds with the
Edessene reckoning as given by Eusebius.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[102:232](2010040.htm#fr_231) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p44"></span> See note 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](2010041)
