[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010356)  [Next](2010358) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p1"></span> §6. *Religious Characteristics.*

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p2"></span>Was Constantine a Christian? This vain
question has to be considered, hardly discussed. The interminable
opinions, one way or the other, are for the most part wise-seeming,
meaningless generalizations. Like any generalized statement, it is
conditioned by the point of view of the author. When ten men answered
the question “What is a Christian?” in ten different ways, who <span
id="page_431">p. 431</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.vi-Page_431"></span>shall say what any one is? This has
been the difficulty. One does not conceive of Christianity apart from
baptismal regeneration. The question has then narrowed to one of
baptism. Constantine was not a Christian until just before his death.
Another has some other test. Another is not a Christian himself, and so
on. A good Biblical, Protestant starting-point is to say he was a
Christian as soon as he believed in Christ, and that the evidence of
faith is in confession and action. Already, before his campaign into
Italy, he seems to have been in intimate contact with the Christians.
Hosius was probably already one of his advisers. The young emperor had
inherited his father’s piety (Paneg. 307, c. 5), and was inclined to
monotheism. The words of advisers must have made him think at least, and
he seems to have made a sort of test of believing at the time of the
famous “vision of the cross,” whatever that may have been. Judging from
the way men think and feel their way to faith, it seems psychologically
probable that, feeling his way along to that point, he tried faith and,
having success, he substantially believed from that time on. Certainly
from a very early period after this, the evidences begin to be clear and
increasingly so as presumably his faith itself became more clear and
fixed. The account in Eusebius of the process of thought by which he
inclined toward Christianity has the greatest plausibility. He says that
“considering the matter of Divine assistance, it occurred to him that
those who had relied on idols had been deceived and destroyed, while his
father…had honored the one Supreme God, had found him Saviour, &c.…he
judged it folly to join in the idle worship of those who were no
gods…and felt it incumbent on him to honor no other than the God of his
father.” The nature of the vision of the cross, whether a miracle, a
natural phenomenon, or only a dream, does not affect the probability of
the account by Eusebius of what followed it (*V. C.* 1. 32). “At the
time above specified, being struck with amazement at the extraordinary
vision, and resolving to worship no other God save him who had appeared
to him, he sent for those who were acquainted with the mysteries of his
doctrines, and inquired also what God was.…They affirmed that he was
God, the only begotten Son of the one and only God,” and he thereupon
“made the priests of God his counsellors and deemed it incumbent on him
to honor the God who had appeared to him, with all devotion.” According
to Sozomen, “it is universally admitted Constantine embraced the
religion of the Christians previous to his war with Maxentius and prior
to his return to Rome and Italy; and this is evidenced by the dates of
the laws which he enacted in favor of religion” (Soz. 1. 5; cf. 1. 3).
Philostorgius (1. 6), “in conformity with all other writers,” ascribes
to the victory over Maxentius (Photius. *Epit.*). This is confirmed,
too, by the remark of the Panegyrist (313, c. 4; cf. c. 2 and c. 11),
that he conducted the war by Divine instruction, and the famous
inscription on the triumphal arch, *“instinctu Divinitatis.”* According
to Augustine he was at the time of the petition of the Donatists,
“mindful of the hope which he maintained in Christ” (August. *contra
litt. Petil.* Bk. II. c. 92, p. 205).

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p3"></span>The tales of his baptism at this time,
or by Sylvester at all, are pure fables (cf. under *The Mythical
Constantine*), but it appears from antecedent probability, from
testimony, and from his early subsequent identification with the
Christians that he became fairly convinced at this time. His letters
concerning the council at Arles, to be sure, have little direct
evidence, but enough to show that he regarded the Christian religion as
the worship of that one supreme God, and in them Hosius was already his
trusted adviser. But in his letters to Chrestus (314) he speaks of those
who are “forgetful of their own salvation and the reverence due to the
most holy faith,” and if his letter to the bishops after the council at
Arles—a letter full of expressions like “Christ the Saviour,” “brethren
beloved,” “I who myself await the judgment of Christ,” “our
Saviour” <span id="fr_3043"></span>[3044](#fn_3043) —be genuine,
Constantine was well advanced in his commitment in 314; but whether it
is or not, <span id="page_432">p. 432</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.vi-Page_432"></span>the fact of his Christian advisers, of
his laws in behalf of Christians, and various substantial favors to
them, his recognition of their God as his one God, makes it almost idle
to discuss the question. Was Constantine a Christian in 314? What is a
Christian? He seems to have been. The type was that of many a
business-man church-member of to-day—Christians, but neither
over-well-instructed, nor dangerously zealous in the exercise of his
faith. It must be remembered that during these earlier years his
confession of his faith and identification of himself with the
Christians was conditioned by his relation to the old religion. Such a
change was a radical novelty. His position was not yet secure. He had to
use his utmost tact to keep all elements in hand. He was conditioned
just as a modern Christian emperor or president, a majority of whose
political advisers and subjects or electors are non-religious. He had
great problems of political organization to effect, and was immersed in
these. The only matter of surprise is that he grew so rapidly. There is
no ground whatever for supposing that he dissembled to the end, or even
at all. To say that his retaining the title of pontifex maximus, or
making concessions respecting the old worship, or allowing soothsayers
to be consulted, or even the postponement of his baptism, indicate this,
is critical absurdity in the face of evidence. <span
id="fr_3044"></span>[3045](#fn_3044) Testimony, both heathen and
Christian, to the openness of his action is complete, and the testimony
of his acts—such, e.g., as the law for the observance of
Sunday—conclusive. Later, at least, he “most openly destroyed temple
worship and built Christian houses of worship” (Eunap. *Vita Ædes.* 37,
ed. Boiss. p. 20). From the defeat of Licinius on, edicts, letters,
speeches, acts of all sorts, testify to a most unequivocal adoption of
the Christian religion. Eusebius hardly overstates in saying that “he
maintained a continual testimony to his Christianity, with all boldness
and before all men, and so far was he from shrinking from an open
profession of the Christian name, that he rather desired to make it
manifest to all that he regarded this as his highest honor” (*V. C.* 3.
2). Really the question whether he considered himself, or was
considered, a Christian at and after the time of the Council of Nicæa is
too idle even to mention, if it had not been gravely discussed. In the
opinion of the bishops there he was “most pious” and “dear to God” (*Ep.
synod.* in Socr. 1. 9; Theodoret, 1. 8). On his part, letters are full
of pious expression and usually begin or end or both with “beloved
brethren.” To the council itself he describes himself as
“fellow-servant” of “Him who is our common Lord and Saviour.” Another
more considerable position is that all that indisputable external
connection with Christianity was pure political expediency, that he was
a shrewd politician who saw which way the wind was blowing, and had
skill to take advantage of it. That Constantine was not a Christian in
the strict sense even to the end of his life was the position of Keim.
Burckhardt regards him as a pure politician, without a touch of
Christian life. Brieger (1880) says we have not grounds to decide either
way, whether he was “a godless egoistic fatalist or had a more or less
warm religious or even Christian interest,” but that the fixed fact is,
that it was not because of his inner belief in the Christian religion
that he showed favor to the Christians. In a brief attempt to get some
basis in the sources, the enthusiastic testimony of Eusebius and other
writers, explicit as it is, may be quite disregarded, even the testimony
to facts, such as his practice of giving thanks (*V. C.* 1. 39), of
invoking Divine aid (Euseb. *V. C.* 2, 4, 6, 13; Soz. 2. 34), of his
erecting a place of prayer in his palace (Soz. 1. 8), of his fasting
(*V. C.* 2. 41), of his having a stated hour of prayer (*V. C.* 4. 22),
although all these are interesting. The documents, however, unless by
supremely uncritical rejection, can be regarded as fundamental sources.
A brief analysis of these, even though imperfect, will furnish grounds
on the basis of which those who apply various tests may apply them.
Starting from his faith in Christ, surely the center of Christianity, he
believed Christ to be Son of God, “God and the Son of God the author of
every blessing” *(S. C.),* the revealer of the Father, who has “revealed
a pure light in the person of Thy Son…and hast thus given testimony
concerning Thyself” (*S. C.* 1), proceeding from the Father *(S. C.),*
and incarnate, his incarnation having been pre<span id="page_433">p.
433</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-Page_433"></span>dicted also by the
prophets. He believed this Son of God to be his Saviour (*Ad Tyr., Ad
Ant., Ad Euseb.,* &c.) “our common Lord and Saviour” *(Ad Euseb.)*, “our
Saviour, our hope, and our life” *(Ad eccl. Al.).* He believed in his
miraculous birth *(S. C.)* and in his death for our deliverance (*Ad
Nic.;* cf. *Ad Mac.* &c.), “the path which leads to everlasting life”
(*S. C.* 1), “a precious and toilsome” work *(Ad Euseb.),* and in his
ascension into heaven (*S. C.* 1). He believed in “God the Father” (*Ad
Euseb.* 2), “Almighty” *(Ad Euseb.),* Lord of all (*Ad Euseb.* 2), and
the Holy Ghost (*Ad eccl. Al.;* cf. *S. C.*). He believed in “Divine
Providence” (*Ad Eccl. Al.; Ad Alex. et Ar.; Ad. Euseb.* 1), God the
preserver of all men *(Ad Alex. et Ar.),* who sees all things *(Ad Syn.
Nic.),* who is near us and the observer of all our actions *(S. C.),*
and “under the guidance of whose Almighty hand” he is *(Ad Prov. Pal.),*
that all things are regulated by the determination of his will *(Ad
Euseb.).* He believed in the existence of a personal devil *(Ad Eccl.
Al.).* He believed in the future life *(Ad Prov. Pal.),* “the only true
life” (*S. C.* 12), the “strife for immortality” *(Ad Euseb.),* to which
those may aspire who know Him (*S. C.* 12). He believed in future
rewards and punishments (*Ad Prov. Pal.; S. C.* 23). He believed in the
inspiration of the Scriptures *(Ad Eccl. Al.).* He loved God (*Ad Euseb.
2; V. C.* 2. 55), and considered it his chief work in life to glorify
Christ *(S. C.).* He loved his fellow-men, being disposed “to love you
with an enduring affection” (*Ad Ant.; V. C.* 3. 60, &c.), and
recognized it as virtue in others (8, c. 11). To him, God, in general,
is the source of all blessings (*Ad Prov. Pal.; S. C.,* &c.). “I am most
certainly persuaded,” he says, “that I myself owe my life, my every
breath, in short, my very inmost and secret thoughts to the favor of the
Supreme God” *(Ad Prov. Pal.).* He recognizes contrition as a requisite
for pardon *(Ad. Prov. Pal),* and that it is the power of God which
removes guilt *(Ad Euseb.).* In the conduct of life. “Our Saviour’s
words and precepts are a model, as it were, of what our life should be”
(*Ad. Ant.; V. C.* 3. 60).

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p6"></span>Expositions of his doctrinal and
ethical positions might be multiplied almost without end from the many
and fruitful sources, but a few specimens in his own expression will
best show the spirit of his religious life. A most suggestive and
beautiful sketch of Christ’s ministry on earth too long to quote here
may be found in his *Oration* (ch. 15), but the following selections
will give the idea:

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p7"></span>*A description of the inner Christian
life.* “For the only power in man which can be elevated to a comparison
with that of God is sincere and guiltless service and devotion of heart
to Himself, with the contemplation and study of whatever pleases Him,
the raising our affections above the things of earth, and directing our
thoughts, as far as we may, to high and heavenly objects” (*S. C*. 14).

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p8"></span>*A description of the outer Christian
life.* “Compare our religion with your own. Is there not with us genuine
concord, and unwearied love of others? If we reprove a fault, is not our
object to admonish, not to destroy; our correction for safety, not for
cruelty? Do we not exercise not only sincere faith toward God, but
fidelity in the relations of social life? Do we not pity the
unfortunate? Is not ours a life of simplicity which disdains to cover
evil beneath the mask of fraud and hypocrisy?” (*S. C.* 23).

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p9"></span>*A prayer.* “Not without cause, O holy
God, do I prefer this prayer to Thee, the Lord of all. Under Thy
guidance have I devised and accomplished measures fraught with blessing:
preceded by Thy sacred sign, I have led Thy armies to victory: and still
on each occasion of public danger, I follow the same symbol of Thy
perfections while advancing to meet the foe. Therefore have I dedicated
to Thy service a soul duly attempered by love and fear. For Thy name I
truly love, while I regard with reverence that power of which Thou hast
given abundant proofs, to the confirmation and increase of my faith”
*(Ad prov. Or.).*

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p10"></span>*A confession of faith in God and in
Christ.* “This God I confess that I hold in unceasing honor and
remembrance; this God I delight to contemplate with pure and guileless
thoughts in the height of his glory.” “His pleasure is in works of
moderation and gentleness. He loves the meek and hates the turbulent
spirit, delighting in faith. He chastises unbelief” *(Ad Sap.).* <span
id="page_434">p. 434</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-Page_434"></span>“He
is the supreme judge of all things, the prince of immortality, the giver
of everlasting life” (*S. C.* 36).

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p11"></span>Was Constantine a Christian? Let each
one apply his own test.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3043"></span>[431:3044](2010357.htm#fr_3043) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p4"></span> It seems to have been frequently
accepted as such—in the collections of councils, by the editor of
Optatus, Ceillier, &c. It first appeared in the edition of Optatus,
among the monuments relating to the Donatists gathered by him. These
monuments are from one single though tolerably ancient <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>ms.</span> and no source
for this is quoted, though the sources of others are given. In itself
considered it is a surprise to find it at this stage of Constantine’s
life. Still, it is not unlike his later productions, and it is not
impossible to think of its having been written in the enthusiasm of a
successfully ended enterprise. It would seem (unless there be some
confirmatory study of the letter, not now at hand) that a cautious
criticism would base nothing on this letter alone.

<span id="fn_3044"></span>[432:3045](2010357.htm#fr_3044) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.vi-p5"></span> His saying before baptism is
discussed in the *V. C.* 4. 2, notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](2010358)
