[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010705)  [Next](2010707) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p2.1"></span>And</span> now the time is come for us to
proceed to the demonstration of these things; if indeed such truths
require demonstration, and if the aid of testimony be needful to confirm
the certainty of palpable facts. Such testimony, however, shall be here
given; and let it be received with an attentive and gracious ear.

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p3"></span>2. Of old the nations of the earth,
the entire human race, were variously distributed into provincial,
national, and local governments, <span
id="fr_3573"></span>[3574](#fn_3573) subject to kingdoms and
principalities of many kinds. The consequences of this variety were war
and strife, depopulation and captivity, which raged in country and city
with unceasing fury. Hence, too, the countless subjects of history,
adulteries, and rapes of women; hence the woes of Troy, and the ancient
tragedies, so known among all peoples.

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p5"></span>3. The origin of these may justly be
ascribed to the delusion of polytheistic error. But when that instrument
of our redemption, the thrice holy body of Christ, which proved itself
superior to all Satanic fraud, and free from evil both in word and deed,
was raised, at once for the abolition of ancient evils, and in token of
his victory over the powers of darkness; the energy of these evil
spirits was at once destroyed. The manifold forms of government, the
tyrannies and republics, the siege of cities, and devastation of
countries caused thereby, were now no more, and one God was proclaimed
to all mankind.

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p6"></span>4. At the same time one universal
power, the Roman empire, arose and flourished, while the enduring and
implacable hatred of nation against nation was now removed: and as the
knowledge of one God, and one way of religion and salvation, even the
doctrine of Christ, was made known to all mankind; so at the self-same
period, the entire dominion of the Roman empire being vested in a single
sovereign, profound peace reigned throughout the world. And thus, by the
express appointment of the same God, two roots of blessing, the Roman
empire, and the doctrine of Christian piety, sprang up together for the
benefit of men.

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p7"></span>5. For before this time the various
countries of the world, as Syria, Asia, Macedonia, Egypt, and Arabia,
had been severally subject to different rulers. The Jewish people,
again, had established their dominion in the land of Palestine. And
these nations, in every village, city, and district, actuated by some
insane spirit, were engaged in incessant and murderous war and conflict.
But two mighty powers, starting from the same point, the Roman empire,
which henceforth was swayed by a single sovereign, and the Christian
religion, subdued and reconciled these contending elements.

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p8"></span>6. Our Saviour’s mighty power
destroyed at once the many governments and the many gods of the powers
of darkness, and proclaimed to all men, both rude and civilized, to the
extremities of the earth, the sole sovereignty of God himself. Meantime
the Roman empire, the causes of multiplied governments being thus
removed, effected an easy conquest of those which yet remained; its
object being to unite all nations in one harmonious whole; an object in
great measure already secured, and destined to be still more perfectly
attained, even to the final conquest of the ends of the habitable world,
by means of the salutary doctrine, and through the aid of that Divine
power which facilitates and smooths its way.

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p9"></span>7. And surely this must appear a
wondrous fact to those who will examine the question in the love of
truth, and desire not to cavil at these blessings. <span
id="fr_3574"></span>[3575](#fn_3574) The falsehood of demon superstition
was convicted: the inveterate strife and mutual hatred of the nations
was removed: at the same time One God, and the knowledge of that God,
were proclaimed to all: one universal empire prevailed; and the whole
human race, subdued by the controlling power of peace and concord,
received one another as brethren, and responded to the feelings of their
common nature. Hence, as children of one God and Father, and owning true
religion as their common mother, they saluted and welcomed each other
with words of peace. Thus the whole world appeared like one well-ordered
and united family: each one might journey unhindered as far as and
whithersoever he pleased: men might <span id="page_607">p. 607</span>
<span id="iv.viii.xvii-Page_607"></span>securely travel from West to
East, and from East to West, as to their own native country: in short,
the ancient oracles and predictions of the prophets were fulfilled, more
numerous than we can at present cite, and those especially which speak
as follows concerning the saving Word. “He shall have dominion from sea
to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth.” And again, “In his
days shall righteousness spring up; and abundance of peace.” “And they
shall beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into
sickles: and nation shall not take up sword against nation, neither
shall they learn to war any more.” <span
id="fr_3575"></span>[3576](#fn_3575)

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p12"></span>8. These words, predicted ages before
in the Hebrew tongue, have received in our own day a visible
fulfillment, by which the testimonies of the ancient oracles are clearly
confirmed. And now, if thou still desire more ample proof, receive it,
not in words, but from the facts themselves. Open the eyes of thine
understanding; expand the gates of thought; pause awhile, and consider;
inquire of thyself as though thou wert another, and thus diligently
examine the nature of the case. What king or prince in any age of the
world, what philosopher, legislator, or prophet, in civilized or
barbarous lands, has attained so great a height of excellence, I say not
after death, but while living still, and full of mighty power, as to
fill the ears and tongues of all mankind with the praises of his name?
Surely none save our only Saviour has done this, when, after his victory
over death, he spoke the word to his followers, and fulfilled it by the
event, saying to them, “Go ye, and make disciples of all nations in my
name.” <span id="fr_3576"></span>[3577](#fn_3576) He it was who gave the
distinct assurance, that his gospel must be preached in all the world
for a testimony to all nations, and immediately verified his word: for
within a little time the world itself was filled with his doctrine.

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p14"></span>9. How, then, will those who caviled
at the commencement of my speech be able to reply to this? For surely
the force of ocular testimony is superior to any verbal argument. Who
else than he, with an invisible and yet potent hand, has driven from
human society like savage beasts that ever noxious and destructive tribe
of evil spirits who of old had made all nations their prey, and by the
motions of their images had practiced many a delusion among men? Who
else, beside our Saviour, by the invocation of his name, and by
unfeigned prayer addressed through him to the Supreme God, has given
power to banish from the world the remnant of those wicked spirits to
those who with genuine and sincere obedience pursue the course of life
and conduct which he has himself prescribed? Who else but our Saviour
has taught his followers to offer those bloodless and reasonable
sacrifices which are performed by prayer and the secret worship of God?

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p15"></span>10. Hence is it that throughout the
habitable world altars are erected, and churches dedicated, wherein
these spiritual and rational sacrifices are offered as a sacred service
by every nation to the One Supreme God. Once more, who but he, with
invisible and secret power, has suppressed and utterly abolished those
bloody sacrifices which were offered with fire and smoke, as well as the
cruel and senseless immolation of human victims; a fact which is
attested by the heathen historians themselves? For it was not till after
the publication of the Saviour’s Divine doctrine, about the time of
Hadrian’s reign, that the practice of human sacrifice was universally
abandoned.

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p16"></span>11. Such and so manifest are the
proofs of our Saviour’s power and energy after death. Who then can be
found of spirit so obdurate as to withhold his assent to the truth, and
refuse to acknowledge his life to be Divine? Such deeds as I have
described are done by the living, not the dead; and visible acts are to
us as evidence of those which we cannot see. It is as it were an event
of yesterday that an impious and godless race disturbed and confounded
the peace of human society, and possessed mighty power. But these, as
soon as life departed, lay prostrate on the earth, worthless as dung,
breathless, motionless, bereft of speech, and have left neither fame nor
memorial behind. For such is the condition of the dead; and he who no
longer lives is nothing: and how can he who is nothing be capable of any
act? But how shall his existence be called in question, whose active
power and energy are greater than in those who are still alive? And
though he be invisible to the natural eye, yet the discerning faculty is
not in outward sense. We do not comprehend the rules of art, or the
theories of science, by bodily sensation; nor has any eye yet discerned
the mind of man. Far less, then, the power of God: and in such cases our
judgment is formed from apparent results.

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p17"></span>12. Even thus are we bound to judge
of our Saviour’s invisible power, and decide by its manifest effects
whether we shall acknowledge the mighty operations which he is even now
carrying on to be the works of a living agent; or whether they shall be
ascribed to one who has no existence; or, lastly, whether the inquiry be
not absurd and inconsistent in itself. For with what reason can we
assert the existence of one who is not? Since all allow that that which
has no existence <span id="page_608">p. 608</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xvii-Page_608"></span>is devoid of that power, and energy,
and action, for these are characteristics of the living, but the
contrary is characteristic of the dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3573"></span>[606:3574](2010706.htm#fr_3573) <span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p4"></span> Eparchies, ethnarchies, and
toparchies.

<span id="fn_3574"></span>[606:3575](2010706.htm#fr_3574) <span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p10"></span> This is a fair appeal, applicable to
his present hearers. It at least was true of Constantine’s reign, that
it produced a state of relative peace and prosperity.

<span id="fn_3575"></span>[607:3576](2010706.htm#fr_3575) <span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p11"></span> \[[Ps.
71:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#008)<span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p11.1"></span>; [Isaiah ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p11.2"></span>. Septuagint.—*Bag.*\] [Psalm
lxxii](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#000)<span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p11.3"></span>., English version.

<span id="fn_3576"></span>[607:3577](2010706.htm#fr_3576) <span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvii-p13"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p13.1"></span>. There is an interesting various reading
here, where Eusebius, with B. as against Aleph, adds something; but
where B. and others have <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p13.2"></span>ουν</span>, and D. and others have <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.xvii-p13.3"></span>νυν</span>, Eusebius
has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.xvii-p13.4"></span>γουν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](2010707)
