[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010362)  [Next](2010364) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p1"></span> §3. *Letters and Edicts.*

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p2"></span>It is hard to separate between
letters, edicts, and laws. A substantial autocrat, the form of address
was much the same, and the force. The extant letters are quite numerous,
and those of which we have definite or general mention, many. He seems
to have been a most industrious letter-writer. Of the extant letters a
majority are undoubtedly or probably genuine. Some, however, need more
critical study than seems to have been given to them. <span
id="fr_3047"></span>[3048](#fn_3047) Following is the roughly
chronological list, the works being grouped by years. The dating is
taken mainly from <span id="page_437">p. 437</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-Page_437"></span>the Migne edition, Ceillier, and
Valesius with slight original study. The descriptions are of course from
the documents themselves.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p4"></span>1. (313 <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>) *Edict of Constantine and
Licinius for the restoration of the Church.* In Lact. *De M. P.* c. 48,
and also in Euseb. *H. E.* 10. 5 (Op. Const. ed. Migne, 105–110). The
second edict of toleration. The first edict (Euseb. 8. 17; Lact. *De M.
P.* 34) can hardly be classed among the “writings” of Constantine. This
famous second edict grants full religious liberty to the Christians and
restoration of their property. Compare section on *Acts of Toleration*
in Wordworth’s *Constantinus.*

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p5"></span>2. (313.) *First letter of
Constantine and Licinius to Anulinus.* In Euseb. *H. E.* 10. 5 (Op.
Const. ed. Migne, 479–480). Restores goods to the Catholic Christians;
written about the same time as the edict of toleration, according to
Ceillier.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p6"></span>3. (313.) *Second Letter of
Constantine to Anulinus.* In Euseb. *H. E.* 10. 7 (Op. Const. 481–2).
Ordering that the Catholic clergy be free from public service, that they
might not be disturbed in their worship of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p7"></span>4. (313.) *Letter of Constantine to
Cæcilianus.* In Euseb. *H. E.* 10. 6 (Op. Const. 481–4). Presents
money—three thousand purses (folles)—to be distributed according to
direction of Hosius.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p8"></span>5. (313.) *Letter of Constantine to
Melchiades (or Miltiades).* In Euseb. *H. E.* 10. 5 (Op. Const. 477- ).
Having received various letters from Anulinus regarding Cæcilian and the
Donatists, he summons a council at Rome to consider the matter.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p9"></span>6. (314.) *Letter of Constantine to
Ablavius (or Ælafius).* In Optat. *Mon. vet*. p. 283–4 (Op. Const.
483–6). The result of the council at Rome not having proved final, he
summons the Council of Arles.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p10"></span>7. (314.) *Letter of Constantine to
Chrestus (Crescentius), bishop of Syracuse.* In Euseb. *H. E.* 10. 5
(Op. Const. 485–8). Invites to the Council of Arles.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p11"></span>8. (314.) *Letter of Constantine to
the Bishops after the Council of Arles.* In Optat. *Mon. vet.* p. 287–8
(Op. Const. 487–90). Contains gratulations, reprobations of obstinate
schismatists, and exhortations to patience with such obstinateness. It
is full of religious expressions, and if genuine, is a most interesting
exhibition of Constantine’s religious position at this time, but it
looks suspicious, and probably is not genuine.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p12"></span>9. (314) *Letter of Constantine and
Licinius to Probianus, the Proconsul of Africa.* In Augustine, *Ep.* 88
(ed. Migne 33 \[1865\] 3045), and also in *Contr. Cresc*. (43 \[1861\]
540, also in Op. Const. and tr. Engl. in Schaff, *Nicene and Post-Nicene
Fathers,* 1, p. 370). Orders that the Donatist Ingentius be brought to
his court. One text adds Maximianus or Maximus in place of Maximus as
epithet of Constantine.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p13"></span>10. (314 or 315.) *Letter of
Constantine to the Donatist Bishops.* In Optat. *Mon. vet.* p. 290 (Op.
Const. ed. Migne \[1844\] 490). As the Donatists were not yet satisfied,
he summons them to meet Cæcilian, and promises if they convict him in
one particular, it shall be as if in all.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p14"></span>11. (315.) *Letter of Constantine
to Celsus.* In Optat. *Mon. vet* p. 291 (Op. Const. 489–90). In reply to
letter mentioning disturbances of the Donatists, he hints that he
expects to go shortly to Africa and settle things summarily.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p15"></span>12. (315.) *Fragment of a Letter of
Constantine to Eumalius Vicarius.* In Augustine’s *Contr. Crest*. 3. 71
(ed. Migne 43 \[1861\] 541; also Op. Const. 491–2). An extract of six
lines, in which he says Cæcilianus was entirely innocent.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p16"></span>13. (316 or 317.) *Letter of
Constantine to the bishops and people of Africa.* Optat. *Mon. vet.* p.
294 (Op. Const. 491–2). He has tried every way to settle the Donatist
disturbances in vain, and now leaves them to God and advises patience.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p17"></span>14. (323.) *First Letter of
Constantine to Eusebius.* In Euseb. *V. C.* 2. 46; Theodoret, 1. 14;
Socr. 1. 9 (Op. Const. 491–4). Empowers the repairing, enlarging of old,
and building of new churches.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p18"></span><span id="page_438">p. 438</span>
<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-Page_438"></span>15. (323 <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>a.d.</span>) *Law of
Constantine respecting piety toward God and the Christian Religion* (Ad
prov. Pal.). In Euseb. *V. C*. 2. 24–42; abstr. in Soz. 1. 8 (Op. Const.
253–282). This long edict, addressed to the inhabitants of Palestine,
contains an exposition of the prosperity which attends the righteous and
the adversity which comes to the wicked, followed by edict for the
restitution of confiscated property, the recall of exiles, and various
other rectifications of injustices. This is the copy, “or letter,” sent
to the heathen population of the empire.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p19"></span>16. (324.) *Constantine’s edict to
the people of the eastern provinces concerning the error of polytheism,*
&c. (Ad. prov. Or). In Euseb. *V. C*. 48– . This letter, written in
Latin and translated by Eusebius, begins with “some general remarks on
virtue and vice,” touches on the persecutions and the fate of the
persecutors, expresses the wish that all would become Christians,
praises God, and exhorts concord.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p20"></span>17. (323 or 324.) *Letter of
Constantine to Alexander the Bishop and Arius the Presbyter.* In Euseb.
*V. C*. 2. 64–72; Gelas. 2. 4; Socr. 1. 7 (Op. Const. 493–502).
Expresses his desire for peace, his hope that they might have helped him
in the Donatist troubles, his distress at finding that they, too, were
in a broil, his opinion that the matters under discussion are of little
moment, and what he thinks they are. He exhorts to unanimity, repeats
his opinion that the matters are of little moment, mentions his “copious
and constant tears,” and finally gets through.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p21"></span>18. (324–5.) *Letter to Porphyrius*
(Optatian). In Migne, *Patrol. Lat.* 19 \[1846\] 393–394 and in various
editions of Optatian. This letter to Porphyrius or Optatian was on the
occasion of the sending of a poem by the latter for his vicennalia. It
expresses his pleasure and his disposition to encourage the cultivation
of *belles lettres.* Compare note on Optatian under sources.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p22"></span>19. (325.) *Letter of Constantine
the King, summoning the bishops to Nicæa.* In Cowper, *Syriac Misc.,*
Lond. 1841, p. 5–6. This is translated from a Syriac <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p22.1"></span>ms.</span> in the
British Museum, written in 501. Gives as reason for the choice of Nicæa
the convenience for the European bishops and “the excellent temperature
of the air.” This, if genuine, is the letter mentioned by Eusebius, *V.
C*., but it looks suspicious.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p23"></span>20. (325.) *Letter of Constantine
to the churches after the Council of Nicæa.* In Euseb. *V. C*. 3. 17–20;
Socr. 1. 9 (Op. Const. 501–506). Dwells on the harmonious result,
especially respecting the Easter controversy, and commends to the
bishops to observe what the Council has decreed.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p24"></span>21. (325.) *Letter of Constantine
to the church of Alexandria*. In Socr. 1. 9 (Op. Const. 507–510).
Expresses great horror of the blasphemy of Arius, and admiration for the
wisdom of the more than three hundred bishops who condemned him.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p25"></span>22. (325.) *Letter of Constantine
to Arius and the Arians.* In “Conc. 2. 269.” A long and rather railing
address against Arius.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p26"></span>23. (325.) *Letter of Constantine
to the churches.* In Socr. *H. E.* 1. 9. A translation of a Syriac
translation of this, written in 501, in Cowper, *Syriac Misc*., Lond.
1861, p. 6–7. Against Arius and the Porphyrians, and threatens that any
one who conceals a work of Arius shall be punished with death.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p27"></span>24. (325.) *Letter of Constantine
to the Nicomedians against Eusebius and Theognis.* In Gelas. 3. 2;
Theodoret, 1. 20; Soz. 1. 21 (Op. Const. 519–524). A theological
discussion partly of the relation of Father and Son, and an attack on
Eusebius of Nicomedia.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p28"></span>25. (325.) *Letter to Theodotus.*
In Gelas. 3. 3 (Op. Const. 523–524). Counsels him to take warning by
what has happened to Eusebius (of Nicomedia) and Theognis, i.e.
banishment, and get rid of such evil influence, if any, as they may have
had on him.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p29"></span>26. (325.) *Letter of Constantine
to Macarius*. In Euseb. *V. C.* 3. 30–32; Theodoret, 1. 16. Directs the
erection of a peculiarly magnificent church at the Holy Sepulcher in
Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p30"></span>27. (330.) *Letter of Constantine
to the Numidian Bishops*. In Optat. *Mon. vet.* p. 295 (Op. Const.
531–532). Concerns a church taken possession of by schismatists.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p31"></span>28. (332.) *Letter of Constantine
to the Antiochians*. In Euseb. *V. C.* 3. 60 (Op. Const. 533- ). Exhorts
them not to persist in their effort to call Eusebius from Cæsarea to
Antioch.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p32"></span><span id="page_439">p. 439</span>
<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-Page_439"></span>29. (332 <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p32.1"></span>a.d.</span>) *Letter
of Constantine to the Synod of Tyre deprecating the removal of Eusebius
from Cæsarea*. In Euseb. *V. C.* 362; Theodoret, 1. 27 (Op. Const.
543–546).

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p33"></span>30. (332.) *Second Letter of
Constantine to Eusebius*. In Euseb. *V. C.* 3. 61 (Op. Const. 537–540).
Commends Eusebius for having declined the call to Antioch.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p34"></span>31. (332.) *Second Letter of
Constantine to Macarius and the rest of the Bishops in Palestine (to
Eusebius)*. In Euseb. *V. C*. 3. 52–53 (Op. Const. 539–544). Directs the
suppression of idolatrous worship at Mamre.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p35"></span>32. (332.?) *Edict against the
heretics*. In Euseb. *V. C*. 3. 64–5. Against Novatians, Valentinians,
Marcionites, Paulians, Cataphrygians who are forbidden to assemble and
whose houses of worship are to be given to the Catholic party.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p36"></span>33. (333.) *Letter of Constantine
to Sapor, King of the Persians*. In Euseb. 4. 9–13; Theodoret, 1. 24
(Op. Const. 545–552). Is mainly a confession of faith commending the
Persian Christians to the special care of their king.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p37"></span>34. (333.) *Letters of Constantine
to Antonius, the monk, and of Antonius to him* are mentioned in
Athanasius, 1. 855 (Op. Const. 551–552). Constantine and his sons write
as to a father. Antony grudgingly replies with some good advice for them
to remember the day of judgment, regard Christ as the only emperor, and
have a care for justice and the poor.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p38"></span>35. (333.) *Letter of Constantine
to Eusebius in praise of his discourse concerning Easter*. Eusebius, *V.
C.* 4. 35 (Op. Const. 551–554) praises the discourse and asks for more.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p39"></span>36. (333.) *Letter of Constantine
to Eusebius on the preparation of the copies of the Scriptures*. In
Euseb. *V. C*. 4. 36; Theod. 1. 15; Socr. 1. 9 (Op. Const. 553–554).
Orders fifty copies with directions as to style.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p40"></span>37. (335.) *Fragment of the first
letter of Constantine to Athanasius*. In Athan. *Apol*.; Socr. 1. 27
(Op. Const. 553–556; Tr. Engl. in Athan. *Hist. Tracts*, Oxf. 1843, p.
89). The letter summoning to the Council of Tyre, but only a half-dozen
lines remain. This bids him admit all who wish to enter the church.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p41"></span>38. (335.) *Letter of Constantine
to the people of the Alexandrian Church*. In Athan. *Apol. c. Ar*. c. 61
(Op. Const. 559–562; abstract in Soz. 2. 31; Tr. Engl. in Athan. *Hist.
Tracts*, Oxf. 1850, p. 90–92). Is a general lamentation over the
dissensions of the Church, with expression of confidence in Athanasius.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p42"></span>39. (335.) *Second Letter of
Constantine to Athanasius*. Athan. *Apol*. (Op. Const. 555–558).
Expresses his reprobation of the false accusations of the Meletians
against Athanasius.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p43"></span>40. (335.) *Letter of Constantine
to Joannes the Meletian*. Athan. *Apol*. (Op. Const. 557–560).
Congratulates on his reconciliation with Athanasius.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p44"></span>41. (335.) *Letter of Constantine
to Arius*. In Socr. 1. 25 (Op. Const. 561–562). Invites Arius to visit
him—the famous visit where he presented a confession of faith claimed to
be in conformity with that of Nicæa.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p45"></span>42. (335.) *A Letter to Dalmatius*
is mentioned by Athanasius, *Apol*. 5. 13, but not preserved (Op. Const.
563–564; Tr. Engl. in Athan. *Hist. Tracts*, Oxf. 1850, p. 94). It
required him to make judicial enquiry respecting the charge against
Athanasius of the murder of Arsenius.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p46"></span>43. (335.) *Celebrated Letter of
Constantine concerning the Synod of Tyre*. In Euseb. *V. C*. 3. 42 (Op.
Const. 561–564). Exhorts the bishops to give zeal to fulfilling the
purpose of the synod in the restitution of peace to the Church.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p47"></span>44. (335.) *Letter to the Bishops
assembled at Tyre*. In Socr. *H. E*. 1. 34, and in Soz. *H. E*. 2. 28.
Summons them to come to him at Constantinople and give account of their
proceedings.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p48"></span>Besides these there are the clearly
spurious:

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p49"></span>1. *Letter of Helena to
Constantine* (Op. Const. 529–530).

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p50"></span>2. *Letter of Constantine in
response to Helena* (Op. Const. 529–532).

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p51"></span>3. *Treaty of peace between
Constantine, Sylvester and Tiridates* (Op. Const. 579–582). On <span
id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-Page_440"></span>Tiridates compare various sources in
Langlois *Col. des historiens de…l’Armènie*, and for literature
respecting their authenticity, his note on p. 103.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p52"></span>4. *Edict of Constantine to Pope
Silvester* (Op. Const. 567–578). The famous Donation which first
appeared in Pseudo-Isidore, and for which see under *The Mythical
Constantine*, p. 442–3.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p53"></span>There are also quite a large number
of letters mentioned with more or less description, and a “multitude of
letters” (*V. C.* 3. 24) of which there is no specific knowledge. Of the
former may be mentioned that *to the inhabitants of Heliopolis*, one to
Valerius (or Valerianus or Verinus) (Augustine, *Ad Donat. p. c*. c.
33); one *to the Council of Tyre*, asking them to hasten to Jerusalem
(*V. C*. 4. 43; Soz. 2. 26); and one acknowledging the copies of the
Scriptures prepared at his order, through Eusebius (*V. C*. 4. 37).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3047"></span>[436:3048](2010363.htm#fr_3047) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p3"></span> There is of course more or less
critical treatment of various letters in critical works on Donatism or
Arianism or other special topics. Since writing the above, the
exceedingly interesting analysis of sources for early Donatist history,
by Seeck, in Briegers’ *Ztschr. f. Kirchenges.,* 1889, has been
examined. He has, like Völter and Deutsch before him, admirable critical
studies of certain letters. But a systematic critical study of the
Constantinian letters as a whole seem to be still lacking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](2010364)
