[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010208)  [Next](2010210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.—</span>*The Persecution
under Decius, and the Sufferings of Origen.*

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p2.1"></span>After</span> a reign of seven years Philip
was succeeded by Decius. <span id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059) On
account of his hatred of Philip, he commenced a persecution of the
churches, in which Fabianus <span id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060)
suffered martyrdom at Rome, and Cornelius succeeded him in the
episcopate. <span id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061)

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p6"></span>2. In Palestine, Alexander, <span
id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062) bishop of the church of Jerusalem,
was brought again on Christ’s account <span id="page_281">p. 281</span>
<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-Page_281"></span>before the governor’s judgment
seat in Cæsarea, and having acquitted himself nobly in a second
confession was cast into prison, crowned with the hoary locks of
venerable age.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p8"></span>3. And after his honorable and
illustrious confession at the tribunal of the governor, he fell asleep
in prison, and Mazabanes <span id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063)
became his successor in the bishopric of Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p10"></span>4. Babylas <span
id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064) in Antioch, having like Alexander
passed away in prison after his confession, was succeeded by
Fabius <span id="fr_2065"></span>[2066](#fn_2065) in the episcopate of
that church.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p13"></span>5. But how many and how great things
came upon Origen in the persecution, and what was their final result,—as
the demon of evil marshaled all his forces, and fought against the man
with his utmost craft and power, assaulting him beyond all others
against whom he contended at that time,—and what and how many things he
endured for the word of Christ, bonds and bodily tortures and torments
under the iron collar and in the dungeon; and how for many days with his
feet stretched four spaces in the stocks <span
id="fr_2066"></span>[2067](#fn_2066) he bore patiently the threats of
fire and whatever other things were inflicted by his enemies; and how
his sufferings terminated, as his judge strove eagerly with all his
might not to end his life; and what words he left after these things,
full of comfort to those needing aid, a great many of his epistles show
with truth and accuracy. <span id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[280:2060](2010209.htm#fr_2059) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p3"></span> Philip was defeated and slain near
Verona, on June 17, 249 by the Pannonian legions who had compelled
Decius, the envoy sent by Philip to quell a mutiny among them, to accept
the title of Augustus. Philip’s death made Decius emperor; and he
reigned for a little over two years, when he perished in a campaign
against the Goths. The cause given by Eusebius for the terrible
persecution of Decius is quite incorrect. The emperor, who before his
elevation was one of the most highly respected senators, seems to have
been a man of noble character and of high aims. He was a thorough-going
patriot and a staunch believer in the religion and laws of Rome. He saw
the terrible state of corruption and decay into which the empire had
fallen; and he made up his mind that it could be arrested only by
restoring the ancient Roman customs, and by strengthening the ancient
religion. He therefore revived the old censorship, hoping that the moral
and social habits of the people might be improved under its influence;
and he endeavored to exterminate the Christians, believing that thus the
ancient purity of the state religion might be restored. It was no low
motive of personal revenge or of caprice which prompted the persecution.
We must recognize the fact that Decius was one of the best and noblest
of the Roman emperors, and that he persecuted as a patriot and a
believer in the religion of his fathers. He was the first one that aimed
at the complete extermination of the Christians. He went systematically
to work to put the religion out of existence; and the persecution was
consequently both universal and of terrible severity, far more terrible
than any that had preceded it. The edicts published by Decius early in
the year 250 are no longer extant; but we can gather from the notices,
especially of Cyprian and Dionysius, that the effort was first made to
induce Christians throughout the empire to deny their faith and return
to the religion of the state, and only when large numbers of them
remained obstinate did the persecution itself begin.

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[280:2061](2010209.htm#fr_2060) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p4"></span> On Fabianus, bishop of Rome, see
chap. 29, note 4.

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[280:2062](2010209.htm#fr_2061) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p5"></span> After the martyrdom of Fabianus the
church of Rome was without a bishop for about fourteen months. The
bishopric of that church was naturally under Decius a place of the
greatest danger. Cornelius became bishop in 251, probably in March,
while Decius was away from the city. After the emperor’s death, which
took place in the following winter, Gallus renewed the persecution, and
Cornelius with a large part of the church fled to Cività Vecchia, where
he died in the summer of 253, according to Lipsius (the Liberian
catalogue says 252, which is the commonly accepted date, but is clearly
incorrect, as Lipsius has shown). Both versions of the *Chron.* are
greatly confused at this point, and their statements are very faulty
(Jerome’s version assigning a reign of only fifteen months to Decius and
two years and four months to Gallus). Eusebius, in Bk. VII. chap. 2,
says that Cornelius held office “about three years,” which is reasonably
accurate, for he was actually bishop nearly two years and a half. It was
during the episcopate of Cornelius that the Novatian schism took place
(see chap. 43). Eight epistles from Cyprian to Cornelius are extant, and
two from Cornelius to Cyprian. In chap. 43 Eusebius makes extended
quotations from an epistle written by Cornelius to Fabius of Antioch,
and mentions still others which are not preserved. In chap. 46 he refers
to one against Novatian addressed to Dionysius of Alexandria, which is
likewise lost.

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[280:2063](2010209.htm#fr_2062) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p7"></span> On Alexander, bishop of Jerusalem,
see chap. 8, note 6.

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[281:2064](2010209.htm#fr_2063) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p9"></span> The time of Mazabanes’ accession is
fixed approximately by the fact that Alexander’s death took place in the
persecution of Decius. His death is put by Eusebius (Bk. VII. chap. 14)
in the reign of Gallienus (260–268), and with this the notice in the
*Chron.* agrees, which assigns it to the year 265. Since his successor,
Hymenæus, was present at the council of Antioch, in which the case of
Paul of Samosata was considered (see below, Bk. VII. chaps. 29 and 30),
it will not do to put Mazabanes’ death later than 265.

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[281:2065](2010209.htm#fr_2064) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p11"></span> On Babylas, see chap. 29, note 8.

<span id="fn_2065"></span>[281:2066](2010209.htm#fr_2065) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p12"></span> Eusebius gives the name of this
bishop as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p12.1"></span>Β€βιος</span>, Jerome as Fabianus, and
Syncellus as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p12.2"></span>φλαβιανός</span>. The time of his
accession is fixed by the death of Babylas in the persecution of Decius.
He was bishop of Antioch while Cornelius was bishop of Rome, as we learn
from the latter’s epistle to him, quoted in chap. 43, below. From an
epistle written by Dionysius of Alexandria to Cornelius of Rome
(referred to in chap. 46), we learn that Fabius died while the latter
was still bishop, i.e. before the summer of 253 (see note 3, above). The
*Chron. pasch.* assigns three years to the episcopate of Fabius; and
though we cannot place much reliance upon the figure, yet it leads us to
think that he must have been bishop for some time,—at least more than a
year,—and so we are inclined to put his death as late as possible. The
*Chron.* puts the accession of his Successor Demetrianus in the year
254, which is too late, at least for the death of Fabius. We may
conclude that the latter died probably in the year 253, or not long
before. Harnack decides for the time between the fall of 252 and the
spring of 253. Fabius, as we learn from the epistles addressed to him by
Cornelius and Dionysius (see chaps. 43 and 44), was inclined to indorse
Novatian and the rigoristic discipline favored by him. We know nothing
more of the life or character of Fabius.

<span id="fn_2066"></span>[281:2067](2010209.htm#fr_2066) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p14.1"></span>τοὺς πόδας ὑπὸ τέσσαρα τοῦ κολαστηρίου
ξύλου παρατηθεὶς διαστήματα</span>. Otto, in his edition of Justin’s
*Apology* (*Corp. Apol. Christ.* I. p. 204), says: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p14.2"></span>ξύλον</span> *erat
truncus foramina habens, quibus pedes captivorum immitebantur, ut
securius in carcere servarentur aut tormentis vexarentur* (“a <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p14.3"></span>ξύλον</span> was a
block, with holes in which the feet of captives were put, in order that
they might be kept more securely in prison, or might be afflicted with
tortures”). The farther apart the feet were stretched, the greater of
course was the torture. Four spaces seems to have been the outside
limit. Compare Bk. VIII. chap. 10, §8.

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[281:2068](2010209.htm#fr_2067) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxix-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxix-p15"></span> A tradition arose in later centuries
that Origen died in the persecution of Decius (see Photius, *Cod.* 118);
but this is certainly an error, for Eusebius cannot have been mistaken
when he cites Origen’s own letters as describing his sufferings during
the persecution. The epistles referred to here are no longer extant. On
Origen’s epistles in general, see chap. 36, note 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL](2010210)
