[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010695)  [Next](2010697) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.vii-p2.1"></span>And</span> God himself, as an earnest of
future reward, assigns to him now as it were tricennial crowns <span
id="fr_3516"></span>[3517](#fn_3516) composed of prosperous periods of
time; and now, after the revolution of three circles of ten years, he
grants permission to all mankind to celebrate this general, nay rather,
this universal festival.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p4"></span>2. And while those on earth thus
rejoice, crowned as it were with the flowers of divine knowledge,
surely, we may not unduly suppose that the heavenly choirs, attracted by
a natural sympathy, unite their joy with the joy of those on earth: nay,
that the Supreme Sovereign himself, as a gracious father, delights in
the worship of duteous children, and for this reason is pleased to honor
the author and cause of their obedience through a lengthened period of
time; and, far from limiting his reign to three decennial circles of
years, he extends it to the remotest period, even to far distant
eternity.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p5"></span>3. Now eternity <span
id="fr_3517"></span>[3518](#fn_3517) in its whole extent is beyond the
power of decline or death: its beginning and extent alike incapable of
being scanned by mortal thoughts. Nor will it suffer its central point
to be perceived, nor that which is termed its present duration to be
grasped by the inquiring mind. Far less, then, the future, or the past:
for the one is not, but is already gone; while the future has not yet
arrived, and therefore is not. As regards what is termed the present
time, it vanishes even as we think or speak, more swiftly than the word
itself is uttered. Nor is it possible in any sense to apprehend this
time as present; for we must either expect the future, or contemplate
the past; the present slips from us, and is gone, even in the act of
thought. Eternity, then, in its whole extent, resists and refuses
subjection to mortal reason.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p7"></span>4. But it does not refuse to
acknowledge its own Sovereign and Lord, <span
id="fr_3518"></span>[3519](#fn_3518) and bears him as it were mounted on
itself, rejoicing in the fair trappings which he bestows. <span
id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519) And he himself, not binding it, as
the poet imagined, with a golden chain, <span
id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520) but as it were controlling its
movements by the reins of ineffable wisdom, has adjusted its months and
seasons, its times and years, and the alterations of day and night, with
perfect harmony, and has thus attached to it limits and measures of
various kinds. For eternity, being in its nature direct, and stretching
onward into infinity, and receiving its name, eternity, as having an
everlasting existence, <span id="fr_3521"></span>[3522](#fn_3521) and
being similar in all its parts, or rather having no division or
distance, progresses only in a line of direct extension. But God, who
has distributed it by intermediate sections, and has divided it, like a
far extended line, in many points, has included in it a vast number of
portions; and though it is in its nature one, and resembles unity
itself, he has attached to it a multiplicity of numbers, and has given
it, though formless in itself, an endless variety of forms.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p12"></span>5. For first of all he framed in it
formless matter, as a substance capable of receiving all forms. He next,
by the power of the number two, imparted quality to matter, and gave
beauty to that which before was void of all grace. Again, by means of
the number three, he framed a body compounded of matter and form, and
presenting the three dimensions of breadth, and length, and depth. Then,
from the doubling of the number two, he devised the quaternion of the
elements, earth, water, air, and fire, and ordained them to be
everlasting sources for the supply of this universe. Again, the number
four produces the number ten. For the aggregate of one, and two, and
three, and four, is ten. <span id="fr_3522"></span>[3523](#fn_3522) And
three multiplied with ten discovers the period of a month: and twelve
successive months complete the course of the sun. Hence the revolutions
of years, and changes of the seasons, which give grace, like variety of
color in painting, to that eternity which before was formless and devoid
of beauty, for the refreshment and delight of those whose lot it is to
traverse therein the course of life.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p14"></span>6. For as the ground is defined by
stated distances for those who run in hope of obtaining the prize; and
as the road of those who travel on a distant journey is marked by
resting-places and measured intervals, that the traveler’s courage may
not fail at the interminable prospect; even so the Sovereign of the
universe, controlling eternity itself within <span id="page_588">p.
588</span> <span id="iv.viii.vii-Page_588"></span>the restraining power
of his own wisdom, directs and turns its course as he judges best. The
same God, I say, who thus clothes the once undefined eternity as with
fair colors and blooming flowers, gladdens the day with the solar rays;
and, while he overspreads the night with a covering of darkness, yet
causes the glittering stars, as golden spangles, to shine therein. It is
he who lights up the brilliancy of the morning star, the changing
splendor of the moon, and the glorious companies of the starry host, and
has arrayed the expanse of heaven, like some vast mantle, in colors of
varied beauty. Again, having created the lofty and profound expanse of
air, and caused the world in its length and breadth to feel its cooling
influence, he decreed that the air itself should be graced with birds of
every kind, and left open this vast ocean of space to be traversed by
every creature, visible or invisible, whose course is through the tracts
of heaven. In the midst of this atmosphere he poised the earth, as it
were its center, and encompassed it with the ocean as with a beautiful
azure vesture.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p15"></span>7. Having ordained this earth to be at
once the home, the nurse, and the mother of all the creatures it
contains, and watered it both with rain and water-springs, he caused it
to abound in plants and flowers of every species, for the enjoyment of
life. And when he had formed man in his own likeness, the noblest of
earthly creatures, and dearest to himself, a creature gifted with
intellect and knowledge, the child of reason and wisdom, he gave him
dominion over all other animals which move and live upon the earth. For
man was in truth of all earthly creatures the dearest to God: man, I
say, to whom, as an indulgent Father, he has subjected the brute
creation; for whom he has made the ocean navigable, and crowned the
earth with a profusion of plants of every kind; to whom he has granted
reasoning faculties for acquiring all science; under whose control he
has placed even the creatures of the deep, and the winged inhabitants of
the air; to whom he has permitted the contemplation of celestial
objects, and revealed the course and changes of the sun and moon, and
the periods of the planets and fixed stars. In short, to man alone of
earthly beings has he given commandment to acknowledge him as his
heavenly Father, and to celebrate his praises as the Supreme Sovereign
of eternity itself.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p16"></span>8. But the unchangeable course of
eternity the Creator has limited by the four seasons of the year,
terminating the winter by the approach of spring, and regulating as with
an equal balance that season which commences the annual period. Having
thus graced the eternal course of time with the varied productions of
spring, he added the summer’s heat; and then granted as it were a relief
of toil by the interval of autumn: and lastly, refreshing and cleansing
the season by the showers of winter, he brings it, rendered sleek and
glossy, like a noble steed, by these abundant rains, once more to the
gates of spring.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p17"></span>9. As soon, then, as the Supreme
Sovereign had thus connected his own eternity by these cords of wisdom
with the annual circle, he committed it to the guidance of a mighty
Governor, even his only begotten Word, to whom, as the Preserver of all
creation, he yielded the reins of universal power. And he, receiving
this inheritance as from a beneficent Father, and uniting all things
both above and beneath the circumference of heaven in one harmonious
whole, directs their uniform course; providing with perfect justice
whatever is expedient for his rational creatures on the earth,
appointing its allotted limits to human life, and granting to all alike
permission to anticipate even here the commencement of a future
existence. For he has taught them that beyond this present world there
is a divine and blessed state of being, reserved for those who have been
supported here by the hope of heavenly blessings; and that those who
have lived a virtuous and godly life will remove hence to a far better
habitation; while he adjudges to those who have been guilty and wicked
here a place of punishment according to their crimes.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p18"></span>10. Again, as in the distribution of
prizes at the public games, he proclaims various crowns to the victors,
and invests each with the rewards of different virtues: but for our good
emperor, who is clothed in the very robe of piety, he declares that a
higher recompense of his toils is prepared; and, as a prelude to this
recompense, permits us now to assemble at this festival, which is
composed of perfect numbers, of decades thrice, and triads ten times
repeated.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p19"></span>11. The first of these, the triad, is
the offspring of the unit, while the unit is the mother of number
itself, and presides over all months, and seasons, and years, and every
period of time. It may, indeed, be justly termed the origin, foundation,
and principle of all number, and derives its name from its abiding
character. <span id="fr_3523"></span>[3524](#fn_3523) For, while every
other number is diminished or increased according to the subtraction or
addition of others, the unit alone continues fixed and steadfast,
abstracted from all multitude and the numbers which are formed from it,
and resembling that indivisible essence which is distinct from all
things beside, but by virtue of participation in which the nature of all
things else subsists.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p21"></span>12. For the unit is the originator of
every number, since all <span id="page_589">p. 589</span> <span
id="iv.viii.vii-Page_589"></span>multitude is made up by the composition
and addition of units; nor is it possible without the unit to conceive
the existence of number at all. But the unit itself is independent of
multitude, apart from and superior to all number; forming, indeed, and
making all, but receiving no increase from any.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p22"></span>13. Kindred to this is the triad;
equally indivisible and perfect, the first of those sums which are
formed of even and uneven numbers. For the perfect number two, receiving
the addition of the unit, forms the triad, the first perfect compound
number. And the triad, by explaining what equality is, first taught men
justice, having itself an equal beginning, and middle, and end. And it
is also an image of the mysterious, most holy, and royal Trinity, which,
though itself without beginning or origin, yet contains the germs, the
reasons, and causes of the existence of all created things.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p23"></span>14. Thus the power of the triad may
justly be regarded as the first cause of all things. Again, the number
ten, which contains the end of all numbers, and terminates them in
itself, may truly be called a full and perfect number, as comprehending
every species and every measure of numbers, proportions, concords, and
harmonies. For example, the units by addition form and are terminated by
the number ten; and, having this number as their parent, and as it were
the limit of their course, they round this as the goal of their career.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p24"></span>15. Then they perform a second
circuit, and again a third, and a fourth, until the tenth, and thus by
ten decades they complete the hundredth number. Returning thence to the
first starting point, they again proceed to the number ten, and having
ten times completed the hundredth number, again they recede, and perform
round the same barriers their protracted course, proceeding from
themselves back to themselves again, with revolving motion.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p25"></span>16. For the unit is the tenth of ten,
and ten units make up a decade, which is itself the limit, the settled
goal and boundary of units: it is that which terminates the infinity of
number; the term and end of units. Again, the triad combined with the
decade, and performing a threefold circuit of tens, produces that most
natural number, thirty. For as the triad is in respect to units, so is
the number thirty in respect to tens.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p26"></span>17. It is also the constant limit to
the course of that luminary which is second to the sun in brightness.
For the course of the moon from one conjunction with the sun to the
next, completes the period of a month; after which, receiving as it were
a second birth, it recommences a new light, and other days, being
adorned and honored with thirty units, three decades, and ten triads.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p27"></span>18. In the same manner is the
universal reign of our victorious emperor distinguished by the giver of
all good, and now enters on a new sphere of blessing, accomplishing, at
present, this tricennalian festival, but reaching forward beyond this to
far more distant intervals of time, and cherishing the hope of future
blessings in the celestial kingdom; where, not a single sun, but
infinite hosts of light surround the Almighty Sovereign, each surpassing
the splendor of the sun, glorious and resplendent with rays derived from
the everlasting source of light.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p28"></span>19. There the soul enjoys its
existence, surrounded by fair and unfading blessings; there is a life
beyond the reach of sorrow; there the enjoyment of pure and holy
pleasures, and a time of unmeasured and endless duration, extending into
illimitable space; not defined by intervals of days and months, the
revolutions of years, or the recurrence of times and seasons, but
commensurate with a life which knows no end. And this life needs not the
light of the sun, nor the lustre of the moon or the starry host, since
it has the great Luminary himself, even God the Word, the only begotten
Son of the Almighty Sovereign.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p29"></span>20. Hence it is that the mystic and
sacred oracles reveal him to be the Sun of righteousness, and the Light
which far transcends all light. We believe that he illumines also the
thrice-blessed powers of heaven with the rays of righteousness, and the
brightness of wisdom, and that he receives truly pious souls, not within
the sphere of heaven alone, but into his own bosom, and confirms indeed
the assurances which he himself has given.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p30"></span>21. No mortal eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor can the mind in its vesture of flesh understand what things
are prepared for those who have been here adorned with the graces of
godliness; blessings which await thee too, most pious emperor, to whom
alone since the world began has the Almighty Sovereign of the universe
granted power to purify the course of human life: to whom also he has
revealed his own symbol of salvation, whereby he overcame the power of
death, and triumphed over every enemy. And this victorious trophy, the
scourge of evil spirits, thou hast arrayed against the errors of idol
worship, and hast obtained the victory not only over all thy impious and
savage foes, but over equally barbarous adversaries, the evil spirits
themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3516"></span>[587:3517](2010696.htm#fr_3516) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p3"></span> \[Alluding (says Valesius) to the
crowns of gold which the people of the several provinces were accustomed
to present to the Roman emperors on such occasions as the
present.—*Bag.*\] In his prologue to the *Life,* Eusebius calls this
very oration a weaving of tricennial crowns (or garlands). These crowns
had their historical origin in the triumphal crowns under the Roman
system. Cf. Rich, in Smith, *Dict. Gr. and Rom. Ant.* p. 361.

<span id="fn_3517"></span>[587:3518](2010696.htm#fr_3517) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p6"></span> \[It is perhaps difficult to find a
better word to express the original <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.vii-p6.1"></span>αἰ& 240·ν</span>.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3518"></span>[587:3519](2010696.htm#fr_3518) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p8"></span> Compare <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p8.1"></span>[1 Tim. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span id="iv.viii.vii-p8.2"></span>
(*marg.*), “King of the ages” (“æons,” or according to this translation
“eternity”).

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[587:3520](2010696.htm#fr_3519) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p9"></span> \[Days, months, years, seasons, &c.,
are here intended. Valesius, ad loc.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[587:3521](2010696.htm#fr_3520) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p10"></span> Hom. *Il.* 8, 19.

<span id="fn_3521"></span>[587:3522](2010696.htm#fr_3521) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p11"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.vii-p11.1"></span>Αἰ& 241·ν, ὥσπερ ἀεὶ ὤν</span>.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3522"></span>[587:3523](2010696.htm#fr_3522) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p13"></span> From what source Eusebius draws this
particular application of the Pythagorean principle is uncertain. This
conception of the derivation of ten from four is found in Philo, *de
Mund. Opif.* ch. 15, and indeed it is said (*Ueberweg*) that with the
earliest Pythagoreans four and ten were the especially significant
numbers in creation. This mixture of Neo-Pythagoreanism with Platonism
and Philonism was characteristic of the time.

<span id="fn_3523"></span>[588:3524](2010696.htm#fr_3523) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p20"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.vii-p20.1"></span>Μονὰς, παρὰ τὸ μένειν ὠνομασμένη</span>.
The analogies from number in this chapter (which the reader will
probably consider puerile enough) seem to be an imitation of some of the
mystical speculations of Plato.—*Bag.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](2010697)
