[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010652)  [Next](2010654) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXVII</span>.—*He received the
same Honors from the Counts and other Officers as before his Death.*

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxvii-p2.1"></span>The</span> military officers, too, of
the highest rank, the counts, and the whole order of magistrates, who
had been accustomed to do obeisance to their emperor before, continued
to fulfill this duty without any change, even after his death entering
the chamber at the appointed times, and saluting their coffined
sovereign with bended knee, as though he were still alive. After them
the senators appeared, and all who had been distinguished by any
honorable office, and rendered the same homage. These were followed by
multitudes of every rank, who came with their wives and children to
witness the spectacle. These honors continued to be rendered for a
considerable time, the soldiers having resolved thus to guard the body
until his sons should arrive, and take on themselves the conduct of
their father’s funeral. No mortal had ever, like this blessed prince,
continued to reign even after death, and to receive the same homage as
during his life: he only, of all who have ever lived, obtained this
reward from God: a suitable reward, since he alone of all sovereigns had
in all his actions honored the Supreme God and his Christ, and God
himself accordingly was pleased that even his mortal remains should
still retain imperial authority among men; thus indicating to all who
were not utterly devoid of understanding the immortal and endless empire
which his soul was destined to enjoy. This was the course of events
here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII](2010654)
