[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010062)  [Next](2010064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—</span>*The Egyptian, who is
mentioned also in the Acts of the Apostles.*

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p2.1"></span>After</span> other matters he proceeds as
follows: <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) “But the Jews were
afflicted with a greater plague than these by the Egyptian false
prophet. <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) For there appeared in
the land an impostor who aroused faith in himself as a prophet, and
collected about thirty thousand of those whom he had deceived, and led
them from the desert to the so-called Mount of Olives whence he was
prepared to enter Jerusalem by force and to overpower the Roman garrison
and seize the government of the people, using those who made the attack
with him as body guards.

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p5"></span>2. But Felix anticipated his attack,
and went out to meet him with the Roman legionaries, and all the people
joined in the defense, so that when the battle was fought the Egyptian
fled with a few followers, but the most of them were destroyed or taken
captive.”

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p6"></span>3. Josephus relates these events in
the second book of his History. <span id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465)
But it is worth while comparing the account of the Egyptian given here
with that contained in the Acts of the Apostles. In the time of Felix it
was said to Paul by the centurion in Jerusalem, when the multitude of
the Jews raised a disturbance against the apostle, “Art not thou he who
before these days made an uproar, and led out into the wilderness four
thousand men that were murderers?” <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) These are the events which took place
in the time of Felix. <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_463"></span>[123:464](2010063.htm#fr_463) <span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p3"></span> Jos. *B. J.* II. 13. 5.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[123:465](2010063.htm#fr_464) <span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p4"></span> An Egyptian Jew; one of the numerous
magicians and false prophets that arose during this century. He
prophesied that Jerusalem, which had made itself a heathen city, would
be destroyed by God, who would throw down the walls as he had the walls
of Jericho, and then he and his followers, as the true Israel and the
army of God, would gain the victory over the oppressors and rule the
world. For this purpose he collected his followers upon the Mount of
Olives, from whence they were to witness the falling of the walls and
begin their attack.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[123:466](2010063.htm#fr_465) <span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p7"></span> Josephus gives two different accounts
of this event. In the *B. J.* he says that this Egyptian led thirty
thousand men out of the desert to the Mount of Olives, but that Felix
attacked them, and the Egyptian “escaped with a few,” while most of his
followers were either destroyed or captured. In *Ant.* XX. 8. 6, which
was written later, he states that the Egyptian led a multitude “out from
Jerusalem” to the Mount of Olives, and that when they were attacked by
Felix, four hundred were slain and two hundred taken captive. There
seems to be here a glaring contradiction, but we are able to reconcile
the two accounts by supposing the Egyptian to have brought a large
following of robbers from the desert, which was augmented by a great
rabble from Jerusalem, until the number reached thirty thousand, and
that when attacked the rabble dispersed, but that Felix slew or took
captive the six hundred robbers, against whom his attack had been
directed, while the Egyptian escaped with a small number (i.e. small in
comparison with the thirty thousand), who may well have been the four
thousand mentioned by the author of the Acts in the passage quoted below
by Eusebius. It is no more difficult therefore to reconcile the Acts and
Josephus in this case than to reconcile Josephus with himself, and we
have no reason to assume a mistake upon the part of either one, though
as already remarked, numbers are so treacherous in transcription that
the difference may really have been originally less than it is. Whenever
the main elements of two accounts are in substantial agreement, little
stress can be laid upon a difference in figures. Cf. Tholuck,
*Glaubwürdigkeit,* p. 169 (quoted by Hackett, *Com. on Acts,* p. 254).

<span id="fn_466"></span>[123:467](2010063.htm#fr_466) <span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p8"></span> [Acts xxi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#038)<span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[123:468](2010063.htm#fr_467) <span
id="iii.vii.xxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxii-p9"></span> Valesius and Heinichen assert that
Eusebius is incorrect in assigning this uproar, caused by the Egyptian,
to the reign of Nero, as he seems to do. But their assertion is quite
groundless, for Josephus in both of his accounts relates the uproar
among events which he expressly assigns to Nero’s reign, and there is no
reason to suppose that the order of events given by him is incorrect.
Valesius and Heinichen proceed on the erroneous assumption that Festus
succeeded Felix in the second year of Nero, and that therefore, since
Paul was two years in Cæsarea before the recall of Felix, the uprising
of the Egyptian, which was referred to at the time of Paul’s arrest and
just before he was carried to Cæsarea, must have taken place before the
end of the reign of Claudius. But it happens to be a fact that Felix was
succeeded by Festus at the earliest not before the sixth year of Nero
(see chap. 22, note 2, below). There is, therefore, no ground for
accusing either Josephus or Eusebius of a blunder in the present case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](2010064)
