[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010300)  [Next](2010302) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—</span>*Panegyric on the
Splendor of Affairs.*

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p2.1"></span>A certain</span> one of those of moderate
talent, <span id="fr_2813"></span>[2814](#fn_2813) who had composed a
discourse, stepped forward in the presence of many pastors who were
assembled as if for a church gathering, and while they attended quietly
and decently, he addressed himself as follows to one who was in all
things a most excellent bishop and beloved of God, <span
id="fr_2814"></span>[2815](#fn_2814) through whose zeal the temple in
Tyre, which was the most splendid in Phœnicia, had been erected.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p5"></span>Panegyric upon the building of the
churches, addressed to Paulinus, Bishop of Tyre.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p6"></span>2. “Friends and priests of God who are
clothed in the sacred gown and adorned with the heavenly crown of glory,
the inspired unction and the sacerdotal garment of the Holy Spirit; and
thou, <span id="fr_2815"></span>[2816](#fn_2815) oh pride of God’s new
holy temple, endowed by him with the wisdom of age, and yet exhibiting
costly works and deeds of youthful and flourishing virtue, to whom God
himself, who embraces the entire world, has granted the distinguished
honor of building and renewing this earthly house to Christ, his only
begotten and first-born Word, and to his holy and divine bride; <span
id="fr_2816"></span>[2817](#fn_2816) —

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p9"></span>3. one might call thee a new
Beseleel, <span id="fr_2817"></span>[2818](#fn_2817) the architect of a
divine tabernacle, or Solomon, king of a new and much better Jerusalem,
<span id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-Page_371"></span>or also a new Zerubabel, who added a
much greater glory than the former to the temple of God; <span
id="fr_2818"></span>[2819](#fn_2818) —

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p12"></span>4. and you also, oh nurslings of the
sacred flock of Christ, habitation of good words, school of wisdom, and
august and pious auditory of religion: <span
id="fr_2819"></span>[2820](#fn_2819)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p14"></span>5. It was long ago permitted us to
raise hymns and songs to God, when we learned from hearing the Divine
Scriptures read the marvelous signs of God and the benefits conferred
upon men by the Lord’s wondrous deeds, being taught to say ‘Oh God! we
have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us the work which thou
didst in their days, in days of old.’ <span
id="fr_2820"></span>[2821](#fn_2820)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p16"></span>6. But now as we no longer perceive the
lofty arm <span id="fr_2821"></span>[2822](#fn_2821) and the celestial
right hand of our all-gracious God and universal King by hearsay merely
or report, but observe so to speak in very deed and with our own eyes
that the declarations recorded long ago are faithful and true, it is
permitted us to raise a second hymn of triumph and to sing with loud
voice, and say, ‘As we have heard, so have we seen; in the city of the
Lord of hosts, in the city of our God.’ <span
id="fr_2822"></span>[2823](#fn_2822)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p19"></span>7. And in what city but in this newly
built and God-constructed one, which is a ‘church of the living God, a
pillar and foundation of the truth,’ <span
id="fr_2823"></span>[2824](#fn_2823) concerning which also another
divine oracle thus proclaims, ‘Glorious things have been spoken of thee,
oh city of God.’ <span id="fr_2824"></span>[2825](#fn_2824) Since the
all-gracious God has brought us together to it, through the grace of his
Only-Begotten, let every one of those who have been summoned sing with
loud voice and say, ‘I was glad when they said unto me, we shall go unto
the house of the Lord,’ <span id="fr_2825"></span>[2826](#fn_2825) and
‘Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy house and the place where thy
glory dwelleth.’ <span id="fr_2826"></span>[2827](#fn_2826)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p24"></span>8. And let us not only one by one, but
all together, with one spirit and one soul, honor him and cry aloud,
saying, ‘Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised in the city of our
God, in his holy mountain.’ <span id="fr_2827"></span>[2828](#fn_2827)
For he is truly great, and great is his house, lofty and spacious and
‘comely in beauty above the sons of men.’ <span
id="fr_2828"></span>[2829](#fn_2828) ‘Great is the Lord who alone doeth
wonderful things’; <span id="fr_2829"></span>[2830](#fn_2829) ‘great is
he who doeth great things and things past finding out, glorious and
marvelous things which cannot be numbered’; <span
id="fr_2830"></span>[2831](#fn_2830) great is he ‘who changeth times and
seasons, who exalteth and debaseth kings’; <span
id="fr_2831"></span>[2832](#fn_2831) ‘who raiseth up the poor from the
earth and lifteth up the needy from the dunghill.’ <span
id="fr_2832"></span>[2833](#fn_2832) ‘He hath put down princes from
their thrones and hath exalted them of low degree from the earth. The
hungry he hath filled with good things and the arms of the proud he hath
broken.’ <span id="fr_2833"></span>[2834](#fn_2833)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p32"></span>9. Not only to the faithful, but also
to unbelievers, has he confirmed the record of ancient events; he that
worketh miracles, he that doeth great things, the Master of all, the
Creator of the whole world, the omnipotent, the all-merciful, the one
and only God. To him let us sing the new song, <span
id="fr_2834"></span>[2835](#fn_2834) supplying in thought, <span
id="fr_2835"></span>[2836](#fn_2835) ‘To him who alone doeth great
wonders: for his mercy endureth forever’; <span
id="fr_2836"></span>[2837](#fn_2836) ‘To him which smote great kings,
and slew famous kings: for his mercy endureth forever’; <span
id="fr_2837"></span>[2838](#fn_2837) ‘For the Lord remembered us in our
low estate and delivered us from our adversaries.’ <span
id="fr_2838"></span>[2839](#fn_2838)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p38"></span>10. And let us never cease to cry aloud
in these words to the Father of the universe. And let us always honor
him with our mouth who is the second cause of our benefits, the
instructor in divine knowledge, the teacher of the true religion, the
destroyer of the impious, the slayer of tyrants, the reformer of life,
Jesus, the Saviour of us who were in despair.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p39"></span>11. For he alone, as the only
all-gracious Son of an all-gracious Father, in accordance with the
purpose of his Father’s benevolence, has willingly put on the nature of
us who lay prostrate in corruption, and like some excellent physician,
who for the sake of saving them that are ill, examines their sufferings,
handles their foul sores, and reaps pain for himself from the miseries
of another, <span id="fr_2839"></span>[2840](#fn_2839) so us who were
not only diseased and afflicted with terrible ulcers and wounds already
mortified, but were even lying among the dead, he hath saved for himself
from the very jaws of death. For none other of those in heaven had such
<span id="page_372">p. 372</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-Page_372"></span>power as without harm <span
id="fr_2840"></span>[2841](#fn_2840) to minister to the salvation of so
many.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p47"></span>12. But he alone having reached our
deep corruption, he alone having taken upon himself our labors, he alone
having suffered the punishments due for our impieties, having recovered
us who were not half dead merely, but were already in tombs and
sepulchers, and altogether foul and offensive, saves us, both anciently
and now, by his beneficent zeal, beyond the expectation of any one, even
of ourselves, and imparts liberally of the Father’s benefits,—he who is
the giver of life and light, our great Physician and King and Lord, the
Christ of God.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p48"></span>13. For then when the whole human race
lay buried in gloomy night and in depths of darkness through the
deceitful arts of guilty demons and the power of God-hating spirits, by
his simple appearing he loosed once for all the fast-bound cords of our
impieties by the rays of his light, even as wax is melted.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p49"></span>14. But when malignant envy and the
evil-loving demon well-nigh burst with anger at such grace and kindness,
and turned against us all his death-dealing forces, and when, at first,
like a dog gone mad which gnashes his teeth at the stones thrown at him,
and pours out his rage against his assailants upon the inanimate
missiles, he leveled his ferocious madness at the stones of the
sanctuaries and at the lifeless material of the houses, and desolated
the churches,—at least as he supposed,—and then emitted terrible
hissings and snake-like sounds, now by the threats of impious tyrants,
and again by the blasphemous edicts of profane rulers, vomiting forth
death, moreover, and infecting with his deleterious and soul-destroying
poisons the souls captured by him, and almost slaying them by his
death-fraught sacrifices of dead idols, and causing every beast in the
form of man and every kind of savage to assault us—then, indeed, the
‘Angel of the great Council,’ <span id="fr_2841"></span>[2842](#fn_2841)
the great Captain <span id="fr_2842"></span>[2843](#fn_2842) of God
after the mightiest soldiers of his kingdom had displayed sufficient
exercise through patience and endurance in everything, suddenly appeared
anew, and blotted out and annihilated his enemies and foes, so that they
seemed never to have had even a name.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p52"></span>15. But his friends and relatives he
raised to the highest glory, in the presence not only of all men, but
also of celestial powers, of sun and moon and stars, and of the whole
heaven and earth, so that now, as has never happened before, the supreme
rulers, conscious of the honor which they have received from him, spit
upon the faces of dead idols, trample upon the unhallowed rites of
demons, make sport of the ancient delusion handed down from their
fathers, and acknowledge only one God, the common benefactor of all,
themselves included.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p53"></span>16. And they confess Christ, the Son of
God, universal King of all, and proclaim him Saviour on monuments, <span
id="fr_2843"></span>[2844](#fn_2843) imperishably recording in imperial
letters, in the midst of the city which rules over the earth, his
righteous deeds and his victories over the impious. Thus Jesus Christ
our Saviour is the only one from all eternity who has been acknowledged,
even by those highest in the earth, not as a common king among men, but
as a trite son of the universal God, and who has been worshiped as very
God, <span id="fr_2844"></span>[2845](#fn_2844) and that rightly.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p56"></span>17. For what king that ever lived
attained such virtue as to fill the ears and tongues of all men upon
earth with his own name? What king, after ordaining such pious and wise
laws, has extended them from one end of the earth to the other, so that
they are perpetually read in the hearing of all men?

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p57"></span>18. Who has abrogated barbarous and
savage customs of uncivilized nations by his gentle and most
philanthropic laws? Who, being attacked for entire ages by all, has
shown such superhuman virtue as to flourish daily, and remain young
throughout his life?

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p58"></span>19. Who has founded a nation which of
old was not even heard of, but which now is not concealed in some corner
of the earth, but is spread abroad everywhere under the sun? Who has so
fortified his soldiers with the arms of piety that their souls, being
firmer than adamant, shine brilliantly in the contests with their
opponents?

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p59"></span>20. What king prevails to such an
extent, and even after death leads on his soldiers, and sets up trophies
over his <span id="page_373">p. 373</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-Page_373"></span>enemies, and fills every place, country
and city, Greek and barbarian, with his royal dwellings, even divine
temples with their consecrated oblations, like this very temple with its
superb adornments and votive offerings, which are themselves so truly
great and majestic, worthy of wonder and admiration, and clear signs of
the sovereignty of our Saviour? For now, too, ‘he spake, and they were
made; he commanded, and they were created.’ <span
id="fr_2845"></span>[2846](#fn_2845) For what was there to resist the
nod of the universal King and Governor and Word of God himself? <span
id="fr_2846"></span>[2847](#fn_2846)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p62"></span>21. “A special discourse would be
needed accurately to survey and explain all this; and also to describe
how great the zeal of the laborers is regarded by him who is celebrated
as divine, <span id="fr_2847"></span>[2848](#fn_2847) who looks upon the
living temple which we all constitute, and surveys the house, composed
of living and moving stones, which is well and surely built upon the
foundation of the apostles and prophets, the chief cornerstone being
Jesus Christ himself, who has been rejected not only by the builders of
that ancient building which no longer stands, but also by the
builders—evil architects of evil works—of the structure, which is
composed of the mass of men and still endures. <span
id="fr_2848"></span>[2849](#fn_2848) But the Father has approved him
both then and now, and has made him the head of the corner of this our
common church.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p65"></span>22. Who that beholds this living temple
of the living God formed of ourselves—this greatest and truly divine
sanctuary, I say, whose inmost shrines are invisible to the multitude
and are truly holy and a holy of holies—would venture to declare it? Who
is able even to look within the sacred enclosure, except the great High
Priest of all, to whom alone it is permitted to fathom the mysteries of
every rational soul?

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p66"></span>23. But perhaps it is granted to
another, to one only, to be second after him in the same work, namely,
to the commander of this army whom the first and great High Priest
himself has honored with the second place in this sanctuary, the
shepherd of your divine flock who has obtained your people by the
allotment and the judgment of the Father, as if he had appointed him his
own servant and interpreter, a new Aaron or Melchizedec, made like the
Son of God, remaining and continually preserved by him in accordance
with the united prayers of all of you.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p67"></span>24. To him therefore alone let it be
granted, if not in the first place, at least in the second after the
first and greatest High Priest, to observe and supervise the inmost
state of your souls,—to him who by experience and length of time has
accurately proved each one, and who by his zeal and care has disposed
you all in pious conduct and doctrine, and is better able than any one
else to give an account, adequate to the facts, of those things which he
himself has accomplished with the Divine assistance.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p68"></span>25. As to our first and great High
Priest, it is said, <span id="fr_2849"></span>[2850](#fn_2849)
‘Whatsoever he seeth the Father doing those things likewise the Son also
doeth.’ <span id="fr_2850"></span>[2851](#fn_2850) So also this
one, <span id="fr_2851"></span>[2852](#fn_2851) looking up to him as to
the first teacher, with pure eyes of the mind, using as archetypes
whatsoever things he seeth him doing, produceth images of them, making
them so far as is possible in the same likeness, in nothing inferior to
that Beseleel, whom God himself ‘filled with the spirit of wisdom and
understanding’ <span id="fr_2852"></span>[2853](#fn_2852) and with other
technical and scientific knowledge, and called to be the maker of the
temple constructed after heavenly types given in symbols.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p73"></span>26. Thus this one also bearing in his
own soul the image of the whole Christ, the Word, the Wisdom, the Light,
has formed this magnificent temple of the highest God, corresponding to
the pattern of the greater as a visible to an invisible, it is
impossible to say with what greatness of soul, with what wealth and
liberality of mind, and with what emulation on the part of all of you,
shown in the magnanimity of the contributors who have ambitiously
striven in no way to be left behind by him in the execution of the same
purpose. And this place,—for this deserves to be mentioned first of
all,—which had been covered with all sorts of rubbish by the artifices
of our enemies he did not overlook, nor did he yield to the wickedness
of those who had brought about that condition of things, although he
might have chosen some other place, for many other sites were available
in the city, where he would have had less labor, and been free from
trouble.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p74"></span>27. But having first aroused himself to
the work, and then strengthened the whole people with zeal, and formed
them all into one great body, he fought the first contest. For he
thought that this church, which had been <span id="page_374">p.
374</span> <span id="iii.xvi.iv-Page_374"></span>especially besieged by
the enemy, which had first suffered and endured the same persecutions
with us and for us, like a mother bereft of her children, should rejoice
with us in the signal favor of the all-merciful God.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p75"></span>28. For when the Great Shepherd had
driven away the wild animals and wolves and every cruel and savage
beast, and, as the divine oracles say, ‘had broken the jaws of the
lions,’ <span id="fr_2853"></span>[2854](#fn_2853) he thought good to
collect again her children in the same place, and in the most righteous
manner he set up the fold of her flock, ‘to put to shame the enemy and
avenger,’ <span id="fr_2854"></span>[2855](#fn_2854) and to refute the
impious daring of the enemies of God. <span
id="fr_2855"></span>[2856](#fn_2855)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p79"></span>29. And now they are not,—the haters of
God,—for they never were. After they had troubled and been troubled for
a little time, they suffered the fitting punishment, and brought
themselves and their friends and their relatives to total destruction,
so that the declarations inscribed of old in sacred records have been
proved true by facts. In these declarations the divine word truly says
among other things the following concerning them:

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p80"></span>30. ‘The wicked have drawn out the
sword, they have bent their bow, to slay the righteous in heart; let
their sword enter into their own heart and their bows be broken.’ <span
id="fr_2856"></span>[2857](#fn_2856) And again: ‘Their memorial is
perished with a sound’ <span id="fr_2857"></span>[2858](#fn_2857) and
‘their name hast thou blotted out forever and ever’; <span
id="fr_2858"></span>[2859](#fn_2858) for when they also were in trouble
they ‘cried out and there was none to save: unto the Lord, and he heard
them not.’ <span id="fr_2859"></span>[2860](#fn_2859) But ‘their feet
were bound together, and they fell, but we have arisen and stand
upright.’ <span id="fr_2860"></span>[2861](#fn_2860) And that which was
announced beforehand in these words,—‘O Lord, in thy city thou shalt set
at naught their image,’ <span id="fr_2861"></span>[2862](#fn_2861) —has
been shown to be true to the eyes of all.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p87"></span>31. But having waged war like the
giants against God, <span id="fr_2862"></span>[2863](#fn_2862) they died
in this way. But she that was desolate and rejected by men received the
consummation which we behold in consequence of her patience toward God,
so that the prophecy of Isaiah was spoken of her:

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p89"></span>32. ‘Rejoice, thirsty desert, let the
desert rejoice and blossom as the lily, and the desert places shall
blossom and be glad.’ <span id="fr_2863"></span>[2864](#fn_2863) ‘Be
strengthened, ye weak hands and feeble knees. Be of good courage, ye
feeble-hearted, in your minds; be strong, fear not. Behold our God
recompenseth judgment and will recompense, he will come and save
us.’ <span id="fr_2864"></span>[2865](#fn_2864) ‘For,’ he says, ‘in the
wilderness water has broken out, and a pool in thirsty ground, and the
dry land shall be watered meadows, and in the thirsty ground there shall
be springs of water.’ <span id="fr_2865"></span>[2866](#fn_2865)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p93"></span>33. These things which were prophesied
long ago have been recorded in sacred books; but no longer are they
transmitted to us by hearsay merely, but in facts. This desert, this dry
land, this widowed and deserted one, ‘whose gates they cut down with
axes like wood in a forest, whom they broke down with hatchet and
hammer,’ <span id="fr_2866"></span>[2867](#fn_2866) whose books also
they destroyed, <span id="fr_2867"></span>[2868](#fn_2867) ‘burning with
fire the sanctuary of God, and profaning unto the ground the habitation
of his name,’ <span id="fr_2868"></span>[2869](#fn_2868) ‘whom all that
passed by upon the way plucked, and whose fences they broke down, whom
the boar out of the wood ravaged, and on which the savage wild beast
fed,’ <span id="fr_2869"></span>[2870](#fn_2869) now by the wonderful
power of Christ, when he wills it, has become like a lily. For at that
time also she was chastened at his nod as by a careful father; ‘for whom
the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he
receiveth.’ <span id="fr_2870"></span>[2871](#fn_2870)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p99"></span>34. Then after being chastened in a
measure, according to the necessities of the case, she is commanded to
rejoice anew; and she blossoms as a lily and exhales her divine odor
among all men. ‘For,’ it is said, ‘water hath broken out in the
wilderness,’ <span id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871) the fountain of
the saving bath of divine regeneration. <span
id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872) And now she, who a little before
was a desert, ‘has become watered meadows, and springs of water have
gushed forth in a thirsty land.’ <span
id="fr_2873"></span>[2874](#fn_2873) The hands which before were ‘weak’
have become ‘truly strong’; <span id="fr_2874"></span>[2875](#fn_2874)
and these works are great and convincing proofs of strong hands. The
knees, also, which before were ‘feeble and infirm,’ recovering their
wonted strength, are moving straight forward in the path of divine
knowledge, and hastening to the kindred flock <span
id="fr_2875"></span>[2876](#fn_2875) of the all-gracious Shepherd.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p105"></span>35. And if there are any whose souls
have been stupefied by the threats of the tyrants, not even they are
passed by as incurable by the saving Word; but he heals them also and
urges them on to receive divine comfort, saying, ‘Be ye comforted, ye
who are faint-hearted; be ye strengthened, fear not.’ <span
id="fr_2876"></span>[2877](#fn_2876)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p107"></span>36. This our new and excellent
Zerubabel, having heard the word which announced beforehand, that she
who had been made a desert on account of God should enjoy these things,
after the bitter cap<span id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-Page_375"></span>tivity and the abomination of
desolation, did not overlook the dead body; but first of all with
prayers and supplications propitiated the Father with the common consent
of all of you, and invoking the only one that giveth life to the dead as
his ally and fellow-worker, raised her that was fallen, after purifying
and freeing her from her ills. And he clothed her not with the ancient
garment, but with such an one as he had again learned from the sacred
oracles, which say clearly, ‘And the latter glory of this house shall be
greater than the former.’ <span id="fr_2877"></span>[2878](#fn_2877)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p109"></span>37. Thus, enclosing a much larger
space, he fortified the outer court with a wall surrounding the whole,
which should serve as a most secure bulwark for the entire
edifice. <span id="fr_2878"></span>[2879](#fn_2878)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p111"></span>38. And he raised and spread out a
great and lofty vestibule toward the rays of the rising sun, <span
id="fr_2879"></span>[2880](#fn_2879) and furnished those standing far
without the sacred enclosure a full view of those within, almost turning
the eyes of those who were strangers to the faith, to the entrances, so
that no one could pass by without being impressed by the memory of the
former desolation and of the present incredible transformation. His hope
was that such an one being impressed by this might be attracted and be
induced to enter by the very sight.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p113"></span>39. But when one comes within the
gates he does not permit him to enter the sanctuary immediately, with
impure and unwashed feet; but leaving as large a space as possible
between the temple and the outer entrance, he has surrounded and adorned
it with four transverse cloisters, making a quadrangular space with
pillars rising on every side, which he has joined with lattice-work
screens of wood, rising to a suitable height; and he has left an open
space <span id="fr_2880"></span>[2881](#fn_2880) in the middle, so that
the sky can be seen, and the free air bright in the rays of the sun.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p115"></span>40. Here he has placed symbols of
sacred purifications, setting up fountains opposite the temple which
furnish an abundance of water wherewith those who come within the
sanctuary may purify themselves. This is the first halting-place of
those who enter; and it furnishes at the same time a beautiful and
splendid scene to every one, and to those who still need elementary
instruction a fitting station.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p116"></span>41. But passing by this spectacle, he
has made open entrances to the temple with many other vestibules within,
placing three doors on one side, likewise facing the rays of the sun.
The one in the middle, adorned with plates of bronze, iron bound, and
beautifully embossed, he has made much higher and broader than the
others, as if he were making them guards for it as for a queen.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p117"></span>42. In the same way, arranging the
number of vestibules for the corridors on each side of the whole temple,
he has made above them various openings into the building, for the
purpose of admitting more light, adorning them with very fine
wood-carving. But the royal house he has furnished with more beautiful
and splendid materials, using unstinted liberality in his disbursements.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p118"></span>43. It seems to me superfluous to
describe here in detail the length and breadth of the building, its
splendor and its majesty surpassing description, and the brilliant
appearance of the work, its lofty pinnacles reaching to the heavens, and
the costly cedars of Lebanon above them, which the divine oracle has not
omitted to mention, saying, ‘The trees of the Lord shall rejoice and the
cedars of Lebanon which he hath planted.’ <span
id="fr_2881"></span>[2882](#fn_2881)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p120"></span>44. Why need I now describe the
skillful architectural arrangement and the surpassing beauty of each
part, when the testimony of the eye renders instruction through the ear
superfluous? For when he had thus completed the temple, he provided it
with lofty thrones in honor of those who preside, and in addition with
seats arranged in proper order throughout the whole building, and
finally placed in the middle <span id="fr_2882"></span>[2883](#fn_2882)
the holy of holies, the altar, and, that it might be inaccessible to the
multitude, enclosed it with wooden lattice-work, accurately wrought with
artistic carving, presenting a wonderful sight to the beholders.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p122"></span>45. And not even the pavement was
neglected by him; for this too he adorned with beautiful marble of every
variety. Then finally he passed on to the parts without the temple,
providing spacious exedræ and buildings <span
id="fr_2883"></span>[2884](#fn_2883) on each side, which were <span
id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span id="iii.xvi.iv-Page_376"></span>joined
to the basilica, and communicated with the entrances to the interior of
the structure. These were erected by our most peaceful <span
id="fr_2884"></span>[2885](#fn_2884) Solomon, the maker of the temple of
God, for those who still needed purification and sprinkling by water and
the Holy Spirit, so that the prophecy quoted above is no longer a word
merely, but a fact; for now it has also come to pass that in truth ‘the
latter glory of this house is greater than the former.’ <span
id="fr_2885"></span>[2886](#fn_2885)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p126"></span>46. For it was necessary and fitting
that as her shepherd and Lord had once tasted death for her, and after
his suffering had changed that vile body which he assumed in her behalf
into a splendid and glorious body, leading the very flesh which had been
delivered <span id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886) from corruption to
incorruption, she too should enjoy the dispensations of the Saviour. For
having received from him the promise of much greater things than these,
she desires to share uninterruptedly throughout eternity with the choir
of the angels of light, in the far greater glory of regeneration, <span
id="fr_2887"></span>[2888](#fn_2887) in the resurrection of an
incorruptible body, in the palace of God beyond the heavens, with Christ
Jesus himself, the universal Benefactor and Saviour.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p129"></span>47. But for the present, she that was
formerly widowed and desolate is clothed by the grace of God with these
flowers, and is become truly like a lily, as the prophecy says, <span
id="fr_2888"></span>[2889](#fn_2888) and having received the bridal
garment and the crown of beauty, she is taught by Isaiah to dance, and
to present her thank-offerings unto God the King in reverent words.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p131"></span>48. Let us hear her saying, ‘My soul
shall rejoice in the Lord; for he hath clothed me with a garment of
salvation and with a robe of gladness; he hath bedecked me like a
bridegroom with a garland, and he hath adorned me like a bride with
jewels; and like the earth which bringeth forth her bud, and like a
garden which causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth,
thus the Lord God hath caused righteousness and praise to spring forth
before all the nations.’ <span id="fr_2889"></span>[2890](#fn_2889)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p133"></span>49. In these words she exults. And in
similar words the heavenly bridegroom, the Word Jesus Christ himself,
answers her. Hear the Lord saying, ‘Fear not because thou hast been put
to shame, neither be thou confounded because thou hast been rebuked; for
thou shalt forget the former shame, and the reproach of thy widowhood
shalt thou remember no more.’ <span id="fr_2890"></span>[2891](#fn_2890)
‘Not <span id="fr_2891"></span>[2892](#fn_2891) as a woman deserted and
faint-hearted hath the Lord called thee, nor as a woman hated from her
youth, saith thy God. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with
great mercy will I have mercy upon thee; in a little wrath I hid my face
from thee, but with everlasting mercy will I have mercy upon thee, saith
the Lord that hath redeemed thee.’ <span
id="fr_2892"></span>[2893](#fn_2892)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p137"></span>50. ‘Awake, awake, thou who hast drunk
at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury; for thou hast drunk the cup
of ruin, the vessel of my wrath, and hast drained it. And there was none
to console thee of all thy sons whom thou didst bring forth, and there
was none to take thee by the hand.’ <span
id="fr_2893"></span>[2894](#fn_2893) ‘Behold, I have taken out of thine
hand the cup of ruin, the vessel of my fury, and thou shalt no longer
drink it. And I will put it into the hands of them that have treated
thee unjustly and have humbled thee.’ <span
id="fr_2894"></span>[2895](#fn_2894)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p140"></span>51. ‘Awake, awake, put on thy
strength, put on thy glory. Shake off the dust and arise. Sit thee down,
loose the bands of thy neck.’ <span id="fr_2895"></span>[2896](#fn_2895)
‘Lift up thine eyes round about and behold thy children gathered
together; behold they are gathered together and are come to thee. As I
live, saith the Lord, thou shalt clothe thee with them all as with an
ornament, and gird thyself with them as with the ornaments of a bride.
For thy waste and corrupted and ruined places shall now be too narrow by
reason of those that inhabit thee, and they that swallow thee up shall
be far from thee.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p142"></span>52. For thy sons whom thou hast lost
shall say in thine ears, The place is too narrow for me, give place to
me that I may dwell. Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath
begotten me these? I am childless and a widow, and who hath brought up
these for me? I was left alone, and these, where were they for
me?’ <span id="fr_2896"></span>[2897](#fn_2896)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p144"></span>53. “These are the things which Isaiah
foretold; and which were anciently recorded concerning us in sacred
books and it was necessary that we should sometime learn their
truthfulness by their fulfillment.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p145"></span>54. For when the bridegroom, the Word,
addressed such language to his own bride, the sacred and holy Church,
this bridesman, <span id="fr_2897"></span>[2898](#fn_2897) —when she was
desolate and lying like a corpse, bereft of hope in the eyes of men,—in
accordance with the united prayers of all of you, as was proper,
stretched out your hands and aroused and raised her up at the command of
God, the universal King, and at the manifestation of the power of Jesus
Christ; and having raised her he established her as he had learned from
the description given in the sacred oracles.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p147"></span>55. This <span id="page_377">p.
377</span> <span id="iii.xvi.iv-Page_377"></span>is indeed a very great
wonder, passing all admiration, especially to those who attend only to
the outward appearance; but more wonderful than wonders are the
archetypes and their mental prototypes and divine models; I mean the
reproductions of the inspired and rational building in our souls.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p148"></span>56. This the Divine Son himself
created after his own image, imparting to it everywhere and in all
respects the likeness of God, an incorruptible nature, incorporeal,
rational, free from all earthly matter, a being endowed with its own
intelligence; and when he had once called her forth from non-existence
into existence, he made her a holy spouse, an all-sacred temple for
himself and for the Father. This also he clearly declares and confesses
in the following words: ‘I will dwell in them and will walk in them; and
I will be their God, and they shall be my people.’ <span
id="fr_2898"></span>[2899](#fn_2898) Such is the perfect and purified
soul, so made from the beginning as to bear the image of the celestial
Word.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p150"></span>57. But when by the envy and zeal of
the malignant demon she became, of her own voluntary choice, sensual and
a lover of evil, the Deity left her; and as if bereft of a protector,
she became an easy prey and readily accessible to those who had long
envied her; and being assailed by the batteries and machines of her
invisible enemies and spiritual foes, she suffered a terrible fall, so
that not one stone of virtue remained upon another in her, but she lay
completely dead upon the ground, entirely divested of her natural ideas
of God.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p151"></span>58. “But as she, who had been made in
the image of God, thus lay prostrate, it was not that wild boar from the
forest which we see that despoiled her, but a certain destroying demon
and spiritual wild beasts who deceived her with their passions as with
the fiery darts of their own wickedness, and burned the truly divine
sanctuary of God with fire, and profaned to the ground the tabernacle of
his name. Then burying the miserable one with heaps of earth, they
destroyed every hope of deliverance.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p152"></span>59. But that divinely bright and
saving Word, her protector, after she had suffered the merited
punishment for her sins, again restored her, securing the favor of the
all-merciful Father.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p153"></span>60. Having won over first the souls of
the highest rulers, he purified, through the agency of those most
divinely favored princes, the whole earth from all the impious
destroyers, and from the terrible and God-hating tyrants themselves.
Then bringing out into the light those who were his friends, who had
long before been consecrated to him for life, but in the midst, as it
were, of a storm of evils, had been concealed under his shelter, he
honored them worthily with the great gifts of the Spirit. And again, by
means of them, he cleared out and cleaned with spades and mattocks—the
admonitory words of doctrine <span id="fr_2899"></span>[2900](#fn_2899)
—the souls which a little while before had been covered with filth and
burdened with every kind of matter and rubbish of impious ordinances.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p155"></span>61. And when he had made the ground of
all your minds clean and clear, he finally committed it to this all-wise
and God-beloved Ruler, who, being endowed with judgment and prudence, as
well as with other gifts, and being able to examine and discriminate
accurately the minds of those committed to his charge, from the first
day, so to speak, down to the present, has not ceased to build.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p156"></span>62. Now he has supplied the brilliant
gold, again the refined and unalloyed silver, and the precious and
costly stones in all of you, so that again is fulfilled for you in facts
a sacred and mystic prophecy, which says, ‘Behold I make thy stone a
carbuncle, and thy foundations of sapphire, and thy battlements of
jasper, and thy gates of crystals, and thy wall of chosen stones; and
all thy sons shall be taught of God, and thy children shall enjoy
complete peace; and in righteousness shalt thou be built.’ <span
id="fr_2900"></span>[2901](#fn_2900)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p158"></span>63. Building therefore in
righteousness, he divided the whole people according to their strength.
With some he fortified only the outer enclosure, walling it up with
unfeigned faith; such were the great mass of the people who were
incapable of bearing a greater structure. Others he permitted to enter
the building, commanding them to stand at the door and act as guides for
those who should come in; these may be not unfitly compared to the
vestibules of the temple. Others he supported by the first pillars which
are placed without about the quadrangular hall, initiating them into the
first elements of the letter of the four Gospels. Still others he joined
together about the basilica on both sides; these are the catechumens who
are still advancing and progressing, and are not far separated from the
inmost view of divine things granted to the faithful.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p159"></span>64. Taking from among these the pure
souls that have been cleansed like gold by divine washing, <span
id="fr_2901"></span>[2902](#fn_2901) he then supports them by pillars,
much better than those without, made from the inner and mystic teachings
of the Scripture, and illumines them <span
id="fr_2902"></span>[2903](#fn_2902) by windows.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p162"></span>65. Adorning the whole temple with a
great vestibule of the glory of the one universal King and only God, and
placing <span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-Page_378"></span>on either side of the authority of the
Father Christ, and the Holy Spirit as second lights, he exhibits
abundantly and gloriously throughout the entire building the clearness
and splendor of the truth of the rest in all its details. And having
selected from every quarter the living and moving and well-prepared
stones of the souls, he constructs out of them all the great and royal
house, splendid and full of light both within and without; for not only
soul and understanding, but their body also is made glorious by the
blooming ornament of purity and modesty.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p163"></span>66. And in this temple there are also
thrones, and a great number of seats and benches, in all those souls in
which sit the Holy Spirit’s gifts, such as were anciently seen by the
sacred apostles, and those who were with them, when there ‘appeared unto
them tongues parting asunder, like as of fire, and sat upon each one of
them.’ <span id="fr_2903"></span>[2904](#fn_2903)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p165"></span>67. But in the leader of all it is
reasonable to suppose <span id="fr_2904"></span>[2905](#fn_2904) that
Christ himself dwells in his fullness, <span
id="fr_2905"></span>[2906](#fn_2905) and in those that occupy the second
rank after him, in proportion as each is able to contain the power of
Christ and of the Holy Spirit. <span
id="fr_2906"></span>[2907](#fn_2906) And the souls of some of those,
namely, who are committed to each of them for instruction and care—may
be seats for angels.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p169"></span>68. But the great and august and
unique altar, what else could this be than the pure holy of holies of
the soul of the common priest of all? Standing at the right of it, Jesus
himself, the great High Priest of the universe, the Only Begotten of
God, receives with bright eye and extended hand the sweet incense from
all, and the bloodless and immaterial sacrifices offered in their
prayers, and bears them to the heavenly Father and God of the universe.
And he himself first worships him, and alone gives to the Father the
reverence which is his due, beseeching him also to continue always kind
and propitious to us all.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p170"></span>69. “Such is the great temple which
the great Creator of the universe, the Word, has built throughout the
entire world, making it an intellectual image upon earth of those things
which lie above the vault of heaven, so that throughout the whole
creation, including rational beings on earth, his Father might be
honored and adored.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p171"></span>70. But the region above the heavens,
with the models of earthly things which are there, and the so-called
Jerusalem above, <span id="fr_2907"></span>[2908](#fn_2907) and the
heavenly Mount of Zion, and the supramundane city of the living God, in
which innumerable choirs of angels and the Church of the first born,
whose names are written in heaven, <span
id="fr_2908"></span>[2909](#fn_2908) praise their Maker and the Supreme
Ruler of the universe with hymns of praise unutterable and
incomprehensible to us,—who that is mortal is able worthily to celebrate
this? ‘For eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of men those things which God hath prepared for them that love
him.’ <span id="fr_2909"></span>[2910](#fn_2909)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p175"></span>71. Since we, men, children, and
women, small and great, are already in part partakers of these things,
let us not cease all together, with one spirit and one soul, to confess
and praise the author of such great benefits to us, ‘Who forgiveth all
our iniquities, who healeth all our diseases, who redeemeth our life
from destruction, who crowneth us with mercy and compassion, who
satisfieth our desires with good things.’ <span
id="fr_2910"></span>[2911](#fn_2910) ‘For he hath not dealt with us
according to our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities;’ <span id="fr_2911"></span>[2912](#fn_2911) ‘for as far as
the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our iniquities from
us. Like as a father pitieth his own children, so the Lord pitieth them
that fear him.’ <span id="fr_2912"></span>[2913](#fn_2912)

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p179"></span>72. Rekindling these thoughts in our
memories, both now and during all time to come, and contemplating in our
mind night and day, in every hour and with every breath, so to speak,
the Author and Ruler of the present festival, and of this bright and
most splendid day, let us love and adore him with every power of the
soul. And now rising, let us beseech him with loud voice to shelter and
preserve us to the end in his fold, granting his unbroken and unshaken
peace forever, in Christ Jesus our Saviour; through whom be the glory
unto him forever and ever. <span id="fr_2913"></span>[2914](#fn_2913)
Amen.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2813"></span>[370:2814](2010301.htm#fr_2813) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p3"></span> This person was clearly Eusebius
himself (see above, p. 11). Upon the date of this dedicatory service, at
which Eusebius delivered the oration given in full in this chapter, see
*ibid*.

<span id="fn_2814"></span>[370:2815](2010301.htm#fr_2814) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p4"></span> Paulinus, bishop of Tyre. See above,
chap. 1, note 1.

<span id="fn_2815"></span>[370:2816](2010301.htm#fr_2815) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p7"></span> i.e. Paulinus.

<span id="fn_2816"></span>[370:2817](2010301.htm#fr_2816) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p8"></span> Cf. [Rev. xxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2817"></span>[370:2818](2010301.htm#fr_2817) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p10"></span> βεσελεήλ, which is the form found in
the LXX. The Hebrew is לאֵלְצַבְּ, which the R.V. renders “Bezalel.” See
<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p10.1"></span>[Ex. xxxv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#030)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p10.2"></span>
sq.

<span id="fn_2818"></span>[371:2819](2010301.htm#fr_2818) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p11"></span> See [Hag. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2819"></span>[371:2820](2010301.htm#fr_2819) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p13"></span> Eusebius addresses first the assembled
clergymen in general, then Paulinus in particular, and finally the
people, calling the latter “nurslings,” “habitation,” “school,”
“auditory.” The significance of the words as used by him is plain
enough, but their collocation is rather remarkable.

<span id="fn_2820"></span>[371:2821](2010301.htm#fr_2820) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p15"></span> [Psa. xliv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2821"></span>[371:2822](2010301.htm#fr_2821) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p17"></span> Cf. [Ex. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p17.1"></span>,
*et al*.

<span id="fn_2822"></span>[371:2823](2010301.htm#fr_2822) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p18.1"></span>[Psa. xlviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p18.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2823"></span>[371:2824](2010301.htm#fr_2823) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p20"></span> <span id="iii.xvi.iv-p20.1"></span>[1
Tim. iii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p20.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2824"></span>[371:2825](2010301.htm#fr_2824) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p21"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p21.1"></span>[Psa. lxxxvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p21.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2825"></span>[371:2826](2010301.htm#fr_2825) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p22"></span> [Psa. cxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2826"></span>[371:2827](2010301.htm#fr_2826) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p23"></span> [Psa. xxvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2827"></span>[371:2828](2010301.htm#fr_2827) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p25"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p25.1"></span>[Psa. xlviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p25.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2828"></span>[371:2829](2010301.htm#fr_2828) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p26"></span> [Psa. xlv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2829"></span>[371:2830](2010301.htm#fr_2829) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p27"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p27.1"></span>[Psa. cxxxvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#004)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p27.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2830"></span>[371:2831](2010301.htm#fr_2830) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p28"></span> [Job ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#010)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2831"></span>[371:2832](2010301.htm#fr_2831) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p29"></span> [Dan. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2832"></span>[371:2833](2010301.htm#fr_2832) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p30"></span> [1 Sam.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008), [Ps.
113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p30.1"></span>[1 Sam. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p30.2"></span>.
([Psa. cxiii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p30.3"></span>).

<span id="fn_2833"></span>[371:2834](2010301.htm#fr_2833) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p30.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p31"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p31.1"></span>[Luke
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052),
[53](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#053)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p31.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2834"></span>[371:2835](2010301.htm#fr_2834) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p33"></span> Cf. [Psa. xcvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2835"></span>[371:2836](2010301.htm#fr_2835) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p34"></span> προσυπακούοντες. Eusebius seems to use
this rather peculiar expression because the words of song which he
suggests are not the words of the “new song” given by the Psalmist, but
are taken from other parts of the book.

<span id="fn_2836"></span>[371:2837](2010301.htm#fr_2836) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p35"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p35.1"></span>[Psa. cxxxvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#004)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p35.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2837"></span>[371:2838](2010301.htm#fr_2837) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p36"></span> [Psa.
136.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#017)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2838"></span>[371:2839](2010301.htm#fr_2838) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p37"></span> [Ps.
136:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#024)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2839"></span>[371:2840](2010301.htm#fr_2839) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p40"></span> It is remarked by Valesius that these
words are taken from some tragic poet. That they are quoted from an
ancient writer is clear enough from the Ionic forms which occur (ὁρῇ,
ἀλλοτριῇσι, ξυμφορῇσι), and if a few slight changes be made (καμνόντων
to καμόντων, ἕνεκεν to εἵνεκεν, μὲν to τὰ, ἐπ᾽ ἀλλοτριῇσι τε to
ἀλλοτριῇσι) the words resolve themselves into iambic trimeters:—

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p41"></span>τῆς τῶν καμόντων εἵνεκεν σωτηρίας

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p42"></span>ὁρῇ τὰ δεινὰ, θιγγ€νει δ᾽ ἀηδέων,

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p43"></span>ἀλλοτριῇσι συμφορῇσιν ἰδίας

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p44"></span>καρποῦται λύπας.

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p45"></span>According to Valesius, Gregory
Nazianzen in his first *Oratio* quotes the last verse (καὶ τὸ ἐπ᾽
ἀλλοτρίαις συμφοραῖς ἰδίας καρποῦσθαι λύπας, in which there is no trace
of the poetical form) with the remark ὡςžφη τις τῶν παρ᾽ ἐκείνοις σοφῶν;
and Valesius adds: “*Ad quem locum Elias Cretensis notat verba hæc esse
Hippocratis quem Gregorius Nazianzenus sapientis cujusdam nomine
designat*.” Moreover, Schwegler remarks that the words are taken from
Hippocrates. In a note *ad locum* he says: “*Hippocratis medici* (cf.
Hippocr. de Flat. *init*. p. 78, ed. Foes) *quæ eadem laudantur et ab
aliis Scriptoribus, veluti a Luciano in Bis. Accus*. c. I. p. 49, ed.
Bip. Cf. *quæ interpretes adnotaverunt ad Luciani*, *l.c*. Tom. VII. p.
400, ed. Bip.” I have not examined these references, and can therefore
form no judgment in the matter.

<span id="fn_2840"></span>[372:2841](2010301.htm#fr_2840) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p46"></span> ἀβλαβῶς. The application of the word
is not perfectly clear, but the meaning seems to be “without harm to
himself,” “unharmed.” “He is the only one able to minister to our
salvation without sinking under the weight of the burden, or suffering
from his contact with us.” Eusebius is perhaps thinking especially of
Christ’s absolute sinlessness and victory over all temptation; perhaps
only in a more general way of the great strength needed for such a task,
strength possessed by Christ alone in sufficient measure to prevent his
own complete exhaustion under the immense task.

<span id="fn_2841"></span>[372:2842](2010301.htm#fr_2841) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p50"></span> Cf. [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2842"></span>[372:2843](2010301.htm#fr_2842) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p51"></span> μέγας ἀρχιστρ€τηγος; cf. <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p51.1"></span>[Josh. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p51.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2843"></span>[372:2844](2010301.htm#fr_2843) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p54"></span> This seems to be simply a rhetorical
expression of what is recorded in Bk. IX. chap. 9, in regard to the
great statue of Constantine with a cross in his hand, erected in Rome
after his victory over Maxentius. It is possible that other smaller
monuments of a similar kind were erected at the same time.

<span id="fn_2844"></span>[372:2845](2010301.htm#fr_2844) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p55"></span> αὐτοθεόν. The exact sense in which
Eusebius uses this word is open to dispute. That it asserts the Son to
be possessed *per se*, in and of himself, of absolute deity,—that is,
that he is self-existent,—can hardly be maintained, though Valesius does
maintain it. The word admits some latitude of meaning, as Heinichen
shows (in his edition of Eusebius, III. p. 736 sq., *Melet*. XX.), and
its use does not forbid a belief in the subordination of the Son. In my
opinion it clearly indicates a belief in an essential deity of the Son,
but not a full and absolute deity. Stein, in his *Eusebius*, p. 138,
remarks: “Eusebius wendet hier dei platonischen Ausdrücke nach dem
Vorbilde des Origenes auf das Wesen des Sohnes an. Nach Origines
bezeichnen diese Ausdrücke die Absolutheit des Sohnes, nach den
Platonikern jedoch bedeuten sie nicht das höchste Wesen. Es ist nun
Zweifelhaft, ob Eusebius mit diesen Begriffen den Sinn des Origenes,
oder den der Platoniker verknüpft habe.” There can be little doubt, in
my opinion, that Eusebius followed Origen so far as he understood him,
but that he never carried the essential deity of the Son so far as to
cease to think of some kind of an essential subordination. See the
discussion of Eusebius’ position, on p. 11 sq. of this volume. I have
translated the word αὐτοθεόν “very God,” because there seems to be no
other phrase which does not necessarily express more, or less, than
Eusebius means by the word. It must be remembered, however, that in
using the phrase which is commonly employed to translate the later
Nicene ἀληθινὸν θεόν, I do not use it in the full sense thus ordinarily
attached to it.

<span id="fn_2845"></span>[373:2846](2010301.htm#fr_2845) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p60"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p60.1"></span>[Psa. xxxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p60.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2846"></span>[373:2847](2010301.htm#fr_2846) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p60.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p61"></span> τοῦ παμβασιλέως καὶ πανηγεμόνος καὶ
αὐτοῦ θεοῦ λόγου. Valesius translates, *Verbi omnium regis ac principis
ac per se Dei*; Closs, “des Wortes, das der König aller Könige, der
oberste Fürst und selbst Gott ist”; Crusè, “The universal King, the
universal Prince, and God, the Word himself.” A conception is thus
introduced which the clause as it stands, without the repetition of the
article with λόγου, seems to me hardly to warrant. At any rate, the
rendering which I have adopted seems more accurately to reproduce the
original.

<span id="fn_2847"></span>[373:2848](2010301.htm#fr_2847) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p63"></span> θεολογουμένῳ. The use of the word
θεολογέω in the sense of speaking of, or celebrating a person as divine,
or attributing divinity to a person, was very common among the Fathers,
especially in connection with Christ. See Suicer’s *Thesaurus*, *s.v*.
II. and Bk. V. chap. 28, § 4, above.

<span id="fn_2848"></span>[373:2849](2010301.htm#fr_2848) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p64"></span> Eusebius’ reference to these various
buildings is somewhat confusing. He speaks first of the Church of
Christ, “the living temple which we all constitute”; then of the Jews,
“the builders of that ancient temple which no longer stands”; and
finally, as it seems, of the heathen, “builders of the structure which
still endures and is composed of the mass of men” (τῶν πολλῶν ἀνθρώπων).

<span id="fn_2849"></span>[373:2850](2010301.htm#fr_2849) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p69"></span> Literally, “it says” (φησί), i.e. “the
Scripture says.”

<span id="fn_2850"></span>[373:2851](2010301.htm#fr_2850) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p70"></span> [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2851"></span>[373:2852](2010301.htm#fr_2851) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p71"></span> i.e. Paulinus.

<span id="fn_2852"></span>[373:2853](2010301.htm#fr_2852) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p72"></span> [Ex. xxxv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#031)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2853"></span>[374:2854](2010301.htm#fr_2853) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p76"></span> [Psa. lviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p76.1"></span>.
Eusebius agrees with the LXX, which reads τὰς μύλας τῶν λεόντων.

<span id="fn_2854"></span>[374:2855](2010301.htm#fr_2854) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p77"></span> [Psa. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p77.1"></span>.
The LXX has καταλῦσαι instead of Eusebius’ καταισχῦναι

<span id="fn_2855"></span>[374:2856](2010301.htm#fr_2855) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p78"></span> Literally, “the God-fighting, daring
deeds of the impious” (ταῖς θεομ€χοις τῶν ἀσεβῶν τόλμαις).

<span id="fn_2856"></span>[374:2857](2010301.htm#fr_2856) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p81"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p81.1"></span>[Ps.
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p81.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2857"></span>[374:2858](2010301.htm#fr_2857) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p81.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p82"></span> [Psa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p82.1"></span>.
Eusebius agrees with the LXX in reading μετ᾽ ἤχου: “with a sound.”

<span id="fn_2858"></span>[374:2859](2010301.htm#fr_2858) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p83"></span> [Psa.
9.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2859"></span>[374:2860](2010301.htm#fr_2859) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p84"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p84.1"></span>[Psa. xviii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#041)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p84.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2860"></span>[374:2861](2010301.htm#fr_2860) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p84.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p85"></span> [Psa.
18.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2861"></span>[374:2862](2010301.htm#fr_2861) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p86"></span> [Psa.
73.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2862"></span>[374:2863](2010301.htm#fr_2862) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p88"></span> Cf. Bk. I. chap. 2, § 19, above, and
the note on that passage.

<span id="fn_2863"></span>[374:2864](2010301.htm#fr_2863) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p90"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2864"></span>[374:2865](2010301.htm#fr_2864) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p91"></span> [Isa.
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#004)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2865"></span>[374:2866](2010301.htm#fr_2865) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p92"></span> [Isa.
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#007)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2866"></span>[374:2867](2010301.htm#fr_2866) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p94"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p94.1"></span>[Ps.
74:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#006)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p94.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2867"></span>[374:2868](2010301.htm#fr_2867) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p94.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p95"></span> Diocletian’s first edict included the
destruction of the sacred books of the Christians, as well as of their
churches. See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 2.

<span id="fn_2868"></span>[374:2869](2010301.htm#fr_2868) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p96"></span> [Psa. lxxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#007)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2869"></span>[374:2870](2010301.htm#fr_2869) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p97"></span> [Ps.
80:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2870"></span>[374:2871](2010301.htm#fr_2870) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p98"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p98.1"></span>,
with which Eusebius agrees exactly, differing from [Prov. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p98.2"></span>
in the use of παιδεύει instead of ἐλέγχει.

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[374:2872](2010301.htm#fr_2871) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p100"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[374:2873](2010301.htm#fr_2872) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p100.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p101"></span> τῆς θείας τοῦ σωτηρίου λουτροῦ
παλιγγενεσίας. Cf. <span id="iii.xvi.iv-p101.1"></span>[Titus iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p101.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2873"></span>[374:2874](2010301.htm#fr_2873) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p101.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p102"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#007)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2874"></span>[374:2875](2010301.htm#fr_2874) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p102.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p103"></span> [Isa.
35.3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2875"></span>[374:2876](2010301.htm#fr_2875) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p104"></span> τὴν οἰκείαν ποίμνην.

<span id="fn_2876"></span>[374:2877](2010301.htm#fr_2876) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p106"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#004)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2877"></span>[375:2878](2010301.htm#fr_2877) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p108"></span> [Hag. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2878"></span>[375:2879](2010301.htm#fr_2878) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p110"></span> The description of the church of Tyre
which follows is very valuable, as being the oldest detailed description
which we have of a Christian basilica. Eusebius mentions other churches
in his *Vita Constantini*, III. 30–39, 41–43, 48, 50, 51–53, 58, IV. 58,
and describes some of them at considerable length. We have a number of
descriptions from later sources, but rely for our knowledge of early
Christian architecture chiefly upon the extant remains of the edifices
themselves. For a very full discussion of the present church, which was
an excellent example of an ancient Christian basilica, and for a
detailed description of its various parts, see Bingham’s *Antiquities*,
Bk. VIII. chap. 3 sq., and compare also the article *Basilika* in Kraus’
*Real-Encyclopädie der Christ. Alterthümer*. The literature on the
general subject of early Christian architecture is very extensive. See
more particularly the works referred to in the articles in Smith and
Cheetham’s *Dict. of Christ. Antiq*. and in the *Encyclop. Britannica*;
and cf. also Schaff’s *Ch. Hist*. III. p. 538 sq.

<span id="fn_2879"></span>[375:2880](2010301.htm#fr_2879) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p112"></span> Bingham remarks that the ancient
basilicas commonly faced the west, and that therefore the position of
this church of Tyre was exceptional; but this is a mistake. It is true
that from the fifth century on, the altar almost uniformly occupied the
east end of the church, but previous to that time the position observed
in the present case was almost universally followed, so that the present
building was not at all exceptional in its position. See the article
*Orientierung* in Kraus’ *Real-Encyclopädie*. Although the common custom
was to have the church stand east and west, yet the rule was often
neglected, and there exist many notable examples of churches standing
north and south, or quite out of line with the points of the compass.

<span id="fn_2880"></span>[375:2881](2010301.htm#fr_2880) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p113.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p114"></span> αἴθριον, the Latin *atrium*.

<span id="fn_2881"></span>[375:2882](2010301.htm#fr_2881) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p119"></span> [Psa. civ.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#016)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2882"></span>[375:2883](2010301.htm#fr_2882) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p121"></span> i.e. in the apse, or chancel, not in
the middle of the nave, or body of the church.

<span id="fn_2883"></span>[375:2884](2010301.htm#fr_2883) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p123"></span> ἐξέδρας καὶ οἴκους. Large basilicas
were always provided with additional rooms, and adjacent buildings, such
as baptisteries, diaconica, secretaria, &c., which were used for various
ecclesiastical purposes, and which were often of considerable size, so
that important synods frequently met in one or another of them. Cf.
Bingham, *ibid*. chap. 7.

<span id="fn_2884"></span>[376:2885](2010301.htm#fr_2884) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p124"></span> The name Solomon (Heb. הׁמׁלשְׁ)
means “peaceful.”

<span id="fn_2885"></span>[376:2886](2010301.htm#fr_2885) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p124.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p125"></span> [Hag. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[376:2887](2010301.htm#fr_2886) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p126.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p127"></span> λυθεῖσαν, which may mean also
“dissolved, decayed.” Crusè translates “dissolved”; Closs, “schon
verwesend.”

<span id="fn_2887"></span>[376:2888](2010301.htm#fr_2887) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p127.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p128"></span> Cf. [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2888"></span>[376:2889](2010301.htm#fr_2888) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p129.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p130"></span> See [Isa. xxxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p130.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2889"></span>[376:2890](2010301.htm#fr_2889) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p132"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p132.1"></span>[Isa.
61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#011)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p132.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2890"></span>[376:2891](2010301.htm#fr_2890) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p133.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p134"></span> [Isa.
54.4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2891"></span>[376:2892](2010301.htm#fr_2891) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p134.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p135"></span> The word “not” is omitted in the
Hebrew (and consequently in our English versions), but is found in the
LXX.

<span id="fn_2892"></span>[376:2893](2010301.htm#fr_2892) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p135.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p136"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p136.1"></span>[Isa. liv.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p136.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2893"></span>[376:2894](2010301.htm#fr_2893) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p137.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p138"></span> [Isa.
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#018)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2894"></span>[376:2895](2010301.htm#fr_2894) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p138.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p139"></span> [Isa.
51:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#023)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2895"></span>[376:2896](2010301.htm#fr_2895) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p140.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p141"></span> [Isa.
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#002)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2896"></span>[376:2897](2010301.htm#fr_2896) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p142.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p143"></span> [Isa.
49.18-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2897"></span>[376:2898](2010301.htm#fr_2897) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p145.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p146"></span> νυμφοστόλος, referring to Paulinus.

<span id="fn_2898"></span>[377:2899](2010301.htm#fr_2898) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p148.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p149"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2899"></span>[377:2900](2010301.htm#fr_2899) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p153.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p154"></span> ταῖς πληκτικαῖς τῶν μαθημ€των
διδασκαλίας

<span id="fn_2900"></span>[377:2901](2010301.htm#fr_2900) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p156.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p157"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p157.1"></span>[Isa. liv.
11-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p157.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2901"></span>[377:2902](2010301.htm#fr_2901) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p159.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p160"></span> θεί& 251· λουτρῷ; i.e. baptism.

<span id="fn_2902"></span>[377:2903](2010301.htm#fr_2902) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p160.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p161"></span> Heinichen, followed by Closs, reads
τοὺς μὲν…τοὺς δέ: “*Some of them* he supports by pillars…*others of
them* he illumines by windows.” But all the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p161.1"></span>mss</span>. read τοὺς μὲn…τοῖς δὲ, which,
in view of the general character of Eusebius’ style throughout this
oration, we are hardly justified in changing. I have therefore followed
Valesius, Burton, and Crusè in retaining the reading of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xvi.iv-p161.2"></span>mss</span>.

<span id="fn_2903"></span>[378:2904](2010301.htm#fr_2903) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p163.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p164"></span> [Acts ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2904"></span>[378:2905](2010301.htm#fr_2904) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p165.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p166"></span> ἴσως

<span id="fn_2905"></span>[378:2906](2010301.htm#fr_2905) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p166.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p167"></span> αὐτὸς ὅλος ἐγκ€θηται χριστός.

<span id="fn_2906"></span>[378:2907](2010301.htm#fr_2906) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p167.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p168"></span> Valesius remarks, “*Sic Hieronymus
seu quis alius de ordinibus ecclesiæ: in illis esse partes et membra
virtutem, in episcopo plenitudinem divinitatis habitare*.” From what
source the quotation comes I do not know.

<span id="fn_2907"></span>[378:2908](2010301.htm#fr_2907) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p171.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p172"></span> Cf. [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p172.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2908"></span>[378:2909](2010301.htm#fr_2908) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p172.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p173"></span> Cf. [Heb.
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p173.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2909"></span>[378:2910](2010301.htm#fr_2909) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p173.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p174"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2910"></span>[378:2911](2010301.htm#fr_2910) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p175.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p176"></span> <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p176.1"></span>[Psa. ciii.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p176.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2911"></span>[378:2912](2010301.htm#fr_2911) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p176.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p177"></span> [Psa.
103.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2912"></span>[378:2913](2010301.htm#fr_2912) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p177.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p178"></span> [Ps.
103:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p178.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2913"></span>[378:2914](2010301.htm#fr_2913) <span
id="iii.xvi.iv-p179.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.iv-p180"></span> εἰς τοὺς σύμπαντας αἰ& 242·νας τῶν
αἰ& 240·νων.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](2010302)
