[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kis18)  [Next](kis20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

IV

The King of Ireland's Son rode towards the East the next day, and in the
first hour's journey he saw the blue falcon sailing above. He followed
where it went and the falcon never lifted nor stooped, but sailed
steadily on, only now and again beating the air with its wings. Over
benns and through glens and across moors the blue falcon flew and the
King of Ireland's Son followed. Then his horse stumbled; he could not go
any further, and he lost sight of the blue falcon.

Black night was falling down on the ground when he came back to the
King's Castle. Art, the King's Steward, was waiting for him and he
walked beside his limping horse. And Art said when they were a little
way together, "The Coming of the King of the Cats is a story still to be
told.

"To your father's Son in all truth be it told"--

By the magic powers they possessed it was made known to all the cats in
the country that their King was being pursued by the hounds. Then on
every hearthstone a cat howled. Cats sprang to the doors, overturning
cradles upon children. They stood upon the thresholds and they all made
the same curse--"That ye may break your backs, that ye may break your
backs before ye catch the King of the Cats."

When he heard the howls of his vassals, retainers and subjects, the King
of the Cats turned over on his back and clawed at the first hound that
came after him. He stood up then. So firmly did he set himself on his
four legs that those that dashed at him did not overthrow him. He humped
up his body and lifted his forepaws. The hounds held back. A horn
sounded and that gave them an excuse to get away from the claws and the
teeth, the power and the animosity of the King of the Cats.

Then, even though it might cost each and every one of them the loss of
an eye, the cats that had sight of him came running up. "We will go with
you, my lord, we will help you, my lord," they cried all together.

"Go back to the hearthstones," said the King of the Cats. "Go back and
be civil and quiet again in the houses. You will hear of my deeds. I go
to find the tracks of our enemy, the Eagle-Emperor."

When they heard that announcement the cats lamented, and the noise of
their lamentation was so dreadful that horses broke their harnesses
where they were yoked; men and women lost the color of their faces
thinking some dreadful visitation was coming on the land; every bag of
oats and rye turned five times to the right and five times to the left
with the fright it got; dishes were broken, knives were hurled round,
and the King's Castle was shaken to the bottom stone.

"It is not the time to seek the tracks of the Eagle-Emperor," said
Quick-to-Grab. "Stay for a while longer in men's houses."

"Never," said the King of the Cats. "Never will I stay by the
hearthstone and submit to be abused by cocks and hounds and men. I will
range the world openly now and seek out the enemy of the Cat-Kind, the
Eagle-Emperor."

Without once turning his back he went towards the wood that was filled
with his enemies, the birds. The cats, when they saw their petitions
were no use, went everyone back to the house where he or she stayed.
Each one sat before a mouse-hole and pretended to be watching. But
though mice stirred all round them the cats of Ireland never turned a
head that night.

It was the wren, the smallest of birds, that saw him and knew him for
the King of the Cats. The wren flew through the wood to summon the
Hawk-Clan. But it was towards sunset now and the hawks had taken up
their stations at the edge of the wood to watch that they might pick up
the farmers' chickens. They wouldn't turn an eye when the wren told them
that a cat was in the wood during the time forbidden to cats to be
outside the houses of men. "It is the King of the Cats," said the wren.
None of the hawks lifted a wing. They were waiting for the chickens that
would stray about the moment after sunset.

But if the wren couldn't rouse the Hawk-Clan she was able to rouse the
other bird-tribes. "A cat, a cat, on your lives a cat," she called out
as she flew through the wood. The rooks that were going home now rose
above the trees, cawing threats. The blackbirds, thrushes and jays
screamed as they flew before the King of the Cats. The woodpeckers,
hedge-sparrows, tom-tits, robins and linnets chattered as they flew
behind him. Sometimes the young rooks made a great show of attacking
him. They flew down from the flock. "He is here, here, here," they cawed
and flew up again. The rooks kept telling themselves and the other birds
in the wood what they were going to do with the King of the Cats. But a
single raven did more against him than the thousand rooks that made so
much noise. This raven was in a hole in the tree. She struck the King of
the Cats on the head with her beak as he went past.

The King of the Cats was annoyed by the uproar the birds were making and
he was angered by the raven's stroke, but he did not want to enter into
a battle with the birds. He was on his way to the house of the Hag of
the Wood who was then known as the Hag of the Ashes. Now as this is the
first time you have heard of the Hag of the Ashes, I'Il have to tell you
how the King of the Cats had heard of her and how he knew where her
house was in the wood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part V](kis20.md)
