[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kis19)  [Next](kis21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

V

The next day the King's Son put a bridle on the Slight Red Steed and
rode towards the East again. He saw the blue falcon and he followed
where it flew. Over benns, and through glens and across mountains and
moors the blue falcon went and the Slight Red Steed neither swerved nor
stumbled but went as the bird flew. The falcon lighted on a pine tree
that grew alone. The King's Son rode up and put his hands to the tree to
climb and put his head against it, and as he did he heard speech from
the tree. "The stroke of the Sword of Light will slay the King of the
Land of Mist and the stroke of the Sword of Light that will cut a tress
of her hair will awaken Fedelma." There was no more speech from the tree
and the falcon rose from its branches and flew high up in the air. Then
the King of Ireland's Son rode back towards his father's Castle.

He went to the meadow and stood with Art and listened to what Art had to
tell him. And as before the King's Steward began--

"To your father's Son in all truth be it told"--

 

Quick-to-Grab had said to the King of the Cats, "If ever you need the
counsel of a human being, go to no one else but the Hag of the Ashes who
was once called the Hag of the Wood. In the very centre of the wood four
ash trees are drawn together at the tops, wattles are woven round these
ash trees, and in the little house made in this way the Hag of the Ashes
lives, with no one near her since her nine daughters went away, but her
goat that's her only friend." The King of the Cats was now in the centre
of the wood. He saw four ash trees drawn together at the tops and he
jumped to them.

Now the Hag of the Ashes had a bad neighbor. This was a crane that had
built her nest across the roof of the little house. The nest prevented
the smoke from coming out at the top and the house below was filled with
it. The Hag could hardly keep alive on account of the smoke and she
could neither take away the nest nor banish the bird.

The crane was there when the King of the Cats sprang on the roof. She
was sitting with her two legs stretched out, and when the King of the
Cats came down beside her she slipped away and sailed over the trees.
"Time for me to be going," said the crane. And from that day to this she
never came back to the house of the Hag of the Ashes.

"Oh, thanks to you, good creature," said the Hag of the Ashes, coming
out of the house. "Tear down her nest now and let the smoke rise up
through the roof."

The King of the Cats tore up the sticks and wool that the crane's nest
was made of, and the smoke came up through the top of the house. "Oh,
thanks to you, good creature, that has destroyed the cross crane's nest.
Come down on my floor now and I'll do everything that will serve you."

The King of the Cats jumped down on the floor of the Hag's house and saw
the Hag of the Ashes sitting in a corner, She was a little, little woman
in a gray cloak. All over the floor there were ashes in heaps, for she
used to light a fire in one corner and when it was burnt out light
another beside the ashes of the first. The smoke had never gone through
the hole in the roof since the crane had built her nest on the top of
the house. Her face was yellow with the smoke and her eyes were half
closed on account of it.

"Do you know who I am, Hag of the Ashes?" said the King of the Cats when
he stood on the floor.

"You are a cat, honey," said the Hag of the Ashes.

"I am the King of the Cats."

"The King of the Cats you are indeed. And it was you who let the smoke
out of the top of my little house by destroying the nest the cross crane
had built on it."

"It was I who did that."

"Welcome to you then, King of the Cats. And what service can the Hag of
the Ashes do for you in return?"

"I would go to where the Eagle-Emperor is. You must show me the way."

"By my cloak I will do that. The Eagle-Emperor lives on the top of the
Hill of Horns."

"And how can I get to the top of the Hill of Horns?"

"I don't know how you can get there at all. All over the Hill is bare
starvation. No four-footed thing can reach the top--no four-footed
thing, I mean, but my goat that's tied to the hawthorn bush outside."

"I will ride on the back of your goat to the top of the Hill of Horns."

"No, no, good King of the Cats. I have only my goat for company and how
could I bear to be parted from him?"

"Lend me your goat, and when I come back from the Hill of Horns I will
plate his horns with gold and shoe his hooves with silver."

"No, no, good King of the Cats. How could I bear my goat to be away from
me, and I having no other company?"

"If you do not let me ride on your goat to the top of the Hill of Horns
I will leave a sign on your house that will bring the cross crane to
build her nest on the top of it again."

"Then take my goat, King of the Cats, take my goat but let him come back
to me soon."

"I will. Come with me now and bid him take me to the top of the Hill of
Horns."

The King of the Cats marched out of the house and the Hag of the Ashes
hobbled after him. The goat was lying under the hawthorn bush. He put
his horns to the ground when they came up to him.

"Will you go to the Hill of Horns?" said the Hag of the Ashes.

"Indeed, that I will not do," said the goat.

"Oh, the soft tops of the hedges on the way to the Hill of Horns--sweet
in the mouth of a goat they should be," said the Hag of the Ashes. "But
my own poor goat wants to stay here and eat the tops of the burnt-up
thistles."

"Why didn't you tell me of the hedges on the way to the Hill of Horns
before?" said the goat, rising to his feet. "To the Hill of Horns I'll
go."

"And will you let a cat ride on your back to the Hill of Horns?"

"Indeed, I will not do that."

"Then, my poor goat, I'll not untie the rope that's round your neck, for
you can't go to the Hill of Horns without this cat riding on your back."

"Let him sit on my back then and hold my horns, and I'll take no notice
of him."

The Hag of the Ashes untied the rope that was round his neck, the King
of the Cats jumped up on the goat's back, and they started off on the
path through the wood. "Oh, how I'lI miss my goat, until he comes back
to me with gold on his horns and silver on his hooves," the Hag of the
Ashes cried after them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VI](kis21)
