[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr028) 
[Next](abr030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TENTH CHAPTER.

### CONCERNING WHAT THINGS A MAN MAY LEARN AND STUDY DURING THESE TWO MOONS.

<span id="img_ainit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/ainit.jpg) |

LTHOUGH the best counsel which I can give is that a man should go into
retirement in some desert or solitude, until the time of the Six Moons
destined unto this Operation be fulfilled, and that he shall have
obtained that which he wisheth; as the Ancients used to do; nevertheless
now this is hardly possible; and we must accommodate ourselves unto the
era (in which we live); and being unable to carry it out in one way, we
should endeavour to do so in another; and attach ourselves only unto
Divine Things.

But there be certain who cannot even do this thoroughly, notwithstanding
they may honestly wish the same; and this because of their divers
employments and positions which will not permit them to act in
accordance with their desires, so that they are compelled to carry on
their worldly occupations.

In order then that such may know what occupations and business they can
follow out without prejudice to this Operation, I will here state the
same in few words.

We may then exercise the profession of Medicine, and all arts connected
with the same; and we may perform

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

all operations which tend unto charity and mercy towards our neighbour
purely and simply. As for what concerneth the liberal arts ye may
interest yourselves in Astronomy, etc., but flee all arts and operations
which have the least tincture of Magic and Sorcery, seeing that we must
not confound together God and Belial: God wisheth to be alone; unto Him
pertain all honour and glory. All the above matters are however
permitted during the two first and the two second Moons.

You may walk in a garden for recreation; but you shall do no servile
work; and amidst the flowers and the fruits you can also meditate upon
the greatness <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121) of God. But during
the two third and last Moons ye shall quit every other matter only
permitting your recreation to consist in things Spiritual and Divine. If
ye wish to be participators in the Conversation of the Angels, and in
the Divine Wisdom, lay aside all indiscreet <span
id="fr_122"></span>[2](#fn_122) things, and regard it as a pleasure when
ye can spare two or three hours to study the Holy Scripture, because
hencefrom ye shall derive incredible profit; and even the less ye are
learned, so much the more will ye become wise and clever. It sufficeth
that in the performance of your Orisons ye shall not give way unto
sleep, and that ye shall fail in nowise in this operation through
negligence and voluntarily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[73:1](abr029.htm#fr_121) In the text evidently
by a slip the word *grandeur* is repeated *la grandeur la grandeur de
Dieu*.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[73:2](abr029.htm#fr_122) "*Laissez apart
touttes les choses curieuses*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eleventh Chapter. Concerning the Selection of the
Place](abr030)
