[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr035) 
[Next](abr037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER.

### WHAT WE SHOULD ANSWER UNTO THE INTERROGATIONS OF THE SPIRITS, AND HOW WE SHOULD RESIST THEIR DEMANDS.

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/tinit.jpg) |

HE Wicked Devil knoweth full well that you are in no way obliged unto
him, and that you have commenced this Operation under the Grace and
Mercy of God, and under the protection and defence of the Holy Angels;
nevertheless, he will not fail to try his

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

fortune, and he will seek to turn you aside from the Veritable Path; but
be you constant and courageous, and swerve not in any way, either to the
right hand or to the left. If he showeth himself proud with you, render
unto him the like, and in your turn show him your pride. If he be
humble, be in no wise too rude and severe toward him, but be moderate in
all things. If he asketh you some matter, you shall make answer unto him
according to the instruction which the Guardian Angel shall have given
you; and understand that the Four Princes, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182) more than all the rest, will powerfully
tempt you, saying unto you "*Who is he who hath given thee* so great
authority?" They will reproach you with your hardihood and presumption
in summoning them, knowing how powerful they are, and contrariwise, how
weak and sinful you yourself are. They will reproach you with your sins,
and will especially seek to dispute with you concerning your religion
and your faith in God: if you be a Jew they will tell you that your
faith and your religion have been refuted by God Himself, and that you
observe not the True Law as it should be (observed): also if you be a
Pagan they will say, What hath God to do with you or His Creatures
either, seeing that you know not God? if you be a Christian they will
say unto you, What business is it of yours to have to do with Hebrew
Ceremonies which are tainted with idolatry, and the like? But let none
of this disquiet you in the least; answer them in few words, and
laughingly, that it is none of their business to discuss these matters
with you, and to deliver their opinions concerning them; and that
although you may be a worthless wretch and a great sinner, you will yet
hope that the True and Only God, Who hath created the Heaven and the
Earth, and Who hath condemned them <span id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_183)
and brought them into submission under

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

your feet, will forgive you your sins, both now and in future, whatever
may be the religion which you profess. (Further that) you wish to know,
understand, confess, and honour no other than the Great and Only God,
the Lord of Light, by Whose Power, Virtue, and Authority you command
them to obey you.

When you shall have spoken unto them thus, then will they sing another
song, telling you that if you wish them to serve and to be obedient unto
you, that you must first come to terms with them. Then shall you answer
them on this wise:--

"God our Lord hath condemned and sentenced you <span
id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_184) to serve me, and I do not treat as an
equal with those who are accustomed to obey".

Then will they demand of you some sacrifice or courtesy if you wish to
be served and obeyed promptly. You shall reply that sacrifice is not to
be made unto them, but rather unto the only God.

They will then entreat you not to hinder or bring to shame by means of
this Wisdom any of their Devotees and Enchanters in their operations and
enchantments. You shall then make answer that you are obliged to pursue
the Enemies of God and the Lord, and to repress their malice, and also
to save and defend your neighbour, and any who are offended and hurt by
them.

Then with much verbiage, and an infinitude of different ways will they
make severe attacks upon you, and even the Familiar Spirits will rise up
against you in their turn. These latter will demand and beseech of you
that you will in no way give them over unto others (to serve them). Hold
firm, however, and promise nothing either to one class (of Spirits) or
another; but reply to them that every true and brave man is obliged to
aid and serve his friends to the best of his ability, and with all his

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

possessions, among the which they must assuredly also be comprised.

When at length they see that they have lost all hope of making you
prevaricate, and that they can obtain nothing notwithstanding all their
requests; they will definitely surrender, and will ask nothing else of
you unless it be that you shall not be too rude and insulting in
commanding them. You shall make answer to this, that if they prove
themselves to be obedient and prompt in serving you, that it may be that
your Angel, by whose instruction and command you are governing yourself,
may instruct you not to be so rigid and severe with them if they shall
obey, and that in such case you will act as may be right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[99:1](abr036.htm#fr_182) *Viz.*: Lucifer,
Leviathan, Satan, and Belial.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[99:2](abr036.htm#fr_183) *I.e.*, the Demons
and Evil Spirits generally.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[100:1](abr036.htm#fr_184) The Demons
generally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eighteenth Chapter. How He Who Operateth Should Behave as
Regardeth the Spirits](abr037)
