[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr082) 
[Next](abr084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NOTES TO CHAPTER XIX.

(*a*) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in part by the Angels,
and in part also by the Evil Spirits.

(*b*) Probably BELZEBUD performs this Operation; as those of the
Twentieth Chapter are submitted to him; and these two Chapters are
classed together by Abraham the Jew in his special instructions, the one
being the exact reverse of the other.

(*c*) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent perform the Operations of
this Chapter.

(*d*) Name aloud the person or persons by whom you wish to be loved, and
move the Symbol under whose class they come. But if it be not for
yourself that you are operating, but for two or more other persons,
whether for love or for hatred, you should still name such persons
aloud, and move the Symbols of the class or classes under which they
come. Also, if possible, it is a good thing to touch them with the
Symbol, on the bare skin, if you can. Under this heading

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

are included all classes of good-will and affection, among the which
Abraham says that the most difficult thing is to make oneself or others
beloved by religious persons.

(*e*) No. 1 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25. DODIM
means "loves, pleasures".

No. 2 consists of 17 Squares arranged like a capital letter E taken from
a Square of 25 Squares. RAIAH means "a female companion".

No. 3 consists of 13 Squares taken from a Square of 2 5 Squares. MODAH =
"Adorned as for a bridal".

No. 4 consists of 25 Squares from a Square of 49.

No. 5 consists of 29 Squares taken from 49. ALMANAH = "A virgin"; hence
evidently this should be numbered 4 and not 5, while probably No. 4
should be here placed.

No. 6 consists of 26 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. CALLAH
means "a married woman, but especially a bride".

No. 7. A Gnomon of 7 from a Square of 16. ELEM means "a widow".

No. 8. A Square of 25 Squares. NAQID = "Remote offspring".

No. 9. This has a strong likeness to the well-known SATOR, AREPO, TENET,
OPERA, ROTAS. It is a Square of 25 Squares. SALOM = "Peace". AREPO = "he
distils". LEMEL = "unto fulness". OPERA, "upon the dry ground". MOLAS =
"in quick motion," or perhaps better "stirring it up into quickness,
*i.e.*, life". The former sentence is capable of a rather free Latin
translation, thus:--

SATOR = The Creator.  
AREPO = Slow-moving.  
TENET = Maintains.  
OPERA = his creations.  
ROTAS = As vortices.

No. 10 is a Square of 25 Squares. DEBAM signifies "influential persons".

No. 11. 8 Squares from a Square of 16. AHHB signifies "to love". BEAR
signifies in Hebrew "to waste or consume".

No. 12. A Square of 36 Squares. IALDAH signifies "a girl".

No. 13 consists of 19 Squares arranged like the capital letter F, and
taken from a Square of 49 Squares. BETULAH = a virgin.

No. 14 consists of 25 Squares from a Square of 49. IEDIDAH is from a
Hebrew Root, signifying objects of Love. DILOQAH means "to eagerly
pursue, or to burn as with a fever". DOQARCA = "pierced".

No. 15. 12 Squares from a Square of 25. SAQAL means "a wise person".

No. 16. A Square of 36 Squares. QEBHIR = "a protector".

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

No. 17. 14 Squares from a Square of 25. EFEHA means "passionate".

No. 18. A Gnomon of 11 from a Square of 36. TAAFAH = "to join together,
to connect".

No. 19 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares from one of 25 Squares. SARAH means
"powerful, high in authority".

No. 20 is also a Gnomon of 9 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. CATAN
= "to adhere closely".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Twentieth Chapter. To Excite ... Hatred and Enmity, Discords,
Quarrels, etc.](abr084)
