[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr004) 
[Next](abr006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

# (APPENDIX C.)

### EXAMPLES OF OTHER METHODS OF ANGELIC EVOCATION.

FOR the benefit of the Occult Student I here give two other systems of
Angelic Evocation. The first is taken from that part of the Book called
"Barrett's Magus" (1801), which is entitled "the Key to Ceremonial
Magic". The second is copied from my Key of Solomon the King".

From  
The Perfection and Key of . . . Ceremonial Magic";  
being the second part of the second Book of  
"The Magus  
or  
Celestial Intelligencer"; <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)  
by  
Francis Barrett, F.R.C.

"The good Spirits may be invocated of us, or by us, divers ways, and
they in sundry shapes and manners offer themselves to us, for they
openly speak to those that watch, and do offer themselves to our sight,
or do inform us by dreams and by oracle of those things which we have a
great desire to know. Whoever therefore would call any good Spirit to
speak or appear in sight, he must particularly observe two things; one
whereof is about the *disposition* of the invocant, the other concerning
those things which are outwardly to be adhibited to the invocation for
the conformity of the Spirit to be called.

"It is necessary therefore that the invocant religiously dispose himself
for the space of many days to such a mystery, and to conserve himself
during the time chaste, abstinent, and to abstract himself as much as he
can from all manner of foreign and secular business; likewise he should
observe fasting, as much as shall seem convenient to him, and let him
daily, between sun-

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

rising and setting, being clothed in pure white linen, seven times call
upon God, and make a deprecation unto the Angels to be called and
invocated, according to the rule which we have before taught. Now the
number of days of fasting and preparation is commonly one month, *i.e.*,
the time of a whole lunation. Now, in the Cabala, we generally prepare
ourselves forty days before.

"Now concerning the place, it must be chosen clean, pure, close, quiet,
free from all manner of noise, and not subject to any stranger's sight.
This place must first of all be exorcised and consecrated; and let there
be a Table or Altar placed therein, covered with a clean white linen
cloth, and set towards the east: and on each side thereof place two
consecrated wax-lights burning, the flame thereof ought not to go out
all these days. In the middle of the Altar let there be placed lamens,
or the holy paper we have before described, covered with fine linen,
which is not to be opened until the end of the days of consecration. You
shall also have in readiness a *precious perfume* and a *pyre anointing
oil*. And let them both be kept consecrated. Then set a censer on the
head of the Altar, wherein you shall kindle the *holy fire*, and make a
precious perfume every day that you pray.

"Now for your habit, you shall have a long garment of white linen, close
before and behind, which may come down quite over the feet, and gird
yourself about the loins with a girdle. You shall likewise have a veil
made of pure white linen on which must be wrote in a gilt lamen, the
name *Tetragrammaton*; all which things are to be consecrated and
sanctified in order. But you must not go into this holy place till it be
first washed and covered with a cloth new and clean, and then you may
enter, but with your feet naked and bare; and when you enter therein you
shall sprinkle with holy water, then make a perfume upon the altar; and
then on your knees pray before the altar as we have directed.

"Now when the time is expired, on the last day, you shall fast more
strictly; and fasting on the day following, at the rising of the sun,
enter the holy place, using the ceremonies before spoken of, first by
sprinkling thyself, then, making, a perfume, you shall sign the cross
with holy oil on the forehead, and anoint your eyes, using prayer in all
these consecrations. Then open the lamen and pray before the Altar upon
your knees; and then an invocation may be made as follows:--

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

 

AN INVOCATION OF THE GOOD SPIRITS.

"IN the Name of the Blessed and Holy Trinity, I do desire ye, strong and
mighty Angels (*here name the Spirit or Spirits you would have appear*),
that if it be the Divine Will of Him Who is called Tetragrammaton,
*etc.*, the Holy God, the Father, that ye take upon ye: some shape as
best becometh your celestial nature, and appear to us visibly here in
this place, and answer our demands, in as far as we shall not transgress
the bounds of the Divine mercy and goodness, by requesting unlawful
knowledge; but that thou wilt graciously shew us what things are most
profitable for us to know and do, to the glory and honour of His Divine
Majesty Who liveth and reigneth world without end. *Amen*.

"Lord, Thy Will be done on earth as it is in heaven--make clean our
hearts within us, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from us. O Lord, by Thy
Name we have called them, suffer them to administer unto us.

"And that all things may work together for Thy Honour and Glory, to Whom
with Thee, the Son and blessed Spirit, be ascribed all might, majesty,
and dominion, world without end. *Amen*.

 

"The Invocation being made, the Good Angels will appear unto you which
you desire, which you shall entertain with a chaste communication, and
licence them to depart.

"Now the Lamen which is used to invoke. any Good Spirit must be made
after the following manner: either in metal conformable or in new wax
mixed with convenient spices and colours; or it may be made with pure
white paper with convenient colours, and the outward form of it may be
either square, circular, or triangular, or of the like sort, according
to the rule of the numbers; in  <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) or
character of six corners; in the middle thereof write the Name and
Character of the Star, or of the Spirit his Governor, to whom the Good
Spirit that is to be called is subject. And about this Character let
there be placed so many Characters of five corners, or pentacles, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9) as the Spirits we

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

would call together at once. But if we should call only one,
nevertheless there must be made four pentagons, wherein the name of the
Spirit or Spirits with their characters are to be written. Now this
Lamen ought to be composed when the Moon is in her increase, on those
days and hours which agree to the Spirit; and if we take a fortunate
planet therewith, it will be the better for the producing the effect;
which Table or Lamen being rightly made in the manner we have fully
described, must be consecrated according to the rules above delivered.

"And this is the way of making the general Table or Lamen for the
invocating of all Spirits whatever; the form whereof you may see in
plates of pentacles, seals, and lamens.

"We will yet declare unto you another rite more easy to perform this
thing: Let the Man who wishes to receive an oracle from a Spirit, be
chaste, pure, and sanctified; then a place being chosen pure, clean, and
covered everywhere with clean and white linen, on the Lord's-day in the
new of the Moon, let him enter into that place clothed with white linen;
let him exorcise the place, bless it, and make a circle therein with a
consecrated coal; let there be written in the outer part of the Circle
the Names of the Angels; in the inner part thereof write the Mighty
Names of God; and let be placed within the Circle, at the Four Parts of
the World, <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) the vessels for the
perfumes. Then being washed and fasting, let him enter the place, and
pray towards the East this whole Psalm:--"Blessed are the undefiled in
the way, etc.". Psalm cix. Then make a fumigation, and deprecate the
Angels by the said Divine Names, that they will appear unto you, and
reveal or discover that which you so earnestly desire; and do this
continually for six days washed, and fasting. On the seventh day being
washed and fasting, enter the Circle, perfume it, and anoint thyself
with holy oil upon the forehead, eyes, and in the palms of both hands,
and upon the feet; then with bended knees, say the Psalm aforesaid, with
Divine and Angelical Names. Which being said, arise, and walk round the
Circle *from East to West*, until thou shalt be wearied with a giddiness
of thy head and brain, then straightway fall down in the Circle, where
thou mayest rest, and thou wilt be wrapped up in an ecstasy; and a
Spirit will appear and inform thee of all things necessary to be known.
We must observe also, that in the Circle there ought to be four holy

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] God, I the Minister and faithful Servant of the
Most High conjure ye, let God Himself, the Existence of Existences,
conjure ye to come and be present at this Operation; I the Servant of
God, most humbly entreat ye. Amen.

 

"After which thou shalt incense it with the incense proper to the Planet
and the Day, and thou shalt replace the Book on the aforesaid table,
taking heed that the Fire of the Lamp be kept up continually during the
operation, and keeping the curtains closed. Repeat the same Ceremony for
seven days, beginning with Saturday, and perfuming the Book each day
with the Incense proper to the Planet ruling the day and hour, and
taking heed that the Lamp shall burn both day and night; after the which
thou shalt shut up the Book in a small Drawer under the table, made
expressly for it, until thou shalt have occasion to use it; and every
time that thou wishest to use it, clothe thyself with thy vestments,
kindle the lamp, and repeat upon thy knees the aforesaid prayer,
'ADONAI, ELOHIM,' etc.

"It is necessary also in the Consecration of the Book, to summon all the
Angels whose Names are written therein in the form of Litanies, the
which thou shalt do with devotion; and even if the Angels and Spirits
appear not in the Consecration of the Book, be not thou astonished
thereat, seeing that they are of a pure nature, and consequently have
much difficulty in familiarising themselves with men who are inconstant
and impure, but the Ceremonies and Characters being correctly carried
out, devoutly, and with perseverance, they will be constrained to come,
and it will at length happen that at thy first invocation thou wilt be
able to see and communicate with them. But I advise thee to undertake
nothing unclean or impure, for then thy importunity, far from attracting
them will only serve to chase them from thee; and it will be thereafter
exceedingly difficult for thee to attract them for use for pure ends."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xliii:1](abr005.htm#fr_7) Published originally
by Lackington & Allen, London, 1801; but reprinted and re-issued by
Bernard Quaritch, Piccadilly, some years since.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xlv:1](abr005.htm#fr_8) Probably an error for
"hexagram, or "hexangle".

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xlv:2](abr005.htm#fr_9) Probably an error for
"pentagrams," or "pentangles".

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xlvi:1](abr005.htm#fr_10) *I.e.*, The Cardinal
Points, or Quarters.

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

candles burning at the Four Parts of the World, which ought not to want
light for the space of a week.

"And the manner of fasting is this: to abstain from all things having a
life of sense, and from those which do proceed from them, let him drink
only pure running water; neither is there any food or wine to be taken
till the going down of the Sun.

"Let the perfume and the holy anointing oil be made as is set forth in
Exodus, and other holy books of the Bible. It is also to be observed,
that as often as he enters the Circle he has upon his forehead a golden
lamen, upon which must be written the Name *Tetragrammaton*, in the
manner we have before mentioned."

In "The Key of Solomon the King" <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11)
(Book II.--Chapter XXI.) will be found other directions for invoking
spirits as follows:--

"Make a small Book containing the Prayers for all the Operations, the
Names of the Angels in the form of Litanies, their Seals and Characters;
the which being done thou shalt consecrate the same unto God and unto
the pure Spirits in the manner following:--

"Thou shalt set in the destined place a small table covered with a white
cloth, whereon thou shalt lay the Book opened at the Great Pentacle
which should be drawn on the first leaf of the said Book; and having
kindled a lamp which should be suspended above the centre of the table,
thou shalt surround the said table with a white curtain; <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12) clothe thyself in the proper vestments,
and holding the Book open, repeat upon thy knees the following prayer
with great humility:--

 

THE PRAYER.

ADONAI, ELOHIM, EL, EHEIEH ASHER EHEIEH, Prince of Princes, Existence of
Existences, have mercy upon me, and cast Thine eyes upon Thy servant
(N.) who invoketh Thee most devoutly, and supplicateth Thee by Thy Holy
and tremendous Name, Tetragrammaton, to be propitious and to order Thine
Angels and Spirits to come and take up their abode in this place; O ye
Angels and Spirits of the Stars, O all ye Angels and Elementary Spirits,
O all ye Spirits present before the Face of

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xlvii:1](abr005.htm#fr_11) Published by G.
Redway, London, 1889.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xlvii:2](abr005.htm#fr_12) So as to make a
species of small tabernacle around the altar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prologue](abr006)
