[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr062) 
[Next](abr064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NOTES TO CHAPTER IX.

(*a*) The Symbols of this Chapter are only manifested by the Evil
Spirits.

(*b*) ASHTAROTH and ASMODEUS together execute the Signs and Operations
of this Chapter.

(*c*) The Familiar Spirits cannot execute the Operations of this
Chapter.

\(d\) Let the being, whether man or animal, see the Symbol, and then
touch them suddenly with it; when they will appear transformed; but this
is only a kind of fascination. When you wish to make it cease, place the
Symbol upon the head and strike it sharply with the Wand, and the Spirit
will make things resume their ordinary condition.

\(e\) No. 1 is a Square of 49 Squares. IEMIMEI is evidently from Hebrew
IMIM = Mules. A very perfect Acrostic.

No. 2 is a Square of 49 Squares also. AIACILA, Hebrew AILH = a deer.

No. 3 is a border of 24 taken from a Square of 49 Squares.--CHADSIR;
Hebrew KZR = Fierce, Savage. ChTzR = *perhaps*, "the

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

tusk of an Elephant ". But ChZR = a wild boar, whence this Square should
perhaps be numbered 4.

No. 4 consists of 24 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares; two
letters SI are allotted to one Square. BEDASEK is perhaps from BD, a
limb, and SK, covered or protected, as with a strong skin. It may thus
stand for the Elephant as having powerful and thick-skinned limbs. If
so, this Square should be numbered 3.

No. 5 is a Square of 49 Squares. KALTEPH. The Hebrew word for Dog is
KLB. This Square it will be noted is not a perfect Acrostic.

No. 6 is a Square of 64 Squares.--DISEEBEH is probably from ZABH = a
wolf.--This Square also is not at all perfect as an Acrostic.

No. 7 is a Square of 144 Squares.--ISICHADAMION, probably from DMIVN =
Similitude of; and SIG, Scoria or Lava, or SQ, stone; root of SQL, to
stone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tenth Chapter. To hinder any Necromantic or Magical
Operations from taking effect...](abr064)
