[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](coli09)  [Next](coli11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Culture of the Luiseño Indians*, by Philip Stedman Sparkman,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOWS AND ARROWS.

Bows are usually about five feet long, somewhat thicker in the middle,
and gradually tapering towards the ends, the intent being to give more
spring to the bow and carry the arrow with greater force. They are
commonly made of willow, also of elder and ash, which are considered
superior to willow. Excellent wood for making bows is said to be
furnished by a species of mountain ash, and still better by a shrub that
grows in a few places on Palomar mountain.

The arrow generally used has a mainshaft of cane, *Elymus condensatus*,
and a foreshaft of a greasewood, *Adenostoma fasciculatum*, which is
generally hardened in the fire. The mainshaft will perhaps average about
two feet three inches in length, and the foreshaft about nine inches.
The latter is inserted in the hollow end of the cane used for the
mainshaft, glued in place with pitch or asphaltum, and bound firmly with
sinew.

Three trimmed feathers are attached to the shaft by wrapping with sinew,
a little asphaltum being used to keep the sinew threads from slipping
out of place. The feathers are not tied straight on the shaft, but
twisted slightly to one side, the object being to give a rotary motion
to the arrow, and so, it is thought, hold it straighter to its course,
on the same principle as the spiral grooving of a rifle barrel. The
feathers used are mostly from different species of hawks.

Some arrows were formerly tipped with stone points, teket, the base of
the point being inserted in a notch in the end of the foreshaft, to
which it was securely tied with sinew, gum or asphaltum being also used
to assist in keeping it in place. The gum most esteemed for this purpose
was that obtained from the greasewood, *Adenostoma fasciculatum*, the
same shrub from which the foreshafts are made.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

Small arrows are also made from the stems of two tall weeds, *Artemisia
heterophylla* and *Heterotheca grandifolia*. These arrows have a
foreshaft, and are feathered like those of cane.

All the above arrows are straightened by means of a grooved stone,
yaulash. This is heated in the fire, and the arrow passed back and forth
along the groove until it is thoroughly heated, when it is straightened
and allowed to cool, after which it will retain its shape.

Arrows are also made from the arrow-weed, *Pluchea borealis*. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_3.md)

The stone points or arrowheads always have a concave base. Farther north
tanged arrowheads were sometimes used, but the Luiseños did not employ
them.

Arrowpoints are chipped or flaked into shape with a tool, pilaxpish,
made from a piece of deer antler. Some arrowpoints are quite large, the
two ends of the concave base projecting considerably on either side of
the foreshaft, while others are very small indeed.

An ordinary Luiseño bow will carry an arrow about one hundred yards, but
is not effective for more than half that distance. When not in use it is
always unstrung to keep the string from weakening. Bowstrings are
oftenest made of the fiber of dogbane, *Apocynum cannabinum*, but are
also made from that of milkweed or the stinging nettle. Most of the
strings are two-ply, but some are three-ply and four-ply. They are also
made of sinew thread, and then are always three-ply. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[3a](#fn_4.md)

The quiver is made of the skin of a fox, wildcat, or other animal, and
is slung over the shoulder by a cord attached to it. A small quantity of
long tree-moss may be placed in the bottom to keep the arrowpoints from
being damaged.

In using the bow, arrows of arrow-weed are grasped between the thumb and
forefinger, but other kinds are held loosely between the fingers,
usually between the first and second; this leaves all the four fingers
free to draw the bowstring.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[206:3](coli10.htm#fr_4.md) This sentence was left
uncompleted by the author. Perhaps he intended to add that this type of
arrow lacked foreshaft and stone point.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[206:3a](coli10.htm#fr_5.md) Two Cahuilla bows in
the Museum of the Department of Anthropology show three-ply sinew
string. The sinew strings on two of three Mohave bows are also
three-ply.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Stone Implements](coli11.md)
