[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](coli10)  [Next](coli12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Culture of the Luiseño Indians*, by Philip Stedman Sparkman,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

### STONE IMPLEMENTS.

Many stone implements have been found in the habitat of the Luiseños
whose use they have lost all knowledge of, if indeed they were not left
behind by some other tribe who formerly occupied the territory.

The ordinary pestle is merely a conveniently shaped stone, and the
ordinary mortar a hole in a large flat granite rock near the dwelling.
But many mortars are made of roundish boulders, mostly granite, though
some are of tufa rock from a locality near the coast. So there are two
kinds of mortars, the permanent ones of the large rocks, and others made
from loose boulders, which, being portable, may be used where there are
no large rocks near, or when, on account of bad weather, it is necessary
to do the grinding under shelter.

In beginning to make a new mortar, arusut, the hole was not hollowed out
at once to the required depth. A slight cavity was chipped in the rock,
and a basin-shaped basket placed over it and glued in place with
asphaltum or pitch, the sides of the basket keeping the acorns or other
seeds from flying out when struck with the pestle. But with constant use
the slight cavity made in the rock becomes deeper and deeper until the
basket is no longer necessary, when it is removed. Many discarded
mortars are found that have been worn clear through by continual
pounding. Often on a large flat rock a number of mortar holes will be
found, some of them of the usual depth, others only an inch or two deep,
evidently just begun, while others may be a foot or more in depth, which
having by continued use become too deep, have been abandoned and the new
holes commenced.

One kind of mortar, tamyush, was used exclusively by the medicine men
for pounding up the roots of jimson weed, *Datura meteloides*, for use
at the boys’ puberty ceremony. Some of these are quite symmetrical,
being polished with considerable care, and some have even an attempt at
ornamentation in the shape of grooves cut on the outside. The pestle of
these mortars is also neatly shaped and polished. Another and very small
mortar, tamya-mal, is said to have been used for mixing paint. This is
also polished, and is almost exactly round.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

It is a question whether the metates or grinding stones, ngohilish, now
in use were employed prior to the arrival of the Mexicans. Some of the
Luiseños think they were, while others say they were not, that their
ancestors used only mortars. The rub-stone of the metate is called
ngohilish po-ma, metate its-hand.

Flat perforated stones have been found. It is thought these were
formerly used for cooking, the hole enabling them to be easily handled,
when hot, by a stick thrust through them. They were probably also used
for heating water.

A large stone tool has been found which may perhaps be called a stone
adze. It weighs nearly eleven pounds, and was evidently intended to be
used by being grasped with both hands.

Small sharp-edged flakes of a hard black stone were used as knives.
Larger stones with a cutting edge were probably used for skinning or
fleshing hides, but some are heavier than would be required for these
purposes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Feather Objects](coli12)
