[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](coli21)  [Next](coli23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Culture of the Luiseño Indians*, by Philip Stedman Sparkman,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SPIRITS AND MONSTERS.

There is still a strong belief in a malevolent water spirit,
yuyungviwut. It is thought to belong to both sexes. The male is believed
to spirit women away at night to his home in the water, not bodily, but
the soul or spirit of the woman, and there to treat her as his wife. The
women say they are well treated while there, but have to eat animals
that frequent water, such as frogs and snakes. It is usually, though by
no means always, young unmarried women who are subject to this delusion,
more especially those who are subject to epileptic fits. Women who
imagine themselves to be under the dominion of the water spirit often
become seriously ill, and are treated by the medicine-men, who claim to
be able to frighten the spirit away when it approaches. They pretend to
detect its presence by a smell resembling that of stagnant water, the
spirit of course being invisible. We have known a medicine-man to be
sent for from a distance of a hundred miles to treat a woman who
imagined herself to be under the dominion of this spirit. And a strange
thing is that women brought up almost entirely among the whites, and
others with very little Indian blood, often suffer from this disease, or
rather delusion.

Men also sometimes suffer from this delusion, imagining themselves to be
under the dominion of a female yuyungviwut. As in the case of the women,
they are usually those who are subject to epileptic fits. Many are so
afraid of this spirit that they will not call it by its true name, but
instead speak of it as an "animal of the water."

There is another water spirit, pavawut, that is believed to inhabit
certain springs and ponds of water, which it is thought

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

to object to having people visit. For this reason many will not put
their houses near springs, as they are afraid to incur the anger of this
spirit by doing so. It is said sometimes to drag under the water people
who bathe near its haunts and to drown them. It is also related that a
man shot one at a spring at Santa Margarita, and that the spring
immediately dried up. The man also died within a short time. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[6](#fn_7)

A being known as koyul is said to have its abode at the main falls of
Pauma creek, not the falls that visitors to Palomar mountain sometimes
go to see, but others much lower down the canon. It is thought to object
to having people visit its abode, which is exceedingly difficult of
access, and many are afraid to do so.

There is a tale to the effect that some twenty-five years ago a man who
had been told of the existence of this animal, and warned not to go
where it lived, declared that he was not afraid of it, that he would go
where it was said to live, and shoot it if he should see it. So one day
he entered the canon and managed to get within a short distance of the
falls, when he saw the animal sitting on a large rock directly above the
fall. It looked like a very large toad, and was about the size of a man.
He shot at it with a rifle he had taken along with him, when it at once
jumped from the rock into a deep water-hole at the foot of the falls. As
it struck the water a dense mist rose from it and filled the canon so
that it was impossible to see in any direction. At this the man was
badly frightened, and would have left the canon at once, but as he could
not see anything, thought it best to wait until the mist cleared off.
But though he waited and waited it did not do so, and at last he was
obliged to grope his way back out of the canon as best he could. Strange
to say he did not die at once, as every one prophesied he would, but is
still alive, or was a few years ago.

A meteor or shooting star is known by the name of Takwish, and is
considered to be an animate being that carries people off and devours
them. He is believed to have his abode at a locality in the San Jacinto
mountains. There is a rocky peak on Palomar

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

where it is said he pounds the flesh of his victims to make it tender
before devouring it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[220:6](coli22.htm#fr_8) A tradition recorded by
Mr. Sparkman regarding the pavawut has been published in the Journal of
American Folk-Lore, XXI, 35, 1908.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Boys’ Puberty Ceremonies](coli23)
