[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](coli22)  [Next](coli24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Culture of the Luiseño Indians*, by Philip Stedman Sparkman,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOYS’ PUBERTY CEREMONIES.

Puberty ceremonies were generally performed with several boys at once,
always of the same clan. The feast-chief <span
id="fr_9"></span>[7](#fn_8.md) of the clan to which the boys belonged never
performed the rites himself, but employed another to do so. This was
usually the feast-chief of another clan, though any one outside of his
own clan who understood the rites might be employed.

At the commencement the boys were given a small quantity of the juice of
the roots of the toloache or jimson-weed, *Datura meteloides*. This soon
stupefied them, and while they were in this condition dancing was kept
up in a circle around them. As soon as they recovered they had to engage
in the dance themselves, at the conclusion of which they were taken by
the person in charge of the rites into the field, not to their homes.
The following day they were required to bathe and be painted, and in the
afternoon were taken to the dance again. This was kept up every day for
a month, during which time they did not visit their homes.

Even after this period they were under certain restrictions for a year,
not being allowed to eat either meat or salt for that time. At the close
of the period of restriction the most important rites of all were
performed.

A treble circle was drawn on the ground, with an opening on the side
facing the north. The outer circle represented the milky way, the middle
one night, and the inner one blood. A small pit, representing "hell,"
was made in the center of the treble circle, and figures of animals were
made between this hole and the inner circle, as indicated in the
illustration. ([Pl. 20](coli00.htm#img_pl20)..md) These figures were made
by strewing sand on the ground. <span id="fr_10"></span>[8](#fn_9.md)

A long lecture or counsel was then given to the youths by the person in
charge of the ceremonies. They were told to respect

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

their parents, and all grown-up people; not to shout in the presence of
old men; and if an old person came to their house, to welcome him or
her, and give them food and water, if they had any; if not, to tell them
so politely. Also, if when out hunting they should kill a hare or
rabbit, and an old man should ask them for it, they should hand it to
him without being angry. They were told to bathe on rising in the
morning (which it was formerly customary to do), to eat but little, and
not to eat hurriedly, even when hungry. Also not to eat chia, venison,
and jackrabbit. <span id="fr_11"></span>[9](#fn_10.md) If they did not heed
the counsel given them, the bear and panther would kill them, the raven
would shoot them with bow and arrow, if bitten by a rattlesnake in the
field they would die right there, and they would also die if bitten by a
black spider. Apmikat would lame them, make them blind, make boils break
out on their bodies, or cause them to have consumption. The "breaker"
would kill them, the stick would splinter them, and so on.

But if they did heed the counsel given them, they would kill the bear
and panther and thereby gain fame. If bitten by a rattlesnake or black
spider, they would not die, and if chased by a bear or panther they
would not be overtaken. Illness would not attack them, their bodies
would be active, and they would win races. They might even on rising to
the sky after death live again as one of the stars, which it was said
were formerly people. Still other inducements were held out to them to
obey the counsel given them, and they were told that their actions were
seen by the earth and sky. <span id="fr_12"></span>[9](#fn_10.md)

At the close of the lecture they were given some flour of white sage
seeds mixed with salt. This they were required to chew and eject from
their mouths into the small pit in the center of the circle. The
lecturer examined this, and by its appearance pretended to tell whether
the youth who ejected it had heeded the counsel given him or not. If dry
he declared that he had done so, if moist, that he had not. In the
latter case, shouts of disapprobation were made by the spectators, who
were gathered around the edge of the outer circle.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

The following is a literal translation of the lecture or counsel given
to boys over the torohaish or tarohaish, ground painting.

See these, these are alive, this is bear panther; these are going to
catch you if you are not good and do not respect your elder relations
and grown up people. And if you do not believe, these are going to kill
you; but if you do believe, everybody is going to see your goodness, and
you then will kill bear panther. And you will gain fame and be praised;
and your name will be heard everywhere.

See this, this is the raven, who will shoot you with bow and arrow, if
you do not put out your winnowing basket. Hearken, do not be a
dissembler, do not be heedless, do not eat food of overnight (*i.e.*, do
not secretly eat food left after the last meal of the day). Also you
will not get angry when you eat, nor must you be angry with your elder
relations.

The earth hears you, the sky and wood-mountain see you. If you will
believe this you will grow old. And you will see your sons and
daughters, and you will counsel them in this manner, when you reach your
old age. And if when hunting you should kill a hare or rabbit or deer,
and an old man should ask you for it, you will hand it to him at once.
Do not be angry when you give it, and do not throw it to him. And when
he goes home he will praise you, and you will kill many, and you will be
able to shoot straight with the bow.

This is a black-rattlesnake, this is going to bite you. Do not eat
venison, do not eat jackrabbit, do not eat chia, do not shout in
presence of old people. And if old people arrive at your house, you will
welcome them at once. And if you have no food to give them, you will
tell them so politely. And if you have, then you will give them some at
once, also water. And when they arrive at their house, they will praise
your goodness, and you will have a good name. And if a rattlesnake
should bite you far off in the field, you will be able to arrive at your
house. But if you should be wicked and heedless, you will not arrive;
right there you will die in the field. And people will say that you are
heedless, and that for that reason the rattlesnake bit you.

See this, this is a black-spider, this is going to bite you. Do not
steal food of overnight, do not eat hurriedly when you are hungry. Also
when you rise in the early morning you will bathe in the water, and you
will always be active, and you will win when you run races. And the
people will praise you, and you will shout, and will throw away food.
And you will not eat much, or your body is going to be heavy, and you
will get tired when you run races, and you will sting your foot with
nettle.

See this, this (apmikat) is alive, this is going to break you, this is
going to lame you, this is going to cause you to have boils on your
body, this is going to make you blind, this is going to give you
consumptive cough. In the early morning you will bathe, and if illness
comes it will pass you by, also blood (*i.e.*, blood-vomiting sickness).

When you die your spirit will rise to the sky, and people will blow
(three times) and will make rise your spirit. And everywhere it will he
heard that you have died. And you will drink bitter medicine, and will
vomit, and your inside will be clean, and illness will pass you by, and
you will grow old,

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

if you heed this speech. This is what the people of long ago used to
talk, that they used to counsel their sons and daughters. In this manner
you will counsel your sons and daughters.

This is the breaker, this is going to kill you. Heed this speech and you
will grow old. And they will say of you: He grew old because he heeded
what he was told. And if you die at some future time you will be spoken
of as those of the sky, like the stars. Those it is said were people,
who went to the sky and escaped death. And like those will rise your
soul (towish). In this manner you will counsel your sons and daughters,
should you have any. Pay heed to this speech, that was spoken by the
people of long ago.

See this, this is going to splinter you, this is going to give notice
what you do, this is going to see you, this is going to know if you have
bad thoughts. And if you marry, you will not approach your wife when she
is menstruating. The rattlesnake is going to bite you, the stick is
going to splinter you, consumption is going to catch you, the earth and
sky are going to see if you do anything bad. Listen to this speech and
you will grow up and become old. And you will think well of your elder
relations, and they will say of you: He is good, whose son is he? In
this manner you will counsel your sons and daughters.

And if a bear or panther will wish to catch you, they will not overtake
you. And if a rattlesnake or black-spider should bite you, you will not
die. But if you are heedless and a despiser, right there you will die.
And your spirit (heart) will not rise to the north, or your soul
(towish) to the sky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[221:7](coli23.htm#fr_9.md) "Feast-chief" is
probably a translation of "capitan de fiesta"; by this term must be
understood a chief of ceremonies, the "religious chief" mentioned in the
paragraphs concerning government.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[221:8](coli23.htm#fr_10.md) This sentence was left
incomplete by the author, as if an addition had been intended.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[222:9](coli23.htm#fr_12.md) These sentences were
left incomplete by the author, as if additions had been intended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Girls’ Puberty Ceremonies](coli24.md)
