[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](coli01)  [Next](coli03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Culture of the Luiseño Indians*, by Philip Stedman Sparkman,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

### EDITOR'S NOTE.

Philip Stedman Sparkman, the author of this paper, by birth an
Englishman, was killed at his home at Rincon, near Valley Center, San
Diego county, California, May 19, 1907. For years before his death he
had spent much time in communication with the Luiseño Indians of Rincon
and vicinity, and in the study of their language, of which he published
a sketch in the American Anthropologist of 1905. He left a voluminous
manuscript grammar and dictionary of the Luiseño language, which have
been secured for permanent preservation by the University of California
and are being prepared for publication. Among the papers obtained by the
University is the following account of the culture of the Luiseños,
which is presented without addition and with only such minor alterations
as have been necessary to make it ready for the printer. A Luiseño tale
recorded by Mr. Sparkman is published in the Journal of American
Folk-Lore of 1908. Several papers issued in this series of University of
California Publications, especially "The Religion of the Luiseño Indians
of Southern California," "Shoshonean Dialects of California," "A Mission
Record of California Indians," and "The Ethnography of the Cahuilla
Indians," treat in part or wholly of the same Indians as the present
account or of closely related tribes. It will be found that these papers
and Mr. Sparkman's corroborate one another closely. Even the slight
discrepancies, resting on information independently obtained and
representing significant differences of point of view, may have value
for future students.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](coli03)
