[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsm04)  [Next](wsm06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE THEFT OF PINE NUTS

(Saline Valley, California. Shoshoni)

The people in this country had no pine nuts. They talked about going off
toward the north to get some.

They started off toward the northeast. Coyote was among them. They went
to a big camp where there were many people gathering pine nuts. Soon
after they arrived, they began to play the hand game against these
people. But the next day, they did not know whether they had lost or
won. They went on to another place where there were also people who had
pine nuts. Here they played a game of shooting at a small round target
with a bow and arrow. They bet their lives in this game; the losers were
to be killed by the winners. When one side missed the target, its
opponents took its arrow. Crow was shooting and had only two arrows
left. Coyote watched him. When Coyote saw him losing, he walked around
and shouted and wondered what to do. Crow was about to shoot at the
target again. Coyote said to him, "Why don't you hit the target?" Crow
shot and missed. He had only one arrow now. When he shot this one, he
hit the target. Then he began to win. He won back everything they had
lost and then won everything the other people owned. Finally, their
opponents even bet their pine nuts, and lost them.

The people did not want to give up their pine nuts. They hung them on a
tall tree which had no branches, so that no one could climb up. During
the night they slept under the tree to prevent anyone getting the pine
nuts. Cottontail began to play his flute, "tu hu du du du . . ." Some
old women who were helping to protect the nuts knew that they were going
to lose them and began to cry for help. Early in the morning, while the
people under the tree were still asleep, Coyote and the others started
to get the pine nuts. Coyote said, "What do these old women make a noise
for? Why don't they go to sleep?" He poked their eyes with a stick and

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

blinded them. Woodpecker (a red woodpecker) flew up in the tree and took
the pine nuts.

When Woodpecker brought the pine nuts down, Coyote and the people took
them and began to run for home. The others pursued them and caught those
who became tired while they were running. They killed every one they
caught. Although many people started out, nearly all were killed before
they got home.

When nearly all the people were dead, Woodpecker gave the pine nuts to
Crow. Crow went on with them. He hid them under his feathers, behind his
ear, and in other parts of his body. The pursuers knew he would hide
them this way and tried to hit him. They struck his leg and knocked it
off. It went a long way through the air. Then they struck Crow and
brought him to the ground. They said, "Now we will wait and take a
rest."

After they had rested, they went on to where Crow had fallen and
searched his body for the pine nuts. They found that Crow had left his
feathers behind \[i. e., shed his skin\] and gone on, taking the pine
nuts with him. They looked and a long way off saw where his leg had
fallen, but Crow was far beyond, still carrying his pine nuts. They saw
pine-nut trees all over the mountains, where the nuts had fallen from
Crow's leg when it was knocked through the air. They saw smoke coming up
through the trees, where the people were already out picking the pine
nuts. Crow was flying about crying, "Caw, caw, I have had my pine nuts
with me all the time."

All this happened up by Lida.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Origin of People (Smith Valley, Nevada. Shoshoni)](wsm06)
