[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsm16)  [Next](wsm18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COYOTE LEARNS TO FLY; THE ORIGIN OF PEOPLE

(Saline Valley, California. Shoshoni)

Coyote had a house in Saline Valley where he lived alone. He decided to
make a basket and he went out to gather willows. He did this for many
days. While he was gathering the willows he heard a sound but did not
know what caused it. He said, "Oh, what was that noise I just heard?"
There were green blowflies all over Coyote. The flies buzzed so loudly
he could not hear the noise. . . . He killed them. After he had killed
all the flies he knew what the noise was. It was somebody singing. Then
Coyote began to sing and dance, carrying all his basket willows. He
said, "Maybe I am going to be a doctor."

While he danced, he heard someone laughing at him. He looked up in the
air and saw that Geese were laughing. He said, "What are you fellows, my
brothers, doing up there?" Geese said, "We are going to eat eggs."
Coyote said, "I think I will go along with you fellows." He dropped the
basket willows and ran along under the Geese.

After a while, the Geese rested on the ground to wait for Coyote. They
said, "We had better give some feathers to Coyote." When Coyote overtook
them, each one gave him a feather. After this, they pointed to a
mountain some distance off and said, "You fly

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

around that hill and try your feathers." Coyote put on the feathers, and
flew away saying, "Wo’ wo’ wo’." The Geese told Coyote to land on a
certain mountain top and face them. But he lighted on it. with his back
to them. The Geese did not like to have Coyote's back to them. It made
them angry.

Coyote left the mountain and walked back to the Geese. They were angry
and killed him. They smashed his head with a rock. Then they flew away
toward the east (Hauta). Coyote lay dead.

When Coyote came to life again, he stretched and placed his hands behind
his head. His fingers felt his brain, which was running out of his
skull. He said "My brothers have left me something to eat," and he began
to eat, thinking his brains were food they had given him. Then he got up
and found that he had been eating his own brains. He said, "I was eating
my own brain," and vomited.

Then Coyote looked for the Geese. He saw them way over the mountains,
toward the east. Coyote picked up some rocks and put them into his head,
in place of the brains he had eaten, and started after the Geese. He
went to the top of the mountain where he had seen the Geese, and saw
that they were over the next mountain to the east. He went on to that
mountain, and saw that they were over the next one to the east. In this
way, Coyote kept going until he came to the shore of the ocean.

Here he saw many people, lying scattered on the shore, with their faces
down. They were all dead. He turned over each one to look under him for
eggs, but the Geese had eaten all of them.

One woman was lying at some distance from the others; she had one egg.
Coyote cut her open, and found a girl baby. He said to the baby, "You
are going to be my sister." Then he said, "You are going to be my baby."
Coyote got himself some clay and made himself like a woman, with all the
parts. He built a fire and steamed himself, as women do after
childbirth. After this he drank only warm water. In this way Coyote made
himself into a woman to nurse and care for the baby.

Coyote started back for her old home, carrying the baby on her back.
While she traveled along, the baby became bigger each day. As the girl
rapidly grew bigger, Coyote began to remove the clay which he had used
to make himself into a woman. He changed himself back into a man, for
the girl had grown very large. He said to her, "You will be my wife."
But the girl said to him, "When you first cut open the woman and found
me as a baby, you called me sister." Coyote said, "No, I called you my
wife then." The girl said, "No you didn't, you called me sister." Coyote
said, "No, I called you my wife." Coyote liked that girl.

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

Coyote and the girl stayed together that night. She became pregnant at
once. They traveled on toward this country. A baby was born on the
trail. Coyote began to weave a water jug. When he finished it, he put
the baby inside. His wife disappeared, and Coyote came home alone,
carrying the jug with the baby inside.

When Coyote arrived in his own country, he set the jug down. Out came
dozens of boys and girls, fully grown, walking by themselves. The first
to come out were fine looking, but they had no bows and arrows. They
started off toward the north, running and raising a big dust. Coyote
shouted, "Wait! I want to pick some of the best ones for my people."
Fine looking people without bows and arrows also ran across the
mountains to the west. Those that went toward the east (süvü watü nümü)
were scrubby people, and carried bows and quivers full of arrows. Those
who went south were also scrubby, and had bow and arrows. These were
Coyote's people, the Shoshoni. Those who went north, settled at
different places along Owen's Valley. They were the Northern Paiute.

If Coyote had not found a live egg on the shore of the ocean, there
wouldn't be any people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Coyote Learns to Fly; Coyote Becomes a Mother (Ash Meadows,
Nevada. Shoshoni)](wsm18)
