[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vov02)  [Next](vov04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

100

By mere thinking shalt) thou attain truth? If thou meditate not, but
remain still shalt thou reach it? By thinking neither on thought nor on
the absence, this is true path and beatitude.

101

If thou fix the sight of both thy eyes equally and thy mind he similarly
fixed, if thou restrain all external tastes and heedfully gaze, the
deity shall be made evident to thee.

102

Closing the external nine and mingling the internal airs with your mind,
if, understanding this secret you perform the worship of the
(*atmalingam*) Divinity, this is the beatitude.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

103

Let the pure saint confuse all his connections (valenu for valenu) in
this outward world in conformity to his high desires. In his outward
connections be thus dissolved he shall attain heaven and beatitude
(*Kailasa and Mukti*) .

104

Quickly stop your anus with your left heel and fasten your anus and part
of generation. Then set thy desire in thy mind on the unseen (secret)
and behold him.

105

He whose mind sleeps in abstraction is the great saint wherever he lies,
the securest situation is the (destruction) retention of respiration. He
who can securely loose his apertures (*mudras*) they being fixed of
themselves becomes the chief. He is not entangled in connections; is
alone the independent sage. (lit: Indifferent)

106

He who maketh his inmost mind pure (or who maketh his inside his
outside) and slays all worldliness, burneth his caste and casting off
all qualities hath attained the reflection of reflections. He is the
devotee.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

107

If thou truly understand, thou cannot seek god. Then can't see him if
thou move not thy eyeballs. If thou wink not thy eyelids, he will appear
betwixt them.

108

He who fixing his view eagerly on the end of the nose, looking into his
heart, hath noble might. If he knows the path of beatitude, h becomes
the exalted devotee.

109

The spirit that is named unparalleled being united with the spirit of
his pristine name will be destroyed in one mode. That mode Vemana will
teach thee.

110

He who has severed the desires of his house from him and duly in his
heart is cautious; he who thus establishes his house, is deeply skilled
in tatwa.

111

He is the happiest person in the world who in whatever his views and in
the six creeds and sects and the four *asramas* wavers not at any time
in his walk.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

112

It is [impossible](errata.htm#15) for us to see the wondrous writing on
the noble hill in our path, following the shadow of our nose. If we go
to view, it is perfection. It is Siva.

113

A man shall attain long life when he has learnt to low breathing (*i.e.*
to save up some respirations daily of the portion predestined to each
man). Then shall he grow, he shall wear his body through out the age of
Brahma.

114

He that will not be entangled in the forest of (*acshara*) letters but
considering the (nobleness) charms of (*acshara*) the indestructible,
and in this earth adores the prime letter (*Om*) this man shall become
Imperishable (*acshaya*). This is sufficient!

115

There is no distinct region named deity; self is evidently the deity. If
thou know thyself thou art the divinity.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

116

The whole world exists in the divine atom. The divine atom lies hid in
our body The man that restrains his mind will surely attain beatitude
(*mucti*).

117

Like him who, holding butter in his hand, but not knowing its
properties, wishes for ghee (which he might obtain by merely melting the
butter) is he who being himself divinity meditates on God as though
removed from him.

118

By beholding the first of being thou shalt become united with the
universe. No man is able to behold that prime existence. That prime who
is the path of bliss existeth within the soul.

119

He who knows clearly in his own mind that he is a part of the universe,
internally and externally, the man who hath brightly learned this shall
in this world attain beatitude.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

120

By not knowing clearly the corporal frame that exists in the external
frame, those that are without become outcast. To know that external that
is within this external--this is Divine knowledge.

121

All matter is concreted in the world and all is again resolved into
space. That which we call the Divinity if we comprehend it, beatitude
shall be manifested to us.

122

If thou make the face of the heaven and thy own face to be one and
manifest the true nature of the external figure of the divinity, thou
shalt by knowing outward external attain bliss. (loose version, the
original being more obscure).

123

All connections are produced in this world; they are not aboriginal; and
those ties shall again be [resolved](errata.htm#16) into primordial
matter--view this well, if these connections be doomed to become
resolved into space, then the path to beatitude is found to be in void
([paraphrase](errata.htm#17)).

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

124

The god knows him who is in the eye pupil: behold in the sky, Him who is
in the pupil. The eye and the sky become the sky of the heart.

125

A man must become eternal by knowing the source of truth; and learning
carefully the inmost word (the signification of the scriptures or
*upanishads*) consider who that word is and closely view it.

126

If thou know the five lettered name of Namassiva thou knowest the
supreme! If thou know the supreme, thou shalt for ever shine. He who
shines glorious becometh the Spirit.

127

If the unborn enters our inner man as we meditate, we shall attain
beatitude, but never shalt thou attain it by gazing on external shapes.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

128

If by holding the Linga we become resolved into primitive nature, gazing
on our bodies, we shall be happy. But men will not know the
signification of the Linga, and thereby attain that coalescence.
(Observe this curious grammatical construction)

129

The teacher, the image of Siva, compounded the three worlds into one,
and combined the six worlds; thus he [remains](errata.htm#18) firm
(these nine worlds, or regions are the nine mystic *chacras* of the
human form).

130

If, ignorant of the postures thou [learn](errata.htm#19) not of thy
teacher, their secret force (*murma & curma*) and fix not thy heart how
shalt thou become of the second birth? (*Dwija* signifying a Brahmin,
means, reform-regenerate)

131

The body is the Mundane Egg; what is called soul is air. The eyes are
the moon and sun in our estimation. Where is there a Divinity beyond
this? Ye are gods in your own estimation.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

132

We are born in air and grown in air. Understand the order of blessing in
the air. For, from air is born that air of the soul which is our
essence.

133

He who has himself become the universe and knows that the great whole
dwells in him and who has learned to unite his inner man with all that
is external this man while yet on earth, has attained perfection.

134

Meditate on the thought that is within our thought and know it; this
thou must do in the appropriate mode by giving up all thy other
thoughts. The thought of thought is essence (*tatwa*); it is soul (or it
is the essential spirit).

135

Connection originates in this outward world. Let it be resolved again
into universe. If we resolve it fairly into universe, this is the path
to happiness.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

136

If thou become the universe, the great all shall shine resplendent in
thee, that man who knoweth the god who shineth within him shall hereby
attain beatitude.

137

If thou canst see that the all is one, thou shalt attain a sure
knowledge of God; thy eye-lid shall not close night or day. Behold that
great spirit that is the light of light.

138

Unless thy outward form be (humbled) mortified thou shall not see the
living form. But who is able to mortify that outward form? Unless the
creation be destroyed, we cannot behold the creation.

139

All fear belongs to the body; If we quit fear the certainly we shall
attain will be that of the great spirit; the only destruction shall be
that of the body. Teach men that victory is the property of the soul.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

140

The *yogee* who knows the one letter (Om) shall know the (*param*)
Deity, beholding him and attain his nature. He shall himself become the
forms in which the Deity exists and all the rest of the creation,
becoming a particle of the primeval unity.

141

The *yogee* who raiseth his palms aloft fixeth his feet, fixeth his gaze
full on heaven becometh hereby part of the universe and attaineth length
of days.

142

Consider that fire, and air, and all worlds exist in the body at their
proper places. Then touch and behold the Teacher in thy mind.

143

If thou quit not the hopes of the place above and devise a mode attain
it, thou shalt arrive therein, that place and thou shalt be united, and
thou shalt become the self-existent Deity.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

144

He is himself metamorphosed into the worship and into the worshipper
that performs adoration. He [becomes](errata.htm#20) himself sacrificial
implement. Wherever he performs worship he becomes himself
(Omnipresent). He is myself, and I myself am, he.

145

All that is born on the earth was born in the earth. All reality is born
in the body. The great whole is produced from toil . Let us ourselves
become that mighty whole.

146

If the soul be closely united with the body though it be devout, unless
it quits, the body is not blessed. Through the body must we attain the
abode of beatitude.

147

If thou know that the prime existent is single and fix thy mind on that
prime, never [quitting](errata.htm#21) the prime thou shalt become the
unborn. He that path quitted the prime is like to the blind.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

148

Without making distinctions of situations (lit, without saying there or
here) as we behold all things, the god (Vishnu) ever views and
comprehends all things. The circumambient (God [Vishnu](errata.htm#22))
goes around the orbit of the world.

149

By considering forms thou shalt attain the unseen and thy form shall
assimilate to his. Devoid of both these (i.e., body and mind) become
thus invisible. (loose version)

150

By viewing thyself inwardly, thou shalt become the joy of the world. By
viewing what is external, thou shalt be immersed in earthly connections.
By beholding thyself, the divinity shall become thy salvation.

151

That divinity who is our rescue is attained by deep thought. If thou
comprehend him by meditation thou shalt become that being, If thou know
the thought of thought, thou shalt become it.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

152

All those who possess pure wisdom gaze of the Mundane Oval. If thy mind
be pure, thou shalt ever gaze on the admirable *pindanda* universe of
the body.

153

Being born in a human generation and grown up in it, if, after becoming
a man, a man cries scorn on the line of men, and (become a *Haracula*)
becomes a participator in the nature of Siva; he shall become Siva.

154

The devotee who knoweth the great secret walketh with out considering
the [burning](errata.htm#23) sunshine, he shall live to all time on the
earth. Is the attainment of wisdom in the power of a glutton?

155

To nourish our bodies let us cease from all mental occupation and by the
aid of the living being let us daily rove free from care. By considering
our bodies, we shall perceive that the Divine soul permanently resides
within us.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

156

In the one body of the universe there are forms innumerable. How many
forms shine in it! When they perish all shall become one whole. Thus is
the nature of spirit. (This ataveladi has four versions).

157

(A difficult verse in pure Telugu)

It is only one man here and there who can try and explain the second
birth of (*yatees*) the recluse with extreme exactitude. It is an
[extraordinary](errata.htm#24) qualification; sense is more stable than
even worship.

158

Where is heaven for that soul full of cupidity, that thinks his body is
his own self and entangled in his own (vāsana, smell) attractions
ensnared in repeated births and deaths. Ignorant of all matter wallows
in lusts.

159

He who grips his foot in the palm of his hand and with an eye fixed on
heaven stands firm. He shines transformed into the universe and shall
live long.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

160

Those voluptuaries who forget their thoughts and principles (i.e.,
themselves; lit. *chitta* is the faculty of doubt and *buddhi* that of
assurance) are given up to vain confidence and cannot collect their
whole attention and fix it on Siva. They shall never attain bliss
(terribly difficult).

161

How should those who imagine themselves to be one with their body, and
who remain immersed in the ocean of the cursed three attachments (to
wife, son and wealth) attain the knowledge (*sangati*) of the truth
(*moksham*).

162

He exists in the shape of the universe and is the general soul. He is
the all witnessing spirit. He hath truly converted.. himself into the
soul. Look at the universal world. He is himself all and even exists in
truth.

163

He that has seen is greater than who has heard. But he that possesses
Him is greater than who hath beheld. Greatest of the noble is he in the
earth.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

164

It thou firmly fix the idea of the divinity in the mind, and establish
thyself in the temple of the body, thou shalt be firm in the earth and
attain the inner vision.

165

If thou excuse that life (*jiva tatwa*) that possesses the marks of
vitality, to be united to the teacher, he is greater than the life. He
who thus restrains the body is himself.

166

The great whole exists within us. If we know that we are, if, by this
means of salvation in this soul shall the man who thus walks attains
heaven.

167

If a man be converted into his intrinsic self in the midst of all
external he would contract no alienation. I swear by my father. If we
were converted into self how should we entertain any anxiety?

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

168

If he be himself prudent cautiously will he save himself, and in every
manner he considers himself as the great spirit.

169

If he knows that he is himself the universe and the universe himself;
that he is himself all essence, if, knowing this he fails to walk
accordingly, there is no salvation for that map.

170

(Pure Sanskrit) Water, earth, fire, sky, air--it is well known that
these compose the world. The natural body, the invisible form, the body
of delusion, if thought on, are the basis of all.

171

To say I will not this (i.e., wish not for it) and still not to leave it
but remain entangled in the desire of things convenient nor quit them.
This is origin of worldliness.

172

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

If the face and name are unalterable, the name and the face are both
implicated in our acts. It would be well if we could lose both our name
and face.

173

The devotee to Siva who understands all the properties of the body,
shall not entangled in desire and deceived to his ruin. How should a
juggler be ensnared by any man?

174

The exalted sages have declared in the earth that when through
instruction a man relinquishes the desires (or schemes) of his mind, he
shall through his love of them attain the abode of purities.

175

If thou be thyself excellent, but, as the bliss be wedded to nature and
ruin thy beatification thou shall not behold that preceptor who caused
the creation of precepts.

176

Doth an infant know any thing of (dressing) roasting stones to extract
metals? The god-like sage alone comprehends it. Know thou the degraded
nature metal and leave it?

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

177

If thy mortal form perish, thy inward eye shall clearly shine. If the
fruits be destroyed that tree becomes free as the tree of desire. If thy
eye be humbled to see with it is happiness.

178

Where is shame hidden? Where is the darkness of
[ignorance](errata.htm#25) hidden? Where is hunger hidden? In the soul!
Learn ye the hiding of the [hidden](errata.htm#26) sleep of abstraction.

179

Look on thy chief (jewels or foes) passions! Haste to destroy them
nourish the whole of thy friends (or lovers). He who thus behold the
great light and in the midst of the body fixes his
[desire](errata.htm#27)--this man is himself Hari.

180

Our own shadow is our foe, and our shadow is a witness to us of our bulk
in [the](errata.htm#28) body; my passions are my enemies and my mind is
the only aid I have. This is true.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

181

To cut off the evils (diseased) of the body ceasing the look of love
towards the robbers (evil wishes) knowing the [origin](errata.htm#29),
attaching our [thought](errata.htm#30) to him and uniting the mind to
him--If the devotee thus recognizes the (friendship) mutual love between
the creature and the creator, this is the institute of sanctity.

182

Though the sage be touched (or affected) by any object of sense, he is
not in truth moved truly. Vemana hath learnt, in the host of sensual
objects and passions to abstain from the six evils (*cama, crodha,
lobha, moha, mada, matsara*) and all other sources of sin
(*durvishaya*). (a tremendous puzzle, but correctly done.)

183

If we consider our real form however great we may seem in our own
delusions, and those of ascetics, and be filled with them can we hereby
see god.

184

He that hath seen and can name the place of his
[primordial](errata.htm#31) birth, walks in wisdom in the earth; the
place of our origin is in the divinity (tatwa).

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

185

From fire which was produced from air was water created; in the
atmosphere it appeared, being self born; such is the history of *Maya*,
that had no father.

186

Those who in their minds muse on the gem on the summit of essence are
[skilled](errata.htm#32) in *tatwa*. He who hath truly beheld in the
midst of darkness, the great light, this is the devotee. He who truly
knoweth that the soul exists in God and God in the soul hath religious
vision. He is the pure, who in the *Sankhya yogamu* (which enumerates
the qualities of spirit) hath ascertained that the entire world is in
Siva. In any but this path shall any one ever attain the deity? If the
life leave the belly, and depart how should it be puffed up?

187

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

If thou walk not so as to become free from. (set aside) all the evil
qualities of thy acts how should thou acquire the divine essence? Will a
lamp devoid of oil blaze merely by filling it with dry sesasum oil
seeds--that are not freed from their hurtful substance.

188

Like as the seeds and the husk (between themselves) are born together in
water but the husk (goes) is destroyed so the concomitant evil fruits of
his acts who knows the essence of God will leave him undefiled--Indeed
it is thus.

189

Acts of religion are far removed from the wise and the wise is far from
acts in *Caliyuga*. The man of purity who ceaseth both works and
knowledge truly hath attained beatitude, For, when he is perfect, faith
and works shall both terminate.

190

If thou be not a performer of acts thou knowest not good works. He who
is trueth to works shall not see any good. Unless thou enter the water,
surely thou can't know the depth; nor, devoid of works know happiness.

191

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

If thou look upon the fruits of thy actions as being defiled will
hypocrisy; then shalt thou attain the fruits of thy righteousness.
Felicity consists in surpassing both thy righteousness and thy good
works.

192

Fruits (senses) produced in a tree (the body) exulting, united in fair
beauty, ripen--eat the fruits (beatitude) and know the leaves of a tree.
(Here it is [impossible](errata.htm#33) to discriminate in English
between *caya* and *pandu*).

193

Like as a swan will not touch the (*mansodakam*) heavenly stream but
turns it off, thus let the yogee be untouched by acts; he shall ramble
in all delight.

194

Searching well into the body and setting God before our eyes, and
throwing aside our future acts, verifying our mind and quitting the love
of our various ties, he that applies himself to stand there, is the
best:

195

The *Puranas* of acts are a great deep. In those acts never shall we see
Siva; surely none is able to declare Siva, the destroyer of acts. Acts
are vile, and vile.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

196

Vishnu, Brahma, the demigods, the *munis* and all the rest were nobly
born and then lost their state of happiness, regularly proceeded through
the state of decrepitude and death. This was through the savour of
delusion.

197

They who perpetually enquire which among three Gods is the chief (or
root) cannot, being fools, know the chief--surely there is a higher root
of the three.

198

There are men who being unable first to perceive which is the noblest of
the three, go into destruction. There is one original substance of which
the three are formed.

199

[Know](errata.htm#34) ye ([ascertain](errata.htm#35) and learn) that
root that knoweth the three. First know Him who is above the three and
extol him with the tongue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 200-299](vov04)
