[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vov03)  [Next](vov05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

200

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

Every thing is called the act of deity. But there is a deity superior to
this god. That god slew Vishnu and he destroyed the
[appearance](errata.htm#36) of Siva (*abhava*) Surely this is the great
God indeed if thou consider it well.

201

They call a pot, olla; they name a hill, collis; salt they call sal; are
they not however one? The languages alone are diverse, the essence is
one.

202

Vishnu, Siva, and Brahma all see the leaf but view it who will, none can
perceive the branch. Were the branch behold, [would](errata.htm#37) any
abstain from lauding it?

203

He, he, and he exist in him; neither he, he, nor he is He. He that
unites them with him--go to--he is the Divinity.

204

If thou know the beauty of the five letters, in these five cloth
beatitude consist. He (the divinity) is the one who dwells in that five.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

205

Slay Brahma, and mingle him with Vishnu. Slay Vishnu and resolve him
into Siva. Slay Siva and become thyself the Siva yogee (or chief
spirit).

206

To them who understand the meaning of the excellent *sankhya yoga* I
will in this world declare the truth through the most noble *raja-yoga*.
Listen to the greatness of Siva (pure sanskrit).

207

Why all this grief. If with singleness of heart thou extinguish thy
desires by immersing thy soul in (Hari, Hara and Aaja, Vishnu, Siva and
Brahma) the three gods and maintain a subdued spirit, happiness shall be
formed within thee.

208

The body of this visible world is a vessel of God, the life therein is
air. The sun, moon and fire are his eyes (number, body assemblage of
eyes). There is no God but this.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

209

He who slays his great (five) foes, and vanquishes cupid, and has learnt
the five lettered name (*Namassivaya*), he attains the porch of him, the
five faced who is entitled *Bhava* (emphatically existence i.e., Siva).

210

Of what use is that Saiva faith that knows not the path through this
universe compounded of inanimate and animate bodies and lingams, They
shall not know the becoming (or the act of transformation into) Hara the
eight bodied.

211

He who divideth the lord Iswara into seven parts and has dedicated by
the ceremony of pouring his whole body to God by any unfailing practice
of such conduct shall become the chief of yogees.

212

He who hath attained the bliss that dwells in the five lettered name,
shall shine both here and hereafter in bliss. To know this life and
next, this is deity.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

213

Mighty let us to cut pieces the six and seven foes of our souls and in
the defection of wisdom unless we worship the dwellings of the three
gods how shall we attain happiness? The [forehead](errata.htm#38) mark,
food and scars on the body and daubings with ashes are in vain applied.
Can the sons of earth hereby attain bliss through the love of these? O
Vemana, the noblest of princes?

214

If thou be thyself converted into those three Brahma, Vishnu and Siva,
who created, saved and destroy the three worlds and praise them, this
man shall be transformed into the deity.

215

He who hath reduced Brahma, Vishnu and Siva in one shall become a
*parama yogee* and the divinity. How can we comprehend one who thus is
equal to the divinity.

216

Those who will not cease from the radical bond of the root (the mind)
unless they destroy the eight creeds, how should they be called sages,
rather are they mad.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

217

The lingam is the great Siva; the life of the body if that creature be
purified he shall attain God. Were there two paths how could the deity
be attained?

218

Seize the robbers (passions) and put them to death; spare but one (the
mind) whoever he be that knows this secret, this shall be to him the
fruit that he seeks.

219

Let us seize the four robbers (four lusts and smite them on the head,
*cama*, *crodha*, *lobha* and *moha*) but spare one (the mind) to the
men of the mind that they may attain the fruits of wisdom.

220

The man who hath learnt to view the order of the secret charms of the
six and three temples, he shall attain the path to perfection. True is
this doctrine.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

221

If thou gain the favour of Siva and thereby destroy the first principle
(*agnyana*) of thy tree (body) and cast it (ignorance) as its root
(*maya*) and thus worship Siva, thou shalt be as a mountain and how
should death befall thee?

222

Have you seen the three worlds, beheld and attained to the three objects
that possess the three qualities and the beatitude that dwells there-in?

223

He who looks upon rain, wind and sunshine as equal and abstains from
thinking of honour or the like and continue in subjection--this is a
stout hearted saint (yogee).

224

(The *Parabramham*) Under this tree there is not even the least shade;
If the waters of delusion are unable to overflow this tree, it is as
tree, how should that tree die?

225

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

(The power of delusion) Often in the midst of her reality shakes her
head in scorn, she often laughs, she is no woman, what means woman? and
What is the name of the being?

226

(mystic) When the five birds (passions) were found in their hole (the
body) and cried, one of them sought the origin. The parrot that sought
him became him.

227

If the unknown being by meditation appear in thy mind thereafter to say
he is dead merely signifies his ultimate tie; when, thou die give up all
earthy connections and worship (Sarvēsa) the Lord of all (total
obscurity).

228

The words of Vemana, if soundly understood, are surely the essence of
all the Vedas. If thou do not invite and comprehend thy greatness in the
five-lettered name shalt thou enjoy prosperity?

229

Wisdom is the prime teacher to this whole world. The one
*Pranava-mantra* is the original teacher (teacher of teachers) and
thirdly, truly, the *Gayatri mantra* is the teacher of our actions.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

230

If thou understand the mystic syllable '*Om*' (Pranava mantra) if it be
in thy mind, the multitude of the acts of the mind shall not in the
least affect thee. Then shall the devotee shine, a lamp of Divine
knowledge.

231

Understand the power of the 'Om', Pranava mantra--it is the lingam. It
resides in the three persons. Can others (those who are without) know
and worship it?

232

He who hath united into one the composition of letters of the mystic
syllable 'Om', and the visible mundane egg, he shall enjoy that letter
'Om'; and shall in certainty inherit bliss.

233

Why thou hast truly entered into the import of the mystic form of
letters in 'Om' why persist in reading ten millions of other subjects?
Fitly and visibly, shall the two letters Siva, constitute purity of soul
in thee.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

234

They who have rightly ordered their inner man, and considering justly
the state of their heart, thrust it away, these are men of
understanding. [These](errata.htm#39) shall dwell in delight in
heaven--(terribly difficult).

235

They talk and talk of Divinity. What is in this Divinity? Were they to
apply themselves and understand and see he is close to them. They cannot
perceive the (*mudricas*) shadows that flit before the eyes closed in
meditation.

236

The soul dwells in the little world of the corporal frame; and the sun
inhabits the greater world of the universe and the divinity dwells in
the sound, the globules of the splendour.

237

The fair (*nadam*) sound is produced from the (jyotee) visionary lights.
The fair (bindu) globules are born from the nadam; and from the *bindu*
are earth and heaven born.

238

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

All those who comprehending in their mind the scheme (or knack) of
gazing at the sky (the khechari mudra) and who dispute not vainly these
have subdued delusion. Can it other-wise be subdued?

239

The hooded serpent by knowing well to fix its gaze like as the crow
under the cover gazes, thus does the yogee by inner wisdom gaze; this is
the path of perfection.

240

How subtle is the interior vision? Pure is the sight of sight. Equal to
the deity is the eye of our eye[.](errata.htm#40)

241

If thou carefully fix thy sight on the top of thy nose, then does a man
correctly view the pre-eminent. He who hath known the pre-eminent
cutteth off all secular ties.

242

Unless he sees (i.e., comprehend) the divine name (the mystic syllable
named *Pranava*), a man cannot become faithful Unless he behold the
lights (*jyotees*) that appear to the closed eyes, he is not in the way.
Unless he behold the everlasting he is not in the state of beatitude.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

248

By the *mudricas* in the mind being rightly ordered, as thou gazest on
the *linga* of soul (the deity), it shall be manifested to thee and
shall it be bestowed on thee devoid of teacher? That thou
[should’st](errata.htm#41) understand it?

244

(Mystic) By gazing at the blight mudras, happiness or sorrow is
produced. Looking at the blessing of the mudras and enjoying it, thou
shalt shine as a beatified saint.

245

Unless thou dissolve the splendours of three affections, how should one
attain permanent bliss in a fit manner? Unless thou annihilate thy mind
can beatitude be put into thy hand,

246

Fixed in meditation, with eyes and ears closed, heard a ringing as of a
bell in my mind; beholding I beheld a pure splendour and attaining the
divinity. I beheld it within me. This is no hypocrisy. Look then to me.

247

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

Behold the (*bayalu-ācāsa*) sky and consider that splendour, view the
departure of that light, uninjured. He that can view uninjured shall
stand unshaken.

248

Lose not understanding behold the enlightening *calas*--confuse not the
*calas* steadily behold the inner heaven (*bayalu-antarācāsa*); confuse
not that heaven and steadily thou shalt behold the divinity.

249

In meditation if after gazing steadily thou persist not to the end, when
thy sight fails again push on thy glance again. Him that fails unable to
push it on, they look on as very light person.

250

*Munees* esteem the splendours that appear to the devotee fixed in
meditation wonderful and excellent. If they understand, this is the
chief spirit.

251

He is no exalted sage who [cannot](errata.htm#42) view the globules or
his ringing sound, nor unite the splendours. Whatever pains he takes how
shall he attain beatitude?

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

252

Let us know the time of attaining the truth and thus become the eternal.
Let us thoroughly attain the mystic form (bindu) that exists with (lit.
in) the sound (nadam). Then shall we attain bliss, and participate with
no others in that enjoyment.

253

He that can convert the *nadam* into the *bindu* and into the *nadam*
again, also convert the *nadu*, the *bindu*, and the *kala* into one
(place) and perceive the sound, this man shall become the *yogee* full
of bliss.

254

The devotee who knoweth the internal sound produced in meditation, shall
with joy know the soul [within](errata.htm#43) him and attain felicity.
That sound is the giver of beatitude, proclaim this for the consolation
of all men.

255

The yogee who knows the sound (*nadam*) shall in his mind know the path
described in the *vedanta* proclaim abroad that this sound is the means
of beatitude.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

256

Lose the idea of "mine and thine" and be illustrious in the belief of
exalted abstraction (nadam). By the absence of the belief and
[disbelief](errata.htm#44), thou shalt attain prudence.

257

He who through instruction hath attained the (*nadam*, *the bindu* and
*the kala*) ringing sound, the globules and the splendours, that he
perceives who in meditation seals his eyes and ears, he who establishes
these in his soul and well fixes his wandering mind, this is the mighty
sage whose soul shall obtain its passage through the sagittal suture of
the skull.

258

The saint who knoweth the (nadam) ringing sound shall know the
indivisible God and the mystic syllable. That is the seed of the five
charactered name (*Namassivaya*). Proclaim to men that the *nadam* in
the mind is the beatitude.

259

Convert the *nadam* and *bindu* into one *nadam* and convert the nadam,
the bindu and the kala into a single nadam, to meditate while beholding
the nadam, this is perfection.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

260

Consider what is the twenty sixth essence. It is a wondrous vital
spirit. If thou unite it intimately with the chief spirit in the
(*gurupada*) cerebral suture. Him who doth this they shall surely call
saint.

261

Establishing the six gods in the six limbs and fixing the chamber of the
head firm on the one pillar of the spine, the reckoning is to allow but
one ruler (man) to each house.

262

There are six sustainers of the earth. There are the six rulers, princes
of the earth. The noble and great warriors are these know that the body
is their chariot and mark the result.

263

The divinity (*atma linga*) dwells in what is termed the *ajna chacra*
(the space between the eyes). It is only by gazing intently on this part
that shines so nobly, that beatitude shall be attained by men.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

28 4

Cut down in thy soul the five chacras, nobly surmount those chacras and
behold the plain beyond them.

265

The tree of beatitude has no (beginning) root but four fair boughs
(forms of existence, animal, vegetable, insects, minerals). It is open
to view and produces fruit. If thou eat them, they have no taste but
cause appetite.

266

In that house in the threshold of which three ways meet with air, in the
place where those three meet cloth Siva dwell (mystic of the
body--worthless).

267

He who has the skill firmly to dwell in the six and three chacrams
knowing their beauty he hath found the path to perfection.

268

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

If thou meditate in thy mind, in the sagittal suture shall there stand,
He who is ruler of all to all who worship him does he give both
sustenance and salvation.

269

Mind, words and works--if thou give up these three, and walk not up and
down the royal path (a mystic part of the body), then shall any loss
befall the yogee?

270

He who restraineth the six (lotuses) mortal parts of his body, and
carefully fixeth his anus or backbone, and the parts above it and who
also fixeth his mind is of course a twice born Brahmin.

271

Go and say, I have cast a great shame upon Vemana himself who named
Vishnu and disgraced Siva and even Brahma. Let the one God alone be
honoured.

272

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

Among them who are not wetted with rain and them who are not those who
relying not on Vemana, follow not him (conduct themselves) wherever thou
seek are not to be found. Never shall we see his equal.

273

Are there not eighty four lacs (84,00,000) of tribes of animals in all?
As for the manner of their production in the earth, is he indeed that
hath described it in your hearing, still to be called the mad Vemana.

274

He has thrown away his caste as water and slain his teachers (as
Bheeshma in Bhārata) and nobly lied lies as big as elephants. Yet his
name is just king--a great *Vepa* seed, bitter and worthless,

275

Locomotive animals all, till death, eat all excellent tasted things
without leaving them, But immovable animals (hills and trees) are ever
dropping their pride sorrowing remain.

276

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

You will say "We are versed in the knowledge of God" Ask
yourselves--what is the meaning of Divinity? Tell, if you know whether
he be whiteness, blackness or redness?

277

He knoweth not what sort of man he is, He knoweth not his former birth.
For so debased a life why should be so careful? He knoweth not that this
world is but an (*maya*) illusion of Ishwara!

278

He who wanders the various lands under the titles of the stranger, the
recluse, of the noble Ganga of a hill or in the character of a man of
exceeding beauty is yet one sole spirit of life.

279

Surely a teacher is requisite in the Siva creed and a teacher is
evidently requisite in the Vishnu faith. What can the wretch of a
debased nature learn without a teacher?

280

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

Surya lover of the lotus, was born in the race of Vishnu, husband of
Lakshmi, the noble mother and as he duly goes his course, going about
the lands and the earth; Vishnu nourisher of the elephant, travels as he
does (for Surya is in reality but a form of Vishnu).

281

Let us know the source of the three Gods. First know one of the three,
Then fitly with thy tongue offer praise.

282

The water in which the race of saints came plunging in defiled it. In
which even Brahma being immersed cannot lift his head out of it. All
men, whatever are plunged in this pond upto the middle.

283

By means of ambrosia all become stable. But if we seek ambrosia none can
find it; ambrosia turns into venom--what a marvel this is!

284

Know well that this world is partly black, partly red, partly white (the
three *gunas*--tamas, rajas, satwa). What is the reason that it should
be all alike?

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

285

The ultimate has no lameness in his foot; He has no name in the dispute
of his world. Understand that this is the bliss of others.

286

He was wonderfully born in the Brahmin class and being sunk in sin
flowed thence into the other castes. Though born in the lotus, the sole
of his foot is not wetted with the holy stream.

287

The king of hills (Himavat) is his father-in-law, the daughter of he
hill (Parvathi) is his wife; a hill Kailas is his home; and gold hill,
*meru*, his bow. Thus O Siva, thou art Lord of Hills. How art thou still
given to such go between practices. (This is a sneer at sexual love
originating in the creator).

288

The house is worldly connections, the bow is his weapon. The
Five--lettered God is mother of redemption but all uniting with woman is
but a lie.

289

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

If you [twitch](errata.htm#45) off a head of Brahma, they call it
murdering Brahma. Brahma is a Vysya (a man of the third class), is he a
Brahmin? If Brahma had even died would Siva become a Brahmin slayer.
(This is an allusion to the base of the lingam representing Brahma).

290

Siva assumed the shape of the sharabha and slew Narasimha; which
([masculine](errata.htm#46), *yēdi*) God is greater than Siva? Where is
there one more worthy to be looked to?

291

Seeing that Vishnu abhorred not himself to be born in ten incarnations,
to grow in them as to delight in them; if then thou do away the lustre
of the noble married state shall thou hereby become one of the
excellent.

292

Agajata (Paravati) causes him (Siva) who gave her half his body (see the
mythology) to be slain (i.e., her worship as shacti, supersedes his)? If
he cannot revenge this cruel is he man and not a woman?

293

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

The Veda is on every subject (words of the choultry). The signification
of the Veda is a refuge (a branch of hold). Its rules are worthy to be
known. Proclaim it consolingly in the world that the sound produced by
closing the ears is subject to the state of meditation.

294

He who has seen the similarity of every generation and by wisdom knows
the nature of the bathing, eating and lying in each, that man who thus
knows how to walk is the *grihasta* (i.e., a perfectly virtuous man of
the world).

295

If defilement attaches to food, it attaches also to the soul that
thereby subsists. Food that is digested within us (let our soul) this is
defilement. Food is the purification of the soul and the soul the
purifier of the food. Thus united as the earth and sky are.

296

Daily does defilement flow down through the nine
[orifices](errata.htm#47), If this defilement of humanity be done away,
man dies; foulness that never dies is produced in the loins.

297

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Heedless of foulness and impurity, they eat three times a day, and
worship him who sports within the soul (Brahma). He who thus attains the
future life is the complete *yogee*.

298

That pious man who delights in bestowing house, garden, and field on
Brahmins, long shall he rule the earth, and be filled with enjoyments.

299

The property given by a Brahmin to a Brahmin, though it be highly
fruitful, yet cannot be enjoyed by a lord of earth (Brahmin). He must
quit it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 300-399](vov05)
