[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vov05)  [Next](vov07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

400

Reading, reading, reading still reading and still reading. Reading and
reading, reading, some reading yet he cannot read so as to discern the
great secret.

401

Who are those we everywhere term wife and husband. If thou will (take
the trouble to) carefully view them, the truth is evident; but no one
can see the joints of puppets (lit. skin images).

402

Take cow's butter and boil it well, mingle vegetables with it
(branchless fruits). It is tasteless. The noblest of tastes is that of
beatitude.

403

When we are born in the womb of our mother, at first, we had not
clothing, nor shall have it at our latter end. Is not it then a joke for
us to wear clothing in our intermediate life?

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

404

Like as a dog while hunting for bran that falls in with a heap of rice
seizes it; thus does the wealth of the merchant fall to the lot of the
hard and the cruel,

405

The *Vaishnavites* are saws in the assembly of kings (causing
dissension). These are the chief gamblers of gamblers. They know not
counsel but are swift in their eagerness for wealth.

406

The vile, leaves the man of worth and lauds the vile? Every man praises
those who resemble him (asinus asinum fricat). Can a block give sense to
a beam?

407

Why should a pearled tire (papita) be given to shaven widow instead of
to a wife possessed of all charms? Why should a lame horse have a
tasselled saddle.

408

Those men in the world who are faithful (*satya*) they shall also obtain
wisdom worthily. When faith and wisdom are expired, a man becomes a
Brahmin, twice born. What hath he who has attained to do with learning.
(The poet evidently had a double meaning, sneering at Brahmins.)

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

409

Taking fire in their hands yet scoffiing at God, the Brahmins have
become [debased](errata.htm#67); wandering in many diverse paths, all
the Brahmins are ruined.

410

The leaf platters of Brahmins are the share of dogs of the street and
the platters of [pariahs](errata.htm#68) alone are honoured. The
platters thus honoured become the share of Brahmins.

411

A Brahmin will eat bone-food in which pounded skeleton is mingled. A
married woman becomes a pēratālu. [These](errata.htm#69) give up their
caste and character through excess of avarice.

412

What sort of caste is theirs who swallow the bearings of those
demon--gods that devour palmwine and flesh. Thou with faith worship Siva
they fail of becoming happiness.

413

Thou in the great destruction (the *pralaya*) all men were destroyed by
the servants (pramatha) of Siva, yet have the Brahmins become enable to
comprehend this.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

414

The Vishnava sect is mere talk. There are no others more fallen than
these wretches. Shall beatitude be attained by any sinner? (lit. by all
hard men).

415

By birth a soodra--how can he become perfect ([the](errata.htm#70) best
of the good)? The soodra state to a woman in every
[respect](errata.htm#71)--his mother being a soodra how is he a Brahmin?

416

Whose son in this world is Brahma? If thou enquire whose son is Vishnu;
if thou plainly enquire whose son is Siva? Men are ignorant of shame who
dare call these persons gods.

417

The mother of the (setti) washerman caste washes menstrous garments,
their father, great as he carries about grain. What is the pomp of these
sons of asses?

418

Rambha, the celestial dancer seized the *Somayaji* (scorned him) and
disgraced him, she covets with the somayaji, casting him down. Thus was
it that this fellow gained the fruit of his sacrifices.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

419

A man may get the title of dasari if merely has the fancy. He may be
called jangam if he will give up a regular life. But he cannot be called
Brahmin by any means.

420

You let your son eat off the same plate of whatever he be a son, you
swallow his leavings--you cannot even see the least of true knowledge.

421

The *comatees* fall down at the gate of him that gives interest--he
suffers the pains of hell. They will give you a penny or a farthing but
nothing respectable.

422

Brahmins go on calling food and water defiled and throw them away
ignorant of their nature. Food and drink are in truth Hari, Ha: a and
Brahma indefilable by touch. They defile him alone who calls them
defiled.

423

First by plunging in water Brahmin loses sight; by roaming he gains
nothing but giddiness, by howling out the Vedas he turns into a dog.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

424

If we take no food, the fire within the belly feeds on its own impurity.
Then how shall he become pure who fasts and thus devours foulness.

425

One may wear a *longoti*, and wish to have himself a mini but cannot
cease from the cupidity of his heart; the semblance indeed is one way
and the heart otherwise.

426

He who seeing men dying and who knoweth the divine nature as removed
equally from the death and birth, who thinketh deeply in his mind and
gazette in abstraction he shall attain beatitude.

427

Like when a frog when beholdeth a snake that snake swalloweth the frog
with great eagerness. Thus is the soul absorbed in worldly pursuits--who
can extricate the frog? Vemana knoweth how to free it--are thou involved
in worldly pursuits? This book shall release thee.

428

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

The verses of Vemana well considered admit of [a
thousand](errata.htm#72) interpretations. If thou think on these, this
shall produce refined wisdom in thee.

429

Let us look upon the fair assemblage of eighty four lakhs of animals as
clearly the sons of Brahma; if thou attain wisdom thou hast the
divinity.

430

The offspring of a multitude of all things and of all bodies and the
five elements are born in this world. Those who fill their bellies with
these cannot discern truth.

431

There being five joints (i.e., shoulders, thighs and neck) this car of
the body goes about the world. If one joint be loosed that splendid car
is ruined.

432

Quit the two weaknesses--hunger and thirst, the two of age and death,
the two of pain and love, the two of pleasure and grief and the two of
wisdom and ignorance. There is but one deity (in account) placed above
the two mansions of the breast and forehead. Thus shall the gifted sage
be happy gazing into his earthen vessel. (The signification of such
riddles depends pp the fancy of the interpreter.)

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

433

He that knoweth the sunrising and knows the course of the sun and who
knows the sunset in its beauty--He that thus knows the sun, he is a part
of the divinity.

434

As long as the body lasts we must alternately sink and rise in
contemplation regarding the *shacti* or creative power. When her
protection leaves us we begin to wish for it not before.

435

Casting out from the ship the seven *dhatus*, five *pranas*, six
passions, eight (5 bhootas and 3 gunas) and one delusion, the king
mounts the vessel and goes about. This is tatwa.

436

Fairly establishing the house built on one [pillar](errata.htm#73) with
its six stores, how shall one make himself lord of that mansion.

437

To be united with six [passions](errata.htm#74), grief at the last; to
be united with the seven becometh a cause of weeping. To slay in unison
of these (for these to perish) is wisdom.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

438

Relinquish the three affections, confuse the three, sink the three
qualities, *gunas*, the three Gods and the three *shareerams*. The
combination of the three, three and three form beatitude.

439

Believing the external world to be the divinity they scrutinise it. How
should the external world (ed quod externumeast) of itself become
divinity? Felicity exists in scrutinising that firmament within us that
is the divinity.

440

Surely those are mad who, while there is one chief quality (satvika) in
the three (*rajasa*, *tamasa* and *satvika*) leave it, unite the three,
place them in their heart and unable to discern it are plunged in
worldly pursuits.

441

Between the Ganga and the Yamuna (i.e., the two nostrils) there is a
maid (spine) like a golden image, If thou unite thyself to her in love
(i.e., meditation) without fail hereby shalt thou attain beatitude.

442

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

Few millions of goats died; only did one monkey mount on a leaf when ten
millions of those monkeys died, a fox cried co, co--This riddle
signifies.

|      |           |                                                 |
|------|-----------|-------------------------------------------------|
| Aja  | a goat    | Aja like wise means Brahma                      |
| Hari | a monkey, | Hari also means Vishnu                          |
| Siva | a fox,    | Siva is Shiva who ultimately survives triumpth. |

443

The tree of the back-bone is fixed on the fruit of its lower extremity
and the wires of nerves are fixed. The fingers on those wires perform
the (tripura tandava) dance of Siva in Tripura.

444

A cock touching sky and earth having horns protrude their
points--splendour without a lamp shall shine.

445

At first it is a tree; at last it is not a bird; it has no mouth, but
six fruits; it his not even one life and slays living creatures.

446

It hath no foot nor hand; but has a petticoat; no horn but rushes
swiftly and bites at all men Without having practiced in a fencing
school it slays us. This is a great marvel.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

447

He that has an external throat with his mouth feeds on leaves; he has
one leg and is all to match he shines and talks in the courts of kings.

448

When acquainted with the path of great [construction](errata.htm#75) of
the body (acunchana) if at any time thou disregard the *moola bandhana*
all the old men in the world shall become youths. (This mystic fooling
signifies that what is apparently the meanest is of the first
consequence)

449

If fixing thy understanding thou look and behold the light of the moon
(i.e.. breast)...([incomplete](errata.htm#76)).

450

*Maya* is not in fact the daughter in-law. She is the wife of all men in
the world. Behold, she is gold, but such as cannot be plundered
(nonsense, useful for words).

451

Brahma became a horse Siva (Bhava) became the saddle; *Adi* Vishnu
became the stirrup. He that mounts on this stud is either
[female](errata.htm#77) or male. I know not which.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

452

The men subject to passions, on one side serpents (passions--*indriya*),
crows on one side, the nine large tomcats (animal senses) on one side;
the nine large paths, being restrained, the light (the soul) departed to
the external, the tiger (ignorance), the fox (delusion) rose up and
gazed; the dog (mind) perished--the men of the woods
([apes](errata.htm#78)) cried out, the soul has become Him, Him.

453

Meddle not with the (yoga) eight connections of the body, the six creeds
or the three causes (*mantra*, *laya*, *hatha*). By the one remaining
means (i.e., pure devotion) thou shalt attain happiness.

454

The spirit that is named without equal, having slain the being that
formerly bore his name, and again caused him to return into life, Vemana
can render his image (or brother) stable for ever. (Mystic raving)

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

455

What wonder is it that the tree of wisdom should grow with its root
upwards (in heaven) and its point downwards (in earth); over its root is
a lustful elephant (the eye) walking. What is the wonder of this? Like a
distinguished soldier, an elephant (ignorance) swallow an ant (wisdom),
what the secret of a marvellous tree (the Sushumna nādam) that never was
born, being produced in the earth, on (the body) a rock and if the
*chemanti* flower (chrysanthemum Indicum) the mudricas be produced, what
is the secret of the birth? Behold if the all knowing and learned men
speak distinctly, Vema listen to them.

456

In the earth a frog (the mind) seized five serpents (passions) and
suddenly swallowed them. What is this? Two

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

men of the woods (apes i.e., wisdom and ignorance) came and by
themselves of themselves swallowed their young (their acts i.e.,
annihilated them), to a fox (delusion) in the Iron age *cāmadhenu* was
born. In what way was this? Possessing intellect there was an infant
that chewed; what was this marvel (wisdom absorbing ignorance). In seven
modes of existence, (mahattu, ahankara, shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa,
gandham) mercilessly was might (delusion) produced and agitated men.
What is this? The all knowing sages that have declared this, listen to
them O Vema.

457

What is the mystery of a fly that screamed out and swallowed a bed? How
was a mace produced in jasmine blossoms? Amazing, on a (marri)neem tree
(ignorance) [plantain](errata.htm#79) fruits (wisdom) were produced; how
was this? What is that dancing that the flower bodied woman knows. How
did the five coloured parrots have power to swallow five mountains. Thus
have the wise of old taught, listen O Vema.

458

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

He who comprehends the [preceding](errata.htm#80) three verses and can
explain them truly he shall see Siva. What is there unknown to thee?

459

He who knows one, two, three and four, five, six, seven, eight, nine
thus far, to the last what these are, that man is Vemana.

460

If they [do](errata.htm#81) not [hesitate](errata.htm#82) in 1006 ways
water courses well turn as men turn. But a thousand ways are
insufficient to teach the chief (root) wisdom to a piece of wood.

461

While impurities are perpetually flowing from the orifices of his body,
how is it said that the recluse is thoroughly pure? O ye sheep who
externally daub yourselves and fall into the hands of Fate!

462

In the eye flowing from [moisture](errata.htm#83), in a boil flowing
with matter, in a house the thatch of which is damaged, in a whirlwind,

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

in the breast that the child sucks--how should there be any tightness?

463

If you say let us look behind, there is the well of (foulness) dirt. If
you say let us look before, there is a nasty pit. Oh when they see a
woman men fell down to pray her.

464

If fate (the female power) look at men they hide their faces. Unless ye
eat the food of that Fate ye shall not be blest That power (fate) is the
origin of the three Gods.

465

A girl is smart powder; but divinity is grain flour. The future state,
in its excellence is fine *calama* flour. Can sages know the excellence
of such flour.

466

If you say I will drink palm wine they abuse you violently; they abuse
the entire body of him who drinks it. Yet he who drinks palm wine they
entitle noble, for the recluse knows not the distinctions of good and
evil.

467

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

The village of our body in which the deity dwells is Hill Town (the
head); his is in back street (the spine). There in silence is the first
house. We gaze and continually view it, this is the road of beatitude.

468

Quitting the bonds of the body he cannot go forth. Sargnee (Vishnu)
walketh with delusion as, with his wife. If he, so mighty, is thus
ensnared, what power had men to release themselves?

469

In Gandicōta there is a musk deer; it is not a great horseman. Be he
great as he may be, that deer will mount (the hill) and overthrow him.

470

Pācanāti Reddee, and Mōtah Reddee and Tōta Pedda Yerra Reddee, these are
all stubborn, wretches accomplished in all hardness. Thus have they
gained celebrity.

471

Are all those creatures men who bear about sedan? He alone who enjoys
himself within it is He (the God); shall the fruits of his good deeds be
enjoyed by these base wretches?

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

472

The accomplished sages all meet and forming the mental figure, purified
it with lime of steel--surely then lime is not the source of all purity.

473

He who eats lime (of stone or shells) possesses the philosopher's stone,
chunam that exceeds in the touch [of](errata.htm#84) gold, is better to
Brahma and the rest.

474

Lime is the best of all matters. Lime displays the present world in the
earth and it also shows us heaven.

475

He who eats lime will be delivered from the ties of relationship which
shall all be calcined; can it remain permanent? (lit. in the path) To
Vishnu, Siva and Brahma never have any power over lime.

476

By eating it have the demigods and *munees* attained immortality. But
they who see and scorn it derive then beauty from it. When men eat it
they become demigods.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

477

Is not the horse noble? Is not it all things? Cannot we attain Siva? If
we meditate on him should we remain thus in darkness?

478

If a horse eat lime, it will grow great. How should it hereby attain and
nourish the truth of desire. If a horse eat lime it shall become wise.

479

What is the purport of this world? Horse is the victorious steed. The
horse is the highest of blessings. Horse signifies a pure substance.

480

There are seven living beings. The eighth (*maya*) is not living--all
the mighty are in anxiety. If thou look into thy thought all words vary.
(raving foolery).

481

If after mounting this creature, the horse, he cannot manage him, the
*tatwa yogee* is in trouble. Let him mount the elephant of knowledge.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

482

He who closely views the firmament being as a globe and duly observes
the moon above it; he who views this well shall find it is for his good.

483

He who builds a house on the open plain (*bayalu*) and void of
discernment wanders confused, is a wretch given up to his lusts. He who
knows the (*bayalu*) open heaven is himself the divinity.

484

*Maya*, the wife laughing, the husband is weeping (the soul), the wife
delights in adultery. That adultery pervades all nature.

485

A wife (*maya*) who hath no figure loves her husband, a man void of
vanity is a stabbing hero, a man who is diseased becomes a soldier of
God.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

486

Whatever difficulties a man meets with in this world, it is not a place
that can be instrumented to the attainment of the next world. Then they
are not worthy however closely you view them.

487

How many are they that live on earth, in heaven, and between them has
any one the power to count them; those who live are indeed those who
die.

488

Though he can teach others and know for himself the instability of the
body and the fleeting nature of wealth, he cannot yet attach himself to
an adequate (illustrious) devotee and attain real perfection.

489

The sins that a wife commits, do with out fail fall on the husband. Of
the good the husband does, half comes to the wife. Why is that we are
not told that the sins of the husband also visit the wife.

490

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

Whether misers or givers there is not one in this world, who asks not of
his friends; he that gives not to others, consider him as the chief of
misers.

491

However many famines and sudden deaths, and terribly severe diseases
occur, if long life be abundantly possessed by the tribes of creatures,
why should they so perpetually sorrow and why at every word should they,
being fools say I have nothing? Behold, the merciful chief spirit is
alone our refuge.

492

A house full of holes and a worthless wife are alike. Like to a
worthless wife is an idiot son; like an idiot son is a jeerer.

493

If God be ours (if the deity has been attained by us) even the
destruction we shall rejoice in glorious majesty, he that knows not god
shall remain a captive.

494

In vessel of water the sky is visible, but in the absence of water how
can the firmament appear therein? Regularly (or daily) comprehend thou
the splendour of god in the vessel of the meditating intellect.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

495

He who makes his body to be as a mill, and his senses as the oxen,
likewise converteth his acts into the oil seed. He through understanding
shall like an oil-man with his soul his intellect shall as fine oil be
freed from carnal impurities.

496

They who go on pilgrimages to sacred places travel league after league
merely through forests, villages, lakes and rivers. This is the sum of
their good works; whatever you wander (Vemadu) the divinity aideth and
accompanieth you.

497

He who minutely views the soul in the body who showeth forth the body in
the soul and who perceiveth the soul to be everywhere, he is become a
part of the divinity,

498

What king is able to sustain and nourish the world composed (mingled) of
earth and sky. How is it then that man assumes the name of (Lord of
Earth) king?

499

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

The wisdom of a wise man is of continual duration but the fool
possesseth no knowledge. To know the wisdom of wisdom, this is the end
of knowledge (*tatwa*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 500-599](vov07)
