[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vov04)  [Next](vov06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

300

As for the gifts of land bestowed on Brahmins, you may mention your
having bestowed it. But if you tell others of your having made a Brahmin
any other gift you shall lose the whole merit there of.

301

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

It is lawful to tell all men in the court that you have made a gift of
land. But of any other gifts of your hand, you are never to tell others
that you have given it.

302

Ignorant of the glory of the great being, all their external observances
are like to a lion attempting to live on grass.

303

The fruit of your acts in a former birth though thou say--I do not
choose it, it will not depart nor it will come for your saying, I wish
for it, then resignation in the heart is best of all.

304

Having burnt up cupid with the flame of his eye he united himself in
lust to (*Gowri*) Parvati. If thou look upon the might of this Siva even
for a moment, thy sins shall pass away.

305

A woman dwells on the head of Siva and ever dues a woman dwell in the
mouth of Brahma. Ir. the splendour of felicity does a woman dwell in
tine noble breast of Vishnu. Thou alone Vema is able to put away women
powerful as they be,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

306

Our bodies are born unconsciously. Do not we bear them about, sunk in
foulness. If we obtained an intellectual body how should we be
continually reproduced in the world, O Vema.

307

Possess not thyself of wives nor sons. He that allows himself to suffer
distress for these is a mad man like him who lifts a stone from the
earth and places it on his head.

308

Through a sin [committed](errata.htm#48) ignorantly in a former birth,
we are immersed in impurity and burdened with the body. But if thou be
one of understanding how should thou be reproduced in the world. Thou
shalt become immortal.

309

Sons are the barred doors of our earthly prison. Wealth and kin are the
encircling wall and fools are the prisoners.

310

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

Unable to swim the stream of abstinence that lies across their path, the
three gods are subdued with the hook (rope) in their noses by the bonds
of marriage. Is not it then a joke for a man to say he will swim it?

311

If a creature kill a creature and give it to a creature, thus devoured,
shall beatitude be attained by the slayers of animals?

312

Did not Rama cast the fire-dart, and dry up the sea, pass over, and
return and stand still. Then did he not bring trees and hills and with
them build the bridge?

313

Whatever thou may, thy life is not in thy possessions. Though thou
possess nothing thou possessest life. The destiny written by Brahma in
thy forehead is vile as the writing of a slut.

314

By not bestowing food on one who begged it off him in the former birth,
he becomes necessitous in the iron age. His being now born wealthy is a
testimony to the [beneficent](errata.htm#49) man.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

315

The acts of the deeply deceitful man who plunders the *Bhutts*
(adulators), poets, and others and feigns innocence shall very suddenly
become the rugs that fall to a dog's portion.

316

A daring thief will plunder the property of poets and the fat of his
sinews grows stout and strong, like a daring dog he roams to bite.

317

If thou fail to destroy the sins (lit, pains) that were
[committed](errata.htm#50) in the former birth, how should they depart.
Thy mind (buddhi) and thy acts being combined and untwined what can such
men say to this? They must endure the fruits of their sins.

318

Be he a great sinner or a Brahmin slayer or merciless or base, when he
dies if, he stay all his desires and meditate on Siva, he shall become
(*muct*) happy.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

319

Why shouldst thou muse on thy acts done in a former birth? They have
become the life of thy present existence. If thou consider the acts, thy
present life shall take effect hereafter. What understanding is that
which cannot know this?

320

Urine turns into excellence. Birth is sure by its means. Being born it
turns to gold and a man of excellence. All those unchangeable souls that
believe in thee, thou shall make acceptable as the blessed above O
Vemana.

321

The woman that cannot give meat or drink is deceitful. If then in a
succeeding birth, if she wish for food shall she gain it? This is like
longing for a vest?

322

They who in time of need sell for an inferior price; these are the men
who in such circumstances hang even in diminished price. Why should they
who accept it consent? Besides should they ever have agreed, still the
act is not befitting (I doubt the meaning of this intricate stupidity).

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

323

If thou bound a *linga* on a *bhavi* and burn something that is *bhavi*
and wear its ashes, shall one who is *bhavi* be unable to see Siva,
because ye choose to exclude him.

324

If thou bestow the exalted *vaishnava* sect on one of debased caste and
call him superior to Brahmins, this is like cleaning a toddy pot and
filling it with the water of Ganges at Benares.

325

He who unasked bestows his property--this is the Brahmin Saint. He who
gives only when asked is a mere giver But he who is poor as to beg again
of him who has solicited his aid, is the Siva Saint.

326

What did Parasurama gain by slaying his mother at his father's advice?
Was he not deprived of all shadows of refuge to stand by him and driven
to *malayadri*?

327

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

There are abundance of those who recite the (*tantra*) treatises on
religion. But there are none who mention the mantras. They have become
powerless as the puppets of a show man.

328

Are not all those who revile Siva ashamed when they view the form
*Dacshu*, the ram faced, and after seeing the precious dignity of
adultery who would commit adultery?

329

What is the cause that being born in water and grown in water; he puts
water away from him and uniting himself with women, he relies on this
fleeting body.

330

The accomplished maid drinks palmwine and water and among the great she
looses her petticoat and dances. When she has done her work, she puts on
her rags again.

331

He that eats dogs (quells his passions) is the (*linga*) Janga Teacher.
He that eats hog (quells his bodily lusts) is the Parama *yogee*. He
that eats the elephant, how wise [must](errata.htm#51) he be!

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

332

On the fourth day of he moon's decrease, a girl brought forth. On the
fifth day she dressed herself and seeing her vest as a screen she gave
the breast to net babe (a mystic riddle not worth explaining).

333

In an [alligator's](errata.htm#52) eye an old woman brought forth; the
chiefs of beings have not put away her uncleanness; if those beings come
how shalt they put it away?

334

In a girl's hand is a bunch of desirable flowers. In that bunch four
spouts (distillations); consider in them the soul resides.

335

At high noon (*mudras*) by the heat of the [full moon](errata.htm#53)
(jyotees), the large bee (wisdom) rapidly fans the breeze (grow). By
full faith the soul enters into thee.

336

He that knows his mother knows the deity. He that knows the earth knows
heaven. He that knows heaven and earth vows himself.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

337

There was a pleasing girl on a loft (story). The girl speaking--I
conceived an intention. In that intention consider thou shalt see
beatitude.

338

A tree grew on a bird. In that tree were thirteen seeds. Listen there is
a tree in those seeds.

339

With a gurgling sound he swallowed down a woman. When he swallowed her
the woman stared. He swallowed her down body and all. (Woman is
delusion).

340

A woman adorned with (wearing) beauty. To wear them, plucks (roots) them
out of the box; when she tries to do so, a chief widow arrested her.

341

The jewel of woman went to buy oil, bought and brought home the cut-oil.
Can oil ever be cut? (worthless)

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

342

First there were three branches born in a tree. Spouts, boughs and
leaves were [therein](errata.htm#54) produced. The flower, the bud (foot
spout) and the full fruit fill the world.

343

With the widowed widow *maya*--they plunge and emerge in
[worldly](errata.htm#55) pursuits. But when that affection has ceased,
when her protection ceases those desires themselves exist not.

344

Born from thy mother, sucking thy mother's breast and playing roguish
pranks with thy mother, what shall I say of the reality (tatwa) of the
mother being in another transmigration--the wife?

345

If a masker openly and causelessly throw the hundred and first tribe
into a well, shall he being a mere toddy pilferer attain a future life?

346

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

He who can turn fire into water and water into fire, who converts fire
into wind, and if he himself be fire, he is the jewel of *yogees* (i.e.,
if by mortification he can purify himself from the impurer elements).

347

Its feet are ten and three tails, one head--Thus it openly appears
roaming the noble earth ill at ease. He who can clearly understand this
is *Ishwara* (a mystic riddle, quite worthless).

348

He lives well known to the people; but is not a king. He has a crown on
him, but he is not Brahma. He knows and speaks of what is fit, yet is no
*yogee*. Know who this is ([pure](errata.htm#56) fooling of *Para
Brahma*).

[349](errata.htm#57)

It produces young ones in the earth and writes their characters on them,
and suffer beheading. He is the chief of the Gods . He is lord of men.
(Siva in his character of creator, fate and destroyer).

350

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

In a flourishing tree, a fruit was produced with three eyes, but is not
Siva. It has a skin on it but is no *yogēe*. It has sweet juice. (mystic
fooling of a coconut)

351

It dwells in light and shuts its eyes while it lays egg with delight.
Surely the cuckoo [practices](errata.htm#58) penance on the bough.

352

Husband and son both (join) delight to touch and seize the wife's
breasts. Such is nature in the world. If the son touched it, milk
springs forth. If the husband touches it, 'that place' moistens with
desire O Vema!

353

A whore devoid of lewdness is the devil's daughter; joyless work a
plague of rubbing. Thus a village [devoid](errata.htm#59) of a liberal
man is demon's town.

354

Say not, this one, she is not fresh and this one is fresh. Be she old or
young, the enamoured paramour cannot quit her. Can you call an old
buffalo's milk nasty? Love goes by liking alone.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

355

The whore praises all the [ways](errata.htm#60) of the whoremonger. The
whore's mother exposes his infamy. It is hurtful to meddle with a whore
who hath a mother.

356

Without coition a woman becomes old. If it enjoys coition, the jewel of
horses becomes decrepit. In the earth, the man becomes aged who with
incessant desire indulges in excessive coition. This is true, O Vema.

357

It is ruin to go with a gypsy's whore who can restrain a sinful mind. If
she will leave the village I begone elsewhere

358

A whore's elder sister will caress and kiss you. The paramour gazes at
her through love of his whore. Those of the wife's side are all his
relations.

359

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

Born in the *yoni*, ye long for the *yoni*; you grow by sucking the
breast and still seize the breast. The soul devoid of shame thus
perisheth in the world.

360

Among men who are born in the belly that contains urines by the churning
which is the lowest and who can be marked as the eminent?

361

The leaf of which cupid has delighted to eat the golden lace that vishnu
born from the lotus navel wears round his chest (Lakshmi), the little
locket (box) which men ever delight to open and gaze into the hillock
that is ever lovingly hidden, the cup from which Brahma daily drinks
with thirst, the crystal vase that princes delight to light up, the fair
diadem of Siva who seeks alms with a dish under his arm, the box of love
powder with which even saints are charmed (or for which they long), it
makes the mightiest sing and talk and dance like the fool and sports
with them. Can there be any greater assembly of mischievous charms? (a
beautiful and easy song)

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

362

He who serves the semen becomes the seed. He who serveth the holy
streams becometh a God. He serves the excellent shall for ever be the
deity. (This alludes to shactiyam)

363

Born by copulation and growing up thereby, he lives in coition (lit.
becomes it). If thou canst lay aside the practice of this thou shalt
attain the pair (Siva & Shacti).

364

He is prisoned in the womb, then gains birth and is wearied through the
fluctuations of loss and increase through the Craft of delusion, how can
he know either his origin or end)

365

When the day when her breast begin to bud she traps (*illegible--JBH*)
with love. When they become hubbies she causes desire When her breasts
dangle, spirits would not covet her.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

366

When breasts are budding she is worth three millions; when her breasts
are swelled, one million; when her breasts are flabby, she is not worth
a farthing,

367

Woman is the mortar in which men pound to wear it out. But they weary
themselves and begin to fall over her thighs [throughout](errata.htm#61)
the world.

368

Him who loses his *langoti*, they deride as a monkey, drew him mad and
hoot him off. Yet will not you loose your langoti in the very presence
of your wife?

369

From the juice of food, the juice of the generative drop is produced.
From the juice of the generatiyn, seed is formed. To discriminate
between the juice and the seed is essential.

370

The forehead .of him whose fate is there written, is but small. The
inscription in the forehead of the forehead eyed Siva and the common
destinies of men are all easily erased by rubbing the forehead.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

371

Infricans penom vulvoe, the zengam orders his affairs thus, so as to
continue his race in the world.

372

He who has not learnt to reward him who bestows a girl, or a poem,
comforts him not (cools his belly) nor enriches him...(incomplete)

373

No one will give away buttermilk as he will toddy; though they hoard up
for the [thief](errata.htm#62) they will not bestow in
virtue...(incomplete)

374

In urine are all bodies born. What matters your caste, and what is your
intrinsic nature? He that ceases from envy and knoweth the abode where
truth is placed, this is the noblest of men.

375

The hill over the womb and the slit in its centre are the long and short
foot. Thus they seem mighty bands; enjoy sweet coition and be happy.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

376

United with a suitable female, if one is stout, a stout boy will be
produced. But if this man be powerless can the sons be strong?

377

If one's wife comes and consents and another's husband comes and shove
it in. O how it hurts, cries the lady with her mouth; but he replies it
is home (it holds).

378

The pest of the anus is known to the whole race; it cannot be loosed;
the pest of the tongue is life (i.e., food causes life). The whole world
is subject to these inconveniences of the tongue and anus.

379

When we behold the body of a woman we are agitated; but cannot perceive
the nastiness in her belly. To what end is this body that lives in
[defilement](errata.htm#63).

380

Your wife was born from the (urine) of her mother and father and the son
is produced from the (urine) of the wife and

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

husband and yet what delight (a pun with) they feel in this (urine)
life.

381

The smell of lust in a woman's body causes an emetic; let us not enter
that leaky hovel. Surely there is little pleasure in joining thyself
with thy wife.

382

Look on woman--when the period of life arrives she is menstruous; from
time to time the menses regularly occur. Then what is the name of the
woman and what has it to do with time.

383

It is sad feeling to praise the subvulvatees; and vile to praise him who
has it over his head and ridiculous to praise him who carries it in his
cheek.

884

[Caste](errata.htm#64) is a pariarism, a wife is a parcel of *mala
mutra*. Can love be produced in the body towards such a wife? The mind
through [spiritual](errata.htm#65) knowledge becomes a form of God.

385

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

Filth goes to the scourer and a block of wood falls to the share of the
potters, [fullness](errata.htm#66) of the nails to the barber as is well
known and as surely must the worshipper, attain the divinity to gain
purity.

386

Foul defied cry they, ignorant of the source of that impurity. Defiled
doth she retire to a corner. If she bathe in water the fourth day, do
that impurity depart? Never shall it leave her.

387

Does not impurity flow from the nine orifices of the male? Do not they
perceive it? How can a woman be so defiled as to be aside from
men--surely all bodies are one.

388

There is no sweetness in the foulness of the loins. Yet there is some
good in the secret parts. Will the defilement of impurity leave us
merely by bathing?

389

In the earth on a mountain, in the pit on a hill, in the red earth in a
white ant-hill, gold is produced. Surely is gold therein hidden.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

390

If thou take the root *chedarasi* plant in its beauty, pour the juice of
the moon plant there on and triturate it well, this shall produce a
universally useful *anjanamn* (magic mixture applied to the eyes to show
where things lie hid) .

391

If thou extract with vermilion the purest part of gold, and if thou form
a crucible of potter's earth and if thou know not this science thou
shalt reap no advantage from it.

392

This is a rock upon a hill. If thou closely combine him who is in the
white-ant hill, so that the similarity shall be great. Then will gold be
produced (spurious).

393

If thou put together a fruit with ripened husk and a grown *vepa* tree,
and black sugar and touch them with quick silver, there will be produced
gold excelling in value and beauty.

394

If thou take a stone and grind it on a stone knowing the nature of metal
and unite them, if thou understand their union thou shalt thereby live.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

395

One man chews and spits her out not caring for her. When he leaves her
then a poor paramour wishes for his chewings; will not dogs lick the
platter made of leaves which you eat of and throw away.

396

Though a fine wife's breasts be lovely let us think through the force of
sin, on her breasts before now we have ourselves sucked comely breasts;
let us not now think on breasts.

397

Of those we name teacher and pupil, which is last and which is first? If
you desire to know and estimate them which is the greater, which is the
less? Consider the teacher and pupil each as a teacher.

398

Seed is produced in the tree. The tree is produced in the seed,
affection budding between them. Understand in the earth of the nature of
the tree and the seed. For thus are the soul and the body connected.

399

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

The shame veiled in a word hides in the mind. The shame that is
concealed by a petticoat is unfit to mention. But open shames are our
seminal connections. Our shame is less as the cause is greater.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 400-499](vov06)
