[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vov07)  [Next](vov09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

600

The grief of a poor man becomes a great demon, an unuttered (invisible)
trouble cannot be spoken (seen); But the anxieties of a rich man are
still greater. What can there be beyond this?

601

The writing written by the hand perishes (spoil) not though thou blot it
out (spoil it). What is written by fate cannot be done away even with
water. The writing of fate in the forehead will not be gone though thou
rub it with sorrow.

602

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

How should this animal life become assimilated with God? Shall we
compare a village cur with a sage (or saint, yogee).

603

To the liberal man, the vessels of the [mundane](errata.htm#91.md) egg will
fall into his hand. The demigods will become his dependants. Liberality
becomes the residence of all modes of knowledge. Through liberality no
grief can befall us in the world.

604

Behold, if thou say not, if thou refuse not, if thou oppose not, if thou
dislike it not, if thou say it is not thine, that which is thus given is
liberality.

605

If thou reproach others (abhor), if thou esteem not strangers as thy
relations, ignorant of what of what is right and wrong and lay not hold
of heaven (phrase, be puffed up). the liberality thus bestowed is no
liberality--it is hoarding up.

606

Those who grind (i.e.; plough) for the good of others, those also that
are dependants on princes--these are the men who are like milk and payer
of taxes; the farmers are ignorant of language.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

607

Though they be greatest of misers and hard and thou full of mischief, an
evil doer when he boils over a cupful must be skimmed off. But they
should not be called causers of the death of others. (That is, pride
should be checked just enough to render it harmless.)

608

A degraded caste is a caste that has set aside all
[distinctions](errata.htm#92.md); the tribe sustains all creatures. Those
who are of such a caste both here and in the next world are the
Universal prop. (the farmer tribe)

609

The endless cupidity of merchant, the fruitless showers on the rocks,
the interminate search made in the sea, the insurpassable light of the
moon and to these there is no end. There is no path (to heaven) to the
man of impure speech.

610

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

The sin committed by a people shall fall on their prince; about half of
the good done by the prince shall come to the people. How then is it
that the sins of the prince fall not on the people?

611

[Would](errata.htm#93.md) thou you were to look on a cow with affection
like the affection with which you view a woman. The man is so much drawn
by merit as by [pleasure](errata.htm#94.md). What can we think of the
conduct of a sinner.

612

All the [excommunication](errata.htm#95.md) of a Brahmin departs by the
(*amrita*) products of the cow (panchagavyam). The faults of a servant
are removed only by punishment. The impurity (menstrual) of the
*Lingayath* is all removed by mere smearing with ashes.

613

A dog knows its own mind, pleased with it. But a man knows not it his
own wishes or nature nor can see them in this iron age.

614

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

The frauds (lies) of a woman are impenetrable as a wall. A man's fraud
is but a grass screen (tatty). The arts of women are ceaseless as the
voice of a cricket.

615

He who holds as his own the afflictions that befall others is the man
who shall remain and live in the earth. He who knows the next world well
is the greatest of the noble in this earth.

616

The stony hearted wretch though be cut his body to pieces, yet will not
give a penny; if you wish for a cow at his hands can you get it? It is
vain as longing for gold buried under a hill.

617

The born villain, who through friendship (covetousness) that originates
in wealth; knows neither himself nor his neighbour, not seeing out of
his eyes with all pride; to go and beg of such a fool is all hard
indeed.

618

So hard a wretch becomes the possession of the flame. The life (man)
void of kindness shall waste away in water; the soul full of cruelty
shall be the portion of cruel plunderers.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

619

He who the [worthless](errata.htm#96.md) wretch who after daily exciting at
hopes last says I cannot give it, his life is like to a radish. At last
he loses all power and waits for the favour of others.

620

They who compare the breasts of an young woman to balls of flowers--the
worthless wretches who are captivated in this earth. There is [a
lump](errata.htm#97.md) of flesh there--what else is there?

621

He who lives after losing his [character](errata.htm#98.md) be he who he
may, can he have any distinction? What dog will not lick a dirty dish
(spittle leaf)?

622

Fools cry for food, food, If they cannot get wealth. Can they procure
food? How should you fail of food if you have wealth--however many
scarcities should occur.

623

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

When a man has lost his refuge let him not draw near to one in poverty.
But he should go to him, he will turn him into a mere straw (with which
platters are served) or into ashes.

624

One cannot give his sorrow to another; nor one can share his happiness
with another. Those who feel either sorrow or good cannot know its
intrinsic qualities (lit. semblance). Surely time (Pluto) shall know
their true nature.

625

Hitherto ignorant to a miracle of what he himself is doing, born as a
man yet unknowing both evil and good, he has sunk down to predication,

626

Like as honey is produced in a hillock (or ant-hill), like as a ruby is
produced on hill, like as fire is produced in a stick--thus produced in
the earth; let a man bestow on others.

627

Of what use is the man who when the wearied guest asks food compounds
not for him, the nine condiments with salt, to quench his exhaustion.
The disappointed guest remains unfilled.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

628

They call the crow the most degraded of birds. None perceiveth the
excellence of the crow in the earth. Man gives food to the crows and
worships their feet. (This alludes to a practice of commencing a meal by
giving a morsel to the crows.)

629

They say that the crow is the most degraded of birds. At the time of
marriages they will not let the crow approach. Then why do you place
food before it and salute it?

630

Like a boy looking at his shadow, who looking at his shadow forgetting
himself, so are those deluded creatures who looking on their shadow call
themselves kings. What shall we think of such fools?

631

The stone hearted hunter, who severs the mothers and the young of
creatures that have heads (fruits are considered as animals void of
heads)--when this hunter dies in the earth, when he falls on the ground,
he shall be, of no use even to vultures.

632

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Were not they born as ourselves in the earth? Have they not a life like
ours? Oh! what an act is it to slay an anima! that has instinct (or
reason, jyana).

633

The great whole continues in one mind. Their madness alone prevents men
from knowing this. If thou walk in the knowledge of him that is our
abode--it is enough.

634

Unknowing the path of thy future life (transmigrations) and if thou
consider all thy enjoyments as permanent thou shall be
[separated](errata.htm#99.md) like a fish from the water. In the end none
but this shall be thy fate; thou shalt melt and perish.

635

He who though reviled or struck answers not again who looks neither this
way nor that nor starts nor will consider himself the person in question
nor is any way agitated--such a man becomes the Divinity.

636

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

Learn to know that great agent of all acts, O! Vema who wieldeth the
thunder bolt, cleareth it from impurity and with its ultimate essence
(i.e.. nectar, pure water) now fishes the iron age

637

The attachment between the teacher and the learner is very deceitful,
Why should we explain or shew it. With subdued longing after beatitude
if ye have full faith, thou shalt attain it and not otherwise.

638

When snakes are performing coition, you may catch them cleverly
(unrivalled) and in a wonderful [manner](errata.htm#100.md). But you cannot
get the obstinate together and seize them with a prepared heart.

638

Consider fully the strength of thy shoulder and dispute not with the
wile. Is not a stone broken by a pot of milk? (Boiled milk is set to
cool on stone stands which thereby are split).

640

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

Where in the earth is the place where he is not beheld? He exists in
everything. Who am I; who is he that I am not--know this truth, O Vema.

641

He who bestows either his own property or that of others shall become
rich. Then let him think why he should entertain the smallest fear;
ultimately heaven shall be his.

642

If he does good to others and gives the property of one to another (res
alienas alieno si det) he shall inherit heaven. Is wealth anything in
comparison with heaven?

643

What is the nourishment of others to the wicked? The sinner transgresses
the lines both of regularity and affinity. What does obstinate know of
the clues of tenderness, what distinction can such a one attain in this
earth?

644

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

In those who prosper in their undertakings may distinguish themselves
with a waste of words in any matter, but in a time when you are not in
favour, no one work will prosper with you, however large your
possessions be.

645

Be he an out caste or of any tribe whatever, he cannot rid himself of
poverty. Will the poor man be disgusted at leaving?

646

The man of prudence who has bestowed the gift of land on Brahmins
(observe scansion) and his heart on his dependents and who has (given
half to) slighted the worthless, how brave is he?

647

The man that understanding all wisdom commits of his wealth, one share
to the earth, one to others and one to the poor who thus shines, he,
when he dies shall dwell in heaven.

648

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

The woman who [holds](errata.htm#101) her [husband's](errata.htm#102.md)
words [as](errata.htm#103.md) the chief good and who loves her lord with
affection shall by burning her body fully inherit heaven.

649

Those senseless [corpses](errata.htm#104.md) who give alms to the re-born
who have [separated](errata.htm#105.md) themselves from dung and urine,
these shall be produced again weeping and in sin nor released from
transmigration. (Spurious)

650

He who after having been imprisoned in the ties of oxen, wealth, women
and sons, is the agent in releasing himself, there from, can his glory
on his virtue be comprehended even by (Sridhara) Vishnu? (Spurious)

651

These sinful men who having it in their power to give up the restraints
of their children, women, cattle will not yet cast off these ties, these
are void of shame and of manhood. (Spurious)

652

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

The whole race of man is in possession of twelve fruits. (that is, men
receive in the next birth twelve percent on the sums they bestow in
alms). But whatever they bestow on Brahmins shall return to them with
[thirty six](errata.htm#106) percent. (evidently apocryphal.md)

653

He who when the land he had bestowed is lost, bestows other land instead
on the original tenant, thus shall form a great blessing to the agent in
such an act.

654

If the [possessor](errata.htm#107.md) loses his possession, this is no
fault of the bestower. If the holder enjoys the gift, the giver hence
derives stability.

655

He who usurps from the Gods, the Brahmin, the poet or the adulator, the
gift bestowed either by himself or others, and grieve them, this man
shall live till he devour dung without measure. (evidently apocryphal)

656

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

To devour a mortgage or the fruits of such a possession is a great sin
though the committer be a king. The tenant alone has the right to the
usufruct, to the exclusion of the land lord.

657

He who mortgages, suffers a certain loss, he loses part of his living.
The acceptor of the pledge derives satisfaction therefrom. But he is
ruined if he begins to covet it.

658

They who recognize (pity not) the nature of the
[irrational](errata.htm#108) (uneducated.md) animals and contrive how to
take mortgages from them, these are themselves the most brutish in the
earth.

659

The thing that is nourished with *vasa* herb is poisoned by the
*vasa-nabhi*, which also secures the body from *venom*; if thou
comprehend this thou shalt become him who knows the secrets of the
heart.

660

Ignorant of the chief good, void of sense, he sinks in darkness. That
saint who is perfect shall know all the great secret.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

661

He is a fool who gives his hand to another in assurance of security
while he himself is transient as a figure in a mirror; void of happiness
why should we contract marriage in this fleeting life?

662

What wisdom can he have who knoweth not knowledge? The fool never shall
know God. What is the chief God (tatwa) to know the wisdom that is
[within](errata.htm#109.md) wisdom?

663

Dwelling in the false earth, unable to reach heaven, grieving in their
members, enduring sever penance-never shall these see happiness (tatwa).

664

A man of the sea may go to sleep with another. Know that an entire
creation exists in the vast deep.

685

This world being continued by means of birth, death and sleep--a man's
calling himself (observe grammar) a jangam therein, is not understood by
any of the ignorant men of the earth. (i.e., ignorant recognize not
holiness)

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

666

Water is changed into the body and the body into water and into
immutable matter. This does the entire world of being exist in water.

687

If even a boil rise on the back of a man of virtue, it will become
notorious. But if even a marriage happen in the house of a poor man, no
one hears of it.,

668

What you call the Goddess of the earth is mere clay. How many fair
beings are born from the earth that Goddess alone knows, but no man
knows the origin.

669

They, heap up earth and wallow in mud but they adhere not to the earth
but turn again, and are mingled with earth. Where shall they then depart
to?

670

The scamp who cannot give up connection with a *Viti* woman (of the
sword-playing caste) will carry about her mat and hovel (or tent) till
death. Never care or aspire to an intimacy with the *Bhagavat* (actors
who are respectable).

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

671

When they behold their refuge Vishnu or wealth, or studies that have
pleasing taste however great they be, all men feel desire.

672

A man who is sent (lit. who sent) into the world, hear me, consider not
one thing eternal and another temporal; such is his conduct. His
projects constitute his family; and the destruction of his projects
shall form the ultimate bliss.

673

The words of truth are equal in excellence with the streams in which
Siva is; (*abhisheca*) bathed. The body is his temple. He who hath
attained peace and placed with God in his soul, this is the Siva Yogi.

674

No numbers of corporal bodies form an obstacle to a death. To what end
is that knowledge that teaches not how to avoid death; this is mere
thievish fraud. Shall salvation be hereby attained?

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

675

Whatever shape we behold, it shows thy form. To view thy form increases
wisdom; if understanding increase, a man is held to be the lord.

676

Carnudu was noble; who in the world is greater? He meditated bestowing
gifts, no man knows of the excellence of him who doth no good to others.

677

Ignorant of the stability of wisdom the variable mortal roams the world.
The ignorant wretch cannot consider why it is he thus roams.

678

When a man does not know what to do with his time, he cannot get on
without listening to some learning or other. But this is fruitless;
famina not audit murmura cassor inter futuendum?

679

To what end do the men of the earth practise austerity and meditation?
There but one mode to behold God. Let not thy mind wander and thou shalt
know him.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

680

What has palm toddy to do with gentle behaviour; why all this care about
appearances that are merely with a view to gaining bread? To what end is
this body, which is [destined](errata.htm#110.md) to the earth of the
[cemetery](errata.htm#111.md).

681

If you powder nitre and tulasi (buds) together, amalgamate then upon
gold; mix the milk of the dushta plant and mingle these upon a plate of
copper which will thus become gold.

682

If thou pour milk in and boil it the tin will shine. If thou observe the
proper moment and take it off the fire, it will turn to silver. This is
no lie but the truth, Iswara.

683

If thou take a certain medicine thou shalt be able to rise from the
earth; if thou take a certain mixture thou shalt be glorious. There is
also a drug that quelleth fever.

684

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

Cattle that fall down in the staggers if they are fired and thus come to
life again. Shall the milk of fired [buffalo](errata.htm#112.md) be held
vile.

685

If he receive great wealth, he forbears to take it; he reviles the
respectable and drives them off till they fly. Will a cow of degraded
blood acknowledge the noble?

686

Numerous as creeds be they are not permanent in the earth. Truth is but
one in the earth. It consists in leaving every creed and
[beholding](errata.htm#113.md) the very deity.

687

In the real composition (lit. rising) of a cloud within the cloud there
is thunder [and](errata.htm#114.md) thunderbolts in abundance. Then to
understand what "cloud" implies and the might embodied in it is great
task (revise).

688

If a seed be damaged, it cannot grow; if the seed be not injured, it
grows. Then surely the seed alone is Viswakarma, the creator.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

689

Though you hear of him, be not thou ever united to him, If thou see and
unite with him, your desires will unite in affection. If from merely
hearing of him thou be united to him, your love will depart. Such is
love that originates in [hearsay](errata.htm#115.md) and sight.

[690](errata.htm#116.md)

The [humility](errata.htm#117.md) of a mad man is great. The widow when
ruined veils herself, and the son of a prostitute performs the rites
very duly.

691

He is a mental wax cloth (changeless) and a cave formed by bowed banyan
trees. This farmer Vemana took all men and taught them well; thus did he
gain renown.

692

A guana will live a century, a serpent will creep for ten centuries, and
the crane will live in a pond for a thousand years. He who possesses
man's chief good (wisdom) is the only excellent one.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

693

If they say he knows not, surely he had no knowledge previously. If he
begins to say I know, he knows the root. Let the mouth of him who says I
know, when he knows not, be filled with a basket of ashes.

694

(Observe comparative) The dog has somewhat a better quality than man;
for if we consider man in the world he is worse than a dog, if he be
void of excellence.

695

A shop keeper's devotion well, never turn to any use. Through a covetous
disposition he sinks downwards. It is as agreeable as tiger entertaining
a saint.

696

A dome, ponds all about, cars and herb gardens, temples---all these are
very fair. But if you go to serve the God, all these divert the mind.

697

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

Until married, they are in subjection. When the cord (about the throat)
is bound, they look scornfully. To be in subjection under woman is a
thing not to be spoken of.

698

While the ears, skin and bright eyes, the tongue and nose continue, the
soul remains; the spirit thus dwelling firmly in the body shines as the
chief thing in the world.

699

What our own history will be and what those of our connections will be,
if we wish to hear or see this futurity, the Gods
[themselves](errata.htm#118.md) know it not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 700-799](vov09.md)
