[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vov13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1200

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

In this world there is not the blessing of complete happiness they say,
how then should that happiness be attained in the next world? If death
were not present with us from the first, how should it at last visit us.
(Our ultimate good or bad fate is but a continuation of our present
lot).

1201

This frail body suffers numberless changes in many ways. Do we nourish
and foster it? At last it is given to the funeral flames or to the foxes
of the wilderness.

1202

If a soldier skilled in war serves a base master he will disobey and
turn again from seeking his favour. He will roam the towns and hamlets
like a monkey.

1203

Sand, coals, stones, grass, skin, dirt, sticks, where is the sinner who
does not [bless](errata.htm#207.md) his teeth with some of these things.

1204

Will not those who are ignorant of swimming fall into a deep well? How
should those who understand swimming fall into the pit, alas, so as to
be reduced to powder.

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

1205

If numerous vessels be placed in one house they are all in various
shapes. If this diversity be removed, all will become space.

1206

Why O ye men do ye always think on the body? Cannot ye perceive that the
body is perishable? Like to a bandicote caught and dying in a trap.

1207

If thou consider the deity far removed from thee, he shall be far from
thee. If thou consider the body as his dwelling he shall dwell therein
and if thou hold life to be his vehicle, such men shall remain stable as
gods.

1208

Classes and customs vary; but birth is one. Viands differ but hunger is
one.

1209

The Sun, Moon, Tusda, Woden (Bhouma), Thor (lit. the teacher,
Brihaspati), Frida (sucra), and Saturn--These are signs only but each
day is the same.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

1210

What is Borax--a substance that is luminous coalesces with metals,
uniting them in love. The life is united to the body in a similar
manner.

1211

He proceeded from woman and longs for woman. Why all this love of woman
and affection for her. He who gives up woman shall gain wisdom.

1212

All fear belongs to the animal body; if fear depart the whole essence
shall become the divine spirit. All destruction belongs to the body and
all victory to the soul.

1213

Whatever difficulties a man meets within this world, it is not a place
that can be instrumental to the attainment of the next world. Then they
are not worthy however closely you view them.

1214

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

How many are they that live on earth, in heaven, and between them; has
any one the power to count them. Those who live are indeed those who
die.

1215

If God be ours (if the Deity has been attained by us) in even the
destruction, we shall rejoice in glorious majesty. He that knows not God
shall remain a captive.
