[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vov12)  [Next](vov14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1100

If we kill, sin is contracted; by not slaying virtue attaches But to the
omniscient, whether he slay or save, neither attaches. How can that
death be slain that thus slay Siva? (a very difficult grammatical
construction to translate).

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

1101

You may straighten a tree to prevent its being crooked. You may duly
rectify stone but you cannot straighten the mind that it become not more
crooked.

1102

Whatever any one at any time advises, a man should listen to
respectfully nor be hasty. After learning the truth he will become a
steady character.

1103

When their crimes fall on their head, they think of God. When they(fall
with their heads under) live headlessly they think not on God. Like
sinners do they make a noise as if in (or seeing) a dream, See they
this? O Vema.

1104

Words are produced by the thousand (let bags of wards come); yet by well
weighing words, they become magic gems. By knowing the
[composition](errata.htm#193) of words, thou with thy words gain
perfection O, Vema!

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

1105

The mind is of tender age itself. The mind is still youth in all men.
Mind witnesses to mind. No decrepitude affects the minds in the world, O
Vema!

1106

Though you have gained wealth you may not have got liberality. The
wisdom of Brahma Deva is the [wisdom](errata.htm#194) of a fool (lit.
slave). He gives wealth here and liberality there.

1107

Looking and looking at himself he cannot perceive thee, O God. Looking
and looking at thee he would forget himself. He that sees thee is the
true saint.

1108

The water poured at the root rises around the root and greatly increases
the entire tree. In the same manner the soul pervades the entire body.

1109

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

Surely the Vedas are all mere contention. Let ashes fill the contentious
man's mouth; surely the vanquisher of the Vedas is Vemana. Surely it is
our great object to know what is true happiness.

1110

If thou plant a tree carefully but give it no trellis, it will not grow
but perish in this world. Thus [it](errata.htm#195) is with him who
desireth wisdom but can obtain no teacher.

1111

Shall not we cut down the forest of ignorance with the sword of
knowledge? Let us not think on ignorance in our mind but look to the
places where the light of wisdom is fixed!

1112

Alas none knows intuition (yeriki for everiki). Though thou teach none
can understand; by teaching and teaching understanding is produced.
Excellent (or divine) is understanding if thou will view it.

1113

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

Like as the (Parabhruta) cuckoo is reared by the crow, like as the worm
comes to life by means of the wasp, thus is it that the fool pretends to
be a teacher but cannot bestow perfection (moksha). The nature of the
pupil does not depend on the teacher.

1114

If you take a vile fellow and give him wealth he will overthrow even the
venerable. [Does](errata.htm#196) the dog that gnaws shoes know the
sweetness of the sugar cane?

1115

Beasts will not beg of beasts; the race of birds will not submissively
ask of their equals. Is he a man who will not bestow when a man asks or
is he a woman in the world, O Vema!

1116

What though you have got a *putti* (1600 lbs) or only a cupful of chaff.
There is not in it one grain in the world. Trouble only increases in
proportion to the store of empty words. The more talk the more trouble.

1117

By want of food they are in distress. How should the wisdom of such mere
corpses become fruitless? If you pour water into an unbaked vessel will
it remain there in?

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

1118

He was born in this land and grew up in this land but cannot bestow this
land on any one. Alas the man of a foreign country is the king of the
world. (Probably alludes to the Musalman Government.)

1119

Why should all wisdom be published? Why should we receive the gifts of a
sinner, O sage, ignorantly.

1120

He that quitteth not a faithless friend--is he not a shepherd? (swain
fool) Has any shepherd in the world horns (i.e. honour)?

1121

What has a thief to do with good habits? What has a fornicator to do
with worship and adoration? What in the world has a palmwine drinker to
do with devotion?

1122

This unstable body falls about like a dog; for many days chatters, he
gives his body to the fire or to the jackals of the forest.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

1123

Your wife is the property of others. Your wealth is the property of the
whores. Your body is the property of earth. If you consider them in
'your mind, the virtue (i.e. practice) alone is yours.

1124

If with thy whole heart thou seek and see that, think that it is of
wondrous semblance; then shalt thou perceive that it pervades all space
and is not of nature divisible.

1125

How should he who is attached to (desires) sin think of the deity. How
should the sinner be a teacher? Behold the mind of a fool. Does it know
(Had) God?

1126

To cleanse his mouth is a great trouble (nastiness) even to the great
saint. Not even a son of Brahma can [purify](errata.htm#197) his mouth,
But the mouth that speaks the truth is the purest in the world.

1127

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

First it rises above the water and becomes a sprout; the sprout is
itself both husband and son of the earth. The earth is the seed, to both
mother and wife

1128

Who are the kings who always being engaged in the earth nourish the
world? Whence does the title of great Lord attach to man?

1129

In former time in the world a Boya man, when a tiger roared in the
forests, held it to be a cruel beast, and slew it. The sin that he
incurred hereby seized the Boysa and whelmed him.

1130

From their birth they continually slay all animals, and become the
garden bed of sin. Shall beatitude be attained by evil doers?

1131

Animals that have tails, they get and cut their throats, they break the
necks of all the goats of the flocks and as for the rest of the animals
they burn and eat them.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

1132

They will quit all tasks whatever and the men of the world long (lit.
dwell) for the taste of the mouth (eloquence). If you say Devil, the
girls are alarmed; [all](errata.htm#198) the world has become thus. O
Vera I look well to thy words.

1133

Look at your wife. She is shackles on your leg. All your children (in a
row) are the rivets. All connections are like to a prison as you
consider them closely.

1134

He himself remain sunk in the ocean of love formed by the triple love of
wife, offspring and wealth. In what way then should men be able to
attain beatitude. When the song is ended we obtain the symphony.

1135

Through those desires that have been wound about us ever since we were
children-thus high are we entrapped by the names of relations, called
younger sister, elder sister, mother and father.

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

1136

How many are thy mothers and fathers? How many births hast thou had?
Again how many are the places where thou sufferest pain (or live)? The
fool knoweth not, this is stable and this fluctuating.

1137

That cannot perceive that life is unstable, thus mad men. They are
puffed up here in the earth. All souls are surely in the sight of Yama
like as goats bound for sacrifice.

1138

When your father and mother are dead, you and your wife unite and look
to building your house agreeably. Like as though a thief already fixed
on the impaling post should ask for food.

1139

Increase are decrease, consider, occur to all, however great. The body
is not real, if you think on the facts. They cannot know this. What can
we say to this.

1140

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

Through a selfish spirit it is that we say of any one thing, I cannot
live (or get on) without this. To have it, but to know you cannot
perceive it, go to. This is the bond of the worldly life.

1141

What though we learn and know whence we came and where we go; it is but
like the coming or going [of](errata.htm#199) sleep. The birth and
departure of the soul, these behold, form the divine state and are alone
of importance.

1142

All men are bound in the cords of their lusts, shining in their dignity.
They cannot sever it with the sword of wisdom.

1143

Who are ye that ye should be able to walk independently of the endless
course of time. Relinquish all your idiotic properties and walk, O men
in the paths of beatitude.

1144

What has become of all the noble race that lived of all? They might have
exalted them in the world. To crush their enemies none has prevailed
besides Siva.

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

1145

Things that are produced from earth we separate from earth and dress
them again in an earthen vessel; at what strong love we feel for the
earthen vessel?

1146

Vegetables without salt are to the taste vile as (salt ground) barren
land. A ruined wretch is he that hath no shoes and the man out of debt
is the richest of the wealthy.

1147

The egg in the womb dwells in the body. By the course of breath it
pleasantly rambles. This is like austerity in a vine-yard (under a palm
tree). When shall he attain bliss.

1148

How is instruction gained? He cannot see the top of his head. It is good
to seek him, the deity who dwells on the top of your head. That skilful
man who comprehends his head, takes beatitude by violence.

1149

In truth, worth is the source of a faithful intention; devoid of faith
thou shalt not attain bliss. What is this we call bliss? Thou art
thyself its origin.

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

1150

Formerly *Boya* Kannappa drew near to the three-eyed god and became
beatified. Purity of heart is the root of all acceptable worship.

1151

Time is the effective form of Siva. Time is the
[duration](errata.htm#200) of God. How shalt a fool know the meaning of
true happiness?

1152

By means of a name, a country becomes a holy ground. Thus have stones,
through names become kings (i.e., idols). By names have water become all
holy streams.

1153

For garden herbs, for spontaneous vegetables, for bran and for empty
ears (of corn), those jack asses who for such boons as these have
written poems and have become as great as the truly
[excellent](errata.htm#201).

1154

When we were born in the womb of our mother at first we not clothing nor
shall have at our latter end. Is not it then a joke for us to wear
clothing in our intermediate life?

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

1152

There is no artist in the land nobler than the creator. Draw near with
delight to him the lord of all; who is greater than that artist; are men
to revile the creator.

1156

If he knows not how to restrain his five senses, and cannot (hold) check
the flame of the fire within, and if he has not singleness of heart how
shall he regenerate?

1157

He considereth himself the teacher of all the tribes (castes) but
knoweth not death, this son of a pariar, when this teacher dies he is
vile as the crow that never had a teacher.

1158

He that cannot restrain his mind is in his soul even lower than a
pariar, after death hell shall be his fate. O men!

1159

Is not it wrong to call that man living soul who can perceive no beauty
in the deity Where is the linga? Where is the Zangam? (i.e., what has
such a [Zangam](errata.htm#202) to do with the linga).

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

1160

Relinquish the degraded [commerce](errata.htm#203) of excessive sensual
delights (Lit. delights of the five senses) and truly become part of the
divine self. Let not the internal vision desire the pleasures of
eyesights. Call not merely with thy mouth on god, O Vema!

1161

Externally ye suspend the lingam to a number of threads and daub
yourselves externally with ashes, yet cannot see that God who dwells
externally in all space,

1162

When God ordered the world to proceed by means of death and birth, the
name of teacher is attached to him; false is the teacher who knoweth not
that his own death is certain.

1163

See these robbers call themselves teachers--void of knowledge, ignorant
of themselves--these unprofitable sons of slave.

1164

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

There is not a single teacher who can show us the (gurutu) truth, not
one excellent scholar is there who discerneth the truth. A teacher and a
wise pupil are rare as a hare's horns.

1165

Setting up a teacher in even each religion, not even one man hath
attained bliss. They worship unblushing teachers.

1166

One is born only to devour food, and perishes, another is born to attain
beatitude, and perishes. To attain power another becomes a pariar...

1167

They talk and say there is a teacher in each sect--O ye pariars!
ignorant of hidden truth. He that calls himself, dies a crow devoid of
instructor.

1168

In the evening the Brahmin performs the religious draughts. The king
mounts the sedan, in this earthly dwelling. The cobbler dances a jig.
The disease is healed by medicine.

1169

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

First knowledge, thereby...let not the pious entertain doubts; without
the illumination of a lamp shall darkness be dissipated?

1170

Knowing that the body will perish in the ground, yet through great
attachment a man nourishes it. Lo! Lo! like as if he should cut off his
nee and set himself to drink the blood,

1171

How large this exterior may be. I know not what connection there is
between the divinity and this world. In the estimation of the wise how
large is the sun, Thus musing they are evidently alarmed.
(exemplification of doubt.) ("sunt qui formidive nulla Imbuti spectent")

1172

If rain raineth, the field fruiteth. If rain fall not, it is soon dried
up. Thus is the field ordained as sustenance to all.

1173

He that speaketh the truth (tatwa) is to be met with some where in the
earth. But he who knows the truth is no where found. If he should exist,
he is certainly imperceptible to us.

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

1174

He who being charitable in his mind considers the hungry guest as God,
and without the least heat (displeasure) gives him a mouthful (as much
as a nut) of food, this is the man who can cry avaunt to yama (death)
and slay him.

1175

Our connections (family) being about us and living in sweet enjoyment,
in the midst of them their ruler (the soul) sits. O ye men attain the
dwelling of God; there alone is true happiness found.

1176

After you have boiled vegetables, is it possible to pick out the straws?
Sense would teach you to gather them before boiling, After you have lost
all you possessed where is charity (dharma).

1177

Where trees are produced, fruits also flourish, They must be cut down
(or gathered) with a knife. If you dress and eat them, you will know
their quality.

1178

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

While there is still salt and tamarind fruits in the village why dread
famine, O farmer! Is there no orpiment? Is there no tin? (That is, I
advise you to poison [yourselves either](errata.htm#204) with natural
poisons or with immoderate quantities of salt or tamarind acid).

1179

If with a mouth defiled with spittle thou meditate on him, does the
divinity thereby become spittle (in a thousand ways)? However many
persons we name they are not thereby defiled.

1180

He who in the budding of prosperity gives the gifts of a virgin
(kanyadan), at the last the region of holiness shall be attained by him.
This is the secret of Vedanta.

1181

If seeing one man's wealth and strength, and desiring his gold, thou
give him thy daughter (kanya) heaven exists not for thee. He who
favouring the poor gives a female to him, what is the use of talking? He
is the Parama Siva.

1182

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

The dowry (or gift in marriage) which is given through seeing and
desiring, all possessions and good things perish. A disproportioned
dowry produces much profits.

1183

At the time when they give a daughter to a man of wealth, fools exult
greatly. It is merely the result of their prayers. Will your pride
remain stable?

1184

Though he be devoid of learning, and void of money, if after all even a
fool, or dumb, if she be grown you may give her to a favourite
connection (bandhu).

1185

He who takes a connection of his own and without reckoning his wealth,
looks only to his age bestows the dowry and thus gives his daughter
(woman) in marriage, this is the wisest of all.

1186

If you bestow your daughter in marriage looking to wealth, it is as if
you gaffe her for a price. The dignified way is to give her to an equal.
If thou give her to a poor man, they remain entwined in close
attachments.

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

1187

Giving one's daughter to a rich man is like the water of a well flowing
into the sea. But a woman given to a poor man is like watering a lime
tree with sea of water,

1188

Through a man's wealth he gets an excellent wife (*punyavati*). Thus a
fit husband is also gained by an excellent woman. By the fortune
(bhagam) of both, friends and good sons and the eight blessings will be
gained.

1189

When a marriage contract (manuvu) is made by a rich man with a poor one,
wealth and poverty became thereby united. What then is possession and
what is poverty?

1190

Mother, father, friends and relations, and all others will seek and
desire a young man. They will give him the girl but not fortune with
her.

1191

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

There is no place that exists not in the mind it is closely united with
our acts, if we meditate on God in our hearts.

1192

During his life he doth not restrain his lusts but when death comes, he
turns recluse. Without thou quell thy mind, is beatitude attainable?

1192

If thy eye be single, the knowledge shall be one like a man in this
earth is united with a woman. Then shall thy interior be full of light
like to the lord of the world.

1194

Born in the dark, we grow up in the darkness. Why are we ensnared in the
(concealment) darkness of delusion. If thou understand this darkness,
this whole world shall appear to thee.

1195

Not seeing the might of time and imagining that this present is
perpetual they merely weary themselves. How is it that the men of this
world can never discern this noble boon, the lapse of time.

1196

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

Through worshipping the three eyed in ignorant faith, in former time,
Boya Kannappa became a sage. Did this happen through his worship? Wisdom
was the cause.

1197

If while we own the error of another we ourselves participate therein,
the fortune we enjoy will perish. Is it not enough if water leaks out of
a cracked pot (i.e., defect is merely less obvious)? (Olla Ollam
melamopraction of pellat)

1198

Shall the amorous, or he that is enslaved to cupidity or for wealth, or
that is engrossed in attachment to his family or the stubborn, or he who
(makes his face half) turns away his face, see heaven? Though these turn
out of the way shall the words of Vemana ever fall to the ground?

1199

By the spread of the passing wind, (water touched by it,) water acquires
coolness. There is another secret hidden near to this, if men would
understand it (the mind is [similarly](errata.htm#205) affected by
outward [occurrences](errata.htm#206)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1200-1215](vov14)
