[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2248)  [Next](sbe2250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THIRD LESSON.

When he has eaten or drunk at a festive entertainment, he might vomit
(what he has eaten), or not well digest it; or some other bad disease or
sickness might befall him. (1)

The Kevalin says this is the reason:

A mendicant, having drunk various liquors, together with the householder
or his wife, monks or nuns, might not find the (promised) resting-place
on leaving the scene of entertainment and looking

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

out for it; or in the resting-place he may get into mixed company; in
the absence of his mind or in his drunkenness he may lust after a woman
or a eunuch; approaching the mendicant (they will say): O long-lived
*S*rama*n*a! (let us meet) in the garden, or in the sleeping-place, in
the night or in the twilight.' Luring him thus by his sensuality (she
says): Let us proceed to enjoy the pleasures of love.' He might go to
her, though he knows that it should not be done.

These are the causes to sin, they multiply continuously. Therefore
should a well-controlled Nirgrantha not resolve to go to any festival
which is preceded or followed by a feast. (2)

A monk or a nun, hearing or being told of some festivity, might hasten
there, rejoicing inwardly: 'There will be an entertainment, sure
enough!' It is impossible to get there from other families alms which
are acceptable and given out of respect for the cloth <span
id="fr_338"></span>[1](#fn_332), and to eat the meal. As this would lead
to sin, they should not do it <span id="fr_339"></span>[2](#fn_333). But
they should enter there, and getting from other families their alms,
should eat their meal. (3)

A monk or a nun, knowing that in a village or a scot-free town, &c. (see
I, 7, 6, § 4), an entertainment will be given, should not resolve to go
to that village, &c., for the sake of the entertainment. The Kevalin
assigns as the reason herefore: When a man goes to

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

a much-frequented and vulgar entertainment somebody's foot treads on his
foot, somebody's hand moves his hand, somebody's bowl clashes against
his bowl, somebody's head comes in collision with his head, somebody's
body pushes his body, or somebody beats him with a stick or a bone or a
fist or a clod, or sprinkles him with cold water, or covers him with
dust; or he eats unacceptable food, or he receives what should be given
to others. Therefore should a well-controlled Nirgrantha not resolve to
go to a much-frequented and vulgar entertainment to partake of it. (4)

A monk or a nun on a begging-tour should not accept such food, &c,,
about the acceptability or unacceptability of which his (or her) mind
has some doubts or misgivings for such food, &c. (5)

When a monk or a nun wishes to enter the abode of a householder, they
should do so with the complete outfit <span
id="fr_340"></span>[1](#fn_334). (6)

A monk or a nun entering or leaving the out-of-door places for religious
practices or study, should do so with the complete outfit. (7)

A monk or a nun wandering from village to village should do so with the
complete outfit <span id="fr_341"></span>[2](#fn_335). (8)

A monk or a nun should not, with the complete outfit, enter or leave the
abode of a householder to collect alms, or the out-of-door places for
religious practices and study, or wander from village to village on
perceiving that a strong and widely-spread rain pours down, or a strong
and widely-spread mist is

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

coming on, or a high wind raises much dust, or many flying insects are
scattered about and fall down. (9)

A monk or a nun on a begging-tour should not accept food, &c., in the
houses of Kshatriyas, kings, messengers, and relations of kings, whether
they are inside or outside, or invite them; for such food, &c., is
impure and unacceptable. Thus I say. (10)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_332"></span>[95:1](sbe2249.htm#fr_338) Esiya*m* vesiya*m*.
The latter word is explained by ra*g*ohara*n*âdiveshâl labdham, what one
gets for the sake of one's apparel, the broom, &c.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[95:2](sbe2249.htm#fr_339) Mâi*tth*â*n*a*m*
sa*m*phâse, no eva*m* kare*gg*â, i.e. mât*ri*sthâna*m* samspri*s*et, na
eva*m* kuryât: mât*ri*sthâna is somewhere explained karmopadânasthâna.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[96:1](sbe2249.htm#fr_340) See I, 7, 4, note 1.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[96:2](sbe2249.htm#fr_341) These Sûtras are
perfectly analogous with §§ 7, 8 of the first lesson.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 1, Lesson 4](sbe2250)
