[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2278)  [Next](sbe2280) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

## THIRD PART.

### FIFTEENTH LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### THE CLAUSES <span id="fr_485"></span>[1](#fn_478).

In that period, in that age lived the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra, the
five (most important moments of whose life happened) when the moon was
in conjunction with the asterism Uttaraphalgunî <span
id="fr_486"></span>[2](#fn_479); to wit: In Uttaraphalgunî he descended
(from heaven), and having descended (thence), he entered the womb (of
Devânandâ); in Uttaraphalgunî he was removed from the womb (of
Devânandâ) to the womb (of Tri*s*alâ); in Uttaraphalgunî he was born; in
Uttaraphalgunî tearing out his hair, he left the house, and entered the
state of houselessness; in Uttaraphalgunî he obtained the highest
knowledge and intuition, called Kevala, which is infinite, supreme,
unobstructed, unimpeded, complete, and perfect. But in Svâti the
Venerable One obtained final liberation <span
id="fr_487"></span>[3](#fn_480). (1)

When in this Avasarpi*n*î era, the Sushama-sushamâ period, the Sushamâ
period, the Sushamadu*h*shamâ period, and much time of the
Du*h*shamasushamâ period had elapsed, seventy-five years nine and a half

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

months of it being left; in the fourth month of summer, in the eighth
fortnight, in the light fortnight of Ashâ*dh*a, on its sixth day, while
the moon was in conjunction with Uttaraphalgunî, the Venerable Ascetic
Mahâvîra descended from the great Vimâna <span
id="fr_488"></span>[1](#fn_481), the all-victorious and all-prosperous
Pushpottara, which is like the lotus amongst the best (and highest
flowers), and like the Svastika and Vardhamânaka amongst the celestial
regions, where he had lived for twenty Sâgaropamas till the termination
of his allotted length of life, (divine) nature and existence (among
gods). Here, forsooth, in the continent of *G*ambudvîpa, in
Bharatavarsha, in the southern part of it, in the southern brahmanical
part of the place Ku*nd*apura, he took the form of an embryo in the womb
of Devânandâ, of the *G*âlandharâya*n*a gotra, wife of the Brâhma*n*a
*Ri*shabhadatta, of the gotra of Ko*d*âla, taking the form of a
lion <span id="fr_489"></span>[2](#fn_482). (2) The knowledge of the
Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra (with reference to this transaction) was
threefold: he knew that he was to descend; he knew that he had
descended; he knew not when he was descending. For that time has been
declared to be infinitesimally small. (3)

Then in the third month of the rainy season, the fifth fortnight, the
dark (fortnight) of Â*s*vina, on its thirteenth day, while the moon was
in conjunction with Uttaraphalgunî, after the lapse of eighty-two days,
on the eighty-third day current, the compassionate god (Indra),
reflecting on what was the established custom (with regard to the birth
of Tîrthakaras), removed the embryo from the southern

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

brahmanical part of the place Ku*nd*apura to the northern Kshatriya part
of the same place, rejecting the unclean matter, and retaining the clean
matter, lodged the fetus in the womb of Tri*s*alâ of the Vâsish*th*a
gotra, wife of the Kshatriya Siddhartha, of the Kâ*s*yapa gotra, of the
clan of the *Gñ*ât*ri*s, and lodged the fetus of the Kshatriyâ*n*î
Tri*s*alâ in the womb of Devânandâ of the *G*âlandharâya*n*a gotra, wife
of the Brâhma*n*a *Ri*shabhadatta, of the gotra of Ko*d*âla, in the
southern brahmanical part of the place Ku*nd*apurî. (4) The knowledge of
the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra (with regard to this transaction) was
threefold: he knew that he was to be removed; he knew that he was
removed; he also knew when he was being removed. (5)

In that period, in that age, once upon a time, after the lapse of nine
complete months and seven and a half days, in the first month of summer,
in the second fortnight, the dark (fortnight) of *K*aitra, on its
thirteenth day, while the moon was in conjunction with Uttaraphalgunî,
the Kshatriyâ*n*î Tri*s*alâ, perfectly healthy herself, gave birth to a
perfectly healthy (boy), the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra. (6)

In that night in which the Kshatriyâ*n*î Tri*s*alâ, perfectly healthy
herself, gave birth to a perfectly healthy (boy), the Venerable Ascetic
Mahâvîra, there was one great divine, godly lustre (originated) by
descending and ascending gods and goddesses (of the four orders of)
Bhavanapatis, Vyantaras, *G*yotishkas, and Vimânavâsins; and in the
conflux of gods the bustle of gods amounted to confusion <span
id="fr_490"></span>[1](#fn_483). (7)

In that night, &c., the gods and goddesses rained

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

down one great shower of nectar, sandal powder, flowers, gold, and
pearls <span id="fr_491"></span>[1](#fn_484). (8)

In that night the gods and goddesses (of the above-mentioned four
orders) performed the customary ceremonies of auspiciousness and honour,
and his anointment as a Tîrthakara. (9)

Upwards from the time when the Venerable Mahâvîra was placed in the womb
of the Kshatriyâ*n*î Tri*s*alâ, that family's (treasure) of gold,
silver, riches, corn, jewels, pearls, shells, precious stones, and
corals increased <span id="fr_492"></span>[2](#fn_485). (10) When the
parents of the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra had become aware of this,
after the lapse of the tenth day, and the performance of the
purification, they prepared much food, drink, sweetmeats, and spices;
and having invited a host of friends, near and remote relatives, they
distributed, portioned out, bestowed (the above-mentioned materials) to
*S*rama*n*as, Brâhma*n*as, paupers, beggars <span
id="fr_493"></span>[3](#fn_486), eunuchs, &c., and distributed gifts to
those who wanted to make presents; then they gave a dinner to the host
of friends, near and remote relatives, and after dinner they announced
the name (of the child) to their guests: (11) 'Since the prince was
placed in the womb of the Kshatriyâ*n*î Tri*s*alâ, this family's
(treasure) of gold, silver, riches, corn, jewels, pearls, shells,
precious stones, and corals increased; therefore the prince shall be
called Vardhamâna (i.e. the Increasing).' (12)

The Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra was attended by five nurses: a wet-nurse,
a nurse to clean him,

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

one to dress him, one to play with him, one to carry him; being
transferred from the lap of one nurse to that of another, he grew up on
that beautiful ground, paved with mosaic of precious stones, like a
*K*ampaka <span id="fr_494"></span>[1](#fn_487) tree growing in the glen
of a mountain. (13)

Then the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra, after his intellect had developed
and the childhood had passed away, lived in the enjoyment of the
allowed, noble, fivefold joys and pleasures: (consisting in) sound,
touch, taste, colour, and smell <span id="fr_495"></span>[2](#fn_488).
(14)

The Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra belonged to the Kâ*s*yapa gotra. His
three names have thus been recorded by tradition: by his parents he was
called Vardhamâna, because he is devoid of love and hate (he is called)
*S*rama*n*a (i.e. Ascetic), because he sustains dreadful dangers and
fears, the noble nakedness, and the miseries of the world; the name
Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra has been given to him by the gods <span
id="fr_496"></span>[3](#fn_489).

The Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra's father belonged to the Kâ*s*yapa gotra;
he had three names: Siddhartha, *S*reyârsa, and *G*asa*m*sa <span
id="fr_497"></span>[4](#fn_490). His mother belonged to the Vâsish*th*a
gotra, and had three names: Tri*s*alâ, Videhadattâ, and Priyakâri*n*î.
His paternal uncle Supâr*s*va belonged to the Kâ*s*yapa gotra. His
eldest brother, Nandivardhana, and his eldest sister, Sudar*s*anâ,
belonged both to the Kâ*s*yapa gotra. His wife Ya*s*odâ belonged to the
Kau*nd*inya gotra. His daughter, who belonged to the Kâ*s*yapa gotra,
had two names: A*n*o*gg*â and

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Priyadar*s*anâ.
His granddaughter, who belonged to the Kau*s*ika gotra, had two names:
*S*eshavatî and Ya*s*ovatî <span id="fr_498"></span>[1](#fn_491). (15)

The Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra's parents were worshippers of Pâr*s*va
and followers of the *S*rama*n*as. During many years they were followers
of the *S*rama*n*as, and for the sake of protecting the six classes of
lives they observed, blamed, repented, confessed, and did penance
according to their sins. On a bed of Ku*s*a-grass they rejected all
food, and their bodies dried up by the last mortification of the flesh,
which is to end in death. Thus they died in the proper month, and,
leaving their bodies, were born as gods in Adbhuta Kalpa. Thence
descending after the termination of their allotted length of life, they
will, in Mahâvideha, with their departing breath, reach absolute
perfection, wisdom, liberation, final Nirvâ*n*a, and the end of all
misery. (16)

In that period, in that age the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra, a *Gñ*ât*ri*
Kshatriya, *Gñ*ât*ri*putra, a Videha, son of Videhadattâ, a native of
Videha, a prince of Videha, lived thirty years amongst the householders
under the name of 'Videha <span id="fr_499"></span>[2](#fn_492).'

After his parents had gone to the worlds of the gods and he had
fulfilled his promise, he gave up his gold and silver, his troops and
chariots, and distributed, portioned out, and gave away his valuable
treasures (consisting of) riches, corn, gold, pearls, &c., and
distributed among those who wanted to make presents to others. Thus he
gave away during a whole year. In the first month of winter, in the
first fortnight, in the dark (fortnight) of Mârga*s*iras,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

on its tenth day, while the moon was in conjunction with Uttaraphalgunî,
he made up his mind to retire from the world. (17)

A year before the best of *G*inas will retire from the world, they
continue to give away their property, from the rising of the sun. i.

One krore and eight [lakhs](errata.htm#4) of gold is his gift at the
rising of the sun, as if it were his morning meal. ii.

Three hundred and eighty-eight krores and eighty [lakhs](errata.htm#5)
were given in one year. iii.

The Ku*nd*aladharas of Vai*s*rama*n*a, the Laukântika and Maharddhika
gods in the fifteen Karmabhûmis <span id="fr_500"></span>[1](#fn_493)
wake the Tîrthakara. iv,

In Brahma Kalpa and in the line of K*ri*sh*n*as, the Laukântika Vimânas
are eightfold and infinite in number. v.

These orders of gods wake the best of *G*inas, the Venerable Vîra:
Arhat! propagate the religion which is a blessing to all creatures in
the world!' vi.

When the gods and goddesses (of the four orders of) Bhavanapatis,
Vyantaras, *G*yotishkas, and Vimânavâsins had become aware of the
Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra's intention to retire from the world, they
assumed their proper form, dress, and ensigns, ascended with their
proper pomp and splendour, together with their whole retinue, their own
vehicles and chariots, and rejecting all gross matter, retained only the
subtile matter. Then they rose and with that excellent, quick, swift,
rapid, divine motion of the gods they came down again crossing
numberless continents and oceans till they arrived in *G*ambûdvîpa

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

at the northern Kshatriya part of the place Ku*nd*apura; in the
north-eastern quarter of it they suddenly halted. (18)

*S*akra, the leader and king of the gods, quietly and slowly stopped his
vehicle and chariot, quietly and slowly descended from it and went
apart. There he underwent a great transformation, and produced by magic
a great, beautiful, lovely, fine-shaped divine pavilion <span
id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_494), which was ornamented with many designs
in precious stones, gold, and pearls. In the middle part of that divine
pavilion he produced one great throne of the same description, with a
footstool. (19)

Then he went where the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra was, and thrice
circumambulating him from left to right, he praised and worshipped him.
Leading him to the divine pavilion, he softly placed him with the face
towards the east on the throne, anointed him with hundredfold and
thousandfold refined oil, with perfumes and decoctions, bathed him with
pure water, and rubbed him with beautifying cool sandal <span
id="fr_502"></span>[2](#fn_495), laid on a piece of cloth worth a
[lakh](errata.htm#6). He clad him in a pair of robes so light that the
smallest breath would carry them away; they were manufactured in a
famous city, praised by clever artists, soft as the fume of horses,
interwoven with gold by skilful masters, and ornamented with designs of
flamingos. Then (the god) decked him with necklaces of many and fewer
strings, with one hanging down over his breast and one consisting of one
row of pearls, with a garland, a golden string, a turban, a diadem,
wreaths of precious stones, and decorated him with

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

garlands, ribbons, scarves, and sashes like the Kalpav*ri*ksha. (20)

The god then, for a second time, underwent a great transformation, and
produced by magic the great palankin, called *K*andraprabhâ <span
id="fr_503"></span>[1](#fn_496), which a thousand men carry. (This
palankin) was adorned with pictures of wolves, bulls, horses, men,
dolphins, birds, monkeys, elephants, antelopes, *s*arabhas <span
id="fr_504"></span>[2](#fn_497), [yaks](errata.htm#7), tigers, lions,
creeping plants, and a train of couples of Vidyâdharas; it had a halo of
thousands of rays; it was decorated with thousands of brilliant
glittering rupees; its lustre was mild and bright; the eyes could not
bear its light; it shone with heaps and masses of pearls; it was hung
with strings and ribbons, and with golden excellent necklaces, extremely
beautiful; it was embellished with designs of lotuses and many other
plants; its cupola was adorned with many precious stones of five
colours, with bells and flags; it was conspicuous, lovely, beautiful,
splendid, magnificent. (21)

This palankin was brought for the best of *G*inas, who is free from old
age and death; it was hung with wreaths and garlands of divine flowers,
grown in water or on dry ground. vii.

In the middle of the palankin (was) a costly throne covered with a
divine cloth, precious stones and silver, with a footstool, for the best
of *G*inas. viii.

H e wore on his head a chaplet and a diadem, his body was shining, and
he was adorned with many ornaments; he had put on a robe of muslin worth
a [lakh](errata.htm#8). ix.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

After a fast of three days, with a glorious resolution he ascended the
supreme palankin, purifying all by his light. x.

He sat on his throne, and *S*akra and Î*s*âna, on both sides, fanned him
with chowries, the handles of which were inlaid with jewels and precious
stones. xi.

In front it was uplifted by men, covered with joyful horripilation;
behind the gods carried it: the Suras and Asuras, the Garu*d*as and the
chiefs of Nâgas. xii.

The Suras carried it on the eastern side, and the Asuras on the southern
one; on the western side the Garu*d*as carried it, and the Nâgas on the
northern side. xiii.

As a grove in blossom, or a lotus-covered lake in autumn looks beautiful
with a mass of flowers, so did (then) the firmament with hosts of gods.
xiv.

As a grove of Siddhârtha <span id="fr_505"></span>[1](#fn_498), of
Kar*n*ikâra <span id="fr_506"></span>[2](#fn_499) or of Kampaka <span
id="fr_507"></span>[3](#fn_500) looks beautiful with a mass of flowers,
so did (then) the firmament with hosts of gods. xv.

In the skies and on earth the sound of musical instruments produced by
hundreds of thousands of excellent drums, kettle-drums, cymbals, and
conches was extremely pleasant. xvi.

Then the gods ordered many hundreds of actors to perform a very rich
concert of four kinds of instruments: stringed instruments and drums,
cymbals and wind-instruments. xvii.

At that period, in that age, in the first month of winter, in the first
fortnight, the dark (fortnight) of Mârga*s*iras, on its tenth day,
called Suvrata <span id="fr_508"></span>[4](#fn_501), in

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

the Muhûrta called Vi*g*aya, while the moon was in conjunction with the
asterism Uttaraphalgunî, when the shadow had turned towards the east,
and the first Paurushî <span id="fr_509"></span>[1](#fn_502) was over,
after fasting three days without taking water, having put on one
garment, the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra, in his palankin Kandraprabhâ,
which only a thousand men can carry, with a train of gods, men, and
Asuras left the northern Kshatriya part of the place Ku*nd*apura by the
high way for the park *Gñ*ât*ri* Sha*nd*a. There, just at the beginning
of night, he caused the palankin *K*andraprabhâ to stop quietly on a
slightly raised untouched ground, quietly descended from it, sat quietly
down on a throne with the face towards the east, and took off all his
ornaments and finery. (22)

The god Vai*s*rama*n*a, prostrating himself <span
id="fr_510"></span>[2](#fn_503), caught up the finery and ornaments of
the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra in a cloth of flamingo-pattern. Mahâvîra
then plucked out with his right and left (hands) on the right and left
(sides of his head) his hair in five handfuls. But *S*akra, the leader
and king of the gods, falling down before the feet of the Venerable
Ascetic Mahâvîra, caught up the hair in a cup of diamond, and requesting
his permission, brought them to the Milk Ocean. After the Venerable
Ascetic Mahâvîra had plucked out his hair in five handfuls (as described
above), he paid obeisance to all liberated spirits, and vowing to do no
sinful act, he adopted the holy conduct. At that moment the

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

whole assembly of men and gods stood motionless, like the figures on a
picture.

At the command of *S*akra, the clamour of men and gods, and the sound of
musical instruments suddenly ceased, when Mahâvîra chose the holy
conduct. xviii.

Day and night following that conduct which is a blessing to all animated
and living beings, the zealous gods listen to him with joyful
horripilation. xix.

When the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra had adopted the holy conduct which
produced that state of soul in which the reward of former actions is
temporarily counteracted, he reached the knowledge called
Mana*h*paryâya <span id="fr_511"></span>[1](#fn_504), by which he knew
the thoughts of all sentient beings, with five organs, which are not
defective, and possess a developed intellect, (living) in the two and a
half continents and the two oceans. Then he formed the following
resolution: I shall for twelve years neglect my body and abandon the
care of it; I shall with equanimity bear, undergo, and suffer all
calamities arising from divine powers, men or animals <span
id="fr_512"></span>[2](#fn_505). (23)

The Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra having formed this resolution, and
neglecting his body, arrived in the village Kummâra when only one
Muhûrta of the day remained. Neglecting his body, the Venerable Ascetic
Mahâvîra meditated on his Self, in blameless lodgings, in blameless
wandering, in restraint, kindness, avoidance of sinful influence
(sa*m*vara), chaste life, in patience, freedom from passion,
contentment; control, circumspectness, practising religious postures and
acts; walking the path of

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nirvâ*n*a and
liberation, which is the fruit of good conduct. Living thus he with
equanimity bore, endured, sustained, and suffered all calamities arising
from divine powers, men, and animals, with undisturbed and unafflicted
mind, careful of body, speech, and mind. (24)

The Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra passed twelve years in this way of life;
during the thirteenth year in the second month of summer, in the fourth
fortnight, the light (fortnight) of Vai*s*âkha, on its tenth day, called
Suvrata, in the Muhûrta called Vi*g*aya, while the moon was in
conjunction with the asterism Uttaraphalgunî, when the shadow had turned
towards the east, and the first wake was over, outside of the town
*Gri*mbhikagrâma <span id="fr_513"></span>[1](#fn_506), on the northern
bank of the river *Rig*upâlikâ <span id="fr_514"></span>[2](#fn_507), in
the field of the householder Sâmâga, in a north-eastern direction from
an old temple <span id="fr_515"></span>[3](#fn_508), not far from a Sâl
tree, in a squatting position with joined heels exposing himself to the
heat of the sun, with the knees high and the head low, in deep
meditation, in the midst of abstract meditation, he reached
Nirvâ*n*a <span id="fr_516"></span>[4](#fn_509), the complete and full,
the unobstructed, unimpeded, infinite and supreme, best knowledge and
intuition, called Kevala. (25) When the Venerable One had become an
Arhat and *G*ina, he was a Kevalin, omniscient and comprehending all
objects, he knew all conditions of the world, of gods, men, and demons;
whence

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

they come, where they go, whether they are born as men or animals
(*k*yavana), or become gods or hell-beings (upapâda); their food, drink,
doings, desires, open and secret deeds, their conversation and gossip,
and the thoughts of their minds; he saw and knew all conditions in the
whole world of all living beings. (26)

On the day when the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvira reached the Kevala, the
gods (of the four orders of) Bhavanapatis, Vyantaras, *G*yotishkas, and
Vimânavâsins descended from, and ascended to heaven, &c. (as on the
moment of his birth, see above, § 7). (27)

Then when the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra had reached the highest
knowledge and intuition, he reflected on himself and the world: first he
taught the law to the gods, afterwards to men. (28)

The Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra endowed with the highest knowledge and
intuition taught the five great vows, with their clauses, the six
classes of lives to the *S*rama*n*as and Nirgranthas, to Gautama, &c.

The six classes of lives are earth-body, &c. (down to) animals. (29)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

i\. The first great vow, Sir, runs thus:

I renounce all killing of living beings, whether subtile or gross,
whether movable or immovable. Nor shall I myself kill living beings (nor
cause others to do it, nor consent to it). As long as I live, I confess
and blame, repent and exempt myself of these sins, in the thrice
threefold way <span id="fr_517"></span>[1](#fn_510), in mind, speech,
and body.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

There are five clauses.

The first clause runs thus:

A Nirgrantha is careful in his walk, not careless <span
id="fr_518"></span>[1](#fn_511). The Kevalin assigns as the reason, that
a Nirgrantha, careless in his walk, might (with his feet) hurt or
displace or injure or kill living beings. Hence a Nirgrantha is careful
in his walk, not careless in his walk.

This is the first clause. (1)

Now follows the second clause:

A Nirgrantha searches into his mind (i.e. thoughts and intentions). If
his mind is sinful, blamable, intent on works, acting on impulses <span
id="fr_519"></span>[2](#fn_512), produces cutting and splitting (or
division and dissension), quarrels, faults, and pains, injures living
beings, or kills creatures, he should not employ such a mind in action;
but if, on the contrary, it is not sinful, &c., then he may put it in
action.

This is the second clause. (2)

Now follows the third clause:

A Nirgrantha searches into his speech; if his speech is sinful,
blamable, &c. (all down to) kills creatures, he should not utter that
speech. But if, on the contrary, it is not sinful, &c., then he may
utter it.

This is the third clause. (3)

Now follows the fourth clause:

A Nirgrantha is careful in laying down his utensils of begging, he is
not careless in it. The Kevalin says: A Nirgrantha who is careless in
laying down his utensils of begging, might hurt or displace or

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

injure or kill all sorts of living beings. Hence a Nirgrantha is careful
in laying down his utensils of begging, he is not careless in it.

This is the fourth clause. (4)

Now follows the fifth clause:

A Nirgrantha eats and drinks after inspecting his food and drink; he
does not eat and drink without inspecting his food and drink. The
Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha would eat and drink without inspecting his
food and drink, he might hurt and displace or injure or kill all sorts
of living beings. Hence a Nirgrantha eats and drinks after inspecting
his food and drink, not without doing so.

This is the fifth clause. (5)

In this way the great vow is correctly practised, followed, executed,
explained, established, effected according to the precept.

This is, Sir, the first great vow: Abstinence from killing any living
beings. i.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

ii\. The second great vow runs thus:

I renounce all vices of lying speech (arising) from anger or greed or
fear or mirth. I shall neither myself speak lies, nor cause others to
speak lies, nor consent to the speaking of lies by others. I confess and
blame, repent and exempt myself of these sins in the thrice threefold
way, in mind, speech, and body.

There are five clauses.

The first clause runs thus:

A Nirgrantha speaks after deliberation, not without deliberation. The
Kevalin says: Without deliberation a Nirgrantha might utter a falsehood
in his speech. A Nirgrantha speaks after deliberation, not without
deliberation.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

This is the first clause. (1)

Now follows the second clause:

A Nirgrantha comprehends (and renounces) anger, he is not angry. The
Kevalin says: A Nirgrantha who is moved by anger, and is angry, might
utter a falsehood in his speech. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the second clause. (2)

Now follows the third clause:

A Nirgrantha comprehends (and renounces) greed, he is not greedy. The
Kevalin says: A Nirgrantha who is moved by greed, and is greedy, might
utter a falsehood in his speech. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the third clause. (3)

Now follows the fourth clause:

A Nirgrantha comprehends (and renounces) fear, he is not afraid. The
Kevalin says: A Nirgrantha who is moved by fear, and is afraid, might
utter a falsehood in his speech. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the fourth clause. (4)

Now follows the fifth clause:

A Nirgrantha comprehends (and renounces) mirth, he is not mirthful. The
Kevalin says: A Nirgrantha who is moved by mirth, and is mirthful, might
utter a falsehood in his speech. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the fifth clause. (5)

In this way the great vow is correctly practised, followed, &c.

This is, Sir, the second great vow. ii.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

iii\. The third great vow runs thus:

I renounce all taking of anything not given, either in a village or a
town or a wood, either of little or much, of small or great, of living
or lifeless things. I shall neither take myself what is not given, nor

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

cause others to take it, nor consent to their taking it. As long as I
live, I confess and blame, &c. (all down to) body.

There are five clauses.

The first clause runs thus:

A Nirgrantha begs after deliberation, for a limited ground, not without
deliberation. The Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha begs without
deliberation for a limited ground, he might take what is not given. A
Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the first clause. (1)

Now follows the second clause:

A Nirgrantha consumes his food and drink with permission (of his
superior), not without his permission. The Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha
consumes his food and drink without the superior's permission, he might
eat what is not given. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the second clause. (2)

Now follows the third clause:

A Nirgrantha who has taken possession of some ground, should always take
possession of a limited part of it and for a fixed time. The Kevalin
says: If a Nirgrantha who has taken possession of some ground, should
take possession of an unlimited part of it and for an unfixed time, he
might take what is not given. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the third clause. (3)

Now follows the fourth clause:

A Nirgrantha who has taken possession of some ground, should constantly
have his grant renewed. The Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha has not
constantly his grant renewed, he might take possession of what is not
given. A Nirgrantha, &c.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

This is the fourth clause. (4)

Now follows the fifth clause:

A Nirgrantha begs for a limited ground for his co-religionists after
deliberation, not without deliberation. The Kevalin says: If a
Nirgrantha should beg without deliberation, he might take possession of
what is not given. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the fifth clause. (5)

In this way the great vow, &c.

This is, Sir, the third great vow. iii.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

iv\. The fourth great vow runs thus:

I renounce all sexual pleasures, either with gods or men or animals. I
shall not give way to sensuality, &c. (all as in the foregoing paragraph
down to) exempt myself.

There are five clauses.

The first clause runs thus:

A Nirgrantha does not continually discuss topics relating to women. The
Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha discusses such topics, he might fall from
the law declared by the Kevalin, because of the destruction or
disturbance of his peace. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the first clause. (1)

Now follows the second clause:

A Nirgrantha does not regard and contemplate the lovely forms of women.
The Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha regards and contemplates the lovely
forms of women, he might, &c. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the second clause. (2)

Now follows the third clause:

A Nirgrantha does not recall to his mind the pleasures and amusements he
formerly had with women. The Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha recalls

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

to his mind the pleasures and amusements he formerly had with women, he
might, &c. A Nirgrantha, &c. This is the third clause. (3)

Now follows the fourth clause:

A Nirgrantha does not eat and drink too much, nor does he drink liquors
or eat highly-seasoned dishes. The Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha did eat
and drink too much, or did drink liquors and eat highly-seasoned dishes,
he might, &c. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the fourth clause. (4)

Now follows the fifth clause:

A Nirgrantha does not occupy a bed or couch affected <span
id="fr_520"></span>[1](#fn_513) by women, animals, or eunuchs. The
Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha did occupy a bed or couch affected by
women, animals, or eunuchs, he might, &c. A Nirgrantha, &c.

This is the fifth clause. (5)

In this way the great vow, &c.

This is, Sir, the fourth great vow. iv.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

v\. The fifth great vow runs thus:

I renounce all attachments <span id="fr_521"></span>[2](#fn_514),
whether little or much, small or great, living or lifeless; neither
shall I myself form such attachments, nor cause others to do so, nor
consent to their doing so, &c. (all down to) exempt myself.

There are five clauses.

The first clause runs thus:

If a creature with ears hears agreeable and disagreeable sounds, it
should not be attached to, nor delighted with, nor desiring of, nor
infatuated by,

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

nor covetous of, nor disturbed by the agreeable or disagreeable sounds.
The Kevalin says: If a Nirgrantha is thus affected by the pleasant or
unpleasant sounds, he might fall, &c. (see above, IV, I).

If it is impossible not to hear sounds, which reach the ear, the
mendicant should avoid love or hate, originated by them.

A creature with ears hears agreeable and disagreeable sounds.

This is the first clause. (1)

Now follows the second clause:

If a creature with eyes sees agreeable and disagreeable forms (or
colours), it should not be attached, &c., to them.

The Kevalin says, &c. (the rest as in the last clause. Substitute only
see and forms for h ear and sounds).

This is the second clause. (2)

Now follows the third clause

If a creature with an organ of smell smells agreeable or disagreeable
smells, it should not be attached to them. (The rest as above.
Substitute smell and nose.)

This is the third clause. (3)

Now follows the fourth clause:

If a creature with a tongue tastes agreeable or disagreeable tastes, it
should not be attached, &c., to them. (The rest as above. Substitute
taste and tongue.)

This is the fourth clause. (4)

Now follows the fifth clause:

If a creature with an organ of feeling feels agreeable or disagreeable
touches, it should not be

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

attached to them. (The rest as above. Substitute feel and touch.)

This is the fifth clause. (5)

In this way the great vow, &c. (see above). v.

He who is well provided with these great vows and their twenty-five
clauses is really Houseless, if he, according to the sacred lore, the
precepts, and

the way correctly practises, follows, executes, explains, establishes,
and, according to the precept, effects them.

End of the Fifteenth Lecture, called the Clauses.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_478"></span>[189:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_485) Bhâva*n*â. The
bhâvanâs are subdivisions of the five great vows.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[189:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_486) Hatthottarâ in the
original.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[189:3](sbe2279.htm#fr_487) Kalpa Sûtra, § 1.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[190:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_488) Vimânas are palaces
of the gods.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[190:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_489) Cf. Kalpa Sûtra, §
2.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[191:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_490) Cf. Kalpa Sûtra, §
97.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[192:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_491) Cf. Kalpa Sûtra, §
98.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[192:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_492) Cf. Kalpa Sûtra, §
90.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[192:3](sbe2279.htm#fr_493) The next word,
bhivvu*m*daga, has been left out in the translation.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[193:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_494) Michelia Champaka.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[193:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_495) Cf. Kalpa Sûtra, §
10.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[193:3](sbe2279.htm#fr_496) Cf. Kalpa Sûtra, §
108.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[193:4](sbe2279.htm#fr_497) The spaced words
are Prâkrit, the Sanskrit form of which cannot be made out with
certainty.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[194:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_498) Cf. Kalpa Sûtra, §
109.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[194:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_499) Cf. Kalpa Sûtra, §
110.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[195:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_500) Those parts of the
world which are inhabited by men who practise religious duties, are
called Karmabhûmi. In *G*ambûdvîpa they are Bharata, Airâvata, and
Videha.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[196:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_501) Deva*kh*a*m*daya in
the original. My translation is but a guess.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[196:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_502) Go*s*îrsha and red
sandal.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[197:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_503) I.e. shining like
the moon.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[197:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_504) A fabulous animal
with eight legs.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[198:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_505) White mustard.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[198:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_506) Cassia Fistula.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[198:3](sbe2279.htm#fr_507) Michelia Champaka.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[198:4](sbe2279.htm#fr_508) Correct
suvvate*n*a*m* in the printed text.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[199:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_509) Wake, Yâma, or time
of three hours.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[199:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_510)
*G*a*m*tuvâyapa*d*ie, according to the Guzerati Bâlbodh this means
making obeisance to the Lord of the world by touching his feet. Another
MS. has: Then *S*akra the chief and king of the gods.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[200:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_511) Or Mana*h*paryaya.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[200:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_512) Cf. Kalpa Sûtra, §
117.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[201:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_513) *G*ambhiyagâma in
Prâkrit.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[201:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_514) U*g*gupâliyâ in
Prâkrit.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[201:3](sbe2279.htm#fr_515) Or, a temple called
Vi*g*ayâvartta.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[201:4](sbe2279.htm#fr_516) Nivvâ*n*e or
nevvâ*n*e; it may also be an adjective, belonging to nirvâ*n*a. This is
of course not the final nirvâ*n*a, which is reached at the dissolution
of the body, but that state which the orthodox philosophers call
*g*îvanmukti.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[202:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_517) I.e. acting,
commanding, consenting, either in the past or the present or the future.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[203:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_518) This could also be
translated: he who is careful in his walk is a Nirgrantha, not he who is
careless.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[203:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_519) A*n*hayakare
explained by karmâsravakâri.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[208:1](sbe2279.htm#fr_520) This may mean
belonging to, or close by.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[208:2](sbe2279.htm#fr_521) This means the
pleasure in external objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 16](sbe2280)
