[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2285)  [Next](sbe2287) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

### LIFE OF PÂR*S*VA.

In that period, in that age lived the Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's
favourite <span id="fr_652"></span>[1](#fn_645), the five most important
moments of whose life happened when the moon was in conjunction with the
asterism Vi*s*âkhâ: in Vi*s*âkhâ he descended (from heaven), and having
descended thence, entered the womb (of his mother); in Vi*s*âkhâ he was
born; in Vi*s*âkhâ, tearing out his hair, he left the house and entered
the state of houselessness; in Vi*s*âkhâ he obtained the highest
knowledge and intuition, called Kevala, which is infinite, supreme,
unobstructed, unimpeded, complete, and full; in Vi*s*âkhâ he obtained
final liberation. (149)

In that period, in that age, in the first month of summer, in the first
fortnight, the dark (fortnight) of *K*aitra, on its fourth day, the
Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite, descended from the Prâ*n*ata
Kalpa <span id="fr_653"></span>[2](#fn_646), where he had lived for
twenty Sâgaropamas, here on the continent *G*ambûdvîpa, in
Bharatavarsha, in the town of Benares; and in the middle of the night
when the moon was in conjunction with the asterism Vi*s*âkhâ, after the
termination of his allotted length of life, divine nature, and existence
(among the gods), he took the form of an embryo in the womb of the queen
Vâmâ, wife of A*s*vasena, king (of Benares). (150)

The knowledge of the Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

favourite, (about this) was threefold, &c. (repeat §§ 3-95 after making
the necessary substitutions, and omitting what exclusively applies to
Mahâvîra, all down to) comfortably carried her unborn child. (i51)

In that period, in that age the Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's
favourite <span id="fr_654"></span>[1](#fn_647)--after the lapse of nine
months and seven and a half days, in the second month of winter, in the
third fortnight, the dark (fortnight) of Paushya, on its tenth day, in
the middle of the night when the moon was in conjunction with the
asterism Vi*s*âkhâ--(Vâmâ), perfectly healthy herself, gave birth to a
perfectly healthy boy. (152)

In that night in which the Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite, was
born, &c. (repeat §§ 97-107 with the necessary alterations, all down to)
therefore shall the name of our boy be Pâr*s*va <span
id="fr_655"></span>[2](#fn_648). (153, 154)

The Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite, clever, with the aspirations
of a clever man, of great beauty, controlling his senses, lucky, and
modest, lived thirty years as a householder. Then the Laukântika gods,
following the established custom, addressed him with these kind,
pleasing, &c., sweet, and soft words: (155)

'Victory, victory to thee, gladdener of the world!' (see § 111, down to)
Thus they raised the shout of victory. (156) Before the Arhat Pâr*s*va,
the people's favourite, had adopted the life of a householder, &c. (see
§ 112, down to) indigent persons.

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

In the second month of winter, in the third fortnight, the dark
(fortnight) of Paushya, on its eleventh day, in the middle of the night,
riding in his palankin called Vi*s*âlâ, followed on his way by a train
of gods, men, and Asuras, &c. (Pâr*s*va) went right through the town of
Benares to the park called A*s*ramapada, and proceeded to the excellent
tree A*s*oka. There, &c. (see § 116, down to) five handfuls.

When the moon was in conjunction with the asterism Vi*s*âkhâ, he, after
fasting three and a half days without drinking water, put on a divine
robe, and together with three hundred men he tore out his hair, and
leaving the house entered the state of houselessness. (157)

The Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite, for eighty-three days
neglected his body, &c. (see § 117, down to) animals. (158)

Thereafter the Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite, was houseless,
circumspect, &c. (see §§ 1 18-120, down to) meditated upon himself for
eighty-three days.

During the eighty-fourth day--it was in the first month of summer, in
the first fortnight, the dark (fortnight) of *K*aitra, on its fourth
day, in the early part of the day, when the moon was in conjunction with
the asterism Vi*s*âkhâ--Pâr*s*va, under a Dhâtaki tree, after fasting
two and a half days without drinking water, being engaged in deep
meditation, reached the infinite, &c. (see § 120, down to) highest
knowledge and intuition called Kevala, &c. (see § 121, down to) moment.
(159)

The Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite, had eight Ga*n*as and eight
Ga*n*adharas (enumerated in a *S*loka):

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

*S*ubha and Âryaghosha, Vasish*th*a <span
id="fr_656"></span>[1](#fn_649) and Brahma*k*ârin, Saumya and
*S*rîdhara, Vîrabhadra and Ya*s*as. (160)

The Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite, had an excellent community
of sixteen thousand Srama*n*as with Âryadatta <span
id="fr_657"></span>[2](#fn_650) at their head; (161) thirty-eight
thousand nuns with Pushpa*k*ûlâ at their head; (162) one hundred and
sixty-four thousand lay votaries with Suvrata at their head; (163) three
hundred and twenty-seven thousand female lay votaries with Sunandâ at
their head; (164) three hundred and fifty sages who knew the fourteen
Pûrvas, &c. (see § 138); (165) fourteen hundred sages who were possessed
of the Avadhi knowledge; one thousand Kevalins; eleven hundred sages who
could transform themselves, six hundred sages of correct knowledge, one
thousand male and two thousand female disciples who had reached
perfection, seven hundred and fifty sages of vast intellect, six hundred
professors, and twelve hundred sages in their last birth. (166)

The Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite, instituted two epochs in his
capacity of a Maker of an end: the epoch relating to generations and the
epoch relating to psychical condition; the former ended in the fourth
generation, the latter in the third year of his Kevaliship. (167)

In that period, in that age the Arhat Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite,
lived thirty years as a householder, eighty-three days in a state
inferior to perfection, something less than seventy years as a Kevalin,
full seventy years as a *S*rama*n*a, and a hundred years on the whole.

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

When his fourfold Karman <span id="fr_658"></span>[1](#fn_651) was
exhausted and in this Avasarpi*n*î era the greater part of the
Du*h*shamasushamâ period had elapsed, in the first month of the rainy
season, in the second fortnight, the light (fortnight) of *S*râva*n*a,
on its eighth day, in the early part of the day when the moon was in
conjunction with the asterism Vi*s*âkhâ, (Pâr*s*va), after fasting a
month without drinking water, on the summit of mount Sammeta, in the
company of eighty-three persons, stretching out his hands, died, &c.
(all down to) freed from all pains. (168) Since the time that the Arhat
Pâr*s*va, the people's favourite, died, &c. (all down to) freed from all
pains, twelve centuries have elapsed, and of the thirteenth century this
is the thirtieth year. (169)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

End of the Life of Pâr*s*va.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_645"></span>[271:1](sbe2286.htm#fr_652) Purisâdâ*n*îya,
explained: who is to be chosen among men because of his preferable
karman.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[271:2](sbe2286.htm#fr_653) This is the tenth
world of the gods.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[272:1](sbe2286.htm#fr_654) As regards the
construction of this passage compare § 96, note 1.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[272:2](sbe2286.htm#fr_655) This name was given
him because before his birth his mother, lying on her couch, saw in the
dark a black serpent crawling about. This is the account given by the
commentator, who forgets to tell us how it comes to bear on the name
Pâr*s*va.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[274:1](sbe2286.htm#fr_656) C. has Visi*tth*a,
i.e. Vi*s*ish*t*a.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[274:2](sbe2286.htm#fr_657) Âriyadinna in the
original.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[275:1](sbe2286.htm#fr_658) See § 147.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Life of Arish*t*anemi](sbe2287)
