[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2208)  [Next](sbe2210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### SEVENTH LESSON.

He who is averse from (all actions relating to) wind, knows affliction.
Knowing what is bad, he who knows it with regard to himself, knows it
with regard to (the world) outside; and he who knows it with regard to
(the world) outside, knows it with regard to himself: this reciprocity
(between himself and) others (one should mind). Those who are appeased,
who are free from passion, do not desire to live. (1)

See! there are men who control themselves; others pretend only to be
houseless, for one destroys this (wind-body) by bad and injurious
doings, and many other beings, besides, which he hurts by means of wind,
through his doing acts relating to wind. (2) About this the Revered One
has taught the truth: for the sake of the splendour, honour, and glory
of this life, for the sake of birth, death, and final liberation, for
the removal of pain, man acts sinfully towards wind, or causes others to
act so, or allows others to act so. This deprives him of happiness and
perfect wisdom. About this he is informed when he has understood, or
heard from the Revered One or from the monks, the faith to be coveted.
There are some who, of a truth, know this to be the bondage, the
delusion, the death, the hell. For this a man is longing when he
destroys this (wind-body) by bad and injurious acts, and many other
beings, besides, which he hurts by means of wind, through his doing acts
relating to wind. Thus I say. (3)

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

There are jumping beings which, coming near wind, fall into it. Some,
certainly, touched by wind, shrivel up; those which shrivel up there,
lose their sense there; those which lose their sense there, die there.
(4)

He who injures these (wind-bodies) does not comprehend and renounce the
sinful acts; he who does not injure these, comprehends and renounces the
sinful acts. Knowing them, a wise man should not act sinfully towards
wind, nor cause others to act so, nor allow others to act so. He who
knows these causes of sin relating to wind, is called a reward-knowing
sage. Thus I say. (5)

Be aware that about this (wind-body) too those are involved in sin who
delight not in the right conduct, and, though doing acts, talk about
religious discipline, who conducting themselves according to their own
will, pursuing sensual pleasures, and engaging in acts, are addicted to
worldliness. He who has the true knowledge about all things, will commit
no sinful act, nor cause others to do so,

&c. (6) Knowing them, a wise man should not act sinfully towards the
aggregate of six (kinds of) lives, nor cause others to act so, nor allow
others to act so. He who knows these causes of sin relating to the
aggregate of the six (kinds of) lives, is called a reward-knowing sage.
Thus I say. (7)

End of the First Lecture, called Knowledge of the Weapon.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I, Lecture 2, Lesson 1](sbe2210)
