[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2260)  [Next](sbe2262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

### THIRD LECTURE,

###### CALLED

###### WALKING <span id="fr_402"></span>[1](#fn_396).

#### FIRST LESSON.

When the rainy season has come and it is raining, many living beings are
originated and many seeds just spring up, the roads between (different
places) contain many living beings, seeds, &c. (see II, 1, 1, § 2), the
footpaths are not used, the roads are not recognisable. Knowing this
(state of things) one should not wander from village to village, but
remain during the rainy season in one place <span
id="fr_403"></span>[2](#fn_397). (1)

When a monk or a nun knows that in a village or scot-free town, &c. (see
I, 7, 6, § 3), there is no large place for religious practices nor for
study; that there cannot easily be obtained a stool, bench, bed, or
couch, nor pure, acceptable alms; that there have come or will come many
*S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, guests, paupers, and beggars; that the
means of existence are extremely small; that it is not fit for a wise
man to enter or leave it, &c. (see II, 1, 4, § 1); in such a village,
scot-free town, &c., they should not remain during the cold season. (2)

When a monk or a nun knows that in a village or scot-free town, &c.,
there is a large place for religious practices or for study; that there
can easily

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

be obtained a stool, bench, bed, or couch, or pure, acceptable alms;
that there have not come nor will come *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as,
guests, paupers, and beggars; that the means of existence are not small,
&c., they may remain in such a village, &c., during the rainy season.
(3)

Now they should know this: After the four months of the rainy season are
over, and five or ten days of the winter have passed, they should not
wander from village to village, if the road contains many living beings,
&c., and if many *S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, &c., do not yet
travel <span id="fr_404"></span>[1](#fn_398). (4)

But if after the same time the road contains few living beings, and many
*S*rama*n*as and Brâhma*n*as, &c., travel, they may circumspectly wander
from village to village. (5)

A monk or a nun wandering from village to village should look forward
for four cubits, and seeing animals they should move on by walking on
his toes or heels or the sides of his feet. If there be some bypath,
they should choose it, and not go straight on; then they may
circumspectly wander from village to village. (6)

A monk or a nun wandering from village to village, on whose way there
are living beings, seeds, grass, water, or mud, should not go straight
if there be an unobstructed byway; then they may circumspectly wander
from village to village. (7)

A monk or a nun on the pilgrimage, whose road (lies through) places
belonging to borderers, robbers, Mle*kkh*as, non-Aryan people <span
id="fr_405"></span>[2](#fn_399), half-civilised people,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

unconverted people, people who rise or eat at an improper time, should,
if there be some other place for walking about or friendly districts,
not choose the former road for their voyage. (8)

The Kevalin says: This is the reason: The ignorant populace might bully,
beat, &c., the mendicant, in the opinion that he is a thief or a spy, or
that he comes from yonder (hostile village); or they might take away,
cut off, steal or rob his robe, alms-bowl, mantle, or broom. Hence it
has been said to the mendicant, &c., that one whose road (lies through)
places belonging, &c. (all as in the last paragraph); then he may
circumspectly wander from village to village. (9)

A monk or a nun on the pilgrimage, whose road (lies through) a country
where there is no king or many kings or an unanointed king or two
governments or no government or a weak government, should, if there be
some other place for walking about or friendly districts, not choose the
former road for their voyage. The Kevalin says: This is the reason: The
ignorant populace might bully or beat, &c., the mendicant, &c. (all as
in § 9). (10)

A monk or a nun on the pilgrimage, whose road lies through a
forest <span id="fr_406"></span>[1](#fn_400) which they are not certain
of crossing in one or two or three or four or five days, should, if
there be some other place for walking about or friendly districts, not
choose the former road for their voyage. (11)

The Kevalin says: This is the reason: During

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

the rain (he might injure) living beings, mildew, seeds, grass, water,
mud. Hence it has been said to the mendicant that one whose road lies
through such a forest, &c. (all as in the last paragraph) then he may
circumspectly wander from village to village. (12)

A monk or a nun on the pilgrimage, on whose way there is some
watercourse which must be crossed by a boat, should not ascend such a
boat which plies up or down or across (the river), neither for one
yo*g*ana's or half a yo*g*ana's distance, neither for a shorter nor a
longer voyage, if they know that the householder <span
id="fr_407"></span>[1](#fn_401) will buy or purloin the boat, or doing
the work necessary to put the boat in order, pull it ashore out of the
water, or push it from the shore into the water, or bale it, if it is
filled (with water), or cause a sinking boat to float. (13)

A monk or a nun, knowing that a boat will cross the river, should, after
having received the owner's permission, step apart, examine their
outfit, put aside their provender, wipe their body from head to heels,
reject the householder's food, and putting one foot in the water and the
other in the air <span id="fr_408"></span>[2](#fn_402), they should
circumspectly enter the boat. (14)

A monk or a nun in entering the boat should not choose for that purpose
the stern or the prow or the middle of the boat; nor should they look at
it holding up their arms, pointing at it with their finger, bowing up
and down. (15)

If, on board, the boatman should say to the monk, 'O long-lived
*S*rama*n*a! pull the boat forward or backward,

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

or push it, or draw it with the rope towards you, or, let us do it
together,' he should not comply with his request, but look on silently.
(16)

If, on board, the other should say to him, 'O long-lived *S*rama*n*a!
you cannot pull the boat forward or backward, or push it, or draw it
with a rope towards you; give us the rope, we will ourselves pull the
boat forward or backward, &c.,' he should not comply with his request,
but look on silently. (17)

If, on board, the other should say to him, 'O long-lived *S*rama*n*a! if
you can, pull the boat by the oar, the rudder, the pole, and other
nautical instruments <span id="fr_409"></span>[1](#fn_403),' he should
not comply with his request, but look on silently. (18)

If, on board, the other should say to him, 'O long-lived Srama*n*a!
please, lade out the water with your hand, or pitcher <span
id="fr_410"></span>[2](#fn_404), or vessel, or alms-bowl, or bucket,' he
should not comply with his request, but look on silently. (19)

If, on board, the other should say to him, 'O long-lived *S*rama*n*a!
please, stop the boat's leak with your hand, foot, arm, thigh, belly,
head, body, the bucket, or a cloth, or with mud, Ku*s*a-grass, or lotus
leaves,' he should not comply with his request, but look on silently.
(20)

If a monk or a nun see that water enters through a leak in the boat, and
the boat becomes dirty all over, they should not approach the boatman
and say: 'O long-lived householder! water enters through a leak into the
boat, and it becomes dirty all over.'

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> One should not
think so or speak so; but undisturbed, the mind not directed outwardly,
one should collect one's self for contemplation; then one may
circumspectly complete one's journey by the boat on the water.

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (21)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_396"></span>[136:1](sbe2261.htm#fr_402) Iriyâ.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[136:2](sbe2261.htm#fr_403) I.e. keep the
pa*gg*usan.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[137:1](sbe2261.htm#fr_404) He should in that
case stay in the same place for the whole month Mârga*s*îrsha, where he
was during the rainy season.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[137:2](sbe2261.htm#fr_405) According to the
commentary mle*kkh*a (milakkhu) means <span id="page_138">p. 138</span>
the Varvara, *S*arvara, Pulindra, &c.; the non-Aryans are those who live
not in the 36½ countries.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[138:1](sbe2261.htm#fr_406) Viha*m*, forest, as
explained in the third lesson. But the commentator here explains it, a
journey of some days.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[139:1](sbe2261.htm#fr_407) By householder is
here intended the host of the mendicant.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[139:2](sbe2261.htm#fr_408) Thale = sthale. The
commentator explains it by âkâ*s*e.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[140:1](sbe2261.htm#fr_409) Rudder is a guess
for pî*dh*a, nautical instruments for valaya and avallaya.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[140:2](sbe2261.htm#fr_410) Pâe*n*a =
pâtre*n*a. The Guzerati commentator takes it for pâdena, foot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 3, Lesson 2](sbe2262)
