[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2288)  [Next](sbe2290) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

### LIFE OF *RI*SHABHA.

In that period, in that age lived the Arhat *Ri*shabha, the
Ko*s*alian <span id="fr_666"></span>[1](#fn_659), four important moments
of whose life happened when the moon was in conjunction with the
asterism Uttarâshâ*dh*â; the fifth, when in conjunction with Abhi*g*it:
(204) in Uttarâshâ*dh*â he descended from heaven, &c. (all down to) in
Abhi*g*it he obtained final liberation. (205)

In that period, in that age, in the fourth month of summer, in the
seventh fortnight, the dark (fortnight) of Ashâ*dh*a, on its fourth day,
the Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian, descended from the great Vimâna
called Sarvârthasiddha, where he had lived for thirty-three Sâgaropamas,
here on the continent *G*ambûdvîpa, in Bharatavarsha, in Ikshvâkubhûmi,
and in the middle of the night, &c., he took the form of an embryo in
the womb of Marudevî, wife of the patriarch <span
id="fr_667"></span>[2](#fn_660) Nâbhi. (206)

The knowledge of the Arhat *Ri*shabha about this, &c. (all as in the
case of Mahâvîra, but note the following differences: the first dream is
a bull 'coming forward with his face,' the other (mothers of Tîrthakaras
see first) an elephant. She (Marudevî) relates them to Nâbhi, the
patriarch; there

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

are no interpreters of dreams; Nâbhi, the patriarch, himself interprets
them). (207)

In that period, in that age the Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian,--in
the first month of summer, in the first fortnight, the dark (fortnight)
of *K*aitra, on its eighth day, &c.,--(Marudevî), perfectly healthy
herself, gave birth to a perfectly healthy boy. (208)

(The circumstances connected with the birth of *Ri*shabha are the same
as in the case of that of Mahâvîra, only that the contents of §§ 100 and
101 do not apply to the present case.) (209)

The Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian, belonged to the Kâ*s*yapa gotra,
and he had five names: *Ri*shabha, First King, First Mendicant, First
*G*ina, and First Tîrthakara. (210)

The Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian, clever, with the aspirations of a
clever man, of great beauty, controlling (his senses), lucky, and
modest, lived two millions of former years <span
id="fr_668"></span>[1](#fn_661) as a prince, and six millions three
hundred thousand former years as a king. During his reign he taught, for
the benefit of the people, the seventy-two sciences, of which writing is
the first, arithmetic the most important, and the knowledge of omens the
last, the sixty-four accomplishments of women, the hundred arts, and the
three occupations of men <span id="fr_669"></span>[2](#fn_662). At last
he anointed his

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

hundred sons as kings, and gave each a kingdom. Then the Laukântika god,
following the established custom, &c. (see §§ 110-112, down to) indigent
persons. In the first month of summer, in the first fortnight, the dark
(fortnight) of *K*aitra, on its eighth day, in the latter part of the
day, riding in his palankin called Sudarsanâ, followed on his way by a
train of gods, men, and Asuras, &c. (*Ri*shabha) went right through the
town Vinîtâ to the park called Siddhârtha Vana, and proceeded to the
excellent tree A*s*oka. There, &c. (see § 116, down to) four handfuls.
When the moon was in conjunction with the asterism Ashâ*dh*â, he, after
fasting two and a half days without drinking water, put on a divine
robe, and together with four thousand of high, noble, royal persons, and
Kshatriyas, he tore out his hair, and leaving the house entered the
state of houselessness. (211)

The Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian, for one thousand years neglected
his body, &c. (see §§ 1 I7-120, down to) meditated upon himself for one
thousand years. Thereupon--it was in the fourth month of winter, the
seventh fortnight, the dark (fortnight) of Phâlguna, on its eleventh
day, in the early part of the day, when the moon was in conjunction with
the asterism Ashâ*dh*â, outside of the town Purimatâla, in the park
called *S*aka*t*amukha, under the excellent tree Nyagrodha--(*Ri*shabha)
after fasting three and a half days without drinking water, being
engaged in deep meditation, reached the infinite, &c. (see § 120, down
to) highest knowledge and intuition called Kevala, &c. (see § 121, down
to) moment. (212)

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

The Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian, had eighty-four Ga*n*as and
eighty-four Ga*n*adharas. (213)

The Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian, had an excellent community of
eighty-four thousand *S*rama*n*as with *Ri*shabhasena at their head;
(214) three hundred thousand nuns with Brahmîsundarî at their head;
(215) three hundred and five thousand lay votaries with *S*reyâ*m*sa at
their head; (216) five hundred and fifty-four thousand female lay
votaries with Subhadrâ at their head; (217) four thousand seven hundred
and fifty sages who knew the fourteen Pûrvas, &c.; (218) nine thousand
sages who were possessed of the Avadhi knowledge; (219) twenty thousand
Kevalins; (220) twenty thousand six hundred sages who could transform
themselves; (221) twelve thousand six hundred and fifty sages of vast
intellect, &c.; (222) twelve thousand six hundred and fifty professors;
(223) twenty thousand male and forty thousand female disciples who had
reached perfection; (224) twenty-two thousand nine hundred sages in
their last birth, &c. (225)

The Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian, instituted, &c. (see § 146, down
to) the former ended after numberless generations, the latter from the
next Muhûrta after his Kevaliship. (226)

In that period, in that age the Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian, lived
two millions of former years as a prince, six millions three hundred
thousand former years as a king, together eight millions three hundred
thousand former years as a householder; a thousand (former) years in a
state inferior to perfection, nine-and-ninety thousand former years as a
Kevalin, together a hundred thousand former years as a *S*rama*n*a, and
eight

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

millions four hundred thousand years on the whole. When his fourfold
Karman was exhausted, and in this Avasarpi*n*î era the Sushamadu*h*shamâ
period had nearly elapsed, only three years and eight and a half months
being left, in the third month of winter, in the fifth fortnight, the
dark (fortnight) of Mâgha, on its thirteenth day, in the early part of
the day when the moon was in conjunction with the asterism Abhi*g*it,
(*Ri*shabha), after fasting six and a half days without drinking water,
on the summit of mount Ash*t*âpada, in the company of ten thousand monks
in the Samparyaṅka position, died, &c. (all down to) freed from all
pains. (227)

Since the time that the Arhat *Ri*shabha, the Ko*s*alian, died, &c. (all
down to) freed from all pains, three years and eight and a half months
elapsed; thereupon one ko*t*i of ko*t*is of Sâgaropamas, less forty-two
thousand and three years and eight and a half months, elapsed. At that
time the Venerable Ascetic Mahâvîra died; after his Nirvâ*n*a nine
centuries elapsed, of the tenth century this is the eightieth year.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

End of the Life of *Ri*shabha.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

End of the Lives of the *G*inas.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_659"></span>[281:1](sbe2289.htm#fr_666) Kosaliya =
Kau*s*alika. He is thus called because he was born in Ko*s*alâ or
Ayodhyâ.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[281:2](sbe2289.htm#fr_667) Kulakara; these
Kulakaras were the first kings and founders of families at the time when
the rest of mankind were 'Yugalins.' The first Kulakara was
Vimalavâhana; the seventh and last of the line Nâbhi.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[282:1](sbe2289.htm#fr_668) See Â*k*ârâṅga
Sûtra I, 6, 3, § 2, note 1.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[282:2](sbe2289.htm#fr_669) The arts, as those
of the potter, blacksmith, painter, weaver, and barber, each of which
five principal arts is subdivided into twenty branches, are inventions
and must be taught; while the occupations, agriculture, trade, &c. have
everywhere developed, as it were, of themselves. The accomplishments of
women are dancing, singing, &c. The commentator adds to these a detailed
list of those questionable accomplishments which Vâtsyâyana has so
curiously described, and refers the reader to the *G*ayamaṅgala for
further details. The latter work, a still extant commentary on the <span
id="page_283">p. 283</span> Kâma Sûtra, must therefore be older than
1307, the date of *G*inaprabhamuni's commentary on the Kalpa Sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of the Sthaviras](sbe2290)
