[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2262)  [Next](sbe2264) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

#### THIRD LESSON.

A monk or a nun on the pilgrimage, in whose way there are walls or
ditches or ramparts or gates, &c. (see II, 3, 2, § 14), hill houses,
palaces, underground houses, houses in trees, mountain caves, a sacred
tree or pillar, workshops, &c. (see II, 2, 2, § 8), should not look at
them holding up their arms, pointing at them with their fingers, bowing
up and down. Then they may circumspectly wander from village to village.
(1)

A monk or a nun on the pilgrimage, on whose way there are marshes,
pasture-grounds, moats, fortified places, thickets, strongholds in
thickets, woods, mountains, strongholds on mountains, caves <span
id="fr_416"></span>[1](#fn_410), tanks, lakes, rivers, ponds, lotus
ponds, long winding ponds, water-sheets, rows of water-sheets, should
not look at them holding up their arms, &c. (see § 1). (2)

The Kevalin says: This is the reason: The deer, cattle, birds, snakes,
animals living in water, on land, in the air might be disturbed or
frightened, and strive to get to a fold or (other place of) refuge,
(thinking): 'The *S*rama*n*a will harm me!'

Hence it has been said to the mendicant, &c., that he should not look at
the objects (mentioned in § 2) holding up his arms, &c. <span
id="fr_417"></span>[2](#fn_411) (3)

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

A monk or a nun, wandering from village to village together with the
master or teacher, should not touch the master's or teacher's hand with
their own, &c.; but without touching or being touched they should
circumspectly wander from village to village together with the master or
teacher. (4)

A monk or a nun, wandering from village to village together with the
master or teacher, might be met on the road by travellers and asked: 'O
long-lived *S*rama*n*a! who are you? whence do you come, and where do
you go?' The master or teacher may answer and explain; but whilst the
master or teacher answers and explains, one should not mix in their
conversation. Thus they may wander from village to village with a
superior priest <span id="fr_418"></span>[1](#fn_412). (5)

A monk or a nun, wandering from village to village with a superior
priest, should not touch the superior's hand with their own, &c. (see §
4). (6).

A monk or a nun, wandering from village to village with superior
priests, might be met on the road by travellers, and be asked: 'O
long-lived *S*rama*n*a! who are you?' He who has the highest rank of
them all, should answer and explain; but whilst the superior answers and
explains, one should not mix in their conversation, &c. (see § 5). (7)

A monk or a nun, wandering from village to village, might be met on the
road by travellers, and be asked: 'O long-lived *S*rama*n*a! did you see
somebody on the road? viz. a man, cow, buffalo, cattle, bird, snake, or
aquatic animal--tell us, show

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

us!' The mendicant should not tell it, nor show it, he should not comply
with their request, but look on silently, or, though knowing it, he
should say that he did not know. Then he may circumspectly wander from
village to village. (8)

He should act in the same manner, if asked about bulbs of water-plants,
roots, bark, leaves, flowers, fruits, seeds, water in the neighbourhood,
or a kindled fire; (9)

Likewise, if asked about (transports of) corn, waggons, cars, &c. (see
II, 3, 2, § 16). (10)

Likewise, if asked: 'O long-lived *S*rama*n*a! how large is this village
or scot-free town, &c.?' (11)

Likewise, if asked: 'O long-lived *S*rama*n*a! How far is it to that
village or scot-free town, &c.?' (12)

If a monk or a nun, wandering from village to village, sees a vicious
cow coming towards them, &c. (see II, 1, 5, § 3), they should not, from
fear of them, leave the road, or go into another road, nor enter a
thicket, wood, or stronghold, nor climb a tree, nor take a plunge in a
large and extended water-sheet, nor desire a fold or any other place of
refuge, or an army or a caravan; but undisturbed, the mind not directed
to outward things, they should collect themselves for contemplation;
thus they may circumspectly wander from village to village. (13)

If the road of a monk or a nun on the pilgrimage lies through a forest,
in which, as they know, there stroll bands of many thieves desirous of
their property, they should not, for fear of them, leave the road, &c.
(all as in § 13). (14)

If these thieves say, 'O long-lived *S*rama*n*a! bring us your clothes,
&c., give them, put them down!' the mendicant should not give or put
them down.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nor should he
reclaim (his things) by imploring (the thieves), or by folding his
hands, or by moving their compassion, but by religious exhortation or by
remaining silent. (15)

If the thieves, resolving to do it themselves, bully him, &c., tear off
his clothes, &c., he should not lodge an information in the village or
at the king's palace; nor should he go to a layman, and say, 'O
long-lived householder! these thieves, resolving to do (the robbing)
themselves, have bullied me, &c., they have torn off my clothes,' &c. He
should neither think so, nor speak so; but undisturbed, &c. (see § 13).

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (16)

End of the Third Lecture, called Walking.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_410"></span>[145:1](sbe2263.htm#fr_416) The word aga*d*a
has been left out in the translation.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[145:2](sbe2263.htm#fr_417) The passage closes:
'then he may circumspectly wander from village to village together with
the master and teacher (âyariova*ggh*âya).' But as the master and
teacher have not been mentioned before, and will be mentioned in the
next Sûtra, it is almost certain that the words in question have been
brought over from the next Sûtra, or that they ought to be supplied to
all Sûtras from the beginning of the third lesson.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[146:1](sbe2263.htm#fr_418) Ahârâti*n*iyâe,
Com. yathâratnâdhikam. Râti*n*iya is opposed to seha (disciple); it is
elsewhere explained by *g*yesh*th*a; see Kalpa Sûtra, Sâm. 59. I am not
sure if the phrase ought not to be translated, with due respect for his
superior.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 4, Lesson 1](sbe2264)
