[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Jainism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2266)  [Next](sbe2268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CQU47O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE22)*, tr. by Hermann Jacobi, \[1884\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### SECOND LESSON.

A monk or a nun should beg for acceptable clothes, and wear them in that
state in which they get them; they should not wash or dye them, nor
should they wear washed or dyed clothes, nor (should they) hide (their
clothes) when passing through other villages, being careless of dress.
This is the whole duty for a mendicant who wears clothes <span
id="fr_436"></span>[1](#fn_430).

A monk or a nun wanting, for the sake of alms, to enter the abode of a
householder, should do so outfitted with all their clothes; in the same
manner they should go to the out-of-door place for religious practices
or study, or should wander from village to village.

Now they should know this: A monk or a nun dressed in all their clothes
should not enter or leave, for the sake of alms, the abode of a
householder, &c. &c., on perceiving that a strong and widely spread rain
pours down, &c. (see II, 1, 3, § 9). (1)

If a single mendicant borrows for a short time a robe <span
id="fr_437"></span>[2](#fn_431) (from another mendicant) and returns
after staying abroad for one, two, three, four, or five days,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

he (the owner) should not take such a robe for himself, nor should he
give it to somebody else, nor should he give it on promise (for another
robe after a few days), nor should he exchange that robe for another
one. He should not go to another mendicant and say: 'O long-lived
*S*rama*n*a! do you want to wear or use this robe?' He (the owner of the
robe) should not rend the still strong robe, and cast it away; but give
it him (who had borrowed it) in its worn state; he should not use it
himself. (2)

The same rule holds good when many mendicants borrow for a short time
clothes, and return after staying abroad for one, &c., days. All should
be put in the plural. (3)

'Well, I shall borrow a robe and return after staying abroad for one,
two, three, four, or five days; perhaps it will thus become my own.' As
this would be sinful, he should not do so. (4)

A monk or a nun should not make coloured clothes colourless, or colour
colourless clothes; nor should they give them to somebody else thinking
that they will get other clothes; nor should they give it on promise
(for other clothes); nor should they exchange them for other clothes;
nor should they go to somebody else and say: 'O long-lived *S*rama*n*a!
do you want to wear or use these clothes?' They should not rend the
still strong clothes, and cast them away, that another mendicant might
think them bad ones. (5)

If he sees in his way thieves, he should not from fear of them, and to
save his clothes, leave the road or go into another road, &c. (see II,
3, 3, § 13), but undisturbed, his mind not directed to outward things,

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

he should collect himself for contemplation; then he may circumspectly
wander from village to village. (6)

If the road of a monk or a nun on the pilgrimage lies through a forest
in which, as they know, there stroll bands of many thieves desirous of
their clothes, they should not from fear of them, and to save their
clothes, leave the road or go into another road, &c. (all as in § 6).
(7)

If these thieves say: 'O long-lived *S*rama*n*a! bring us your robe,
give it, deliver it!' he should not give or deliver it. He should act in
such cases (as prescribed in II, 3, 3, §§ 15 and 16).

This is the whole duty, &c.

Thus I say. (8)

End of the Fifth Lecture, called Begging of Clothes.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_430"></span>[163:1](sbe2267.htm#fr_436) See I, 7, 4, § 1.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[163:2](sbe2267.htm#fr_437) Pa*d*ihâriya*m*,
which is translated prâtihâruka. There are various readings as
parihâriya, pâ*d*ihâriya; but the meaning of the word remains uncertain,
and my translation is but conjectural.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II, Lecture 6, Lesson 1](sbe2268)
