[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gcot08)  [Next](gcot10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0262580020/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Garden Cities of To-morrow*, by Ebenezer Howard, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

### Chapter Seven

#### Semi-Municipal Enterprise—Local Option—Temperance Reform

In the last chapter we saw that no line could be sharply drawn between
municipal and individual enterprise, so that one could definitely say of
one or the other, 'Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further'; and this
ever-changing character of the problem can be usefully illustrated in
our examination of the industrial life of Garden City by reference to a
form of enterprise there carried on which is neither distinctly
municipal nor distinctly individualistic, but partaking, as it does, of
the character of both, may be termed 'semi-municipal'.

Among the most reliable sources of revenue possessed by many of our
existing municipalities are their so-called 'public markets'. But it is
important to notice that these markets are by no means public in the
same full sense as are our public parks, libraries, water undertakings,
or those numerous other branches of municipal work which are carried on
upon public property, by public officials, at the public expense, and
solely with a view to the public advantage. On the contrary, our
so-called 'public markets' are, for the most part, carried on by private
individuals, who pay tolls for the parts of the buildings which they
occupy, but who are not, except on a few points, controlled by the
municipality, and whose profits are personally enjoyed by the various
dealers. Markets may, therefore, be fitly termed *semi-municipal*
enterprises.

It would, however, have been scarcely necessary to touch on this
question, but that it naturally leads up to the consideration of a form
of semi-municipal enterprise which is one of the characteristic features
of Garden City. This is to be found in the Crystal Palace, which, it
will be remembered, is a wide arcade, skirting the Central Park, in
which the most attractive wares on sale in Garden City are exhibited,
and, this being a winter garden as well as the great shopping centre, is
one of the most

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

favourite resorts of the townspeople. The business at the shops is
carried on, not by the municipality, but by various individuals and
societies, the number of traders being, however, limited by the
principle of local option.

The considerations which have led to this system arise out of the
distinction between the cases on the one hand of the manufacturers, and
on the other of the distributive societies and shopkeepers who are
invited to the town. Thus, for example, in the case of the manufacturer,
say, of boots, though he may be glad of the custom of the people of the
town, he is by no means dependent on it; his products go all over the
world; and he would scarcely wish that the number of boot manufacturers
within the area should be specially limited. He would, in fact, lose
more than he would gain by restrictions of this kind. A manufacturer
frequently prefers to have others carrying on the same trade in his
vicinity; for this gives him a larger choice of skilled workmen or
workwomen, who themselves desire it also, because it gives them a larger
range of employers.

But in the case of shops and stores the case is entirely different. An
individual or a society proposing to open in Garden City, say a drapery
store, would be most anxious to know what, if any, arrangements were to
be made for limiting the number of his competitors, for he would depend
almost entirely on the trade of the town or neighbourhood. Indeed it
frequently happens that a private landlord, when laying out a building
estate, makes arrangements with his shopkeeping tenants designed to
prevent them from being swamped by others in the same trade starting on
his estate.

The problem, therefore, seems to be how to make such suitable
arrangements as will at once:

\(1\) Induce tenants of the shopkeeping class to come and start in
business, offering to the community adequate rate-rents.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

\(2\) Prevent the absurd and wasteful multiplication of shops referred
to in the note at the foot of page [1](#fn_15).

\(3\) Secure the advantages usually gained (or supposed to be) by
competition—such as low prices, wide range of choice, fair dealing,
civility, etc.

\(4\) Avoid the evils attending monopoly.

All these results may be secured by a simple expedient, which will have
the effect of converting competition from an active into a latent force
to be brought into play or held in reserve. It is, as we have said, an
application of the principle of local option. To explain: Garden City is
the sole landlord, and it can grant to a proposed tenant—we will suppose
a co-operative society or an individual trader in drapery or fancy
goods—a long lease of a certain amount of space in the Grand Arcade
(Crystal Palace), at a certain annual rate-rent; and it can say, in
effect, to its tenant, 'That site is the only space in that ward which
we for the present intend to let to any tenant engaged in your trade.
The Arcade is, however, designed to be not only the great shopping
centre of the town and district, and the permanent exhibition in which
the manufacturers of the town display their wares, but a summer and
winter garden. The space this Arcade covers will, therefore, be
considerably greater than is actually required for the purposes of shops
or stores, if these are kept within reasonable limits. Now, so long as
you give satisfaction to the people of the town, none of the space
devoted to these recreative purposes will be let to anyone engaged in
your calling. It is necessary, however, to guard against monopoly. If,
therefore, the people become dissatisfied with your methods of trading,
and desire that the force of competition shall be actively brought into
play against you, then, on the requisition of a certain number, the
necessary space in the Arcade will be allotted by the municipality to
some one desirous of starting an opposition store.'

Under this arrangement it will be seen the trader will depend upon the
good-will of his customers. If he charges prices which are too high; if
he misrepresents the quality of his goods; if he does not treat his
employees with proper consideration in regard to hours of labour, wages,
or other matters, he will run a great risk of losing the good-will of
his customers, and the people

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

of the town will have a method of expressing their sentiments regarding
him which will be extremely powerful; they will simply invite a new
competitor to enter the field. But, on the other hand, as long as he
perform his functions wisely and well, his good-will resting on the
solid basis of the good-will of his customers, he will be protected. His
advantages are, therefore, enormous. In other towns a competitor might
enter the field against him at any moment without warning, perhaps at
the very time when he had purchased some expensive goods, which, unless
sold during the season, could only be realized at an enormous sacrifice.
In Garden City, on the other hand, he has full notice of his danger—time
to prepare for it and even to avert it. Besides, the members of the
community, except for the purpose of bringing a trader to reason, will
not only have no interest in bringing a competitor into the field, but
their interests will be best served by keeping competition in the
background as long as possible. If the fire of competition is brought to
bear upon a trader, they must suffer with him. They will lose space they
would far rather see devoted to some other purpose—they will be bound to
pay higher prices than those at which the first trader could supply them
if he would, and they will have to render municipal services to two
traders instead of to one, while the two competitors could not afford to
pay so large a sum in rate-rent as could the original trader. For in
many cases the effect of competition is to make a rise in price
absolutely necessary. Thus, A. has a trade of 100 gallons of milk a day,
and can, we will suppose, pay his expenses, earn a bare living, and
supply his customers with milk, say, at 4d. a quart. But if a competitor
enters the field, then A. can only sell *milk and water* at 4d. a quart
if he is to continue to pay his way. Thus the competition of shopkeepers
absolutely tends not only to ruin the competitors, but to maintain and
even to raise prices, and so to lower real wages. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

Under this system of local option it will be seen that the tradesmen of
the town—be they co-operative societies or individuals—would become, if
not strictly or technically so, yet in a very real sense, municipal
servants. But they would not be bound up in the red-tape of officialism,
and would have the fullest rights and powers of initiation. It would not
be by any literal conformity to cast-iron and inflexible rules, but by
their skill and judgment in forecasting the wishes and in anticipating
the tastes of their constituents, as well as by their integrity and
courtesy as business men and women, that they would win and maintain
their good-will. They would run certain risks, as all tradesmen must,
and in return they would be paid, not of course in the form of salary,
but in profits. But the risks they would run would be far less than they
must be where competition is unchecked and uncontrolled, while their
annual profits in proportion to capital invested might also be greater.
They might even sell considerably below the ordinary rate prevailing
elsewhere, but yet, having an assured trade and being able very
accurately to gauge demand, they might turn their money over with
remarkable frequency. Their working expenses, too, would be absurdly
small. They would not have to advertise for customers, though they would
doubtless make announcements to them of any novelties; but all that
waste of effort and of money which is so frequently expended by
tradesmen in order to secure customers or to prevent their going
elsewhere, would be quite unnecessary.

And not only would each trader be in a sense a municipal servant, but
those in his employ would be also. It is true such a trader would have
the fullest right to engage and dismiss his servants; but if he acted
arbitrarily or harshly, if he paid insufficient wages, or treated his
employees inconsiderately, he would certainly run the risk of losing the
good-will of the majority of his customers, even although in other
respects he might prove himself an admirable public servant. On the
other

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

hand, if the example were set of profit-sharing, this might grow into a
custom, and the distinction between master and servant would be
gradually lost in the simple process of all becoming co-operators. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

This system of local option as applied to shopkeeping is not only
business-like, but it affords an opportunity for the expression of that
public conscience against the sweater which is now being stirred, but
which scarcely knows how to effectually respond to the new impulse. Thus
there was established in London some years ago the Consumers’ League,
the object of which was not, as its name might lead one to suspect, to
protect the consuming public against the unscrupulous producer, but it
was to protect the sweated, over-driven producer against a consuming
public over-clamorous for cheapness. Its aim was to assist such of the
public as hate and detest the sweating system to avail themselves of the
League's carefully compiled information, so that they might be able to
studiously avoid the products which had passed through sweaters' hands.
But such a movement as the Consumers’ League advocated could make but
little headway without the support of the shopkeeper. That consumer must
be an uncommonly earnest opponent of sweating who insists upon knowing
the source whence every article he purchases has come, and a shopkeeper
under ordinary circumstances would scarcely be disposed either to give
such information or to guarantee that the goods he sold were produced
under 'fair' conditions; while to establish shops in large cities, which
are already overcrowded with distributive agencies, and to do this with
the special object of putting down sweating, is to court

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

failure. Here in Garden City, however, there will be a splendid
opportunity for the public conscience to express itself in this regard,
and no shopkeeper will, I hope, venture to sell 'sweated goods'.

There is another question with which the term 'local option' is most
closely associated which may be dealt with here. I refer to the
temperance question. Now it will be noticed that the municipality, in
its position of sole landlord, has the *power* of dealing in the most
drastic manner possible with the liquor traffic. There are, as is well
known, many landlords who will not permit a public-house to be opened on
their estate, and the landlord of Garden City—the people
themselves—*could* adopt this course. But would this be wise? I think
not. First, such a restriction would keep away the very large and
increasing class of moderate drinkers, and would also keep away many of
those who are scarcely moderate in their use of alcohol, but as to whom
reformers would be most anxious that they should be brought under the
healthful influences which would surround them in Garden City. The
public-house, or its equivalent, would, in such a community, have many
competitors for the favour of the people; while, in large cities, with
few opportunities of cheap and rational enjoyment, it has its own way.
The experiment, as one in the direction of temperance reform, would,
therefore, be more valuable if the traffic were permitted under
reasonable regulations than if it were stopped; because, while, in the
former case, the effects in the direction of temperance would be clearly
traceable to the more natural and healthy form of life, if the latter
course were adopted it could only prove, what no one now denies, that it
may be possible, by restrictive measures, to entirely keep away the
traffic from one small area while intensifying the evils elsewhere.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

But the community would certainly take care to prevent the undue
multiplication of licensed houses, and it would be free to adopt any one
of the various methods which the more moderate of temperance reformers
suggest. The municipal authorities might conduct the liquor traffic
themselves, and employ the profits in relief of rates. There is,
however, much force in the objection that it is not desirable that the
revenue of a community should be so derived, and, therefore, it might be
better that the profits should be entirely applied to purposes which
would compete with the traffic, or in minimizing its evil effects by
establishing asylums for those affected with alcoholism. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) On this subject, as on all points
involved, I earnestly invite correspondence from those who have
practical suggestions to offer; and, although the town is but a small
one, it would perhaps not be impracticable to test various promising
suggestions in the different wards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[99:1](gcot09.htm#fr_15) 'It has been calculated
by Mr. Neale' (*Economics of Co-operation*) 'that there are 41,735
separate establishments for twenty-two of the principal retail trades in
London. If for each of these trades there were 648 shops—that is nine to
the square mile, no one would have to go more than a quarter of a mile
to the nearest shop. There would be 14,256 shops in all. Assuming that
this supply would be sufficient, <span id="page_100">p. 100</span> there
are in London 251 shops for every hundred that are really wanted. The
general prosperity of the country will be much increased when the
capital and labour that are now wastefully employed in the retail trade
are set free for other work.' A. and M. P. Marshall, *Economics of
Industry*, Chap. ix, sec. 10.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[101:1](gcot09.htm#fr_16) This principle of
local option, which is chiefly applicable to distributive callings, is
perhaps applicable to production in some of its branches. Thus bakeries
and laundries, which would largely depend upon the trade of the
locality, seem to present instances where it might with some caution be
applied. Few businesses seem to require more thorough supervision and
control than these, and few have a more direct relation to health.
Indeed, a very strong case might be made out for municipal bakeries and
municipal laundries, and it is evident that the control of an industry
by the community is a halfway house to its assumption of it, should this
prove desirable and practicable.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[103:1](gcot09.htm#fr_17) Since *To-morrow* was
published, various companies have been formed with the object of
carrying on the trade on principles advocated by the Bishop of Chester.
A limited dividend is fixed; all profits beyond are expended in useful
public enterprises, and the Managers have no interest whatever in
pushing the trade in intoxicating liquors. It may be interesting also to
observe that Mr. George Cadbury, in the Deed of Foundation of the
Bournville Trust, provided for the complete restriction of the traffic
at the outset. But as a practical man he saw that as the Trust grows
(and its power of growth is among its most admirable features) it may be
necessary to remove such complete restrictions. And he provided that in
that event 'all the net profits arising from the sale and co-operative
distribution of intoxicating liquors shall be devoted to securing
recreation and counter attractions to the liquor trade as ordinarily
conducted'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Eight. Pro-Municipal Work](gcot10)
