[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gcot11)  [Next](gcot13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0262580020/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Garden Cities of To-morrow*, by Ebenezer Howard, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

### Chapter Ten

#### A Unique Combination of Proposals

'Human beings, in their present condition, may be likened to bees in the
act of swarming, as we see them clinging in a mass to a single bough.
Their position is a temporary one, and must inevitably be changed. They
must rise and find themselves a new abode. Every bee knows this, and is
eager to shift its own position, as well as that of the others, but not
one of them will do so until the whole swarm rises. The swarm cannot
rise, because one bee clings to the other and prevents it from
separating itself from the swarm, and so they all continue to hang. It
might seem as if there were no deliverance from this position, precisely
as it seems to men of the world who have become entangled in the social
net. Indeed, there would be no outlet for the bees if each one were not
a living creature possessed of a pair of wings. Neither would there be
any issue for men if each one were not a living individual being, gifted
with a capacity for assimilating the Christian life-conception. If among
these bees who are able to fly not one could be found willing to start,
the swarm would never change its position. And it is the same among men.
If the man who has assimilated the Christian life-conception waits for
others before he proceeds to live in accordance with it, mankind will
never change its attitude. And as all that is needed to change a solid
mass of bees into a flying swarm is for one bee to spread its wings and
fly away, when the second, the third, the tenth and the hundredth will
follow suit; so all that is needed to break through the magic circle of
social life, deliverance from which seems so hopeless, is that one man
should view life from a Christian standpoint and begin to frame his own
life accordingly, whereupon others will follow in his footsteps.'—LEO
TOLSTOY, *The Kingdom of God is Within You* (1893).

In the last chapter, I pointed out the great differences of principle
between the project placed before the reader of this work and some of
those schemes of social reform which, having been put to the test of
experience, have ended in disaster, and I urged that there were features
of the proposed experiment which so completely distinguished it from
those unsuccessful schemes that they could not be fairly regarded as any
indication of the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

results which would probably follow from launching this experiment.

It is my present purpose to show that though the scheme taken as a whole
is a new one, and is, perhaps, entitled to some consideration on that
account, its chief claim upon the attention of the public lies in the
fact that it combines the important features of several schemes which
have been advocated at various times, and so combines them as to secure
the best results of each, without the dangers and difficulties which
sometimes, even in the minds of their authors, were clearly and
distinctly seen.

Shortly stated, my scheme is a combination of three distinct projects
which have, I think, never been united before. These are: (1) The
proposals for an organized migratory movement of population of Edward
Gibbon Wakefield and of Professor Alfred Marshall; (2) the system of
land tenure first proposed by Thos. Spence and afterwards (though with
an important modification) by Mr. Herbert Spencer; and (3) the model
city of James Silk Buckingham. <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)

Let us take these proposals in the order named. Wakefield, in his *Art
of Colonization* (J. W. Parker, London, 1849), urged that colonies when
formed—he was not thinking of home colonies —should be based on
scientific principles. He said (p. 109): 'We send out colonies of the
limbs, without the belly and the head, of needy persons, many of them
mere paupers, or even criminals; colonies made up of *a single class of
persons* in the community, and that the most helpless and the most unfit
to perpetuate our national character, and to become the fathers of a
race whose habits of thinking and feeling shall correspond to those
which, in the meantime, we are cherishing at home. The ancients, on the
contrary, sent out *a representation of the parent State—colonists from
all ranks*. We stock the farm with creeping

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

and climbing plants, without any trees of firmer growth for them to
entwine round. A hop-ground without poles, the plants matted confusedly
together, and scrambling on the ground in tangled heaps, with here and
there some clinging to rank thistles and hemlock, would be an apt emblem
of a modern colony. The ancients began by nominating to the honourable
office of captain or leader of the colony one of the chief men, if not
the chief man of the State, like the queen bee leading the workers.
Monarchies provided a prince of the royal blood; an aristocracy its
choicest nobleman; a democracy its most influential citizen. These
naturally carried along with them some of their own station in
life—their companions and friends; some of their immediate dependants
also—of those between themselves and the lowest class; and were
encouraged in various ways to do so. The lowest class again followed
with alacrity, because they found themselves moving *with* and not *away
from* the state of society in which they had been living. It was the
same social and political union under which they had been born and bred;
and to prevent any contrary impression being made, the utmost solemnity
was observed in transferring the rites of pagan superstition. They
carried with them their gods, their festivals, their games—all, in
short, that held together and kept entire the fabric of society as it
existed in the parent state. Nothing was left behind that could be moved
of all that the heart or eye of an exile misses. The new colony was made
to appear as if time or chance had reduced the whole community to
smaller dimensions, leaving it still essentially the same home and
country to its surviving members. It consisted of a general contribution
of members from all classes, and so became, on its first settlement, a
mature state, with all the component parts of that which sent it forth.
It was a transfer of population, therefore, which gave rise to no sense
of degradation, as if the colonist were thrust out from a higher to a
lower description of community.'

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

J. S. Mill, in his *Elements of Political Economy*, Book I, chap. VIII,
sec. 3, says of this work: 'Wakefield's theory of colonization has
excited much attention, and is doubtless destined to excite much more. .
. . His system consists of arrangements for securing that each colony
shall have from the first a town population bearing due proportion to
the agricultural, and that the cultivators of the soil shall not be so
widely scattered as to be deprived by distance of the benefit of that
town population as a market for their produce.'

Professor Marshall's proposals for an organized migratory movement of
population from London have been already noticed, <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) but the following passage from the article
already referred to may be quoted:

'There might be great variety of method, but the general plan would
probably be for a committee, whether formed specially for the purpose or
not, to interest themselves in the formation of a colony in some place
well beyond the range of London smoke. After seeing their way to
building or buying suitable cottages there, they would enter into
communication with some of the employers of low-waged labour. They would
select, at first, industries that used very little fixed capital; and,
as we have seen, it fortunately happens that most of the industries
which it is important to move are of this kind. They would find an
employer—and there must be many such—who really cares for the misery of
his employees. Acting with him and by his advice, they would make
themselves the friends of people employed or fit to be employed in his
trade; they would show them the advantages of moving, and help them to
move, both with counsel and money. They would organize the sending of
work backwards and forwards, the employer perhaps opening an agency in
the colony. But after being once started it ought to be self-supporting,
for the cost of carriage, even if the employees went in sometimes to get
instructions, would be less than the saving made in rent—at all events,
if allowance be made for the value of the garden produce. And more than
as much gain would probably be saved by removing the temptation to drink
which is caused by the sadness of London. They would meet with much
passive resistance at first. The unknown has terrors

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

to all, but especially to those who have lost their natural spring.
Those who have lived always in the obscurity of a London court might
shrink away from the free light; poor as are their acquaintanceships at
home, they might fear to go where they knew no one. But, with gentle
insistence, the committee would urge their way, trying to get those who
knew one another to move together, by warm, patient sympathy, taking off
the chill of the first change. It is only the first step that costs;
every succeeding step would be easier. The work of several firms, not
always in the same business, might, in some cases, be sent together.
Gradually a prosperous industrial district would grow up, and then, mere
self-interest would induce employers to bring down their main workshops,
and even to start factories in the colony. Ultimately all would gain,
but most the landowners and the railroads connected with the
colony.' <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

What could more strongly point than the last sentence of that quotation
from Professor Marshall's proposal to the necessity of first *buying*
the land, so that the most admirable project of Thomas Spence can be put
into practice, and thus prevent the terrible rise in rent which
Professor Marshall foresees? Spence's proposal, put forward more than a
hundred years ago, at once suggests how to secure the desired end. Here
it is:

'Then you may behold the rent which the people have paid into the parish
treasuries employed by each parish in paying the Government its share of
the sum which the Parliament or National Congress at any time grants; in
maintaining and relieving its own poor and people out of work; in paying
the necessary officers their salaries; in building, repairing, and
adorning its houses, bridges, and other structures; in making and
maintaining convenient and delightful streets, highways, and passages,
both for foot and carriages; in making and maintaining canals and other
conveniences for trade and navigation; in planting and taking in waste
grounds; in premiums for the encouragement of agriculture or anything
else thought worthy of encouragement; and, in a word, in doing whatever
the people

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

think proper, and not, as formerly, to support and spread luxury, pride,
and all manner of vice. . . . There are no tolls or taxes of any kind
paid among them by native or foreigner but the aforesaid rent, which
every person pays to the parish, according to the quantity, quality, and
conveniences of the land . . . he occupies in it. The government, poor,
roads, etc. . . . are all maintained with the rent, on which account all
wares, manufactures, allowable trade employments or actions are entirely
duty free.' (From a lecture read at the Philosophical Society in
Newcastle, on 8th November 1775, for printing which the Society did the
author the honour to expel him.)

It will be observed that the only difference between this proposal and
the proposals as to land reform put forward in this book, is not a
difference of system, but a difference (and a very important one) as to
the *method* of its inauguration. Spence appears to have thought that
the people would, by a fiat, dispossess the existing owners and
establish the system at once and universally throughout the country;
while, in this work, it is proposed to purchase the necessary land with
which to establish the system on a small scale, and to trust to the
inherent advantages of the system leading to its gradual adoption.

Writing some seventy years after Spence had put forward his proposal,
Mr. Herbert Spencer (having first laid down the grand principle that all
men are equally entitled to the use of the earth, as a corollary of the
law of equal liberty generally), in discussing this subject, observes,
with his usual force and clearness:

'But to what does this doctrine that men are equally entitled to the use
of the earth, lead? Must we return to the times of un-enclosed wilds,
and subsist on roots, berries, and game? Or are we to be left to the
management of Messrs. Fourier, Owen, Louis Blanc & Co.? Neither. Such a
doctrine is consistent with the highest civilization, may be carried out
without involving a community of goods, and need cause no very serious
revolution in existing arrangements. The change required would be simply
a change of landlords. Separate ownership would merge in the joint-stock
ownership of the public. Instead of being in the possession of
individuals, the country would be held by the great corporate
body—society. Instead of leasing his acres from an isolated proprietor,
the farmer would lease them from the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

nation. Instead of paying his rent to the agent of Sir John and His
Grace, he would pay it to an agent or deputy agent of the community.
Stewards would be public officials instead of private ones, and tenancy
the only land tenure. A state of things so ordered would be in perfect
harmony with the moral law. Under it all men would be equally landlords;
all men would be alike free to become tenants. A., B., C. and the rest
might compete for a vacant farm as now, and one of them might take that
farm without in any way violating the principles of pure equity. All
would be equally free to bid; all would be equally free to refrain. And
when the farm had been let to A., B., or C., all parties would have done
that which they willed, the one in choosing to pay a given sum to his
fellow men for the use of certain lands—the others in refusing to pay
the sum. Clearly, therefore, on such a system the earth might be
enclosed, occupied, and cultivated in entire subordination to the law of
equal freedom.' (*Social Statics*, Chap. IX, sec. 8.)

But having thus written, Mr. Herbert Spencer at a later period, having
discovered two grave difficulties in the way of his own proposal,
unreservedly withdrew it. The first of these difficulties was the evils
which he considered as inseparable from State ownership (see *Justice*,
published in 1891, Appendix B, p. 290); the second, the impossibility,
as Mr. Spencer regarded it, of acquiring the land on terms which would
be at once equitable to existing owners and remunerative to the
community.

But if the reader examines the scheme of Spence, which preceded the
now-withdrawn proposals of Mr. Herbert Spencer, he will see that
Spence's scheme was entirely freed (as is the one put forward in this
little book), from the objections which might probably attend control by
the State. <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) The rents were, under
Spence's proposals, as in my own, not to be levied by a *Central
Government* far removed from contact with the people, but by the very
parish (in my scheme the municipality) in which the people reside. As to
the other difficulty which presented itself to Mr. Herbert Spencer's
mind—that of acquiring the land on

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

equitable terms, and of yet making it remunerative to the purchasers—a
difficulty which Mr. Herbert Spencer, seeing no way out of, rashly
concluded to be insuperable—that difficulty is entirely removed by my
proposal of buying agricultural or sparsely settled land, letting it in
the manner advocated by Spence, and then bringing about the scientific
migratory movement advocated by Wakefield and (though in a somewhat less
daring fashion) by Professor Marshall.

Surely a project, which thus brings what Mr. Herbert Spencer still terms
'the dictum of absolute ethics'—that all men are equally entitled to the
use of the earth—into the field of practical life, and makes it a thing
immediately realizable by those who believe in it, must be one of the
greatest public importance. When a great philosopher in effect says, we
cannot conform our life to the highest moral principles because men have
laid an immoral foundation for us in the past, but 'if, while possessing
those ethical sentiments which social discipline has now produced, men
stood in possession of a territory not yet individually portioned out,
they would no more hesitate to assert equality of their claims to the
land than they would hesitate to assert equality of their claims to
light and air' <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)—one cannot help
wishing—so inharmonious does life seem—that the opportunity presented
itself of migrating to a new planet where the 'ethical sentiments which
social discipline has now produced' might be indulged in. But a new
planet, or even 'a territory not yet individually portioned out', is by
no means necessary if we are but in real earnest; for it has been shown
that an organized, migratory movement from over-developed, high-priced
land to comparatively raw and unoccupied land, will enable all who
desire it to live this life of equal freedom and opportunity; and a
sense of the possibility of a life on earth at once orderly and free
dawns upon the heart and mind.

The third proposal which I have combined with those of Spence and Mr.
Herbert Spencer, of Wakefield and Professor Marshall, embraces one
essential feature of a scheme of James S. Buckingham, <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) though I have purposely omitted some of
the

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

essential features of that scheme. Mr. Buckingham says (p. 25): 'My
thoughts were thus directed to the great defects of all existing towns,
and the desirability of forming at least one model town which should
avoid the most prominent of these defects, and substitute advantages not
yet possessed by any.' In his work he exhibits a ground plan and a
sketch of a town of about 1,000 acres, containing a population of
25,000, and surrounded by a large agricultural estate. Buckingham, like
Wakefield, saw the great advantages to be derived by combining an
agricultural community with an industrial, and urged: 'Wherever
practicable, the labours of agriculture and manufacture to be so mingled
and the variety of fabrics and materials to be wrought upon also so
assorted as to make short periods of labour on each alternately with
others produce that satisfaction and freedom from tedium and weariness
which an unbroken round of monotonous occupation so frequently
occasions, and because also variety of employment develops the mental as
well as physical faculties much more perfectly than any single
occupation.'

But though on these points the scheme is strikingly like my own, it is
also a very different one. Buckingham having traced, as he thought, the
evils of society to their source in competition, intemperance, and war,
proposed to annihilate competition by forming a system of complete or
integral co-operation; to remove intemperance by the total exclusion of
intoxicants; to put an end to war by the absolute prohibition of
gunpowder. He proposed to form a large company, with a capital of
£4,000,000; to buy a large estate, and to erect churches, schools,
factories, warehouses, dining-halls, dwelling-houses, at rents varying
from £30 a year to £300 a year; and to carry on all productive
operations, whether agricultural or industrial, as one large undertaking
covering the whole field and permitting no rivals.

Now it will be seen that though in outward form Buckingham's scheme and
my own present the same feature of a model town set in a large
agricultural estate, so that industrial and farming pursuits might be
carried on in a healthy, natural way, yet the inner life of the two
communities would be entirely different—the inhabitants of Garden City
enjoying the fullest rights of free association, and exhibiting the most
varied forms

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

of individual and co-operative work and endeavour, the members of
Buckingham's city being held together by the bonds of a rigid cast-iron
organization, from which there could be no escape but by leaving the
association, or breaking it up into various sections.

To sum up this chapter. My proposal is that there should be an earnest
attempt made to organize a migratory movement of population from our
overcrowded centres to sparsely settled rural districts; that the mind
of the public should not be confused, or the efforts of organizers
wasted in a premature attempt to accomplish this work on a national
scale, but that great thought and attention shall be first concentrated
on a single movement yet one sufficiently large to be at once attractive
and resourceful; that the migrants shall be guaranteed (by the making of
suitable arrangements before the movement commences) that the whole
increase in land values due to their migration shall be secured to them;
that this be done by creating an organization, which, while permitting
its members to do those things which are good in their own eyes
(provided they infringe not the rights of others) shall receive all
'rate-rents' and expend them in those public works which the migratory
movement renders necessary or expedient—thus eliminating rates, or, at
least, greatly reducing the necessity for any compulsory levy; and that
the golden opportunity afforded by the fact that the land to be settled
upon has but few buildings or works upon it, shall be availed of in the
fullest manner, by so laying out a Garden City that, as it grows, the
free gifts of Nature—fresh air, sunlight, breathing room and playing
room—shall be still retained in all needed abundance, and by so
employing the resources of modern science that Art may supplement
Nature, and life may become an abiding joy and delight. And it is
important to notice that this proposal, so imperfectly put forward, is
no scheme hatched in a restless night in the fevered brain of an
enthusiast, but is one having its origin in the thoughtful study of many
minds, and the patient effort of many earnest souls, each bringing some
element of value, till, the time and the opportunity having come, the
smallest skill avails to weld those elements into an effective
combination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[119:1](gcot12.htm#fr_23) I may, perhaps, state
as showing how in the search for truth men's minds run in the same
channels, and as, possibly, some additional argument for the soundness
of the proposals thus combined, that, till I had got far on with my
project, I had not seen either the proposals of Professor Marshall or of
Wakefield (beyond a very short reference to the latter in J. S. Mill's
*Elements of Political Economy*), nor had I seen the work of Buckingham,
which, published nearly fifty years ago, seems to have attracted but
little attention.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[121:1](gcot12.htm#fr_24) Chapter III, page
[66](gcot05.htm#page_66).

<span id="fn_25"></span>[122:1](gcot12.htm#fr_25) The project of one
large London manufacturer transferring his works from the east end of
London to the country is the chief theme of a story entitled *Nineteen
Hundred?*, by Marianne Farningham (London, 1892).

<span id="fn_26"></span>[124:1](gcot12.htm#fr_26) Though Mr. Herbert
Spencer, as if to rebuke his own theory that State control is inherently
bad, says, 'Political speculation which sets out with the assumption
that the State has in all cases the same nature must end in profoundly
erroneous conclusions.'

<span id="fn_27"></span>[125:1](gcot12.htm#fr_27) *Justice*, Chap. xi,
p. 85.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[125:2](gcot12.htm#fr_28) Buckingham's scheme is
set forth in a work entitled *National Evils and Practical Remedies*,
published by Peter Jackson, St. Martins le Grand, about 1849.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Eleven. The Path followed up](gcot13)
