[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl12)  [Next](irl14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

# THE

# RETURN

# OF

# SATHANAS

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>A Novel of the Revolt of<br />
Evil Against the Gods.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

—By Richard S. Shaver

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### CHAPTER I

#### Quest of the Darkome

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>"Satan, with vast and hauty strides advanced,<br />
Came towering, armed in adamant and gold."<br />
                                         —John Milton</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

The pursuit needle indicated a dizzy succession of zigs and zags in
front of my straining eyes. The huge dread-nor, the Darkome, slewed in
sickening curves as my hand on the swivel-jet stick tried to follow the
crazily dancing needle. Was it—or was it not—the erratic ion trail of a
dodging ship?

"Are we following one ship or a dozen?" asked Lt. Tyron, tightening the
straining straps of the co-pilot's chair beside me.

"I don't know—but sure as the God's vengeance we're following something
with plenty of reason to want to escape. And we will follow as long as
the fool's drivers leave us a trail.

"Too much trail right now. A few more of those sudden jerks and either
the Darkome or me is going off in two directions at once—and the Darkome
is tough."

"There's no question we can catch the ship or ships on this trail, but,
what I am wondering . . . what has me worried . . . is, will our quarry
be a big enough fish to be important, or some expandable decoy of
Sathanas?"

I turned from my inspection of the dials and looked at my first officer.
Tyron was a good man, but too impatient for action and too continually
worried that he wouldn't see any. But he was intelligent and, in the two
centuries he'd been in my command, there had never been a question of
his reliability. He had the familiar look of fearing that action was
going to get away from him again. I couldn't help laughing down at him.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

"Well, Tyron, before this is over you'll have a chance to catch a lot of
those devils—and when we do you may get those hands you're so proud of,
singed. Carry on!"

I settled myself in my seat before the universal view screen <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37), thinking, "There's nothing to do now
until we catch sight of whatever is making this trail." I, myself, was
as impatient for action as Tyron, but in the long years since I left the
culture farms of Mother Mu, I had learned to restrain my desire for
adventure until the opportunity came to unleash my energies into
effective action.

The irritation I felt at being forced to stay on duty was just another
score I had to settle with the fugitive fleeing through space somewhere
ahead of us. Here, aboard ship, I have my duty, and when it is
performed, the course checked and affirmed, the log set to rights, and
my officers assigned to their special duties, my time is my own. And woe
betide the unfortunate who unnecessarily disturbs my meditations and
experiments in my own ship-board laboratory. It is a well equipped
laboratory—befitting the ennobled station the Gods of Nor have seen fit
to bestow upon their humble servant and brother. Only in the capital
cities of the God race are there comparable laboratories. I have spent
years and many a long voyage in some of the

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

less frequented reaches of space to equip it for the work I do when I am
not on the errands of the Gods. Full of apparatus picked up in the
strange ports of a thousand far off planets—perhaps a little
evil-smelling at times, but it is my life, and in it is life—little
lives whose efforts are at times vastly more successful than man's own .
. . poor doomed mankind whose glorious ancestors are the immortal gods
themselves.

On most of the assignments that I took my ship, the Darkome, I had
plenty of time for my own experiments, far from the distracting social
activities of my own adorable Arl. But this trip would not allow me any
time to myself—this trip was ordered by the great Elders of Nor
themselves. I was to capture and bring to trial that unwise but
accomplished fiend, Sathanas, Ruler of the planet Satana. Sathanas,
though a younger member of the God Race, had started his own private
revolt against all authority—and the dicta of the Elders are not so
lightly flaunted by any upstarts a few score centuries old. He had
violated the Elder laws designed to protect and foster life and
growth—it seemed that he could not get enough victims for his orgies of
cruelty under the existing laws and had set out to make a few laws of
his own. But, as I said, the laws laid down by the myriad Lords of Nor
in Council are not easily broken—even by a powerful and cunning master
of sin like this Sathanas—and thus it was that I sat on the bridge of
the war vessel, Darkome—the crew alerted for battle action—its
glistening hull plunging toward the general area of the planetary system
that gave me birth long years ago.

Once his defection <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) had been fully
exposed, Sathanas escaped our avenging fleet by the barest seconds. The
ships in his fleet—several hundreds in numbers—had blasted

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

up in the very face of our fleet—jockeyed into position in the center of
the 'zone of weightlessness' <span id="fr_39"></span>[3](#fn_39) between
the planet Satana and her satellite Feon—then disappeared in that fierce
burst of full acceleration into light speeds that is only possible in
the precise center of such zones of weightlessness. To make the maneuver
more untraceable, every ship in the enemy fleet disappeared in a
different direction. Perhaps we could have followed a few of them, but
never would we find all of those divergent trails at many light speeds
into the depths of space.

Of course, they must have had some pre-arranged rendezvous. But where?
Our only hope for their capture lay in attempting to follow some of
them, and then, by keeping the various observed courses plotted on the
space charts, eventually figuring out where, approximately, that
rendezvous lay in all the infinite reaches of space. That blasting off
in a variety of directions was a clever maneuver—one they had
accomplished smoothly and at inimitable speed—and a precision that
bespoke much dangerous practice in the zones of weightlessness.

I had flung the Darkome into that center of neutralized gravities
between two spatial bodies and pushed the lever controlling the
dis-flows to the driver plates. Rammed it home to the last notch,
swinging the ship with short side bursts, jockeying the craft to conform
with the zig-zag swings of the pursuit needle, following the crooked
trail of the gas ions left hanging in the ether by the force flows from
the driver-plates of the Satanists’ ships.

Somewhere ahead, the enemy flung himself deeper into the evernight of
space. My ionic-indicator—a device to

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

pick up the most tenuous of ion trails (standard equipment on all the
battle ships of Nor) had finally stopped its wild gyrations and held
steady on what was an ionic trail dead ahead. This was it! No more of
the excitement and doubt if we would get a trail that wasn't just a
decoy—this was heavy with the exhaust of a large craft—steady enough to
indicate that the ship or ships just ahead were actually going some
place. And, if the speed that we were making was any indication of just
how fast the enemy was going, he was really racing through space at
close to the top acceleration of the Darkome—the Darkome that I had
worked and studied over and had the crew tune until it had the
reputation as one of the fastest ships in the Nortan fleet. But, then,
it should be—the best mechanical minds in my planet had been building it
for three centuries.

Like the thoroughbred that she was, the Darkome settled down to the
chase . . . the scent of the quarry was in her mechanical nostrils—and
her powerful drivers were capable of hurtling her to the infinity of
spatial boundaries if need be. We would catch whatever was ahead of us
if it took years at this terrific speed.

Somewhere ahead that enemy crew bored a hole ever deeper into speed
blackened space, their drivers heating as those of the Darkome were
heating. Where would the chase lead?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[112:1](irl13.htm#fr_37) This "universal viewer"
is a device which assembles and coordinates the images resulting from a
large number of penetray beams and their accompanying televisor—or
direct-view screens. These beams point to every direction in space and
the screen images are reprojected upon tiny mental vision (telaug) beams
directly into the brain of the pilot of the ship. (Telaug beams carry
mental messages in a large part of the communication system of the
Nor-tans.) The result was a complete mental view in all directions
disturbing to a man used to seeing in but one direction at a time. But
to a pilot accustomed to the device, it was a vastly superior method to
the older devices—which gave a single view of the space directly ahead.
They were standard equipment on all Nortan war-craft of any size. With
it, an experienced pilot is continuously conscious of the contents of
space in every direction simultaneously—and could at the same time use
his exterior vision for other purposes, to write a report—or a letter
home.—Author.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[113:2](irl13.htm#fr_38) DEFECTION: Note the
persistence of this word—WITH the meaning INTACT—"dis-integrant energy
infection," is shortened to DEfection, and STILL means—"to fall into
evil; err on a job."—Author.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[114:3](irl13.htm#fr_39) ZONE OF WEIGHTLESSNESS:
In a place where no thing has weight, infinite acceleration can be
achieved with every slight impetus—no inertia drag would crush the
occupants. The acceleration would have no effect onthe bodies of the
passengers.

A 'zone of weightlessness'—neutralized gravity—exists between any two
bodies in space. These zones would be used by space ships as starting
points for all long, fast voyages.—Author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Whence Came Sathanas?](irl14)
