[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl16)  [Next](irl18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

#### CHAPTER V

### War Against the Jotuns

The huge multi-beam we aimed by turning and tilting the great turntable
by windlasses upon which the noble muscles of the Aesir were expanded by
the hundreds. It was slow, but it was inexorable destruction. I had
never seen an energy screen or a shorter-fan that could stand against
such an assemblage of ray, anywhere. I had great faith in my rude
handiwork, for I had seen it used. The trick, of course, was to align
the beams perfectly, to form a very dense, small beam of utter power.
Carefully sighting the thing at the base of the big black shorter-beam
from Sathanas’ hidden ship which still held Odin's Eye in its grip, we
tried out our multi-beam. The black beam disappeared in a blaze of
incandescence like the fall of a meteor. Whether we had hit Sathanas’
ship or not I didn't know, but I did know that one beam generator was
burned out for good. A good omen! I took over Odin's Eye now that it was
useful again, and calling instructions to Tyr over the telaug, he walked
the great beam along the lines of waiting ships of the Jotuns, the
assembled raytanks, supply piles and equipment they had gathered for the
prosecution of a long seige of Asgard. Where the multi-beam struck,
there was left nothing but a great smoking ditch in the ground, a ditch
which had no bottom—as far as the eye could see. The destruction was
nearing completion which would end the Jotun hopes of a long war. But,
it was not great enough, for as the beam neared the Jotun aircraft, the
whole fleet took to the air. They had seen that the beam was

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

slow, and they figured they could avoid it by air maneuvers. Like a
great funnel of fury, they rose from the mouth of the cavern and came on
to attack, spreading out and sweeping down on Asgard.

The Jotuns—the personnel of the enemy—came from a dozen planets
forgotten by the Atlans after their migrations. The Atlans were one of
the greatest space roving races of all times, inhabiting thousands of
dark, sunless planets and planetoids, a race that peopled a big chunk of
outer space. As the populations of their home planets grew, population
pressure forced most of the immortal Atlans to seek homes on uninhabited
worlds. Eventually, like all the races of men when the cosmos was young,
their own immortality forced them to seek homes elsewhere as they grew
too big for even a good-sized world to support. So, as they increased in
size and wisdom, they moved to more advanced worlds of the Elder Race,
or else to larger, dark, uninhabited planets, there to stay until they
became too large for even the larger planets—then a trek through space
again in a few thousand years.

As vermin take over the homes of people when they have been deserted by
the owners, so did the Jotun assume the discarded homes of the
ever-migrating and growing Atlans and Titans. Worlds of outgrown and
deserted mech were left by the continually growing races and it was this
mech the Jotuns took as their own. Half the discoverable planets in this
constellation are glutted with the ancient mech. Perhaps someday, the
poor doomed men of this planet I hold so highly, my mother planet Mu,
may find their way over the gulfs between the star-worlds and find this
mech for their own betterment. Truly, the stores of these wondrous
devices, bulging the labyrinthian caverns of thousands of planets are
the "gifts" of the Gods. For the children that will follow us, we leave
them—with our blessing.

Sometimes, however, there do appear dero races that, unluckily, escape
the notice and supervision of the Elder

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Race, and they use
for evil purposes the ancient mech of the Gods—mech designed and built
for good, not evi1. <span id="fr_51"></span>[15](#fn_51)

Such a race were the Jotuns—offsprings of what unknown evil life? Evil
life walking upright in a parody of the dignity and good that is man,
appropriating to their own evil uses the wondrous machines and
mechanisms of the Gods, the Elder Race—the flying craft, the growth and
nutrient mech, the healing ray devices, the awful, deadly war mech and
other weapons from a dozen varying cultures of different states of
progress.

There are times, in my voyages to strange, deserted worlds, when I
wonder if the God Races were truly wise to leave, intact and complete,
so much of their mech science that might be perverted to evil purposes
by minds that have not the good in them that motivates the Elder Races.
But then, the Elders have more knowledge and experience in such things
than I—I am a mere twenty centuries grown. The Elders? Who really can
say? Fifty Lemurian feet is my present height—and that took all those
centuries. I have, on the Ruler Worlds of the Elders, seen some of the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gods that were
easily three hundred or three hundred fifty Lemurian feet in height.
They, alone, know how many centuries they have seen. Perhaps, though,
even they could make an occasional mistake—a mistake like leaving
equipment for the Jotun fleet heading toward us right now.

It was a motley array—the Jotun fleet. The black shape of Sathanas’
space monster <span id="fr_52"></span>[16](#fn_52) rose in the
background, ready to come in when the time and place looked
inviting—poised for a crushing decisive blow.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

We—the Aesir, Arl and I—had nothing to stop them with but the huge
multi-ray I had devised. I radioed the Darkome to come in and back us
up. The huge turntable creaked ponderously around on its improvised
bearings taken from a dismantled elevator that was lifted from the
depths. We turned it by the windlasses manned by the sweating warriors
of the Aesir. It was no weapon for the swift flight of planes. Not at
all. But, fortunately, the fliers were not trained for this sort of
thing, and they missed most of their targets.

I had strict orders not to risk my life except in dire necessity. The
Nor had no particular enthusiasm about wasting thousands of years of
schooling in a moment's madness. And, here I was, drawn into this brawl
of sun-mad dero without seeing any sort of way that I could honorably
withdraw. I imagine Sathanas was cursing the risking of all his plans in
the attack, too. He was mighty careful not to come within range of our
huge multi-beam. The thunder of that distance splitter was deafening,
its flames shot out for thirty miles in a coruscating ray of utter
annihilation. I had no way of figuring its effective range, but it was a
lot more than the thirty miles of its visible force. How to get into
real action was the problem. It couldn't be done. But we kept them
hopping, sweeping it up and down the whole line of battle. They couldn't
bring up any heavy stuff at all. They couldn't blast us out of Asgard's
walls—couldn't touch us except with an occasional bolt from the swooping
fliers. Sathanas moved his ship up to what he calculated was the
effective range of our big beam, and started blasting away with his
power beams—big dissociators they were—and the walls dissolved in great
clouds

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

of rolling black smoke. Chunks fell, and he began to widen the breach.

I centered the big multi-beam on the Satana and played a card I had held
back. Hoping to trap Sathanas into just this maneuver, I turned on the
dissociator beam I had brought from the Darkome. Added to the other
stuff the beam was made of, its effective range was immensely increased,
for the multi-beam created a great path of ionization for it to travel
over. The hull of the great ship, built of the most resistant materials
manufactured by Nor, heated swiftly red and a gaping hole appeared in
the black monster. Quick as thought, Sathanas blasted out of the range
of our fumbling, snail-like beam. He did not take another chance with
his ship.

It had been a close call, for him and for me, for I had little real
knowledge of the strength or nature of the beams of which the great ray
was composed. They were all obsolete forms of equipment of which I knew
about theoretically, but in actual practical use I knew nothing. But the
Atlans and Titans built such things well. They were as powerful and as
uncorroded after two thousand years as they were the day they were
built. Sometime I am going to spend a few years to learn everything
there is to know about antique rays, both the actual equipment and the
theoretical science behind their construction, for I will run into these
hordes using the abandoned equipment again—if I am any ruler over my
actions. I do not like their attitude toward war for war's sake, and I
like the struggling bulldog idealism of such races as the Aesir.
Handicapped by every evil—even their own thoughts play them false—they
contrive to be good, jolly fellows, trustworthy, for the most part, and
surprisingly able when emergency arises to call forth their best
efforts.

As the Aesir began to acquire the knack of picking off the swooping
fliers with their small rays, the whole battle dissolved into a great
retreat of the Jotun forces to nurse

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

their wounds and to prepare a real campaign. The range of the huge ray I
had improvised from the odds and ends the Aesir had gathered
together—work of centuries of life here—had saved the day for us.

"That will be all of that for a while," was Odin's comment, relieved at
the easy victory over what had seemed vastly superior forces. We lost
about a hundred men from the fire of the planes overhead, but, since a
plane is a much bigger target than a man, the Jotuns paid several times
over for this loss. There were a couple of thousand smoking holes in the
walls and pavings from the fliers' rays and a two hundred foot breach in
the walls. It did seem as though the Jotuns had decided the time was not
ripe for a victory over the redoubtable Aesir whose reputation was
greater than their prowess.

Odin continued, "They had no idea that we could reach them from here.
They know little of the true uses of the old ray. That is certain.
Sathanas has small stomach for real fighting, eh? I shall develop this
use of many rays in one which you have shown me, and it will be a
defense for Asgard for many years to come. Many lifetimes, maybe."

Odin's use of the word 'lifetimes' as a measurement of time struck me
gloomily. Evidently the Aesir had lost all idea of fighting death,
accepting it as an inevitable part of life. I shuddered to watch them
down great drafts of water and ale, knowing that every drop of liquid on
Earth contained some tiny particle of the dread radioactive material
which is the cause of age. That a draught of water could become such a
dread thing was a sad thought.

I resolved to do something about the future of the Aesir now. So, I said
to Odin, "You Aesir are not an unworthy race. Long ago, on this very
spot, there was a city called Atlansgard. Those people were the first
colonizers to arrive here from the deeps of space and begin life when
the Sun was young and clean. They were a mighty race, and they fought
the primeval monsters of the world's youth,

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

when growth had no end, and death did not confine size to a fixed
measure for each species. That was the time of the Midgard serpent, who
grew to nearly encircle the Earth, of Cronos who tried to eat all the
life of Earth to keep his tremendous body in food. Those were the days
of endless battle with the giants of growth whom hunger made mad, of the
mad early Titans when the giants and men contended always for food and
living space. Then government and the covenant came to Earth, to Mu, as
men called the old planet then. Then came the time of real growth and
goodness on earth, the Golden Age of Science when men pierced all
mysteries with their minds. After a time, when the Sun began to age and
bring age to Earth, the Atlans and Titans left Mu to dwell in dark space
where no age is ever known. Now, you Aesir have grown here in Atlansgard
and have taken the name of the great ancient Aesir to yourselves so that
something of their greatness might adhere to your name. Well, you are
not bad men, and I have a gift to offer you. Let me take with me into
space a few of your young men with good heads on their shoulders. These
I will teach the ways of navigation in deep space which is all that
keeps your race from using the antique space ships which can still be
found abandoned in the ancient caverns—abandoned because the Sun's
radioactivity has infected the metal of their generators. Our law
forbids such infected ships to be used by our races. But, you can use
them to get away from the Sun, and I will train your men and send them
back to you, and they can lead your people to a new home in space where
the Sun is not an evil force. Then your race will remain forever young,
instead of this pretense of immortality you now carry on for the benefit
of your lessers. You would have the real thing—true immortality where
there is no cause for age. What say you?"

Old Odin's eye shone—he had but one, though, the great ray he used was
also called Odin's Eye—at the prospect

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

of saving his race from age, and he knew enough of the ancient wisdom
from the old writings to know I spoke the truth. There was my immense
size, too, as a proof of unending, evergrowing youth to be found in the
dark spaces. Too, the idea of finding the greater Elder Gods and
learning true wisdom from them was to him the uttermost in attraction.
He straightway selected three young Aesir. Vol, Vi and Zig were their
names; for mentor and captain he sent the aging Tyr. I told the four to
ready themselves, for I was starting back to my ship soon. I had long
overstayed the allotted time for an immortal under an infectious sun's
light.

As I talked to Odin, I was treated to a glimpse of what even
comparatively ignorant men could do with the ancient science of magic,
or 'mag-mech-ic,' as it was called in Atlan. The hundred or more corpses
scattered about the walls of Asgard were gathered into a heap in the
great hall of Gladsheim. Here, the Aesir's wise men and their maiden
helpers concentrated beneficial rays from a dozen great generators upon
the pile of dead. That transformation which has never lost its wonder
for me took place. The hue of death faded from their cheeks; slowly they
began to breathe. The wounds that bored through them—in some cases many
times—began to close gradually, the Tagged red edges grew together as
the healing of the ancient ben rays took place. When these slain
warriors began to stir, the Aesir maidens picked them up and carried
them to a place in the palace where smaller but more intense and potent
ben rays were focused on their wounds to complete the healing process.
The next day, most of them were again on their feet, nearly recovered.
Yet, I knew that neither Odin nor his wise men had the slightest idea
how to build or even repair the antique medical rays, nor had they even
a proper curiosity about how its magic was accomplished. It was the
"Ancient Gods' gift" was their attitude.

I realized that education was all this people needed to

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

raise them to true God estate. But they needed such a lot of it. I
cursed the fear that dwelt in the Great Ones of the dark spaces,
forbidding them to come near any sun, even to rescue such men as these
from the doom that already whitened the hair of many of them. Sometimes,
I realized that even the High Gods have faults.

Well, I was one God who would lose that fault of too great fear of the
hideous sun-death. I would find a way to rescue these Aesir.

I had assured Odin I would send the fleet of the Nor Space Patrol I
expected to contact presently, to put the Jotuns in their place and to
apprehend Sathanas. At the same time I radioed the Darkome to return to
her former position on the Moon. Not enough time elapsed between the two
messages for the Darkome to more than ready herself for flight. Why
didn't I let the Darkome come on down in answer to my first message? She
had ample fuel for several landings on planets no larger than Mu. I knew
Sathanas was at hand, anxious to annihilate everyone such as myself who
knew of his presence on Earth. Such is one's thoughts under infectious
suns—always incorrect. It is a hard thing to remember always to do
otherwise than what one's reason dictates when near a sun. I respect
such races as the Aesir for this one reason—in spite of their life under
the evil-making rays of the sun, they manage to remain good, reasonable
fellows. Their bodies seem to build up a resistance to the mind
distorting magnetic force of the sun, and they manage to think pretty
clearly in spite of it. More power to that ability.

Everything was as beautiful as a powerful ben-ray illusion in a
master-dream as we lifted in the tender toward the Moon. Tyr was
thrilled as a warrior like him is thrilled by a battle-axe coming at his
head, while the three young Aesir, Vol, Vi and Zig, their flashing teeth
and glittering eyes told me that nothing had ever interested them so
much as the sight of this little ship of mine. I wondered what

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

would be their words when they saw for the first time the huge Dread-Nor
Darkome lying in wait on the moon. Then it happened.

As the tender swiftly flashed upward toward the day-lit moon of early
evening, the features of the shoreline and the city of Asgard blurred at
our speed. In a matter of moments we were so high that the flat horizon
of this green ball of Mu could be seen as the curve it is. I felt a glow
of pride in my ship, my lovely Arl, and these four new-found friends.
Like the sudden snap of a breaking glass perfume ball, our contentment
was shattered.

"Mion!" gasped ever watchful Arl, "isn't that the Satana?"

"Awk! Why did that devil have to choose this time to take off?"

Arl, her face intense as a bird hypnotized by a snake, refused to take
her eyes off the enemy craft.

"We're in a tight spot, Arl. If I change our course they can't fail to
see us, and if I don't, we'll collide with them."

That's the way it was, too. Any change of speed or course would have
been certain to attract their attention. I felt—and it was shortly
proven true—that this was just one of those unhappy accidents that
always seems to happen on a sun-cursed planet. The two ships hurtled
upward to a junction.

At the last minute, I drove the tender hard over on the port side and
down, hoping to dive past the Satana's stern and escape to the other
side of the planet before they could come about. As our craft flashed
past the enemy's starboard tail, the dread flash of tractor beams and
dis (disintegration) rays reached over with clawing fingers for the
shiny hull of my space boat. My hands were clammy with the tension of
battle as I hit the lifter controls and desperately pulled the little
craft up and down in short waves. Suddenly, we were dead astern of the
Satana. For the moment they couldn't fire on us, but the game was
discovered.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They must have
known who we were. It was useless to hope for concealment. There was but
one thing to do—and I did it.

I gave the brave little craft all the power she had, and ordering the
rest to strap themselves in their seats, set her nose toward the surface
of Mother Mu. We could feel the heat of the atmosphere being ground
against our hull by the power of the little tender's drivers—powerful
mechanisms that could drive the little boat between worlds if need be,
but more power than was wise near the surface of a planet. And this
violent maneuvering with a space ship so close to the surface wasn't
wise either.

"Arl," I called, "where are they?"

"Oh, Mion, they have swung around—they're coming after us!"

Futilely I struck the driver lever, trying to coax just a bit more power
from the gallant little machines—vibrating and smoking in their
compartments. I knew they'd never last long being used like this.

"Now, Arl—what?"

"They're gaining, I think," sobbed Arl. "Mion, they're trying to reach
us with their rays."

I swung the craft to the right and then frantically to the left—all the
while diving in a long, flat curve toward Earth—

Bang!

With a bone jarring wrench, one of the enemy's tractor beams wrapped
tenuous fingers around the little tender's hull, then locked tight. From
full speed, we were quickly slowed and drawn toward the Satana. A
horrible, painful sensation—tractor beams lock on every atom of the
object they hold—like being clawed inside.

We were lost.

The enemy drew his prey swiftly to the air-lock that surrounded the
tractor-beam turret holding us and pulled us inside.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

With a jar they set the tender on the floor of the airlock. We couldn't
move. The crew of the enemy craft swarmed into the air-lock after
closing the outer port.

As they scrambled over the tender toward the entrance hatch, I took a
look at Arl's strained features and refused to think—probably the last
good look I would take at that lovely face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[145:15](irl17.htm#fr_51) GOD-BUILT MECH: In the
ancient world wide caverns that some old, old race built and then
deserted. they had many marvelous mechanisms. When they left this
planet, Mother Mu or Lemuria (See previous issues of Amazing Stories),
the deadly rays that were emanating from the Sun had infected their
machines and mechanisms, and so, to protect themselves from the death
that they contained, the Elder Race left ALL of their tools of
life—everything—behind them and then departed to far, friendly,
star-homes where they live on even today. But as they live they grow,
like the Giant Redwood trees of our own California, and by now, this
ancient race is too big to tread the paths of Earth.

Their stimulating machines were designed for pleasure and their growth
science was meant to assist Nature—but that is not the use they get
today. The degenerate humans that live in the caves pervert the antique
mech to evil uses, and the machines, being infected with sun poison,
make the evil users more evil—a vicious circle that is almost impossible
to stop for several reasons. First, surface men doubt the existence of
these things, and, secondly, their mech makes them infinitely more
potent and powerful than surface men.—R. S. Shaver.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[146:16](irl17.htm#fr_52) SATHANAS' SPACE
MONSTER: These untellably ancient space ships are huge beyond belief . .
. as large as the rigid, lighter-than-air Zeppelins of Earth were before
the war—the Los Angeles, the Akron, the Hindenburg, etc. They were small
craft compared to the antique spacers. For instance, dirigibles 800 to
1000 feet long with a diameter 80 to 120 feet would not offer much room
or comfort for a man 50 to 60 feet tall, particularly on long space
flights. Then, too, that size wouldn't offer much room for the necessary
space equipment—drivers, stores, motors, etc.

Dirigibles are the largest flying machines modern man has made, yet,
large as they are, they are comparable in size merely to the tender of
the big Nor craft in the story, the Darkome.

For possible accounts of these space ships being seen in recent times,
see Charles Fort's books.

On October 23, 1822, two unknown, dark bodies crossing the sun were
observed by Pastorff (Am. Sci. Disc., 1860-411).

Seven months later, May 22, 1823, an unknown shiny thing was seen near
the planet Venus by the astronomer Webb (NATURE, 14195).

There is no basis for assuming that these unknown objects were
satellites. They would have to be very large even to be thought of as
moons.

Furthermore, Charles Fort quotes from the ANNALES DE CHIMIE,
30-417—"objects that were seen by many persons, in the streets of
Embrun, during the eclipse of Sept. 7, 1820, moving in straight line,
turning and retracing in the same straight lines, all of them separated
by uniform spaces."

Two unknown dark bodies crossing the sun, a shiny thing near Venus, and
objects moving in geometric patterns in this same general area, and all
reported within a matter of months of each other—all these things seem
to indicate unknown SHIPS or something—OF HUGE, ALMOST PLANETOID SIZE
moving under intelligent control.

Were these actually spacers of the Elder Race? Men see only what they
want—or are supposed to see.

Some idea of the size of the artificial caverns built by the Elder Race
beneath the surface of this Earth can be gained when one recalls that
the tender and Sathanas’ ship both flew into the shafts and caverns. It
was in the caverns that they were manufactured, and it was there that
they were stored. The sight of one of these incredibly ancient cave
hangars with several ancient spacers abandoned over the floor is
breathtaking in its immensity, and unbelievable, in fact.—Author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. In the Hands of Sathanas](irl18)
