[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl17)  [Next](irl19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

### CHAPTER VI

#### In the Hands of Sathanas

Sathanas’ family was one of the few families of variforms among the Nor.
Accepted as exiles long ago from some variform city of the Angles of
Earth, the Satanic family was a clovenfooted one, something like Arl in
general makeup, but with shaggy black hair on their legs and of a very
dark complexion, with horns showing Titan blood somewhere in the family
tree.

We were taken directly to his chambers. His dark form loomed ahead of us
in the red mist of his nutrient air—of his own formula, and probably one
of the causes of his evil character, for it had a smell like nothing I
had ever experienced before. Some chemical he had added to the usual
formula had fooled him into thinking it was beneficial, but was more
than likely a dangerous stimulant and had weakened his body's insulative
resistance to detrimental flows of energy. His character had certainly
become that of a mad deco of the most dangerous kind, for his wisdom,
untempered with concern for any other life, would be a never-ending
horror to all men unless he were stopped. It didn't look as if Mutan
Mion would be able to do much about stopping Sathanas.

A pretty predicament for the reputation of Mutan Mion. When my comrades
would come to hear how I had fallen into the hands of Sathanas without a
blow being struck, there would be many a head shaken behind my back.
Sad, sad shakes of Nortan heads. Murmurs of "Tch, tchtoo bad. Mion might
have been such a noble specimen but

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —the Sun
infection, you know." And the others would nod silently in agreement and
touch their foreheads with their finger-tips. Then, despite all the
god-like qualities that they did possess, they would feel very smug and
complacent. They would make a sincere attempt within their minds
to—well, not forgive exactly, but—explain what the cause of my trouble
was, and they would sympathize patronizingly. They'd think, "His
unfortunate Earth background and birth; he lacks real
stamina—resource—too bad." I always had to contend with that in my work
among the God-men of Nor—they worried about the evil that had roamed on
Earth expelling the Titans and Atlans and some foolish ones thought that
everyone of Earth might—no, must—be affected.

Not all the men of Nor thought thusly, however. Most of that great race
of Elders peered deeply into problems and didn't overlook any facts in
arriving at the right answers. But I have found in all races and peoples
in the planets I have trod that there are those who pass judgment on
half facts. Fortunately for the progress on intelligence, those foolish
ones are not too many among the Elder Races.

Sathanas, though infected by a taint of the deadly "de" from the Sun,
usually collected facts—all of them—before making any of his illegal
moves. The one error he'd made had caused me to chase him here to Mu,
but I had been the one to err when we'd come too close to the deadly,
treacherous Sun, and I was in his toils.

My lovely Arl and I and those valiant young Aesir were taken prisoners,
they who had so blindly put their lives into my hands—lives that were
not immortal as the lives of we of the Elder Races, ’tis true, but lives
that were, nevertheless, well thought of by their owners. All those
lives had been entrusted to me—to their belief in my legendary ability
to carry success with me. And what had I done? I had fallen into as
stupid error as any inhabitant

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of the Sun's planets. What was worse for one of my almost god-like
status, I had been trapped like a green cadet on his first solo space
patrol—trapped without firing a shot, without the semblance of a
struggle. Trapped and taken. There was nothing to be done about it now
but to take as stoically as we could whatever foul torments our captor
could devise.

It is not often that a proud member of the Elder Races stands captive
before a creature such as this Sathanas.

The tender had been forced open in the air-lock of the Satana, and the
evil crew of that black craft had ordered us out of it with little
ceremony. At this close range, there was no point to attempt to
overpower the crew, right in the very bowels of the enemy ship, so we
allowed ourselves to be escorted into the presence of the Satana's
master.

Sathanas sat surrounded by his women, his dark face gloating evilly. As
we were led before him, we could hear his ill-repressed sigh of
satisfaction at the prize his luck had won for him.

The first time I saw him I found him distasteful, and I had no more
enthusiasm for him now. I thought that because we were of the Elder
Races we weren't to fare too badly at his hands, and again I erred.
Perhaps the Sun was beginning to affect me.

Slowly I glanced around the chamber—his own personal quarters judging by
the wealth and luxury that had been expended on it. I have said that he
was surrounded by women? That makes it sound like just a few—but there
seemed to be scores of women here. And almost as many planetary races as
there were women. His agents and slave raiders had done their job well.
The place was full of women and girls culled—literally hand picked—from
the beauties of a hundred far flung planet cities. From the looks of
things, Sathanas had first choice of all the women his agents acquired
for all of his illegal pleasure palaces that flourished in spite of all
the laws of the Gods.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

Now there are some pleasure palaces run by wise men, and very good
things they are too, but some are only "apparently" good, concealing
hideous evil behind a perfect facade of beneficence. These were served
by men (or creatures that walk like men) like Sathanas—surface good
concealing abysmal and horrible depravity.

All these beautiful women surrounding Sathanas were the end products of
the hidden vices of the immortal Elder Races—vices that were unsuspected
for a long time. True, these vice-ridden Elders were not very numerous,
but, like every other race in Time, there are always some who do not
measure up to the standard of the tribe—whether their lack is known or
not. Perhaps certain ones have physical afflictions, and others, mental,
but there always seems to be that little group that is incomplete or
evil or decadent. Such was a certain element amongst the Elder
Races—good and noble on the surface, but their minds were evil—or
inclined to evil.

Where there is a profit to be made from evil that men do or desire,
there will be other men to act to gratify evil desires and line their
pockets. That was what Sathanas was—a panderer possessing immortality
and catering to a mass of immortal degenerates—to their lusts and
cruelty, procuring for their lusts, women and girls and for their
cruelty, men, women and children of a hundred different races and
colors. Their cruelty demanded unconditioned victims, but their lusts
required refinements—refinements that no one knows for how many years
have been improved and intensified.

These women around Sathanas, and I don't know how many thousands of
others, had been made into something that was part human and part pure
horror—made into robot servants of vast and synthetic forces beyond
their poor strength to fight in any way—made by forces that can, and do,
mould and pervert even the best natured person into something that is
not human—into a tool or instrument of

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

pleasure, or an instrument of torture of the most insidious kind. Robot
women whose minds the Elder mechanisms had perfected in some ways to
beauty while other parts of their minds had been destroyed.

Centuries of the control of stimulation rays had caused their thought
processes to be—not thoughts of the normal human. Rather, they were
merely mental reaction to outside stimulation. They served others’
purposes with the products of their minds as well as the motions of
their bodies. The shape of their lips, the seductive sleekness of their
bodies, the looks of longing and desire in their eyes. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[17](#fn_53)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[160:17](irl18.htm#fr_53) SIRENS: The authors
are of the opinion that the alterations done upon the slave women of the
Nor vice rings, carried on less efficiently here on Earth in the past,
may be the factual origin of worldwide legends of sirens and goddesses
of love as differentiated from female deities supposed to oversee
fertility and procreation.

In the Hellenic Pantheon, Diana is usually imagined as the goddess of
Fertility and Aphrodite, the goddess of Love. Thus, here we have the
case where Aphrodite COULD have been an outstanding creation of some of
the vice ring or perhaps merely one of those latter day, almost-immortal
humans that, in legend, became the lesser Gods and Goddesses.

In the legend of Ulysees, he had himself tied to the mast of his ship,
after sealing the ears of his crew with wax, so that none of them could
be beguiled by the enchanting voices of the sirens living on the
treacherous, rock-bound shores. (In the story, certain female slaves
were trained in various arts, much as the Geisha of Japan—specialists in
various branches of entertainment.) Quite naturally, that would include
girls that sang, and suppose that some of them were to escape? And, need
we point out that these legends of sirens are almost world wide, but
notably in Greece and in the Teutonic legends? Girls whose
(“RAY-altered) voices were so compelling that even so primary an urge as
self-preservation was thrown overboard in the victim's attempt to get
closer to these infinitely desirable voices.—Author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. A Valuable Chunk of Meat](irl19)
