[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abo02)  [Next](abo04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# INTRODUCTION TO SECTION JURISPRUDENCE.

WITH the present volume we begin the Section "Damages," also called
"Jurisprudence," from the occurrence of discussions on criminal law.
This section forms the fourth in the old edition, and comprises the
following treatises: "First Gate," "Middle Gate," "Last Gate,"
"Sanhedrin," "Stripes," "Oaths," "Testimonies," "Idolatry," "Fathers"
(or "Ethics of the Fathers of the Synagogue"), and "Decisions."

Notwithstanding the fact that in the old edition of the Talmud "Fathers"
stands next to the last tract, we have placed it at the head of the
section, relying upon the decision of Sherira Gaon in his letter
(Goldberg edition, Mayence, 1872, p. 14) declaring that it is perfectly
permissible to change the order of sequence of tracts in the several
sections. Therefore, because the treatise entitled "Fathers" deals
entirely with the ethics of life, we have deemed it best to give it
precedence over the other treatises. Just as in the Pentateuch we find
the ten commandments--the basis of all ethical religion--heading the
subsequent detailed laws and ordinances, so it seems but fit that the
Section ''Damages" should be headed by the tract setting forth the main
ethical principles, and be continued by the detailed discussions. We are
further borne out by the Talmud itself, which reads (First Gate, Chap.
III., Mishna 3): "One who wishes to be pious should observe the laws of
damages. Rabhina said: 'He should observe the teachings of the
Fathers.'" Rabhina's statement should, in our opinion, not be taken
literally, but as indicative of the opinion that the decisions contained
both in "Fathers" and in "Damages" generally are equivalent.

"Fathers" is one of the few treatises which consists of Mishna only;
*i.e.*, has no supplementary Gemara either in the Babylonian or the
Palestinian Talmud, although interspersed throughout the contents of the
entire Talmud may be found amplifications or comments on some of the
sentences of the "Fathers." There is, however, a Tosephtha entitled
"Fathers of Rabbi

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nathan" which
discusses most sentences of the original "Fathers" separately; in fact,
begins the discussion of each sentence with the interrogation "How so?"
Forming, therefore, a valuable addition to the much-valued literature of
the "Fathers," we have considered it our duty to incorporate it in our
edition, and we have therefore inserted the said Tosephtha in the place
where, in other tracts, we have placed the Gemara.

Owing to the fact that the Tosephtha named above bears the name of Rabbi
Nathan of Babylon, one of the most distinguished masters of his
generation, but at the same time contains ethics similar to those of the
Mishna, as well as lectures and discussions which could not have been
compiled by that author and are evidently contributions from scholars of
a later period, the historians of modern times, from Zunz in his
"Gottesdienstliche Vortraege" to Brill in his "Jahrbuecher" and Weiss in
his "Dor Dor Vedorshov," engage in elaborate speculation as to who was
the compiler of the "Fathers of R. Nathan" and at what time it was
compiled. The complicated nature of the Tosephtha in question brought to
the front a number of commentators and text-revisers, and finally
Solomon Tausik and Solomon Shechter made a search of manuscripts, and
published new editions of the Tosephtha, with additions from the
material found in the manuscripts. The latter, in fact, searched so
thoroughly that he found an entirely different version of the Tosephtha,
and then published in his edition two separate texts, calling them First
Text and Second Text, respectively, with his own corrections, notes, and
a long introduction (Vienna, 1887).

True to our methods of translating the Talmud, we have, however, ignored
the new versions of "Fathers of Rabbi Nathan," and have merely adapted
the old version which forms part of the Talmud, simply adhering to the
corrections made by Elias Wilner and the commentaries of Joshua Falk and
others contained in the great Wilna (1890) edition of the Talmud.
Further, in accordance with our wont we have omitted such of the
passages as have already appeared in the preceding tracts of our
edition, merely indicating the places where they can be found. Wherever
necessary, of course, we have added footnotes, remarks, etc.

Our reasons for not making use of the new versions of the Tosephtha in
question are as follows:

In a previous article touching upon the subject, which appeared in our
publication "Hakol," we have pointed out that

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

we cannot give preference to recently discovered manuscripts over those
used by the compilers of the Talmud, and for a reason that is perfectly
obvious, viz.: If those manuscripts were in existence during the
construction period of the Talmud, the compilers, who sifted every
manuscript with the utmost care, undoubtedly rejected them as valueless.
If, on the other hand, they were at that time not in existence, but were
written at a later period, they certainly cannot be used as a medium for
correcting the antedating manuscripts.

As for Schechter's revised and corrected texts, we cannot accept them
for the reason that he presumes to remark, anent Elias Wilner's
corrections, "I do not favor them," or, "They are unnecessary." After
careful investigation we have, however, found that almost all the
corrections made by Elias Wilner, and adopted by us, are founded
directly on Talmudical and Midrashic passages scattered throughout the
Talmud, a fact the learned Dr. Schechter no doubt overlooked.

On the other hand, we find that the commentaries published in the
above-mentioned Wilna edition and credited to Joshua Falk, Chayim Joseph
David Azulayi, and Baruch Frankel Theomim are referred directly to
passages of the Talmud in the several treatises. Therefore we have used
these well-known authorities in our translation, eliminating merely
their lengthy discussions and adductions of proof.

As to the origin of the sayings of the "Fathers of Rabbi Nathan," the
period during which they were compiled, and other historical events
attending their conception, we refrain from rendering our opinion, even
though it has become customary to do this in an introduction, leaving
these matters to the philologists and historians in whose province such
discussions properly fall. Our sole reason for the translation is that
the said sayings have never before been rendered into any modern
language and without them our work would not be complete.

The "Fathers of Rabbi Nathan" contains in the original forty-one
chapters. As we render them, however, in the form of a Gemara to the
Mishna of "Fathers," we have not numbered the chapters, but merely
indicated at the foot of the page to which chapter each paragraph
belongs.

Regarding the translation of "Fathers," *i.e.*, the original Mishna in
the first five chapters, we have found that the translation of C. Taylor
(Cambridge, 1877) is entirely too literal and almost incomprehensible
without foot-notes and commentaries.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

On the other hand, the partial translation contained in the Home Prayer
Book, compiled in the main by Dr. G. Gottheil and Dr. F. De Sola Mendes,
is lucid and in accord with the original text. We have therefore made
use of the latter rendition, with slight changes. The part remaining
untranslated in the Prayer Book we have adapted from C. Taylor's
version, rendering it somewhat more comprehensively. In the rendition of
the sixth chapter, which does not really form part of the Mishna but is
added by the sages in Mishnaic language, we have followed Taylor, making
numerous notes and corrections, in order to make it intelligible to the
lay reader.

We have not deemed it necessary to add a commentary to the "Fathers" as
we did to Tracts Shekalim and Ebel Rabbathi, because the "Fathers" has
been translated into all modern languages and because there is already
considerable literature concerning the ethics of Judaism, especially the
recent publication by Prof. Dr. M. Lazarus entitled "Ethik des
Judenthums" an admirable work, issued at Leipzig (1899), and giving a
masterly exposition of the philosophical tendencies of "Fathers." We
have also devoted a special chapter to this subject in our forthcoming
"History of the Talmud."

We have also thought it well to give in this volume, which treats
exclusively of the ethics of Judaism, the two Tracts Derech Eretz (Rabba
and Zuta), which contain the essential "rules of conduct of life," as
construed by Dr. Mielziner, or Worldly Affairs, as named by us, which
latter is the prevailing interpretation among Hebrew readers.

As to the origin of these two tracts, elaborate discussions may be found
in Zunz, "Gottesdienstliche Vortraege," pp. 110-112, as well as in "Der
Talmud--Tract Derech Erez Sutta Kritisch bearbeitet, übersetzt und
erläutert" (Berlin, 1885), by Abr. Tawrogi. For Tawrogi's reasons for
not translating Derech Eretz Rabba, see his work; nevertheless, inasmuch
as Derech Eretz Rabba has never been translated into any language, a d
of Derech Eretz Zuta, while there is a critical translation into German,
there is none in English, in order to make this volume, which treats of
the ethics of Judaism, complete, we have considered it expedient to
translate into English both tracts almost literally, although they are
not counted among the thirty-seven treatises proper of the Babylonian
Talmud, but only among the minor treatises added to them. We do not,
however, deem it necessary to add any commentary, for the reason that
the sayings

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

are very plain and lucid, and can easily be understood even by those who
are not students of the Talmud.

Because of the similarity in language and style of these two treatises
and of the so-called Mishnayoth of the sixth chapter of Aboth, they
appear in the same large type as the Mishnayoth. Following this treatise
will be published the other tracts of this section in the regular
sequence of the old edition.

THE EDITOR AND TRANSLATOR.

NEW YORK, *March*, 1900.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synopsis of Tract Aboth (Fathers of the Synagogue).](abo04)
