[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abo09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

\[Wise men have taught in the Mishna tongue. Blessed is He that made
choice of them and their Mishna.\]

MISHNA *A*. R. Meir said: "Whosoever is busied in Torah for the love
thereof merits many things; and not. only so, but he is worth the whole
world, as he is called friend, beloved, loves the Omnipotent and
mankind; pleases the Omnipotent and mankind. And it clothes him with
meekness and fear, and fits him to become righteous, pious, upright, and
faithful; and removes him from sin, and brings him toward the side of
merit. And they derive from him the benefit of good counsel, and sound
wisdom, understanding, and strength, as it is written \[Prov. viii.
14\]: 'Mine are counsel and sound wisdom: I am understanding; mine is
might.' And it gives him kingdom and dominion, and faculty of judgment.
And they reveal to him secrets of Torah; and he is made, as it were, a
spring that ceases not and as a river that flows on increasing. And he
becomes modest and long-suffering, and forgiving of insult, and it
magnifies him and exalts him over all things."

MISHNA B. Said R. Jehoshua b. Levi: "Every day a Heavenly voice goes
forth from Mount Horeb, and proclaims as follows: 'Woe to the creatures
for contempt of the Law, for whosoever does not occupy himself in the,
Law is called "blameworthy,"' as it is written \[Prov. xi. 22\]: 'As a
golden ring in a swine's snout, so is a hand some woman that hath thrown
off discretion'; and it is also written \[Ex. xxxii. 16\]: 'And the
tables were the work of God, and the writing, was the writing of God,
engraved (*charuth*) upon the tables.' Do not read *charuth*, graven,

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

but *cheruth*, freedom, for there is no free man but him who is occupied
in the study of the Law; as whosoever is occupied in such study, behold
he exalts himself, as it is written \[Numb. xxi. 19\]: 'And from
Mattanah to Nachaliël; and from Nachaliël to Barmoth.'"

MISHNA *C*. He who learns from his companion one chapter, or one
Halakha, or one verse, or one word, or even one letter is bound to do
him honor, for thus we find with David, King of Israel, who learned from
Achitophel two things only, and nevertheless he named him his master,
his guide, and his acquaintance, as it is written \[Ps. lv. 14\]: "But
it is thou, a man my equal, my guide, and my acquaintance." And is there
not an *a fortiori* conclusion to be drawn from this, that as David,
King of Israel, who learned from Achitophel two things only, called him
his master, his guide, and his acquaintance, he who learns from his
companion one chapter, or one Halakha, or one verse, or even one letter
is so much the more bound to do him honor? And honor is nothing but the
Torah, as it is written \[Prov. iii. 35\]: "The wise shall inherit
glory"; and also \[ibid. xxviii. 10\]: "But the men of integrity will
inherit what is good"; and good is nothing but the Torah, as it is
written \[ibid. iv. 2\]: "For good information do I give you, my
teaching (Torah) must ye not forsake."

MISHNA *D*. This is the path of Torah: A morsel with salt shalt thou
eat. Thou shalt drink also water by measure (Ezek. v. 11) and shalt
sleep upon the ground, and live a life of painfulness, and in Torah
shalt thou labor. If thou doest thus, "happy shalt thou be and it shall
be well with thee" \[Ps. cxxviii. 2\]. "Happy shalt thou be" in this
world, and "it shall be well with thee" in the world to come.

MISHNA *E*. Seek not greatness for thyself, and desire not honor.
Practise more than thou learnest, and lust not for the table of kings,
for thy table is greater than theirs, and thy crown greater than their
crown, and faithful is

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

thy taskmaster, who will pay thee the wage of thy work.

MISHNA *F*. Greater is Torah than the priesthood, and than the kingdom;
for the kingdom is acquired by thirty degrees, and the priesthood by
twenty-four, and the Torah is acquired by forty-eight. And these are
they: by learning, by a listening ear, by orderly speech, by discernment
of heart, by reverence, by fear, by meekness, by cheerfulness, by
purity, by attendance upon the wise, by discussion with associates, by
argumentation of disciples, by sedateness, by Scripture, by Mishna, by
moderation of business, limitation of worldly things, by temperance in
pleasure, by little sleep, by lessening converse, by reducing merriment,
by long-suffering, by a good heart, by faith in the wise, by acceptance
of chastisements; he that knows his place, and that rejoices in his
portion, and that makes a face to his words, and does not claim merit to
himself: he is loved, loves God, loves all creatures, loves
righteousness, loves uprightness, loves reproofs, and retires from
honor, and does not puff up his heart on account of his learning, and
does not rejoice because he is privileged to give decision, bears the
yoke with his associates, and inclines him to the scale of Merit, and
grounds him upon the truth and upon peace, and concentrates his mind in
study, asks and answers, hears and adds thereto; he that learns in order
to teach, and learns in order to practise; that makes his master wiser,
and that considers what he has heard, and tells a thing in the name of
him that said it. Lo, thou hast learned that whosoever tells a thing in
the name of him that said it brings redemption to the world, as it is
written \[Esther, ii. 22\]: "And Esther said it to the king in the name
of Mordecai."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_88)There are four things which bear
good fruit in this world, and yield greater benefits for the world to
come, if man observes

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

them. They are honoring of parents, conferring favors, reconciliation of
adversaries, and, above all, the study of the Law. There are four things
for which one who is guilty of them is punished both in this and in the
world to come; namely, idolatry, incest, shedding of blood, and, above
all, slander.

A meritorious act has both principal and benefit, as it is written \[Is.
iii. 10\]: "Say ye to the righteous, that be hath done well; for the
*fruit* of their doings shall they eat." A transgression has principal
but no benefit, as it is written \[ibid. 11\]: "Woe unto the wicked . .
. for the *recompense* of his hands," etc. According to others,
transgressors have benefit, as it is written \[Prov. i. 31\]: "Therefore
shall they eat of the fruit of their own way," etc.

"*One who causes many to be righteous, no sin prevails upon him*." In
order that he might not go to Gehenna, while his disciples will enjoy
the world to come, as it is written \[Ps. xvi. 10\]: "For thou wilt not
abandon my soul to the grave." On the other hand, "*One who causes
others to sin is never afforded the faculty to repent*"--also for the
reason that the reverse of the above shall not be the case, as it is
written \[Prov. xxviii. 17\]: "A man oppressed by the load of having
shed human blood will flee even to the pit."

One who says, "I will sin and then do repentance," is not afforded the
opportunity to repent; "I will sin, and the Day of Atonement will atone
for it," or, "I will sin, and the day of death will wipe it out"--it
does not do so.

R. Elazar b. Jose says: "One who has sinned and repented, and
thenceforward seeks to perfect himself, does not move from his place
until he is forgiven; and one who says that he will sin and repent
thereafter, he is forgiven only up to three times, and no more."

"*There are four characters among men*," etc. There are four characters
among disciples: one who desires to teach and that others shall do
likewise, he is of a good disposition; if he desires to teach, but does
not like to see others do the same thing, he is of bad disposition. That
others shall teach, and not he--this is medium. According to others,
this is the character of Sodom (as the Sodomites did not want any one to
derive any benefit from them). If, however, he wishes that neither he
nor others shall teach, he is decidedly wicked.

There are four characters among those who sit in the house of learning.
One who becomes friendly (with the sages who

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

study there) and studies with them has a share (with the sages); one who
befriends himself but does not study with them has no share; one who
estranges himself (from the sages) but studies himself has a share; and
the one who both estranges himself and does not study has no share.

One who propounds questions and gives their answers has a share (in the
world to come); one who only questions has none; one who sits and keeps
silent has a share. One who befriends himself in order that he might
listen and learn has a share; if he befriends himself in order that
others might say that he befriends himself and sits before a wise man,
he has none. If he sits at a distance in order to accord honor to one
who is superior to him, he has a share; if, however, the reason is that
others might say that he does not need that sage, he has none. One that
propounds questions and gives their answers in order that others might
say that he propounds questions and gives their answers and serves the
scholars, has no share; if, however, he does so in order really to learn
something, he has. If he sits silent in order to listen and learn, be
has a share; if, however, the purpose is that others might say that he
does so, he has none.

"*There are four different characters among students*," etc. One
resembles a sponge: as a sponge absorbs all liquids, so does that kind
of student absorb all that he studies: Scripture, Mishnah, Midrash,
Halakhoth, and Agadoth. One is like a sieve: as a sieve passes through
the fine flour and retains the coarse particles, so an intelligent
student retains what is good in the study and leaves out what is not.
One is like a funnel: as it lets in the liquid through one opening and
lets it out through the other, so is it with the unintelligent
student--what enters his one ear goes out through the other, until all
is gone. The fourth student is like a wine-strainer which lets the wine
pass through and absorbs the dregs: so also the wicked student forgets
the good teachings and retains the bad ones.

R. Eliezer b. Jacob named the last one a horn (which lets in the liquids
at one end and lets them out at the other). How so? For instance, a
child who is given a pearl, he will drop the latter when given a slice
of bread; and when given a potsherd he will drop the bread, and finally
he has nothing but the potsherd.

As to disciples, R. Gamaliel the elder compares them to the following
four kinds of fish: an unclean, a clean fish, a fish found

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

in the Jordan, and one found in the Ocean. By an unclean fish is meant a
disciple of poor intellect, who, notwithstanding his study of Scripture,
Mishna, Halakhoth, and Agadoth, still remains poor-minded. By a clean
fish is meant a disciple of rich intellect, who studies Scripture,
Mishna, Halakhoth, and Agadoth, and develops his mind. By a fish from
the Jordan is meant a scholar who has studied all the mentioned
subjects, but has not acquired the faculty of answering questions put to
him. And by a fish found in the Ocean is meant a scholar who studied all
the above subjects and has the ability of answering the questions put to
him.

With regard to sight, it may be said that there are four different
misfortunes: those that see and are visible, *e.g.*, the wolf, the lion,
the leopard, the bear, the hyena, the serpent, robbers, and soldiers
(who in time of war commit robbery); those that are visible but do not
see, *e.g.*, the sword, the arrow, the spear, the knife, the stick, the
lance; those that see but are not visible, *e.g.*, the plague of an evil
spirit; and those that neither see nor are visible, *e.g.*, the plague
of stomach trouble.

There are four sages: One who sees R. Johanan b. Nuri in his dream may
hope to be fearful of sin; R. Elazar b. Azariah--he may hope for riches
and greatness; R. Ishmael--he may hope for wisdom; R. Aqiba--he may fear
being chastised.

There are other three scholars (regarding dreams): One who sees Ben Azai
may hope to be one of the pious; Ben Zoma--he may hope for knowledge;
Elisha b. Abuyah--may fear being chastised.

(The same is the case) with the following three books of the prophets:
Kings--he may hope for riches, greatness; Isaiah--satisfaction; and
Jeremiah--chastisement.

(The same is the case) with the following books of the Hagiographa:
Psalms--he may hope to be modest; Proverbs--he may hope for wisdom; and
Job--he may fear being chastised.

There are also three things regarding the righteous and the wicked ones
(which will be explained in Tract Sanhedrin).

"*Every gainsaying*," etc. Every assembly that is for the sake of
performing a religious duty remains everlasting; *e.g.*, the Great
Assembly. And every assembly which is not for such purpose will finally
cease; *e.g.*, the assembly for division \[Gen. xi.\].

MISHNA *G*. Great is Torah, that gives life to those who practise it in
this world and in the world to come, as

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

it is written \[Prov. iv. 22\]: "For they are life unto every one of
those that find them, and to all his body a healing." And it is also
written \[ibid. iii. 8\]: "It will be healing to thy body, and marrow to
thy bones." And it is again written \[ibid., ibid. 18\]: "A tree of life
is she to those who lay hold on her, and every one that firmly graspeth
her will be made happy." And again \[ibid. i. 9\]: "For a wreath of
grace are they unto thy head, and chains for thy throat." And again
\[ibid. iv. 9\]: "She will give to thy head a wreath of grace; a crown
of ornament will she deliver to thee." And again \[ibid. iii. 16\]:
"Length of days is in her right hand; in her left are riches and honor."
And again \[ibid. iii. 2\]: "For length of days, and years of life, and
peace, will they increase unto thee."

MISHNA *H*. R. Simeon b. Menassia said in the name of R. Simeon b.
Jo'hai: "Comeliness, and strength, and wealth, and honor, and wisdom,
and age, and hoariness, and sons are becoming to the righteous, and
becoming to the world, as it is written \[Prov. xvi. 31\]: 'An
ornamental crown is the hoary head, on the way of righteousness can it
be found.' And it is also written \[ibid. XX. 29\]: 'The ornament of
young men is their strength; and the glory of old men is a hoary head';
and again \[ibid. xvii. 6\]: 'The crown of old men is children's
children; and the ornament of children are their fathers'; and again
\[Is. xxiv. 23\]; 'And the moon shall be put to the blush, and the sun
be made ashamed; for the Lord of Hosts will reign on Mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem, and before his ancients in glory.'"

S. Simeon b. Menassia said: "Those seven qualities which the wise have
reckoned to the righteous were all of them confirmed in Rabbi and his
sons."

MISHNA *I*. R. Jose b. Qisma said: "Once I was walking by the way and
there met a man, and he gave me 'Peace!' and I returned him 'Peace!' He
said to me: 'Rabbi, from what place art thou?' I said to him: 'From a
great city of wise men and scribes am I.' He said to

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

me: 'Rabbi, should you like to dwell with us in our place? I will give
thee a thousand thousand dinars of gold, and goodly stones, and pearls.'
I said to him: I If thou shouldest give me all the silver, gold, and
goodly stones, and pearls that are in the world, I would not dwell but
in a place of Torah, as it is written in the Book of Psalms by the hand
of David, King of Israel \[Ps. cxix. 72\]: "Better is unto me the law of
thy mouth than thousands of gold and silver." Moreover, in the hour of a
man's decease, not silver, not gold, nor goodly stones and pearls,
accompany the man, but Torah and good words alone, as it is written
\[Prov. vi. 22\]: "When thou walkest it shall lead thee, when thou liest
down it shall watch over thee; when thou art awake it shall converse
with thee." "When thou walkest it shall lead thee" in this world; "when
thou liest down it shall watch over thee" in the grave; "when thou art
awake it shall converse with thee" in the world to come; and it is also
written \[Haggai ii. 8\]: "Mine is the silver, and mine is the gold,
saith the Lord of Hosts."'

Five possessions had the Holy One, blessed be He, in this world, and
these are they: Torah, one possession; Heaven and earth, one possession;
Abraham, one possession; Israel, one possession; the Sanctuary, one
possession. Torah, whence? As it is written \[Prov. viii. 22\]: "The
Lord created <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_89) me as the beginning of
his way; the first of his works from the commencement." Heaven and
earth, whence? As it is written \[Is. lxvi. 2\] "The heaven is my
throne, and the earth is my footstool where is there a house that ye can
build unto me? and where is the place of my rest?" And it is also
written \[Ps. civ. 24\]: "How manifold are thy works, O Lord! in wisdom
hast thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches." <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_89) Abraham, whence? It is written \[Gen. xiv.
19\]: "And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

of the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth." Israel,
whence? As it is written \[Ex. xv. 16\]: "Till thy people pass over, O
Lord, till this people pass over which thou hast purchased." And it is
also written \[Ps. xvi. 3\]: "In the saints who are on the earth, and in
the excellent--in them is all my delight." The Sanctuary, whence? As it
is written \[Ex. xv. 7\]: "The sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have
established." And it is also written \[Ps. lxxviii, 54\]: "And he
brought them to his holy territory, even to this mount, which his right
hand had acquired." <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_90)

Whatsoever the Holy One, blessed be He, created in this world, He
created not but for his glory, as it is written \[Ps. xliii. 7\]: "Every
one that is called by my name, and whom I have created for my glory;
whom I have formed; yea, whom I have made." And it is also written \[Ex.
xv. 18\]: "The Lord will reign for ever and ever."

R. Hanania b. Aqashia said: "The Holy One, blessed be He, was pleased to
give merit to Israel, therefore he multiplied unto them Torah and
precepts, as it is written \[Is. xlii. 21\]: 'The Lord willed to do this
for the sake of his righteousness; therefore he magnifieth the law and
maketh it honorable.'"

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_91)R. Simeon said there are three
crowns: the crown of Torah, that of priesthood, and that of kingdom; the
crown of a good name, however, is above all. Concerning the crown of
priesthood: If one would offer all the gold and silver in the world for
it, he could not acquire it, as it was only for Aaron and his children
\[Numb. xxv. 13\].

The same is the case with the crown of kingdom, which cannot be gotten
for all the gold and silver in the world, as it was only for David, as
it is written \[Ezek. xxxvii. 24\]: "My servant David will be the prince
for ever." But with the crown of Torah

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

it is different; every one who wants to possess it, he may come and take
it, as it is written \[Is. Iv. 1\]: "Every one of ye that thirsteth,
come ye to the water" (meaning the Torah). Occupy thyself with the words
of the Torah, and do not occupy thyself with idle things.

It happened to R. Elazar b. Simeon, etc. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_92)

Three things were said of charitable men: he who gives charity may be
blessed, but if he gives it in the form of a loan is still better; but
he, however, who gives one money to do business with, with the
understanding that he shall pay him half of the profits, is above all.

There are three different kinds among scholars; one who is able to ask
questions and to answer them is a wise one; one who is only able to ask
questions but not to answer them is inferior to him; but he who is able
neither to ask nor to answer questions is not to be considered at all.

There are three different kinds of sweat that are beneficial to the
body: the sweat following a sickness; the sweat produced by a bath; the
sweat of labor. The sweat following a sickness is healing, but the sweat
produced by a bath has no equal.

There are six kinds of tears: three of them are good and three are bad.
Those produced by weeping, smoke, and in the toilet are bad (see
Sabbath, p. 355). Those produced by spices, laughing, and by sharp fruit
are good.

There are three advantages in an earthen vessel: it absorbs, does not
exude, and gives no bad smell to the thing that is in it.

There are three advantages in a glass vessel: it does neither absorb nor
exude, and it exposes to view what is therein contained; and keeps warm
in a warm temperature, and cold in a cold temperature.

The money that the Israelites carried away from Egypt returned to Egypt,
as it is written \[Ex. xii. 36\]: "And they emptied out Egypt"; and it
is also written \[Gen. xlvii. 14\]: "And Joseph gathered up all the
money," etc.; and it is written \[I Kings, xiv. 25, 26\]: "And it came
to pass in the fifth year," etc.

The heavenly writing on the tables returned to its origin (see Pesachim,
178).

"*R. Jehuda b. Thema said*," etc. He used also to say: Love Heaven, love
all the commandments. If you do the least wrong

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

to your companion, it shall be considered by you the greatest wrong; but
if you have done him good, though it have been a great deal, you shall
consider it little. On the contrary, if your companion has done you the
least good, you shall consider it much; and if he has done you a great
wrong, consider it little. Be as a tight leather-bag that has no opening
to let in the wind. Be prepared to receive affliction, and be forgiving
to those who oppress you.

The following articles were made and were hidden: The first tabernacle,
and the vessels therein contained; the ark, the broken tables and the
receptacle of the manna, the staff, the bottle of the oil of anointment;
the staff of Aaron, its buds and blossoms; the garments of the first
priests and the garments of the anointed priest. But the mortar of the
house of Abtinas, the table, the candelabra of the Temple, the curtain,
the golden plate, are still in Rome.

All that the Holy One, blessed be He, created in His world was so
created only for His glory, as it is written \[Is. xliii. 7\]: "Every
one that is called by my name, and whom I have created for my glory,
whom I have formed-yea, whom I have made"; and it is also written \[Ex.
xv. 18\]: "The Lord will reign for ever and ever."

R. Hananiah b. Akashia said: The Holy One, blessed be He, desired to
reward Israel in the world to come, and therefore He magnified the Law
for them and gave them a great number of merits, as it is written \[Is.
xlii. 21\]: "The Lord willed to do this for the sake of his
righteousness; therefore he magnifieth the law, and maketh it
honorable."

END OF TRACT ABOTH AND OF ABOTH OF R. NATHAN.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[136:1](abo10.htm#fr_90) Chapter XL. of the
original.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[141:1](abo10.htm#fr_92) The Hebrew terms for
these are derived from the verb ‏קנה‎, which the Talmud translates
literally, "to possess," "to acquire."

<span id="fn_90"></span>[142:1](abo10.htm#fr_93) The Hebrew terms for
these are derived from the verb ‏קנה‎, which the Talmud translates
literally, "to possess," "to acquire."

<span id="fn_91"></span>[142:2](abo10.htm#fr_94) Chapter XLI. of the
original.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[143:1](abo10.htm#fr_95) See Section Festivals,
Vol. VIII., Tract Taanith, pp. 52-53, the legend at length.
