[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ere07)  [Next](ere09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX.

ONE should not use a slice of bread to cover therewith a dish. One
should not wipe the dish with a piece of bread and lay it on the table,
for he disturbs the mind of his neighbor. For the same reason, one shall
not bite off a piece of bread and place the remainder in the dish
intended for another person. One should also not drink from a goblet and
give the balance to another one to drink, for it may cause danger to
life. It happened that R. Aqiba stopped at the inn of a certain person,
who offered him a goblet, first tasting its contents, and R. Aqiba told
him to drink the whole of it. He offered him another one, first having
tasted it. R. Aqiba told him to drink it all, until Ben Azai said to
him: "How long

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

wilt thou continue doing so?" It again happened that R. Aqiba was
lodging with a certain person, and he placed a piece of bread underneath
the dish to support it, and R. Aqiba took hold of it and swallowed it.
Said the man to R. Aqiba: "Rabbi, had you no other bread to eat than
that piece with which I supported the dish?" And he answered: "First, I
thought that you could burn yourself with lukewarm water (*i.e.*, you
will understand a slight hint). Now I see that you cannot burn yourself
even with boiling water." One shall also not empty his cup and then
place it on the table, but he shall keep it in his hand until taken away
by the waiter.

Five things said Rabbi in regard to bread, namely: Raw meat must not be
placed on bread, nor shall a cup or dish be placed on bread, nor shall
bread be used to support a dish, nor shall it be thrown from place to
place; nor shall one sit at the table when others are eating, for he
disturbs their appetite. One who comes to the table to take his meal
shall not take his portion and give it to the waiter, for the reason
that some unforeseen thing may happen during the meal (and his portion
may be needed); but he shall place it in front of him until the end of
the meal, and then give it to him. Guests must not give anything to the
son of the host, nor to his servant or messenger, without the permission
of the host. It happened once with a man who invited three guests in
years of famine, that he served them three eggs. The son of the host
then came and stood in front of them, and the first guest took his
portion and gave it to him, and so did the second and third. When the
host returned, and found his son holding one in his mouth and one in
each hand, he raised him full height and struck him to the ground, and
he died. The mother, hearing of what happened when standing on the roof,
was so shocked that she fell down dead. When the father heard this, he
also threw himself from the roof, and died. Then R. Elazar said: "Three
human beings were killed on account of this."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.](ere09)
