[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kam10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

# CHAPTER VIII.

THE FIVE ITEMS OF PAYMENT IN CASE OF INJURY TO A HUMAN BEING,
INDEPENDENTLY OF THE CRIMINAL LIABILITY. THE LIABILITY FOR ASSAULT WHEN
NO INJURY IS SUSTAINED.

MISHNA *I*.: One who wounds his neighbor is liable to pay the following
five things, viz.: damage, pain, healing, loss of time, and disgrace.
"Damage."--If he blinds one's eye, cuts off his hand, or breaks his leg,
the injured person is considered as if he were a slave sold in the
market, and he is appraised at his former and his present value.
"Pain."--If he burns him with a spit or with a nail, if even only on the
nail (of his hand or foot), where it produces no wound, it is appraised
how much a man his equal would take to suffer such pain. "Healing."--If
he caused him bodily injury, he must heal him; if pus collected by
reason of the wound, he must cause him to be healed; if, however, not by
reason of the wound, he is free. If the wound heals up and breaks out
again, even several times, he must cause it to be healed; if, however,
it once heals up thoroughly, he is no more obliged to heal it. "Loss of
time."--The injured person is considered as if be were a watchman of a
pumpkin field, as he was already paid the value of his hand or foot. The
disgrace is appraised with consideration of the station and rank of the
one who causes as well as of the one who suffers it.

GEMARA: Why so? Perhaps it is to be taken literally, for the Scripture
reads \[Ex. xxi. 24\]: "Eye for eye"? This cannot enter the mind, as we
have learned in the following Boraitha: Lest one say, if he blinds one's
eye or cuts off one's hand, that the same should be done unto him,
therefore it is written \[Lev. xxiv. 21\]: "And he that killeth a beast
shall make restitution *for it*; and he that killeth a man," etc. As in
case of a beast only the value is paid, so also in case of a man. And
lest one say, Does not the Scripture read \[Numb. xxxv. 31\]: "Moreover,
ye shall take no redemption for the person of a murderer, who is guilty
of death"? you may say that from this, very verse it may be inferred
that no redemption money is to be

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

taken for a *murderer*, but redemption money is to be taken for one who
destroys such members of the body as cannot grow on again.

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Simeon b. Johi said: "Eye for eye"
means its value. You say, its value. Perhaps it means literally? Nay,
for what should be done when a blind man blinds another, etc.--how
should be fulfilled the commandment "eye for eye"? And lest one say that
such a case is an exception, therefore the Scripture reads \[Lev. xxiv.
22\]: "One manner of judicial law shall ye have"; from which is to be
inferred that it means a law which can be applied alike to all human
cases.

In the school of R. Ishmael it was taught: The Scripture reads \[ibid.,
ibid. 20\]: "So should it be given <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44)
unto him"; and by "given" is meant a thing which is given from hand to
hand. If so, how are the preceding words in the same verse to be
explained? "In the manner he should give a bodily defect," etc. (hence
the word "give" is used also for such a thing as is not given from hand
to hand)? It may be explained thus: The school of R. Ishmael deduce it
from a superfluous verse, thus: Let us see. It reads already in the
preceding verse \[ibid. 19\]: "And if a man cause a bodily defect in his
neighbor; as he hath done, so shall it be done unto him." Why, then, the
repetition in verse 20? To indicate that it means money. But still the
above-stated objection as to the use of the word "give" in the beginning
of the verse remains? Because at the end of the verse the Scripture
desired to use a term from which it should be deduced that it means
*money*. It used the same expression also here.

The school of R. Hyya deduce it from the following: The Scripture reads
\[Deut. xix. 21\]: "Hand for hand" <span
id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45)--that means something that can be passed
from hand to hand, *i.e.*, money.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

It happened that an ass bit off a child's arm. When the case came before
R. Papa b. Samuel he said: Go and appraise the sum to be paid for the
four items. Said Rabha to him: But we have learned that *five* items are
appraised? He answered: I mean in addition to the actual damage. Said
Abayi: But this was an ass, and an ass pays actual damage only? He then
said: Go and appraise his actual damage. But he must be appraised as if
he were a slave? He answered: Go and appraise him as such. Said the
child's father: I do not want to submit to such an indignity. He was
told: This money belongs to the child (and you cannot deprive him of
that). The father then answered: When he shall grow up, I will rather
pay him of my own.

It happened that an ox lacerated the arm of a child, and the case came
before Rabha. He said: Go and appraise the actual damage as if he were a
slave. His disciple said to him: Are not you, master, the one who said
that all appraisements which are made as of a slave are not to be
collected in Babylon? He answered: The appraisement may be made, so that
in case he should subsequently seize some property of the defendant he
will not be compelled to return it. And Rabha in this decision follows
his theory elsewhere: "Damages of an ox caused to him by another ox, or
damages of an ox caused by a man, are to be collected in Babylon, but
damages of a man caused to him by another man, or by an ox, are not to
be collected in Babylon." Why arc the latter damages not collected?
Because it states \[Ex. xxii. 8\]: "Before the judges," etc., and in
Babylon the majority of the judges are not ordained, is it not the same
with damages caused by one ox to another, etc.--for they are all
mentioned together in the Scripture, where the word "Eloim" is written,
which means ordained judges? Rabha speaks of a case when it was caused
by the tooth or foot, which are considered vicious from the beginning,
and such damage is at any rate to be collected in Babylon.

"*Pain--if he burned him*," etc. Who is the Tana who holds that pain
without damage must be paid for? Said Rabha: It is Ben Azai of the
following Boraitha: Rabbi said: "Burning" is mentioned in the Scripture
first. Ben Azai said: "Bruise" is

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

mentioned first. (How is it possible that they should differ as to which
is written first and which last, when the verse \[Ex. xxi. 25\] reads
plainly "burning" first and "bruise" last?) The point on which they
differ is whether "burning" without producing a bruise is considered
pain which is to be paid for: Rabbi says that the word "burning" could
be explained to mean without a bruise, and the word "bruise" mentioned
last is only to explain that burning without a bruise is not to be
considered. Ben Azai, however, maintains that "burning" means with a
bruise; and because "bruise" is repeated again, it may be inferred that
when it happened that the burning was without a bruise it is also
considered pain which must be paid for. R. Papa opposed: On the
contrary, common sense would dictate that Rabha's statement, "Burning is
mentioned first," means to say that because usually burning is
accompanied with a bruise it is also considered pain and must be paid
for; and Ben Azai's statement that bruise is mentioned first means to
say that "bruise" is the main point, as burning without a bruise is not
considered at all. It may also be explained that both agree that the
word "burning" means with or without a bruise, and the point of their
difference is: Given a general and a particular which do not follow one
after the other (*e.g.*, in the verse in question, where the words
"wound for wound" intervene between them), Rabbi holds to the rule "that
a general includes nothing but what is stated in the particular" does
not apply to such a case, while Ben Azai holds that it does. And lest
one say: If "burning" includes also a bruise, why, then, the repetition?
Say that the word "bruise" means to increase the payment.

"*It is appraised how much one would*," etc. When the damage is paid
for, how should the pain be appraised separately? Said the father of
Samuel: It should be appraised how much one would pay to have his arm,
which by the decree of the government must be amputated, severed by a
drug <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) instead of a sword. If so, it
ought to state "give" instead of "take"? Said R. Huna b. R. Juhoshua: It
means that the plaintiff shall take from the defendant what such a man
would give.

"*'Healing.'--If he caused him bodily injury*," etc. The rabbis taught:
If pus collected by reason of the wound and the wound broke out again,
he must heal him; and he must also pay for the loss of his time until he
shall be healed again. If, however, not

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

by reason of the wound, he is free from both. R. Jehudah said: Even if
it was by reason of the wound, he must cure him only, but not pay again
for the loss of time.

The sages, however, say that the healing and the loss of time go
together: When he must pay for one, he must also pay for the other, but
not for one without the other. What is the point of their difference?
Said Rabba: I found the disciples of the college sitting and declaring
that the rabbis and R. Jehudah differed as to whether a wound might be
bandaged or not (i. e., whether the injured person is permitted to
increase the expense of healing by bandaging up his wound and thereby
causing high temperature, which produces pus). The rabbis hold that it
may be bandaged at the expense of the defendant as regards both healing
and loss of time. R. Jehudah, however, holds that it may not be done.
But if he does so, for healing, which is plainly written in the
Scripture (*thoroughly* healed), he must pay; but for loss of time, for
which there is no additional word in the Scripture, he must not pay.
Said I to them: If we should come to the conclusion that a wound may not
be bandaged, even healing would not have to be paid for. We must
therefore say that all agree that a wound may be bandaged; but they
differ, if bandaged too much (and this caused high temperature and
produced pus), as to who must suffer the increased expense. R. Jehudah
holds: That as one must not bandage a wound more than necessary, he is
only obliged to pay for healing, because the Scripture insists on it by
the repetition of the word "healing"; but regarding the loss of time,
about which there is no repetition in the Scripture, he has not to pay
for it. The first Tana, however (of the above-mentioned Boraitha), holds
that because he must pay for the increased healing, for the reason
stated above, he must also pay for the increase in loss of time, which
is equal to healing in all respects.

(Let us see:) According to the rabbis, who hold that he who is liable
for loss of time is also liable for the expense of feeling, and he who
is not liable for loss of time is not liable for the expense of healing,
wherefore the repetition of the word "healing" in the verse? <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) It is needed for what the following
Boraitha states: "R. Ishmael said: It is written \[Ex. xxi. 19\]:
*Thoroughly healed*," from which is to be inferred that a physician is
permitted to heal (although the affliction came from Providence).

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

The rabbis taught: Whence do we know that if pus collected by reason of
the wound and the wound broke out again he must heal him, and also pay
for the loss of time? From \[ibid., ibid.\]: "Only he shall pay for his
loss of time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed." Lest one say
that it is so also if the pus collected not by reason of the wound,
therefore it reads only. R. Jose b. Jehudah said: The above word "only"
excludes the case when it collected even by reason of the wound.

The Master said: "Lest one say," etc. If not by reason of the wound, why
was there a verse needed? The expression in the Boraitha "not by
reason," etc., may be explained as stated in the following Boraitha: If
he disobeyed the prescription of the physician and ate honey or other
saccharine substances, which are injurious to a wound, and a cancer
formed, shall he also be liable to heal him? Therefore it is written
*only*.

If the defendant should say, "I will cure you myself," the plaintiff may
object, saying: "I fear you as a lion lying in wait." And if the
defendant should say, "I will get you my relative, a physician, who will
cure you for nothing," he may say: "A physician who cures for nothing is
worth nothing." And if he should offer to get a physician who lives at a
distance from the plaintiff, the latter may object, saying: "One may get
blind before seeing him." And also, conversely, if the plaintiff should
demand money to heal himself, the defendant may answer: "You may not
comply with the directions of the physician, and thus defer the time of
the healing." And if the plaintiff should demand from the defendant to
agree upon a fixed sum, the defendant may also object, saying: "You may
take the money and not cure yourself, and people will call me 'a vicious
ox.'"

It was taught above: "And all those are paid where actual damage is
paid." Whence do we deduce this? Said R. Zbid in the name of Rabha: The
Scripture reads \[Ex. xxi. 25\]: "Wound for wound," which means that
pain is to be paid for where actual damage is paid. But is this verse
not necessary to make an unintentional act equal to an intentional one,
and an accidental one equal to a voluntary act? If so, let the Scripture
read "wound *by* wound"--why "wound *instead* of a wound"? (See supra,
[p. 54](kam05.htm#page_54).) To infer both. R. Papa, however, said in
the name of the same: There is a repetition as to healing \[ibid.,
[19](kam04.htm#page_19)\], to add healing where actual damage is paid.
But can there be a case where one should be liable for all the four
things where no actual damage was done? Yea, Pain--as is stated in the
Mishna:

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "If he burned him
with a spit or a nail," etc. Healing--as, for instance, when he had a
slight wound and it was healing up, and from the medicines applied the
skin turned white, and other medicines had to be applied to restore the
natural color. Loss of time--when he must be confined to the house.
Disgrace--when he spat in his face.

"*Loss of time*," etc. The rabbis taught: "Loss of time. He is
considered as if he were a watchman of a pumpkin field; and lest one say
that no justice is done in such a case, for should he be cured he could
still do some kind of manual work, or serve as a messenger and get
better compensation? There is no injustice, because he has already
received the value of his limb."

Rabba said: If one cut off another's hand he pays him the value thereof;
and as regards loss of time, it is appraised as if he were a watchman of
a pumpkin field. If one breaks another's leg, he pays the value thereof;
and as regards loss of time, it is appraised as if he were a doorkeeper.
If one blinds another's eye, he pays him the value thereof, and the loss
of time is appraised as if he were a miller. If, however, he makes him
deaf, he pays the value of his whole body, for he is not fit for any
work.

Rabba questioned: In case one cut off another's hand, broke his foot,
blinded his eye, at intervals, and each injury was not appraised
separately when it occurred, and finally he made him deaf, how shall the
appraisement be made? Shall we assume that the appraisement for the
deafness will be sufficient, as he has to pay him for the whole body, or
each of the injuries must be appraised separately, and the difference
would be that he would receive compensation for the pain and the
disgrace of each injury separately? I do not question as regards actual
damage, healing, and loss of time, for each of which he has not to
receive separately, as he receives now compensation for the whole body
as if killed, but for the pain and disgrace suffered with each injury?
Another question: How is it if each injury was appraised, but the money
was not yet collected? Shall we assume that because it was appraised
separately each must be paid; or, because he has not yet paid and now he
has to pay for the whole body that all the previous appraisements are
included therein? Both questions remain undecided. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48)

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

Rabba questioned: If one strikes another and makes him temporarily unfit
to labor, as, for instance, when he strikes him on the hand and it gets
swollen, which will pass over, shall we assume that because he will
recover he need pay him nothing, or perhaps for the time during which he
is incapable to work he must pay? Come and hear: "One who strikes his
father or mother, but makes no bruise, and one who wounds his neighbor
on the Day of Atonement, is liable to all the five things." Does the
first part of this Boraitha not mean a case like the one questioned by
you; *i.e.*, that he struck them on the hand, which will soon pass over,
and still it states that he must pay all? Nay, it may be explained that
he caused him deafness, but makes no bruise. But did not Rabba say that
one who causes deafness to his parents is to suffer the death penalty,
for deafness is impossible without a bruise, which is a drop of blood
that falls into the car? Therefore the Boraitha must be explained that
he shaved off his hair. His hair? It will surely grow on again, and this
is Rabh's question (as there is no difference whether the hand will
recover or the hair will grow on again?) It can be explained that the
Boraitha meant that he applied a depilatory which prevents the hair from
growing on again. Pain--because the depilatory entered the grooves (of
his head) and caused him pain. Healing--because the pain must be allayed
by medicine. Loss of time--as for instance when he was a professional
buffoon who shows different grimaces and gesticulations, and he is
prevented from doing so on account of that. Disgrace--there can be no
greater disgrace than to be without hair.

And this matter, in which Rabba was doubtful, was certain to Abayi in
one way and to Rabha in the opposite way, as it was taught: If he
strikes him on his hand, which gets swollen, Abayi says he must pay both
the value of his hand in his trade during the time of his sickness and
also the loss of time in such labor as he could do without the hand.
Rabha, however, says he is paid only what he loses every day by not
working. It was taught: One who cuts off the arm of his neighbor's
Hebrew servant; Abayi says he pays the value of the arm to the servant
and for the loss of time to his master. Rabha, however, says: The whole
must be paid to the servant, who should buy therewith land, the usufruct
of which should belong to the master. It is certain that where the
injury is wholly to the slave, *e.g.*, where he split his car or his
nostrils (which does not prevent him from work), that all that he gets
belongs to him; but where the injury is of such

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

nature that he cannot do any work, the difference between Abayi and
Rabha concerning the loss of time remains.

"*Disgrace*," etc. Our Mishna is in accordance with R. Simeon of the
following Boraitha only: "All those who sustain injury are looked upon
as if they were independent men that became poor, as all Israelites are
the children of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Such is the dictum of R.
Meir. R. Jehudah says: It is according to his rank and station. R.
Simeon, however, says: The rich ones are looked upon as if they were
independent men who became poor; the poor ones, as if they were the very
poorest class." Hence our Mishna, which states that it is according to
the station of the party, is not in accordance with R. Meir, who makes
no difference, nor according to R. Jehudah, who says further on that a
blind person gets nothing for being disgraced, but according to R.
Simeon only (who considers rank and station).

According to whom is the following Boraitha: "The rabbis taught: If he
intended to disgrace a small one and disgraced a big one, he pays the
big one the amount he would have to pay the small one. If he intended to
disgrace a slave and he disgraced a freeman, he pays to the freeman the
amount he would have to pay to the slave"? It seems to be in accordance
with neither of the Tanaim mentioned above. \[At the first glance, the
Boraitha is to be explained that "small one" means one who is poor in
estate, and "big one" means one who is rich in estate, and therefore it
is not in accordance with R. Meir, to whom all are equal, nor according
to R. Jehudah's theory, who holds no disgrace is paid for to slaves,
and, finally, not according to R. Simeon, who holds that no disgrace is
paid for unless it was caused to him who was intended. Why so? Because
R. Simeon equals it to murder, of which it is written \[Deut. xix. ii\]:
"And he lie in wait for *him*," etc.; and we find also, as regards
disgrace \[ibid. xxv. 11\]: "And *putteth forth her* hand" (which means
intentionally), hence in both intention is required.\] It may be
explained even in accordance with R. Meir, and the terms "small" and
"big" should be taken literally: a grown person and a minor. But is,
then, a minor paid for disgrace? Yea, as R. Papa said elsewhere, if the
minor is of such understanding that he feels ashamed when one says to
him, "Be ashamed of yourself," disgrace is paid for to him.

MISHNA *II*.: One who causes disgrace to a nude, blind, or sleeping
person is liable; if, however, one causes disgrace when

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

asleep, he is free. If one falls down from a roof and causes damage and
disgrace, he is liable for the damage but not for the disgrace, as the
latter requires intention.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: "If he disgrace a nude person, he is liable;
but still, the disgrace caused to a nude person is not equal to that
caused to a dressed one. If he disgrace him in a bath-house, he is
liable; but still, such disgrace is not equal to that caused to one in
the market." The Master said: "If he causes disgrace to a nude person,"
etc. If he walks nude in the street--is, then, such a person capable of
being ashamed? Said R. Papa: As for instance when a wind rolled up his
clothes somewhat, and the defendant rolled them up more and thereby
caused him shame. "In a bath-house." Is, then, a bath-house a place for
claiming for disgrace? Said R. Papa: It means that he caused him shame
while on the banks of a river.

R. Aba b. Mamel questioned: If one causes shame to a sleeping person who
subsequently dies while asleep, what is the law (as to the payment for
shame)? On what point is the question? Said R. Zbid: It is thus: Is
shame paid for, for hurting one's feelings, and here, when he dies while
sleeping, his feelings are not hurt, or it is only a fine for the
indignity of one in the presence of others, and here was such indignity?
Come and hear: "R. Meir says: A deaf-mute, and a minor, disgrace is paid
for to them, but not to an insane person." Now, then, if it is a fine
for the indignity, it is correct that a minor be also paid, but if for
hurting the feelings, has a minor, then, feelings of shame? But even if
it is for indignity, why should an insane person not be paid for?
Insane? is there any greater shame than this?

R. Papa says: The point of the question is thus: Is the reason because
of the hurting of his own feelings--here, when he dies when sleeping,
there was none--or because of the feelings of the family? Come and hear,
etc. (the Boraitha just quoted). Now, then, if for the sake of the
family it is correct that it states also a minor, and if for his own,
is, then, a minor capable of feeling shame? But even if it is because of
his family, it is not correct that an insane person shall not be paid
for? There is no greater shame for a family than the insanity of one of
its members. Be this as it may, let it be inferred that the reason is
because of his family; for if because of his own feelings, the minor
stands in the way? Said R. Papa: A minor is sometimes paid for shame if
he is of such understanding that he feels ashamed when one says to him:
"Be ashamed of yourself!"

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We have also so
learned plainly in a Boraitha: "Rabbi says: A deaf-mute has, an insane
person has not, but a minor sometimes has and sometimes has not,
feelings of shame, as explained above."

"*One who disgraces a blind one*," etc. Our Mishna is not in accordance
with R. Jehudah of the following Boraitha, who says: "A blind person has
no feelings of shame; so also he used to free him from banishment,
stripes, and death punishment by the court." What is the reason of R.
Jehudah's theory? He deduces it from the analogy of expression "the
eye," which is used in speaking of disgracing a person and also in
speaking of collusive witnesses: as in the case of collusive witnesses
blind persons are excluded (for if they cannot see they cannot testify).
And regarding banishment, as it is stated in the following Boraitha: It
is written \[Numb. xxxv. 23\]: "Without seeing him" (which is to be
explained that *here* he has not seen, but he is capable of seeing),
which excludes a blind person (who can never see). Such is the dictum of
R. Jehudah. R. Meir says: (On the contrary,) it includes a blind person.
What is the reason of R. Jehudah? It is written \[Deut. xix. 5\]: "And
he that goeth into the forest with his neighbor to hew wood." Should we
assume that this includes even a blind one? Therefore the Scripture
says, "without seeing him," to exclude him. And R .Meir? (He may explain
it thus:) The Scripture reads "without seeing him," to exclude
something, and it is written \[ibid., ibid. 4\], "without knowledge,"
which also means to exclude something; and there is a rule that where
there is one exclusion after another it means to include. Hence it
includes the blind. R. Jehudah, however, maintains that "without
knowledge" means to exclude the one who does it intentionally (who is
guilty of a crime). "From death by the court." It is deduced by analogy
of the expression "murderer" used here and in case of banishment. (In
case of one killing a person the expression "murderer" is used \[Numb.
xxxv. 31\], and so also in case of banishment.) "From stripes." It is
deduced by the analogy of the expression "Rosha" \[ibid. xxv.\] (the
wicked, the guilty one) used here, and in case of death by the court
\[Numb. xxxv. 31\].

We have learned in another Boraitha: "R. Jehudah says: A blind person
has no sense of shame. He also relieved him from the performance of all
the commandments contained in the Scripture." Said R. Shesheth b. R.
Idi: What is the reason of

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

his statement? It is written \[Deut. vi. 1\]: "And this is the
commandment, with the statutes and the ordinances"--from which is to be
inferred that only those who can be ordained as judges have the
obligation of observing the commandments, but not those who cannot be
ordained (and as a blind person cannot be ordained a judge, he is
exempt).

R. Joseph said: First I used to say: If there should come one and tell
me that the Halakha prevails according to R. Jehudah, who says that a
blind person is exempt from the performance of commandments, I shall
make a feast for the rabbis, because I, who am under no obligation to do
so, still do perform them; but since I heard of what R. Hanina said,
that there is more reward for him who performs a commandment which he
has an obligation to than for him who performs it without such
obligation, I changed my mind, and I say that I shall make a feast if
one should come and tell me that the Halakha does not prevail according
to R. Jehudah; for if I am required to perform the commandment, the
reward will be greater.

MISHNA *III*.: The law is more rigorous in regard to a man than in
regard to an ox in this respect, that a man pays the five certain items,
and also the value of the aborted children, while an ox pays only for
actual damage and is free also from paying for the aborted children. One
who assaults his father or mother, but does not bruise them, and one who
wounds another on the Day of Atonement, is liable to pay all the above
items. One who wounds a Hebrew servant is liable to pay all, but for
loss of time when he is his own. One who wounds a heathen slave of
another is liable to pay all. R. Jehudah says: There is no disgrace to
slaves. A deaf-mute, an insane person, and a minor, one who meets with
them is in a bad position, for the one who wounds them is liable, while
if they do so to others they are free. The same is the case with a slave
and a (married) woman, with the difference that they must pay when they
become independent; namely, when the woman is divorced and the slave is
liberated. If one, however, assaults his father or mother and bruises
them, or, on the Sabbath, any person, he is free from payment of the
above-enumerated items, for he is guilty of a capital punishment. One
who wounds his own heathen slave is free from everything.

GEMARA: R. Elazar questioned Rabh: One who wounds the minor daughter of
another, to whom is the compensation to be paid? Shall we assume that as
the Scripture granted the

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

income of a minor daughter to her father, the same is the case with the
compensation for a wound inflicted upon her, for her value is diminished
thereby; or perhaps the Scripture granted him only the income so far as
she is under his control; for instance, if he wanted to marry her to one
afflicted with scabies he could do so, but as to wounding, if he himself
wanted to wound her he must not do so; hence it is an income which is
not under his control, and therefore he does not acquire title to it? He
answered: The Scripture granted him only the income first stated.

He objected to him from our Mishna: "But for the loss of time when he is
his own?" (Hence we see that the loss of time is considered; and as the
income from the labor of a minor daughter belongs to her father, he
shall at least collect for the loss of time?) Said Abayi: Rabh concedes,
as far as this is concerned, that her father gets it up to the age when
she becomes *vigorous*. He objected again from the following: "One who
wounds his grown son, he pays him at once; if he wounds his minor son,
he makes an investment with the money he has to pay; if he wounds his
minor daughter, he is free; and not only he, but even if others have
done so to her, the father gets the payment?" He answered: This also has
reference to loss of time only.

There is a contradiction to the above statement that in case of a grown
son he pays him at once, from the following: One who wounds another's
children--if they are grown persons, he pays them at once; if they are
minors, he makes an investment with the money due; if his own children,
he is free? This presents no difficulty: The one case treats of where he
provides their board, and the other case treats of where he does not.
Now, let us see: You interpret the first Boraitha that it treats of
where he does not provide their board; then the last part of same: "If
one wounds his minor daughter, he is free, and if others do so to her
the payment belongs to him," also treats of where he does not provide
her with board--why, then, should the payment belong to him? must she
not pay for her board? As Rabha b. R. Ula explained elsewhere that it
refers to that part which is in excess of what she needs for her board,
so also is it to be explained here, that it relates to the excess. If
so, then the second Boraitha treats of where the father does provide
their board--why should they get the payment? does it not belong to the
father? It maybe said that one is particular only

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

about money of his own pocket, but about an income that comes from the
outside one is not particular.

But is, then, a found article not an outside income, and still one is
particular about it? An outside income which comes without any pain to
the body, one is particular about; but an income which comes by reason
of a wound, where she suffers bodily pain, is different. But does not
the Boraitha state that if others wounded her they must pay to her
father? It may be said that, as the Boraitha was interpreted that the
children were not on his board, it is to show that the man is so
penurious that he does not even provide board for his children, and such
a man is certainly particular even about such an income; but in our
case, where it is explained that they are on his board, it may be
assumed that he is not particular about such an income.

What kind of investment (mentioned in the above Boraitha) should he
make? R. Hisda said: He should buy with the money the Holy Scrolls.
Rabba b. R. Huna said: (An article which brings benefit, *e.g.*) a
date-tree, the benefit of the fruit of which should belong to the minor.

And Resh Lakish is also of the opinion that the Scripture granted to the
father only the benefit derived from the labor of a minor daughter. R.
Johanan, however, says: Even the money gotten for a scratch. A scratch?
How can this enter the mind? Even R. Elazar questioned only in case of a
wound, because her value was reduced; but in case of a scratch, which
does not reduce her value, he did not question at all? Said R. Jose b.
Hanina: The case is that the scratch was on the face, and in such a case
it causes a reduction in her value.

"*A heathen slave*," etc. What is the reason of R. Jehudah's theory?
Because it is written \[Deut. xxv. 11\]: "When men strive together, one
with his *brother*," <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) which signifies
one with whom there can be a fraternity, excluding a slave. The rabbis,
however, maintain that the word "brother" can also mean a slave, as
there is a fraternity with a slave, because he is obliged to perform
many commandments which an Israelite is obliged to perform. Now then,
according to R. Jehudah, who is particular about the word "brother"
mentioned in the Scripture, let witnesses who were found collusive in
their testimony against a slave (to convict him of a crime punishable by
death) not be

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

put to death, for it is written \[ibid. xix. 19\]: "Then shall ye do
unto him as he had purposed to do unto his brother"? Said Rabba in the
name of R. Shesheth: The verse reads \[ibid., ibid.\]: "And thou shalt
put away the evil from the midst of thee," which means under any
circumstances.

Now, according to the rabbis, who maintain that a slave is also
considered a "brother," let a slave be qualified to become a king?
According to such a theory the same question could be put as regards a
proselyte (who according to all is named brother, and nevertheless he is
not qualified)? But both are excluded by the following verse \[ibid.
xvii. 15\]: "From the midst of thy brethren shalt thou set a king over
thee," which signifies from the best qualified of your brethren. The
question can, however, be put thus: Let, according to the rabbis, a
slave be eligible as a witness, for it is written \[ibid. xix. 18\]: "He
had testified a falsehood against his brother"? Said Ula: Even as
regards witnesses he must be excluded by the following *a fortiori*
argument, thus: An Israelitish woman is not eligible as a witness--a
slave, who is not an Israelite and cannot even intermarry with an
Israelitish woman, is it not logical that be should not be eligible as a
witness? And if you should say that a slave has the preference, for he
is circumcised, which is not the case with a woman, the case of a minor
can prove it, who is circumcised, and still he is ineligible as a
witness; and if you should say that a minor has no obligation of
performing commandments, while a slave has, the case of the woman can be
cited who has such obligation and still she is ineligible as a witness,
and the former argument will be reinstated; from which it is to be seen
that in some respects one has preference and in others the other has
preference. In one thing, however, they are all equal, in that they are
not fit to perform all the commandments to which an Israelite is subject
and they are eligible as witnesses; the same is the case with a slave,
who is not fit to perform all the commandments and is also eligible as a
witness.

"*A deaf-mute*," etc. The mother of R. Samuel b. Aba of Hagrunia married
R. Aba, and she transferred her estates to her son R. Samuel. When she
died, he went before R. Jeremiah b. Aba and he installed him in the
possession of the estates. His stepfather went and told this to R.
Hoshiya, who in his turn told it to R. Jehudah, and the latter said to
him: So said Samuel: A woman who sells her estates to some one with a
condition that her husband shall have the fruition of same during

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

his lifetime, and thereafter she dies, her husband can recover the
estates from the buyer (for he inherits from his wife, and because he
had the usufruct of the estates he is considered as if he were the first
buyer). When this was stated before R. Jeremiah, he said: I, however,
know of a Mishna (Third Gate, Chap. VIII.) which states: "One who
transfers his estates to his son, after his decease . . . If the son
sell them, the buyer has nothing in them until the father dies." We see,
then, that if the father die the buyer acquires title in them, and even
in case the son dies when the father is still alive, in which case they
never came into the possession of the son. As R. Simeon b. Lakish said,
there is no difference whether the son dies during the lifetime of the
father or the father dies during the lifetime of the son, in both of
which cases they never came into the possession of the son, the buyer
nevertheless acquires title. <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50)

When the answer of R. Jeremiah was repeated before R. Jehudah, he said:
So said Samuel: This is not equal to the case of our Mishna. Why so?
Said Abayi: On account of the enactment of Usha, which is in accordance
with Samuel's statement. (See Khethuboth, p. 20.) Said R. Idi b. Abin:
We have so also learned in the following Boraitha: If witnesses say: "We
testify that that person divorced his wife and paid her the amount of
her marriage contract," and it was found that she was still with him,
and cohabited with him, and those witnesses were found collusive, they
must not pay the full amount of the marriage contract (because she may
die before her husband and nothing will be collected, but it must be
appraised how much she would get in cash now if she should transfer her
right in the marriage contract, so that if she should die before her
husband the buyer would lose), but only the benefit of the same; and if
she dies, her husband inherits also this from her. Now then, if the
enactment of Usha should be of no effect, why should her husband inherit
the amount of her marriage contract--let her be able to sell her right
in the marriage contract and collect the full amount of it? Said Abayi:
What comparison is this: If the enactment was made regarding a woman's
estate which she sells reserving the benefit, should the same enactment
apply to guaranteed estates?

Said Abayi: As we have come to speak about benefit, let

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

us say something regarding it: The above-mentioned benefit belongs to
the wife; for if it should belong to the husband, let the collusive
witnesses say to her: What loss did you sustain--if you had sold them,
the benefit would anyhow have belonged not to you, but to your husband?
Said R. Shalman: It does not matter: This benefit, although it would go
to the husband, would be a benefit for her, as it would be used to
increase the luxury of the household.

Rabha said: The Halakha prevails that the benefit in case of a woman who
sells her right in the marriage contract belongs to herself; and if she
bought estates therewith, her husband has nothing even in their income.
Why so? The rabbis enacted that he should have the direct income of his
wife's estates belonging to her before marriage, but not the income of
her estates which she acquired after her marriage in which her husband
has no share (*e.g.*, estates bought with the money paid her for
disgrace caused to her, etc.). When R. Papa and R. Huna returned from
Rabh's college, they questioned: On account of the enactment made in
Usha, it was taught of a slave and a woman, one who meets with them is
in a bad position, etc. Now, if the enactment of Usha should be of no
effect, why should the compensation for her wound be paid to her
husband, let it be paid to her and let her buy estates the usufruct of
which shall belong to her husband? (What question is this?) Even
according to the theory that the enactment of Usha is of effect and she
cannot sell the right in her marriage contract absolutely, let her sell,
however, her estates of which her husband has the fruition for any
benefit she could derive and pay to him whom she wounded? We must then
say that she does not possess any. The same is the case here.

MISHNA *IV*.: If one blow <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) into the
car of another, he pays one sela (as a fine for the disgrace he caused
him). R. Jehudah, however, in the name of R. Jose the Galilean says, one
manah. If he strike him with the palm of his hand on the cheek, he pays
two hundred zuz; if, however, with the back of his hand, he pays four
hundred. If he pull or cut his ear, or pull his hair, or spit in such a
manner that the spittle fall on him, or strip him of his garment, or he
bare the head of a woman in the market, four hundred zuz is to be paid.
This is the rule:

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rank and station
of the parties are taken into consideration. R. Aqiba, however, says:
Even the poorest of Israel must be considered as if they were
independent men who had lost their estates, for they are the descendants
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And it happened that one bared the head of
a woman in the market, and when the case came before R. Aqiba he imposed
a fine of four hundred zuz. Said the defendant to him: "Grant me time
for payment," and he did so. The defendant then watched her when she was
standing at the gate of her courtyard, and broke her pitcher containing
oil of the value of one issar: she bared her head, dipped her hand in
the oil, and rubbed it into her hair in the presence of witnesses. The
defendant then brought the witnesses before R. Aqiba and said: Rabbi, do
you command me to pay this woman four hundred zuz? R. Aqiba answered:
Your pleading is of no avail, for one who wounds himself, although it is
considered a crime, he does not pay a fine, but if others wound him he
must be paid. The same is the case with one who cuts off his plants;
although it is unlawful, still he pays nothing, but if others do so (to
the same property) it must be paid for.

GEMARA: The schoolmen propounded a question: The manah stated in the
Mishna, does it mean a manah of the city of Zur, <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52) which contains one hundred zuz, or does it
mean the manah of the country, which is one-eighth part of it? Come and
hear: "It happened that a man blew into the ear of another and the case
came before R. Jehudah the Second, and he said: I saw you doing it, and
I hold with R. Jose the Galilean; and there are also other witnesses who
saw you doing it, therefore go and pay him a manah of the city of Zur."
 <span id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53)There was a man who did so to his
neighbor, and when the case came before R. Tubiah b. Mathna he sent a
message to R. Jose, questioning him whether the sela mentioned in the
Mishna meant a sela of Zur or one of the country, which is only of the
value of one-half of a zuz, and he answered: This is to be inferred from
the end of Mishna I., Chap. IV., where it states "the first two a golden
dinar"; and if the Mishna treated of a sela of the country, it would
state one more case, viz.: "If the ox still gore another ox worth two
hundred zuz, the owner of the ox and the owner

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

of the first ox that was injured take each twelve dinars and one sela."
Said R. Tubiah: Should the Tana enumerate all the possible cases as a
peddler does his wares? How was the case decided? It was decided from
the statement of Rabh, which R. Jehudah said in his name, that all the
moneys mentioned in the Scripture mean those of Zur, and those mentioned
by the rabbis mean those of the country. (Hence one-half of a zuz.) Said
the plaintiff: As I have to get only one-half of a zuz, let it be for
the poor, as I do not want it. Thereafter he said again: Give it to me
and I will use it for improving my health. Said R. Joseph to him: The
poor have already acquired title to it, and although they were not here,
we the treasurers of charities are considered the hand of the poor.

Hanan the Bisha (the bad) blew into the ear of another. When the case
came before R. Huna, he said: Go and pay him one-half of a zuz. Hanan
had in his possession a bad zuz that he could not pass, and he tendered
it to the plaintiff, asking for one-half zuz change. When he refused, he
blew in his ear again, and paid him the whole zuz.

(It is said above, "I saw you doing it.") May a witness be a judge in
the same case? Have we not learned in a Boraitha: If the Sanhedrin saw
one murdering another, they shall be divided; viz., some of them shall
appear as witnesses and the others shall perform the function of judges.
Such is the dictum of R. Tarphon. R. Aqiba, however, said: As they are
all witnesses, none of them can perform the function of judges? Did R.
Aqiba indeed say so? Have we not learned in another Boraitha: It is
written \[Ex. xxi. 18\]: "And if men strive together, and one smite the
other with a stone, or with the fist." Said Simeon the Timani: As in the
case of the fist it must be investigated whether the blow of the fist
was of such violence as to make him ill, confined to his bed, the same
is the case with the stone; but if the stone was lost from the hand of
the witnesses, no judgment can be granted. Said R. Aqiba to him: "Did he
strike him in the presence of the court, so that they could testify how
much, for what, and at what place he struck him; and secondly, in case
one pushes his neighbor from the top of the roof of a house or palace
and he dies, are, then, the court obliged to go and investigate if the
height was such as to kill a man, or shall the house or palace be
brought before the Beth Din? And if you should say, 'Yea,' how should be
the case if in the meantime the palace were destroyed--shall we

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

wait until it be rebuilt of the same height, so that it can be measured?
Therefore we must assume that as in the case of the fist (which is
always there) it depends upon the testimony of the witnesses whether the
blow was of such violence, etc., the same is the case with the stone,
except where the stone was lost before the witnesses have seen it." We
see, then, that R. Aqiba said that the court can testify how the
striking was, hence that a witness can act as judge? He said it only to
R. Simeon: According to your theory, should the court, etc., but he
himself does not allow a witness to be a judge under any circumstances.

The rabbis taught: "A non-vicious ox who killed a man and has also
caused damages to another, he must be tried for the crime but not for
the damages (because a non-vicious ox pays for damages from his body,
and in this case his body is to be stoned); a vicious one, however, who
did the same is tried first for the damages and subsequently for the
crime. If, however, he was sentenced to death first, he cannot be tried
again for the damages." What is the reason? Why shall he not be tried
again for the damages. (In such a case the payment is to be made from
the estates of the owner?) Said Rabha: I found the disciples of the
college sitting and discussing about this case, and they came to the
conclusion that the Boraitha is in accordance with R. Simeon the
Timani's theory, that in all cases the appraisement of the court is
necessary also concerning damages; and in our case, as it was already
decided that the ox must be killed, the execution must not be postponed
for the purpose of appraisement. Said I to them: The Boraitha can be
explained also in accordance with R. Aqiba, namely, that the case was
that the owner of the ox ran away (and he cannot be tried when he is not
present). If so, even if the ox was not first tried for the crime, can a
civil case be tried in the absence of the parties? The case was that he
ran away after the witnesses testified in his presence. But if he ran
away, from whom shall the payment be collected? If he was not yet tried
for the crime, the appraisement of the damages can be made and the ox
may be hired to do work with him until the compensation for the hire
equals the amount of the payment, and subsequently he shall be tried for
the crime. If so, let also a non-vicious ox be tried for the damages and
then hired until the hire shall equal the amount of damages, and
thereafter he shall be tried for the crime? Said R. Mari bar Kahana:
From the fact that it does not state so,

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

it may be inferred that the hire paid for an ox is not considered as its
body, but as the estates of the owner.

The schoolmen propounded a question: Is investigation (before
appraisement) necessary in case of damages, or not? Shall we assume that
only in case of a crime it must be investigated whether the blow was
enough to kill, but in case of damages he must pay at any rate, or there
is no difference and investigation must be had? Come and hear: It is
stated above (p. [118](kam08.htm#page_118)), "As a pit of ten spans
depth, which is capable of killing, so also other things, etc. If,
however, it was less deep, he is liable only for damages but not for
killing." Is it not to be assumed that it means from the bottom to the
top--namely, ten spans deep is for killing, less than ten is for
damages? Hence we see that investigation is not necessary, as it must be
paid even if it was only two or three spans? Nay, it means from the top
to the bottom--namely from one up, but not including ten, is
investigated for damages, but it must be investigated how many spans
deep are necessary for such damage (but if it was ten or more, then we
follow the tradition that from ten up it kills).

Come and hear: Concerning the five certain things it must be
investigated, appraised, and collected at once, including healing and
loss of time, which are also previously appraised as how long it will
take before he will be cured. If, however, it was not so--for instance,
during that time he grew worse, or, on the contrary, he was cured in a
shorter time, it does not matter, and the appraisement remains the same.
Infer from this that there is appraisement in damages. (From this the
question of the above schoolmen cannot be decided yet, as) they were not
in doubt that appraisement was necessary of the time needed for the
injured person to be cured, etc., but they still doubted if the article
which caused the damage must be investigated whether it was capable of
causing such damage or not. Come and hear the decision of Simeon the
Timani stated above, from which is to be inferred that investigation is
necessary also for damages. And so it is.

The Master said: If he was examined, and it was concluded that the
healing must take a certain time, and he was healed before the time, he
gets nevertheless the full amount. This will be a support to Rabha, who
said that he who is examined, and it is concluded that his sickness will
continue the whole day, and he becomes cured in half a day, so that the
other half day he is doing some work, he is nevertheless paid for the
full day, as it

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

is considered that his sickness was shortened by the mercy of Heaven.

"*If he spat in such a manner*," etc. Said R. Papa: On those parts of
his body which were not covered, but not if the spittle fell on his
garments. But let it be considered as if he caused him shame by words?
In the West it was said in the name of R. Jose b. Abin that from the
above explanation of the Mishna by R. Papa is to be inferred that if one
disgraces another by mere words he is free.

"*Rank and station*," etc. The schoolmen propounded a question: The
statement of the first Tana, shall it be construed leniently or
rigorously? Leniently, if he was a poor person he must not be paid so
much as if he were a rich one, or rigorously, that if he was of higher
station he is paid more for the disgrace caused him? Come and hear R.
Aqiba's statement in the same Mishna, that even the poorest man must be
considered as an independent man, etc., from which it is seen that the
first Tana meant leniently. And so it is.

"*It happened that one bared*," etc. Do we, then, allow time for payment
in such a case? Did not R. Hanina say that in cases of wounding no time
is given? Yea. We do not allow time in cases of pecuniary damage, but in
cases of disgrace, where there is no pecuniary damage, time is allowed.

"*He watched her when she was standing*," etc. But the Boraitha states
that R. Aqiba said to him: You dived into deep waters and brought up a
fragment of a clay vessel: one may wound himself, but if others wound
him they must pay (and in our Mishna it states that a man must not do
so)? Said Rabha: This presents no difficulty. The Boraitha speaks of a
wound which is not allowed, while the Mishna speaks of disgrace, which
one is allowed to cause to himself.

But the Mishna speaks of disgrace only, and still R. Aqiba said,
"Although he is not allowed," etc.? R. Aqiba meant to say thus: It is
not only in case of disgrace, which one may do to himself, and still if
caused by another he is responsible; but even in case of wounding, in
which he is not allowed to do it to himself, and after he himself did it
others came and caused him other wounds, they are nevertheless
responsible.

"One who cut off his plants," etc. Rabba bar bar Hana taught in the
presence of Rabh: "If the plaintiff says, 'You killed my ox,' or, 'You
cut off my plants,' and the defendant answer, 'You ordered me to do so,'
he is free." Said Rabh to

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

him: If so, you would not leave life to the people-must he then be
believed that he was ordered to do so? Rabba bar bar Hana answered: Then
ignore it. Said Rabh to him: Why should you not explain your Boraitha
that it treats of an ox which was sentenced to be killed, or of a tree
which the court ordered to be cut off? He rejoined: If so, then what is
the complaint of the plaintiff? The complaint is thus: I wanted to do
this commandment myself, as we have learned in the following Boraitha:
It is written \[Lev. xvii. 13\]: "Then shall he pour out the flood
thereof, and cover it up," etc. This means that the covering up must be
done by the one who pours it out (if he desires to do so); and it
happened of one who slaughtered a fowl and another anticipated him and
covered its blood with dust, that R. Gamaliel made him pay ten golden
zuz. (Hence one has the right to complain for a meritorious deed which
he was prevented from doing.)

Rabh said: A tree that contains a kabh of fruit is prohibited to be cut
off. Said Rabbina: If, however, the tree be worth more in wood, it may
be done. We have learned so also in the following Boraitha. It is
written \[Deut. xx. 20\]: "Only those trees of which thou knowest"--that
means, a tree which bears fruit; "that they are not fruit-trees" <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54)--that means, a wild tree. Now as,
according to this explanation, every tree which is needed may be cut
off, why, then, the words "that they are not fruit-trees"? To teach that
if there are both wild trees and fruit-trees, the wild trees have the
preference to be cut off. But lest one say that even when the fruit-tree
is worth more in being used for a beam in a building than for its fruit,
the wild tree must be cut off first, therefore it is written "only."

The gardener of Samuel brought him dates in which Samuel tasted a taste
of wine, and to the question why it was so the gardener answered that
the dates were growing in the vineyard, and Samuel said: If they absorb
so much sap of the vines, uproot them and bring me their roots
to-morrow.

R. Hisda, when he noticed young date-trees in his vineyard, told the
gardener to uproot them, saying: Vines are valuable and date-trees may
be bought from their income, while date-trees

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

are only of slight value, and from their income vines cannot be bought.

MISHNA *V*.: All that which is said regarding payment for disgrace is
only for the satisfaction of the pecuniary damage, but the hurt feelings
of the disgraced are not forgiven, unless he prays and secures
forgiveness from the plaintiff, as it is written \[Gen. xx. 7\]: "And
now restore the man's wife," etc. And whence is it deduced that if the
defendant does not forgive he is considered cruel? From \[ibid., ibid.
17\]: "And Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed Abimelech," etc. If
one says to another: "Blind my eye, cut off my hand, break my foot," he
(the defendant) is liable, even if he told him so on the condition that
he should be free. If he told him: "Tear my garment, break my pitcher,"
he is liable. If, however, he told him so on the condition that he
should be free, he is so. If one says to another to do such damage to a
third person, even on condition that he should be free, the defendant is
liable whether it be personal injuries or injuries to property.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: All that which was said concerning disgrace
is only for the civil court, as to how much the plaintiff should
receive, but there can be no satisfaction for the injury to the
feelings, for which, if he would even offer all the best rams of the
world, they would not atone for it, unless he prays the plaintiff for
forgiveness, as the verse quoted in the Mishna reads farther on: "For he
is a prophet, and he will pray for thee." For he is a prophet! Must,
then, only a prophet's wife be restored, and not that of an ordinary
person? Said R. Simeon b. Na'hmani in the name of R. Jonathan: Read
thus: Restore the man's wife; (and) because he is a prophet, he will
pray for thee-which means that another's wife must be restored. And your
claim \[ibid., ibid. 4 and 5\]: "Lord, wilt thou then slay also a
righteous nation? Said he not unto me, She is my sister?" etc., is of no
avail; for if a stranger comes to a city, he is usually questioned only
what he would eat or drink, but not who is his wife or relatives, as
your habit is; and because he was a prophet and he knew what you were
going to ask him, therefore he and Sarah were compelled to say so. Infer
from this that one is punished even when he commits a crime through
ignorance, because he ought to learn and know.

It is written \[ibid., ibid. 18\]: "Every womb." Said the disciple of R.
Janai, even the hen of Abimelech's household did

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

not lay its eggs. Said Rabha to Rabba bar Mari: <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) Whence is the following saying of the
rabbis deduced: He who prays in behalf of his neighbor for a certain
thing which he himself needs, he is answered first? He answered: From
the following verse \[Job, xlii. 10\]. "And the Lord brought back the
captivity of job, when he prayed in behalf of his friends." He said to
him: You deduce it from this, and I deduce it from the following verse
\[Gen. xx. 17\]: "And Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed Abimelech,
and his wife, and his maid-servants," etc.; and immediately thereafter
it is written \[ibid. xxi. 1\]: "And the Lord visited Sarah as he had
said," etc., which means, as Abraham prayed in behalf of Abimelech.

Said Rabha to Rabba bar Mari: Whence do we deduce the following people's
saying: With the thorn the rose is also beaten? He answered: From the
following verse \[Jer. ii. 29\]: "Wherefore will ye contend with me?
*all* of you have transgressed against me, saith the Lord." ("All,"
although there were some who were righteous, as the prophets, etc.) Said
he to him: You deduce it from this verse, and I deduce it from the
following \[Ex. xvi. 28\]: "How long refuse *ye* to keep my
commandments," etc. "ye" includes Moses and Aaron also).

The same said again to the same: It is written \[Gen. xlvii. 2\]: "And
he took some of his brothers, five men." Who were the five? He answered:
So said R. Johanan: Those whose names were mentioned twice in the
benediction of Moses \[Deut. xliii.\] (Zebulun, Gad, Dan, Asher, and
Naphtali). But is not Jehudah's name also mentioned twice? Jehudah's
name was mentioned twice for another purpose (explained in Tract
Makkoth, 10). He questioned him again: What is the origin of the
following people's saying: "One misfortune follows the other"? He
answered: In the following Mishna: "The rich bring the first-fruit in
golden or silver baskets (and take the baskets back), while the poor
bring it in willow baskets, and the baskets remain with the fruit for
the priests." He said to him: You find it in the Mishna, and I find it
in the Scripture \[Lev. xiii. 45\]: "And

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

the leper. . . . Unclean, unclean, shall he call out." (Hence, it is not
enough that he is afflicted, he must himself call it out.)

He said again: Where is the origin for the rabbis' saying: Arise early
in the morning and eat something, in the summer because of the heat and
in the winter because of the cold; and people say: Sixty men were
running after one who used to eat early in the morning, and could not
overtake him? In the verse \[Is. xlix. 10\]: "They shall not be hungry
nor thirsty, and neither heat nor sun shall smite them." Said he: I,
however, find the origin in the following \[Ex. xxiii. 25\]: "And ye
shall serve the Lord," which means the reading of Shema and prayer; "And
he will bless thy bread, and thy water," which means the bread and salt
and the pitcher of water one takes immediately thereafter; \[and then he
may be sure that\] "I will remove sickness from the midst of thee."

He said again: What is the origin of the rabbis' saying: If your
neighbor calls you "ass," put on a saddle (*i.e.*, do not answer him)?
He answered: In \[Gen. xvi. 8\]: "And he said, Hagar, Sarah's *maid*. .
. . And she said, From the face of my *mistress*."

He said again: And wherefrom is the people's saying: "When talking to a
stranger, tell him first of all the position you are in"? He answered:
From \[ibid. xxiv. 34\]: "And he said, I am Abraham's *servant*." And
wherefrom is the people's saying: A duck while it keeps its head down,
its eyes still look at a distance? He answered: From \[I Samuel, xxv.
31\]: "And when the Lord will do good unto my lord, then do thou
remember thy handmaid." (While praying to save her life, she hinted that
he should marry her.)

And wherefrom. the following people's saying: For the wine furnished by
the host to his guests thanks are due; the main thanks, however,
receives the man who takes care of serving the same in a nice manner? He
answered: From \[Numb. xxvii. 19j: "And thou shalt lay thy hand upon
him"; and also \[Deut. xxxiv. 9\]: "And Joshua the son of Nun was full
of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him, etc."
(Hence we see that the whole credit is given to Moses.) And wherefrom
the following people's saying: A tree bearing bad fruit usually keeps
company with trees which do not bear fruit at all? He answered: This is
written in the Pentateuch, repeated in the Prophets, mentioned a third
time in the Hagiographa, also learned in a Mishna

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

and taught in a Boraitha: *Pentateuch* \[Gen. xxviii. 9\]: "And Esau
went unto Ishmael." *Prophets* \[Judges, xi. 3\]: "And then gathered
themselves to Yiphthach idle men, and they went out with him."
*Hagiographa* \[Ben Sira, xiii.\]: "Every fowl associates with its kind
and man with his equal." *Mishna*: "All that is attached to an unclean
article is unclean and all that is attached to a clean article is
clean." *Boraitha*: "R. Eliezer said: Not in vain did the cuckoo go to
the crow, because it is of its kind." He said again: And wherefrom the
following saying: If you advise your neighbor and he does not heed your
advice, press him to the wall and let him suffer? He answered: From
\[Ezek. xxiv. 13\]: "Because I endeavored to cleanse thee, and thou
wouldst not be clean, thou shalt not be cleansed from thy uncleanness
any more." And wherefrom the following saying: Do not spit in the well
from which you drank water? He answered: From \[Deut. xxiii. 8\]: "Thou
shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother; thou shalt not abhor
an Egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land." And wherefrom
the following saying: If you will help me to lift the burden, I will
carry it; and if not, I will not touch it? He answered: From \[Judges,
iv. 8\]: "If thou wilt go with me, then will I go; but if thou wilt not
go with me, I will not go." And wherefrom the following: When we were
young we were considered as men, and now when we are old we are
considered as children? He answered: It is first written \[Ex. xiii.
21\]: "And the *Lord* went before them . . . and by night in a pillar of
fire, to give light to them"; and thereafter \[ibid., xxiii. 20\]:
"Behold I send an *angel* before thee, to keep you on the way." And
wherefrom the following: If you keep in touch with oil, your hands will
become oily? He answered: From \[Gen. xiii. 5\]: "And Lot also, who went
with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents." R. Hanan said: Whoso
calls down divine judgment on his neighbor is punished first, etc. (See
Rosh Hashana, p. 22. There, however, it is said in the name of R. Abin.)
R. Itz'hux added to this: Woe to him who cries for such, more than to
him upon whom the judgment is called down. We have so also learned in
the following Boraitha: "Both are punished (by the Divine Court), but
the one who calls down the judgment is punished first." The same said
again: Do not hold light the curse of a common man, etc. (See Vol.
VIII., Tract Megila, p. 38.) R. Abahu said: It is better for one to be
of the persecuted than of the persecutors as there are no more
persecuted birds than doves and

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

pigeons, and the Scripture made them fit for the altar. "Blind my eye,"
etc. Said R. Assi <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) to Rabba: Why in
the first part the condition that he should be free is of no effect, and
in the second part it is? He answered: Because no one will ever forgive
for the loss of the principal members of his body. Said he to him: Does,
then, a man easily forgive for pain-and nevertheless a Boraitha states:
"If one say to another, 'strike me,' or 'wound me, upon condition that
you should not be liable for it,' and if he does so, he is free? Rabba
remained silent. Thereafter he said to him: Do you know how to explain
this? He said: So said R. Shesheth: The reason is for the indignity
caused to his family. It was taught: R. Oshiya said: For the reason just
mentioned; and Rabha said: Because one does not forgive for the loss of
the principal members of his body. R. Johanan, however, said: One may
forgive for all that was done to him; and our Mishna, which makes him
liable, although it was on the condition that he should be free, is
because there is sometimes a "nay" which means "yea" and a "yea" which
means "nay" (explained in the following Boraitha). We have learned also
in the following Boraitha: If one says to another, "Strike me," or
"wound me," and the other asks, "On condition that I should be free?"
and he answered "Yea!"(*i.e.*, if so, you would like to do so)? Hence
this "yea" means "nay." "Tear my garment," and he says, "And thereafter
I should pay for it?" And he answers, "Nay." which means "Yea, you may
do so." <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57)

"*Break my pitcher*," etc. There is a contradiction from the following
Boraitha: It is written \[Ex. xxii. 6\]: "If a man . . . to keep," etc.,
for preservation; but not when he says to him keep it for destruction or
for charity. (Hence we see that if he told him to keep it for
destruction, although he did not say on the condition of being free, he
is nevertheless free?) Said R. Huna: This presents no difficulty: The
Boraitha speaks of when it was delivered to the bailee for, and he
accepted it for,

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

destruction--then certainly he is free; and the Mishna speaks of when he
told him to break the pitcher when the same was yet in the hands of the
owner. Said Rabba to him: The words "to keep" in the Scripture mean
certainly that it was delivered to the bailee; and nevertheless, if
thereafter he told him to destroy it, without making the condition to be
free, he is liable, unless he told him to keep it for destruction at the
time of the delivery? Therefore said Rabba: Both cases treat of
destruction after the delivery; but the Mishna speaks of when he told
him to destroy it after he received it for safe-keeping, and the
Boraitha speaks of when he told him at the time of the delivery to keep
it for destruction.

There was an ἀρνᾰχίς; of charity which was sent to Pumbeditha, and R.
Joseph deposited it with a certain man who did not take good care of it,
and it was stolen from him. R. Joseph held him responsible. Said Abayi
to him: Did not the Boraitha state, to keep it for preservation, but not
for charity? He answered: The poor of Pumbeditha receive each a fixed
sum from charity, so that this money belonged to them, and they can be
the claimants thereof (and the reason why the Boraitha holds the bailee
free, if it was given to him to keep it for charity, is because where
the poor do not receive fixed sums at certain periods they cannot claim
a certain fixed amount, and there. fore it is considered that there are
no claimants).

END OF VOLUME II. (X[)](errata.htm#23).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[183:1](kam11.htm#fr_44) The verse reads:
"Yithain . . . Kain yinothen," of which the literal translation is
"should give . . . so should be given and the Talmud takes it as it is,
and infers from this that the expression "give" means money, which is
given from hand to hand. The preceding verse (19), however, reads: "Osso
. . . Yeosseh," the literal translation of which is, "did . . should be
done." Leeser translates in both instances "done," according to the
sense.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[183:2](kam11.htm#fr_45) The Gemara continues
with similar questions: Is it not written, "foot for foot"; and similar
answers, "There is a superfluous verse," etc., are given. It also
proceeds to cite other schools and individuals who deduce it from other
Scriptural sources, with a lengthy discussion, and finally arrives at
the same conclusion, that this law must not be understood literally. We
have omitted all this, as all the explanations are as complicated as the
one translated in the text. And it seems to us <span id="page_184">p.
184</span> that all those who participated in this discussion well knew
that at the time the Thora was given the law was literal in its meaning,
as it was also at that time among other nations; but with the change of
time it was positively necessary to change this law, and if it could not
be deduced from the Scripture it would not be accepted.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[185:1](kam11.htm#fr_46) It probably means the
use of a drug as an anodyne or anæsthetic during the amputation.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[186:1](kam11.htm#fr_47) The word "healing" is
repeated in the text. Leeser translates it "thoroughly healed";
literally, it would be, "concerning healing he should be healed."

<span id="fn_48"></span>[188:1](kam11.htm#fr_48) The codifiers of the
Halakhoth, as the Alphasi, Maimonides, etc., have decided in accordance
with the rule that all undecided questions found in the Talmud must be
decided rigorously; *i.e.*, that in both of the above cases the
defendant pays for each injury separately and then for the whole body.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[195:1](kam11.htm#fr_49) The text reads "Ish
v'ochiv," which literally means "a man and his brother." Leeser,
however, translates it according to the sense, "one with the other."

<span id="fn_50"></span>[197:1](kam11.htm#fr_50) Here follows a
discussion as to whether the usufruct is equivalent to the principal,
which is omitted here, but will be translated in its proper place.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[198:1](kam11.htm#fr_51) According to others, it
means "boxing the ear." We, however, have translated it in accordance
with our method, after the second interpretation of Rashi.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[199:1](kam11.htm#fr_52) One manah of Zur is 25
selas, each sela containing four zuz. A country manah is one-eighth of a
manah of Zur, and also contains 25 selas, so that a country sela is
one-half of a zuz.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[199:2](kam11.htm#fr_53) From here to end of
paragraph is transferred from Chap. IV., Text, 36*b*.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[204:1](kam11.htm#fr_54) The Talmud divides this
verse into two parts, which in reality reads well as it is, and Rashi
tried to explain it that because there are a few superfluous words it
ought to read "only a tree that bears no fruit," why, then, the words,
"which thou knowest"? And this is the reason why the Talmud infers from
this that even a fruit-tree may be cut off when needed.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[206:1](kam11.htm#fr_55) The following series of
questions is placed here because of the verse quoted, "and Abraham
prayed unto God," etc., from which Rabba bar Mari delivered his
statements in the text differing from Rabha; and at the same time he
mentions here all other statements which each of them deduces from
different verses, and casually also others. They wanted also to find the
origin of even the ordinary adages of the people in the Holy Writ, on
account of what is stated elsewhere in the Talmud, that there is nothing
in the world for which there can be found no hint in the Scripture. (See
vol. viii., Tract Taanith, p. 9.[)](errata.htm#22)

<span id="fn_56"></span>[209:1](kam11.htm#fr_56) This name is correct,
according to Alphasi, as the name mentioned in the text would be
incompatible with the time in which R. Assi b. Hama lived.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[209:2](kam11.htm#fr_57) R. Johanan explains
that our Mishna speaks of when there was a question and an answer
between the plaintiff and the defendant, and it was not clear whether it
meant yea or nay; the Boraitha, however, speaks of when the plaintiff
made the condition that the defendant should be free without any
question by the other. This is Rashi's explanation. The text, however,
of R. Johanan's saying mentioned above seems to us to be very simple: It
must be investigated how the condition is to be understood--whether it
is in the absolute affirmative form or in the form of a question.

\[NOTE.--The last two chapters of The First Gate will be printed in the
succeeding volume.\]
