[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sah08)  [Next](sah10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter IX - Creation

<span id="pg_255">p. 255</span>

   Thy throne is established of old  
   Thou art from everlasting.--PSALMS.  

For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain
together until now. And not only they, but ourselves also, which have
the firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves,
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.--PAUL.

Inadequate theories of creation

ETERNAL Truth is changing the universe. As mortals drop off their mental
swaddling-clothes, thought expands into expression. "Let there be
light," is the perpetual demand of Truth and Love, changing chaos into
order and discord into the music of the spheres. The mythical human
theories of creation, anciently classified as the higher criticism,
sprang from cultured scholars in Rome and in Greece, but they afforded
no foundation for accurate views of creation by the divine Mind.

Finite views of Deity

Mortal man has made a covenant with his eyes to belittle Deity with
human conceptions. In league with material sense, mortals take limited
views of all things. That God is corporeal or material, no man should
affirm.

The human form, or physical finiteness, cannot be made the basis of any
true idea of the infinite Godhead. Eye hath not seen Spirit, nor hath
ear heard His voice.

<span id="pg_256">p. 256</span>

No material creation

Progress takes off human shackles. The finite must yield to the
infinite. Advancing to a higher plane of action, thought rises from the
material sense to the spiritual, from the scholastic to the
inspirational, and from the mortal to the immortal. All things are
created spiritually. Mind, not matter, is the creator. Love, the divine
Principle, is the Father and Mother of the universe, including man.

Tritheism impossible

The theory of three persons in one God (that is, a personal Trinity or
Tri-unity) suggests polytheism, rather than the one ever-present I AM.
"Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord."

No divine corporeality

The everlasting I AM is not bounded nor compressed within the narrow
limits of physical humanity, nor can He be understood aright through
mortal concepts. The precise form of God must be of small importance in
comparison with the sublime question, What is infinite Mind or divine
Love?

Who is it that demands our obedience? He who, in the language of
Scripture, "doeth according to His will in the army of heaven, and among
the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay His hand, or say unto
Him, What doest Thou?"

No form nor physical combination is adequate to represent infinite Love.
A finite and material sense of God leads to formalism and narrowness; it
chills the spirit of Christianity.

Limitless Mind

A limitless Mind cannot proceed from physical limitations. Finiteness
cannot present the idea or the vastness of infinity. A mind originating
from a finite or material source must be limited and finite. Infinite
Mind is the creator, and creation is the

<span id="pg_257">p. 257</span>

infinite image or idea emanating from this Mind. If Mind is within and
without all things, then all is Mind; and this definition is scientific.

Matter is not substance

If matter, so-called, is substance, then Spirit, matter's unlikeness,
must be shadow; and shadow cannot produce substance. The theory that
Spirit is not the only substance and creator is pantheistic heterodoxy,
which ultimates in sickness, sin, and death; it is the belief in a
bodily soul and a material mind, a soul governed by the body and a mind
in matter. This belief is shallow pantheism.

Mind creates His own likeness in ideas, and the substance of an idea is
very far from being the supposed substance of non-intelligent matter.
Hence the Father Mind is not the father of matter. The material senses
and human conceptions would translate spiritual ideas into material
beliefs, and would say that an anthropomorphic God, instead of infinite
Principle,--in other words, divine Love,--is the father of the rain,
"who hath begotten the drops of dew," who bringeth "forth Mazzaroth in
his season," and guideth "Arcturus with his sons."

Inexhaustible divine Love

Finite mind manifests all sorts of errors, and thus proves the material
theory of mind in matter to be the antipode of Mind. Who hath found
finite life or love sufficient to meet the demands of human want and
woe, - to still the desires, to satisfy the aspirations? Infinite Mind
cannot be limited to a finite form, or Mind would lose its infinite
character as inexhaustible Love, eternal Life, omnipotent Truth.

Infinite physique impossible

It would require an infinite form to contain infinite Mind. Indeed, the
phrase infinite form involves a contradiction of terms. Finite man
cannot be the image and

<span id="pg_258">p. 258</span>

likeness of the infinite God. A mortal, corporeal, or finite conception
of God cannot embrace the glories of limitless, incorporeal Life and
Love. Hence the unsatisfied human craving for something better, higher,
holier, than is afforded by a material belief in a physical God and man.
The insufficiency of this belief to supply the true idea proves the
falsity of material belief.

Infinity's reflection

Man is more than a material form with a mind inside, which must escape
from its environments in order to be immortal. Man reflects infinity,
and this reflection is the true idea of God.

God expresses in man the infinite idea forever developing itself,
broadening and rising higher and higher from a boundless basis. Mind
manifests all that exists in the infinitude of Truth. We know no more of
man as the true divine image and likeness, than we know of God.

The infinite Principle is reflected by the infinite idea and spiritual
individuality, but the material so-called senses have no cognizance of
either Principle or its idea. The human capacities are enlarged and
perfected in proportion as humanity gains the true conception of man and
God.

Individual permanency

Mortals have a very imperfect sense of the spiritual man and of the
infinite range of his thought. To him belongs eternal Life. Never born
and never dying, it were impossible for man, under the government of God
in eternal Science, to fall from his high estate.

God's man discerned

Through spiritual sense you can discern the heart of divinity, and thus
begin to comprehend in Science the

<span id="pg_259">p. 259</span>

generic term man. Man is not absorbed in Deity, and man cannot lose his
individuality, for he reflects eternal Life; nor is he an isolated,
solitary idea, for he represents infinite Mind, the sum of all
substance.

In divine Science, man is the true image of God. The divine nature was
best expressed in Christ Jesus, who threw upon mortals the truer
reflection of God and lifted their lives higher than their poor
thought-models would allow,--thoughts which presented man as fallen,
sick, sinning, and dying. The Christlike understanding of scientific
being and divine healing includes a perfect Principle and idea,--perfect
God and perfect man,--as the basis of thought and demonstration.

The divine image not lost

If man was once perfect but has now lost his perfection, then mortals
have never beheld in man the reflex image of God. The lost image is no
image. The true likeness cannot be lost in divine reflection.
Understanding this, Jesus said: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your
Father which is in heaven is perfect."

Immortal models

Mortal thought transmits its own images, and forms its offspring after
human illusions. God, Spirit, works spiritually, not materially. Brain
or matter never formed a human concept. Vibration is not intelligence;
hence it is not a creator. Immortal ideas, pure, perfect, and enduring,
are transmitted by the divine Mind through divine Science, which
corrects error with truth and demands spiritual thoughts, divine
concepts, to the end that they may produce harmonious results.

Deducing one's conclusions as to man from imperfec

<span id="pg_260">p. 260</span>

tion instead of perfection, one can no more arrive at the true
conception or understanding of man, and make himself like it, than the
sculptor can perfect his outlines from an imperfect model, or the
painter can depict the form and face of Jesus, while holding in thought
the character of Judas.

Spiritual discovery

The conceptions of mortal, erring thought must give way to the ideal of
all that is perfect and eternal. Through many generations human beliefs
will be attaining diviner conceptions, and the immortal and perfect
model of God's creation will finally be seen as the only true conception
of being.

Science reveals the possibility of achieving all good, and sets mortals
at work to discover what God has already done; but distrust of one's
ability to gain the goodness desired and to bring out better and higher
results, often hampers the trial of one's wings and ensures failure at
the outset.

Requisite change of our ideals

Mortals must change their ideals in order to improve their models. A
sick body is evolved from sick thoughts. Sickness, disease, and death
proceed from fear. Sensualism evolves bad physical and moral conditions.

Selfishness and sensualism are educated in mortal mind by the thoughts
ever recurring to one's self, by conversation about the body, and by the
expectation of perpetual pleasure or pain from it; and this education is
at the expense of spiritual growth. If we array thought in mortal
vestures, it must lose its immortal nature.

Thoughts are things

If we look to the body for pleasure, we find pain; for Life, we find
death; for Truth, we find error; for Spirit,

<span id="pg_261">p. 261</span>

we find its opposite, matter. Now reverse this action. Look away from
the body into Truth and Love, the Principle of all happiness, harmony,
and immortality. Hold thought steadfastly to the enduring, the good, and
the true, and you will bring these into your experience proportionably
to their occupancy of your thoughts.

Unreality of pain

The effect of mortal mind on health and happiness is seen in this: If
one turns away from the body with such absorbed interest as to forget
it, the body experiences no pain. Under the strong impulse of a desire
to perform his part, a noted actor was accustomed night after night to
go upon the stage and sustain his appointed task, walking about as
actively as the youngest member of the company. This old man was so lame
that he hobbled every day to the theatre, and sat aching in his chair
till his cue was spoken,--a signal which made him as oblivious of
physical infirmity as if he had inhaled chloroform, though he was in the
full possession of his so-called senses.

Immutable identity of man

Detach sense from the body, or matter, which is only a form of human
belief, and you may learn the meaning of God, or good, and the nature of
the immutable and immortal. Breaking away from the mutations of time and
sense, you will neither lose the solid objects and ends of life nor your
own identity. Fixing your gaze on the realities supernal, you will rise
to the spiritual consciousness of being, even as the bird which has
burst from the egg and preens its wings for a skyward flight.

Forgetfulness of self

We should forget our bodies in remembering good and the human race. Good
demands of man every hour, in

<span id="pg_262">p. 262</span>

which to work out the problem of being. Consecration to good does not
lessen man's dependence on God, but heightens it. Neither does
consecration diminish man's obligations to God, but shows the paramount
necessity of meeting them. Christian Science takes naught from the
perfection of God, but it ascribes to Him the entire glory. By putting
"off the old man with his deeds," mortals "put on immortality."

We cannot fathom the nature and quality of God's creation by diving into
the shallows of mortal belief. We must reverse our feeble
flutterings--our efforts to find life and truth in matter--and rise
above the testimony of the material senses, above the mortal to the
immortal idea of God. These clearer, higher views inspire the Godlike
man to reach the absolute centre and circumference of his being.

The true sense

Job said: "I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine
eye seeth Thee." Mortals will echo Job's thought, when the supposed pain
and pleasure of matter cease to predominate. They will then drop the
false estimate of life and happiness, of joy and sorrow, and attain the
bliss of loving unselfishly, working patiently, and conquering all that
is unlike God. Starting from a higher standpoint, one rises
spontaneously, even as light emits light without effort; for "where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also."

Mind only the cause

The foundation of mortal discord is a false sense of man's origin. To
begin rightly is to end rightly. Every concept which seems to begin with
the brain begins falsely. Divine Mind is the only cause or Principle of
existence. Cause does not exist in matter, in mortal mind, or in
physical forms.

<span id="pg_263">p. 263</span>

Human egotism

Mortals are egotists. They believe themselves to be independent workers,
personal authors, and even privileged originators of something which
Deity would not or could not create. The creations of mortal mind are
material. Immortal spiritual man alone represents the truth of creation.

Mortal man a mis-creator

When mortal man blends his thoughts of existence with the spiritual and
works only as God works, he will no longer grope in the dark and cling
to earth because he has not tasted heaven. Carnal beliefs defraud us.
They make man an involuntary hypocrite,--producing evil when he would
create good, forming deformity when he would outline grace and beauty,
injuring those whom he would bless. He becomes a general mis-creator,
who believes he is a semi-god. His "touch turns hope to dust, the dust
we all have trod." He might say in Bible language: "The good that I
would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do."

No new creation

There can be but one creator, who has created all. Whatever seems to be
a new creation, is but the discovery of some distant idea of Truth; else
it is a new multiplication or self-division of mortal thought, as when
some finite sense peers from its cloister with amazement and attempts to
pattern the infinite.

The multiplication of a human and mortal sense of persons and things is
not creation. A sensual thought, like an atom of dust thrown into the
face of spiritual immensity, is dense blindness instead of a scientific
eternal consciousness of creation.

Mind's true camera

The fading forms of matter, the mortal body and ma

<span id="pg_264">p. 264</span>

terial earth, are the fleeting concepts of the human mind. They have
their day before the permanent facts and their perfection in Spirit
appear. The crude creations of mortal thought must finally give place to
the glorious forms which we sometimes behold in the camera of divine
Mind, when the mental picture is spiritual and eternal. Mortals must
look beyond fading, finite forms, if they would gain the true sense of
things. Where shall the gaze rest but in the unsearchable realm of Mind?
We must look where we would walk, and we must act as possessing all
power from Him in whom we have our being.

Self-completeness

As mortals gain more correct views of God and man, multitudinous objects
of creation, which before were invisible, will become visible. When we
realize that Life is Spirit, never in nor of matter, this understanding
will expand into self-completeness, finding all in God, good, and
needing no other consciousness.

Spiritual proofs of existence

Spirit and its formations are the only realities of being. Matter
disappears under the microscope of Spirit. Sin is unsustained by Truth,
and sickness and death were overcome by Jesus, who proved them to be
forms of error. Spiritual living and blessedness are the only evidences,
by which we can recognize true existence and feel the unspeakable peace
which comes from an all-absorbing spiritual love.

When we learn the way in Christian Science and recognize man's spiritual
being, we shall behold and understand God's creation,--all the glories
of earth and heaven and man.

Godward gravitation

The universe of Spirit is peopled with spiritual beings,

<span id="pg_265">p. 265</span>

and its government is divine Science. Man is the offspring, not of the
lowest, but of the highest qualities of Mind. Man understands spiritual
existence in proportion as his treasures of Truth and Love are enlarged.
Mortals must gravitate Godward, their affections and aims grow
spiritual,--they must near the broader interpretations of being, and
gain some proper sense of the infinite,--in order that sin and mortality
may be put off.

This scientific sense of being, forsaking matter for Spirit, by no means
suggests man's absorption into Deity and the loss of his identity, but
confers upon man enlarged individuality, a wider sphere of thought and
action, a more expansive love, a higher and more permanent peace.

Mortal birth and death

The senses represent birth as untimely and death as irresistible, as if
man were a weed growing apace or a flower withered by the sun and nipped
by untimely frosts; but this is true only of a mortal, not of a man in
God's image and likeness. The truth of being is perennial, and the error
is unreal and obsolete.

Blessings from pain

Who that has felt the loss of human peace has not gained stronger
desires for spiritual joy? The aspiration after heavenly good comes even
before we discover what belongs to wisdom and Love. The loss of earthly
hopes and pleasures brightens the ascending path of many a heart. The
pains of sense quickly inform us that the pleasures of sense are mortal
and that joy is spiritual.

Decapitation of error

The pains of sense are salutary, if they wrench away false pleasurable
beliefs and transplant the affections

<span id="pg_266">p. 266</span>

from sense to Soul, where the creations of God are good, "rejoicing the
heart." Such is the sword of Science, with which Truth decapitates
error, materiality giving place to man's higher individuality and
destiny.

Uses of adversity

Would existence without personal friends be to you a blank? Then the
time will come when you will be solitary, left without sympathy; but
this seeming vacuum is already filled with divine Love. When this hour
of development comes, even if you cling to a sense of personal joys,
spiritual Love will force you to accept what best promotes your growth.
Friends will betray and enemies will slander, until the lesson is
sufficient to exalt you; for "man's extremity is God's opportunity." The
author has experienced the foregoing prophecy and its blessings. Thus He
teaches mortals to lay down their fleshliness and gain spirituality.
This is done through self-abnegation. Universal Love is the divine way
in Christian Science.

The sinner makes his own hell by doing evil, and the saint his own
heaven by doing right. The opposite persecutions of material sense,
aiding evil with evil, would deceive the very elect.

Beatific presence

Mortals must follow Jesus' sayings and his demonstrations, which
dominate the flesh. Perfect and infinite Mind enthroned is heaven. The
evil beliefs which originate in mortals are hell. Man is the idea of
Spirit; he reflects the beatific presence, illuming the universe with
light. Man is deathless, spiritual. He is above sin or frailty. He does
not cross the barriers of time into the vast forever of Life, but he
coexists with God and the universe.

<span id="pg_267">p. 267</span>

The infinitude of God

Every object in material thought will be destroyed, but the spiritual
idea, whose substance is in Mind, is eternal. The offspring of God start
not from matter or ephemeral dust. They are in and of Spirit, divine
Mind, and so forever continue. God is one. The allness of Deity is His
oneness. Generically man is one, and specifically man means all men.

It is generally conceded that God is Father, eternal, selfcreated,
infinite. If this is so, the forever Father must have had children prior
to Adam. The great I AM made all "that was made." Hence man and the
spiritual universe coexist with God.

Christian Scientists understand that, in a religious sense, they have
the same authority for the appellative mother, as for that of brother
and sister. Jesus said: "For whosoever shall do the will of my Father
which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother."

Waymarks to eternal Truth

When examined in the light of divine Science, mortals present more than
is detected upon the surface, since inverted thoughts and erroneous
beliefs must be counterfeits of Truth. Thought is borrowed from a higher
source than matter, and by reversal, errors serve as waymarks to the one
Mind, in which all error disappears in celestial Truth. The robes of
Spirit are "white and glistering," like the raiment of Christ. Even in
this world, therefore, "let thy garments be always white." "Blessed is
the man that endureth \[overcometh\] temptation: for when he is tried,
\[proved faithful\], he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord
hath promised to them that love him." (James i. 12.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X - Science of Being](sah10) 
