[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sah03)  [Next](sah05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter IV - Christian Science Versus Spiritualism

<span id="pg_70">p. 70</span>

And when they shall say unto you,  
Seek unto them that have familiar spirits,  
And unto wizards that peep and that mutter;  
Should not a people seek unto their God?--ISAIAH.  

Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never
see death. Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou hast a
devil.--JOHN.

The infinite one Spirit

MORTAL existence is an enigma. Every day is a mystery. The testimony of
the corporeal senses cannot inform us what is real and what is delusive,
but the revelations of Christian Science unlock the treasures of Truth.
Whatever is false or sinful can never enter the atmosphere of Spirit.
There is but one Spirit. Man is never God, but spiritual man, made in
God's likeness, reflects God. In this scientific reflection the Ego and
the Father are inseparable. The supposition that corporeal beings are
spirits, or that there are good and evil spirits, is a mistake.

Real and unreal identity

The divine Mind maintains all identities, from a blade of grass to a
star, as distinct and eternal. The questions are: What are God's
identities? What is Soul? Does life or soul exist in the thing formed?

<span id="pg_71">p. 71</span>

Nothing is real and eternal,--nothing is Spirit,--but God and His idea.
Evil has no reality. It is neither person, place, nor thing, but is
simply a belief, an illusion of material sense.

The identity, or idea, of all reality continues forever; but Spirit, or
the divine Principle of all, is not in Spirit's formations. Soul is
synonymous with Spirit, God, the creative, governing, infinite Principle
outside of finite form, which forms only reflect.

Dream-lessons

Close your eyes, and you may dream that you see a flower,--that you
touch and smell it. Thus you learn that the flower is a product of the
so-called mind, a formation of thought rather than of matter. Close your
eyes again, and you may see landscapes, men, and women. Thus you learn
that these also are images, which mortal mind holds and evolves and
which simulate mind, life, and intelligence. From dreams also you learn
that neither mortal mind nor matter is the image or likeness of God, and
that immortal Mind is not in matter.

Found wanting

When the Science of Mind is understood, spiritualism will be found
mainly erroneous, having no scientific basis nor origin, no proof nor
power outside of human testimony. It is the offspring of the physical
senses. There is no sensuality in Spirit. I never could believe in
spiritualism.

The basis and structure of spiritualism are alike material and physical.
Its spirits are so many corporealities, limited and finite in character
and quality. Spiritualism therefore presupposes Spirit, which is ever
infinite, to be a corporeal being, a finite form,--a theory contrary to
Christian Science.

<span id="pg_72 ">p. 72</span>

There is but one spiritual existence,--the Life of which corporeal sense
can take no cognizance. The divine Principle of man speaks through
immortal sense. If a material body--in other words, mortal, material
sense--were permeated by Spirit, that body would disappear to mortal
sense, would be deathless. A condition precedent to communion with
Spirit is the gain of spiritual life.

Spirits obsolete

So-called spirits are but corporeal communicators. As light destroys
darkness and in the place of darkness all is light, so (in absolute
Science) Soul, or God, is the only truth-giver to man. Truth destroys
mortality, and brings to light immortality. Mortal belief (the material
sense of life) and immortal Truth (the spiritual sense) are the tares
and the wheat, which are not united by progress, but separated.

Perfection is not expressed through imperfection. Spirit is not made
manifest through matter, the antipode of Spirit. Error is not a
convenient sieve through which truth can be strained.

Scientific phenomena

God, good, being ever present, it follows in divine logic that evil, the
suppositional opposite of good, is never present. In Science, individual
good derived from God, the infinite All-in-all, may flow from the
departed to mortals; but evil is neither communicable nor scientific. A
sinning, earthly mortal is not the reality of Life nor the medium
through which truth passes to earth. The joy of intercourse becomes the
jest of sin, when evil and suffering are communicable. Not personal
intercommunion but divine law is the communicator of truth, health, and
harmony to earth and humanity. As readily can you mingle fire and frost
as

<span id="pg_73">p. 73</span>

Spirit and matter. In either case, one does not support the other.

Spiritualism calls one person, living in this world, material, but
another, who has died to-day a sinner and supposedly will return to
earth to-morrow, it terms a spirit. The fact is that neither the one nor
the other is infinite Spirit, for Spirit is God, and man is His
likeness.

One government

The belief that one man, as spirit, can control another man, as matter,
upsets both the individuality and the Science of man, for man is image.
God controls man, and God is the only Spirit. Any other control or
attraction of so-called spirit is a mortal belief, which ought to be
known by its fruit, - the repetition of evil.

If Spirit, or God, communed with mortals or controlled them through
electricity or any other form of matter, the divine order and the
Science of omnipotent, omnipresent Spirit would be destroyed.

Incorrect theories

The belief that material bodies return to dust, hereafter to rise up as
spiritual bodies with material sensations and desires, is incorrect.
Equally incorrect is the belief that spirit is confined in a finite,
material body, from which it is freed by death, and that, when it is
freed from the material body, spirit retains the sensations belonging to
that body.

No mediumship

It is a grave mistake to suppose that matter is any part of the reality
of intelligent existence, or that Spirit and matter, intelligence and
non-intelligence, can commune together. This error Science will destroy.
The sensual cannot be made the mouthpiece of the spiritual, nor can the
finite become the channel of the infinite. There is no communication
between so

<span id="pg_74 ">p. 74</span>

called material existence and spiritual life which is not subject to
death.

Opposing conditions

To be on communicable terms with Spirit, persons must be free from
organic bodies; and their return to a material condition, after having
once left it, would be as impossible as would be the restoration to its
original condition of the acorn, already absorbed into a sprout which
has risen above the soil. The seed which has germinated has a new form
and state of existence. When here or hereafter the belief of life in
matter is extinct, the error which has held the belief dissolves with
the belief, and never returns to the old condition. No correspondence
nor communion can exist between persons in such opposite dreams as the
belief of having died and left a material body and the belief of still
living in an organic, material body.

Bridgeless division

The caterpillar, transformed into a beautiful insect, is no longer a
worm, nor does the insect return to fraternize with or control the worm.
Such a backward transformation is impossible in Science. Darkness and
light, infancy and manhood, sickness and health, are
opposites,--different beliefs, which never blend. Who will say that
infancy can utter the ideas of manhood, that darkness can represent
light, that we are in Europe when we are in the opposite hemisphere?
There is no bridge across the gulf which divides two such opposite
conditions as the spiritual, or incorporeal, and the physical, or
corporeal.

In Christian Science there is never a retrograde step, never a return to
positions outgrown. The so-called dead and living cannot commune
together, for they are in separate states of existence, or
consciousness.

<span id="pg_75">p. 75</span>

Unscientific investiture

This simple truth lays bare the mistaken assumption that man dies as
matter but comes to life as spirit. The so-called dead, in order to
reappear to those still in the existence cognized by the physical
senses, would need to be tangible and material,--to have a material
investiture,--or the material senses could take no cognizance of the
so-called dead.

Spiritualism would transfer men from the spiritual sense of existence
back into its material sense. This gross materialism is scientifically
impossible, since to infinite Spirit there can be no matter.

Raising the dead

Jesus said of Lazarus: "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I
may awake him out of sleep." Jesus restored Lazarus by the understanding
that Lazarus had never died, not by an admission that his body had died
and then lived again. Had Jesus believed that Lazarus had lived or died
in his body, the Master would have stood on the same plane of belief as
those who buried the body, and he could not have resuscitated it.

When you can waken yourself or others out of the belief that all must
die, you can then exercise Jesus' spiritual power to reproduce the
presence of those who have thought they died,--but not otherwise.

Vision of the dying

There is one possible moment, when those living on the earth and those
called dead, can commune together, and that is the moment previous to
the transition, - the moment when the link between their opposite
beliefs is being sundered. In the vestibule through which we pass from
one dream to another dream, or when we awake from earth's sleep to the
grand verities of Life, the departing may hear the glad welcome of those

<span id="pg_76 ">p. 76</span>

who have gone before. The ones departing may whisper this vision, name
the face that smiles on them and the hand which beckons them, as one at
Niagara, with eyes open only to that wonder, forgets all else and
breathes aloud his rapture.

Real Life is God

When being is understood, Life will be recognized as neither material
nor finite, but as infinite,--as God, universal good; and the belief
that life, or mind, was ever in a finite form, or good in evil, will be
destroyed. Then it will be understood that Spirit never entered matter
and was therefore never raised from matter. When advanced to spiritual
being and the understanding of God, man can no longer commune with
matter; neither can he return to it, any more than a tree can return to
its seed. Neither will man seem to be corporeal, but he will be an
individual consciousness, characterized by the divine Spirit as idea,
not matter. Suffering, sinning, dying beliefs are unreal. When divine
Science is universally understood, they will have no power over man, for
man is immortal and lives by divine authority.

Immaterial pleasure

The sinless joy,--the perfect harmony and immortality of Life,
possessing unlimited divine beauty and goodness without a single bodily
pleasure or pain, constitutes the only veritable, indestructible man,
whose being is spiritual. This state of existence is scientific and
intact,--a perfection discernible only by those who have the final
understanding of Christ in divine Science. Death can never hasten this
state of existence, for death must be overcome, not submitted to, before
immortality appears.

The recognition of Spirit and of infinity comes not

<span id="pg_77">p. 77</span>

suddenly here or hereafter. The pious Polycarp said: "I cannot turn at
once from good to evil." Neither do other mortals accomplish the change
from error to truth at a single bound.

Second death

Existence continues to be a belief of corporeal sense until the Science
of being is reached. Error brings its own self-destruction both here and
hereafter, for mortal mind creates its own physical conditions. Death
will occur on the next plane of existence as on this, until the
spiritual understanding of Life is reached. Then, and not until then,
will it be demonstrated that "the second death hath no power."

A dream vanishing

The period required for this dream of material life, embracing its
so-called pleasures and pains, to vanish from consciousness, "knoweth no
man . . . neither the Son, but the Father." This period will be of
longer or shorter duration according to the tenacity of error. Of what
advantage, then, would it be to us, or to the departed, to prolong the
material state and so prolong the illusion either of a soul inert or of
a sinning, suffering sense,--a so-called mind fettered to matter.

Progress and purgatory

Even if communications from spirits to mortal consciousness were
possible, such communications would grow beautifully less with every
advanced stage of existence. The departed would gradually rise above
ignorance and materiality, and Spiritualists would outgrow their beliefs
in material spiritualism. Spiritism consigns the so-called dead to a
state resembling that of blighted buds,--to a wretched purgatory, where
the chances of the departed for improvement narrow into nothing and they
return to their old standpoints of matter.

<span id="pg_78 ">p. 78</span>

Unnatural deflections

The decaying flower, the blighted bud, the gnarled oak, the ferocious
beast,--like the discords of disease, sin, and death, - are unnatural.
They are the falsities of sense, the changing deflections of mortal
mind; they are not the eternal realities of Mind.

Absurd oracles

How unreasonable is the belief that we are wearing out life and
hastening to death, and that at the same time we are communing with
immortality! If the departed are in rapport with mortality, or matter,
they are not spiritual, but must still be mortal, sinning, suffering,
and dying. Then why look to them--even were communication possible--for
proofs of immortality, and accept them as oracles? Communications
gathered from ignorance are pernicious in tendency.

Spiritualism with its material accompaniments would destroy the
supremacy of Spirit. If Spirit pervades all space, it needs no material
method for the transmission of messages. Spirit needs no wires nor
electricity in order to be omnipresent.

Spirit intangible

Spirit is not materially tangible. How then can it communicate with man
through electric, material effects? How can the majesty and omnipotence
of Spirit be lost? God is not in the medley where matter cares for
matter, where spiritism makes many gods, and hypnotism and electricity
are claimed to be the agents of God's government.

Spirit blesses man, but man cannot "tell whence it cometh." By it the
sick are healed, the sorrowing are comforted, and the sinning are
reformed. These are the effects of one universal God, the invisible good
dwelling in eternal Science.

<span id="pg_79">p. 79</span>

Thought regarding death

The act of describing disease--its symptoms, locality, and fatality--is
not scientific. Warning people against death is an error that tends to
frighten into death those who are ignorant of Life as God. Thousands of
instances could be cited of health restored by changing the patient's
thoughts regarding death.

Fallacious hypotheses

A scientific mental method is more sanitary than the use of drugs, and
such a mental method produces permanent health. Science must go over the
whole ground, and dig up every seed of error's sowing. Spiritualism
relies upon human beliefs and hypotheses. Christian Science removes
these beliefs and hypotheses through the higher understanding of God,
for Christian Science, resting on divine Principle, not on material
personalities, in its revelation of immortality, introduces the harmony
of being.

Jesus cast out evil spirits, or false beliefs. The Apostle Paul bade men
have the Mind that was in the Christ. Jesus did his own work by the one
Spirit. He said: "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work." He never
described disease, so far as can be learned from the Gospels, but he
healed disease.

Mistaken methods

The unscientific practitioner says: "You are ill. Your brain is
overtaxed, and you must rest. Your body is weak, and it must be
strengthened. You have nervous prostration, and must be treated for it."
Science objects to all this, contending for the rights of intelligence
and asserting that Mind controls body and brain.

Divine strength

Mind-science teaches that mortals need "not be weary in well doing." It
dissipates fatigue in doing good. Giving does not impoverish us in the
service of our Maker, neither does withholding enrich us.

<span id="pg_80 ">p. 80</span>

We have strength in proportion to our apprehension of the truth, and our
strength is not lessened by giving utterance to truth. A cup of coffee
or tea is not the equal of truth, whether for the inspiration of a
sermon or for the support of bodily endurance.

A denial of immortality

A communication purporting to come from the late Theodore Parker reads
as follows: "There never was, and there never will be, an immortal
spirit." Yet the very periodical containing this sentence repeats weekly
the assertion that spirit-communications are our only proofs of
immortality.

Mysticism unscientific

I entertain no doubt of the humanity and philanthropy of many
Spiritualists, but I cannot coincide with their views. It is mysticism
which gives spiritualism its force. Science dispels mystery and explains
extraordinary phenomena; but Science never removes phenomena from the
domain of reason into the realm of mysticism.

Physical falsities

It should not seem mysterious that mind, without the aid of hands, can
move a table, when we already know that it is mind-power which moves
both table and hand. Even planchette--the French toy which years ago
pleased so many people - attested the control of mortal mind over its
substratum, called matter.

It is mortal mind which convulses its substratum, matter. These
movements arise from the volition of human belief, but they are neither
scientific nor rational. Mortal mind produces table-tipping as certainly
as table-setting, and believes that this wonder emanates from spirits
and electricity. This belief rests on the common conviction that mind
and matter cooperate both visibly and invisibly, hence that matter is
intelligent.

<span id="pg_81">p. 81</span>

Poor post-mortem evidence

There is not so much evidence to prove intercommunication between the
so-called dead and the living, as there is to show the sick that matter
suffers and has sensation; yet this latter evidence is destroyed by the
Mind-science. If Spiritualists understood the Science of being, their
belief in mediumship would vanish.

No proof of immortality

At the very best and on its own theories, spiritualism can only prove
that certain individuals have a continued existence after death and
maintain their affiliation with mortal flesh; but this fact affords no
certainty of everlasting life. A man's assertion that he is immortal no
more proves him to be so, than the opposite assertion, that he is
mortal, would prove immortality a lie. Nor is the case improved when
alleged spirits teach immortality. Life, Love, Truth, is the only proof
of immortality.

Mind's manifestations immortal

Man in the likeness of God as revealed in Science cannot help being
immortal. Though the grass seemeth to wither and the flower to fade,
they reappear. Erase the figures which express number, silence the tones
of music, give to the worms the body called man, and yet the producing,
governing, divine Principle lives on,--in the case of man as truly as in
the case of numbers and of music,--despite the so-called laws of matter,
which define man as mortal. Though the inharmony resulting from material
sense hides the harmony of Science, inharmony cannot destroy the divine
Principle of Science. In Science, man's immortality depends upon that of
God, good, and follows as a necessary consequence of the immortality of
good.

Reading thoughts

That somebody, somewhere, must have known the deceased person, supposed
to be the communicator, is

<span id="pg_82 ">p. 82</span>

evident, and it is as easy to read distant thoughts as near. We think of
an absent friend as easily as we do of one present. It is no more
difficult to read the absent mind than it is to read the present.
Chaucer wrote centuries ago, yet we still read his thought in his verse.
What is classic study, but discernment of the minds of Homer and Virgil,
of whose personal existence we may be in doubt?

Impossible intercommunion

If spiritual life has been won by the departed, they cannot return to
material existence, because different states of consciousness are
involved, and one person cannot exist in two different states of
consciousness at the same time. In sleep we do not communicate with the
dreamer by our side despite his physical proximity, because both of us
are either unconscious or are wandering in our dreams through different
mazes of consciousness.

In like manner it would follow, even if our departed friends were near
us and were in as conscious a state of existence as before the change we
call death, that their state of consciousness must be different from
ours. We are not in their state, nor are they in the mental realm in
which we dwell. Communion between them and ourselves would be prevented
by this difference. The mental states are so unlike, that intercommunion
is as impossible as it would be between a mole and a human being.
Different dreams and different awakenings betoken a differing
consciousness. When wandering in Australia, do we look for help to the
Esquimaux in their snow huts?

In a world of sin and sensuality hastening to a greater development of
power, it is wise earnestly to

<span id="pg_83">p. 83</span>

consider whether it is the human mind or the divine Mind which is
influencing one. What the prophets of Jehovah did, the worshippers of
Baal failed to do; yet artifice and delusion claimed that they could
equal the work of wisdom.

Science only can explain the incredible good and evil elements now
coming to the surface. Mortals must find refuge in Truth in order to
escape the error of these latter days. Nothing is more antagonistic to
Christian Science than a blind belief without understanding, for such a
belief hides Truth and builds on error.

Natural wonders

Miracles are impossible in Science, and here Science takes issue with
popular religions. The scientific manifestation of power is from the
divine nature and is not supernatural, since Science is an explication
of nature. The belief that the universe, including man, is governed in
general by material laws, but that occasionally Spirit sets aside these
laws, - this belief belittles omnipotent wisdom, and gives to matter the
precedence over Spirit.

Conflicting standpoints

It is contrary to Christian Science to suppose that life is either
material or organically spiritual. Between Christian Science and all
forms of superstition a great gulf is fixed, as impassable as that
between Dives and Lazarus. There is mortal mind-reading and immortal
Mind-reading. The latter is a revelation of divine purpose through
spiritual understanding, by which man gains the divine Principle and
explanation of all things. Mortal mind-reading and immortal Mindreading
are distinctly opposite standpoints, from which cause and effect are
interpreted. The act of reading mortal mind investigates and touches
only human beliefs.

<span id="pg_84 ">p. 84</span>

Science is immortal and coordinate neither with the premises nor with
the conclusions of mortal beliefs.

Scientific foreseeing

The ancient prophets gained their foresight from a spiritual,
incorporeal standpoint, not by foreshadowing evil and mistaking fact for
fiction, - predicting the future from a groundwork of corporeality and
human belief. When sufficiently advanced in Science to be in harmony
with the truth of being, men become seers and prophets involuntarily,
controlled not by demons, spirits, or demigods, but by the one Spirit.
It is the prerogative of the ever-present, divine Mind, and of thought
which is in rapport with this Mind, to know the past, the present, and
the future.

Acquaintance with the Science of being enables us to commune more
largely with the divine Mind, to foresee and foretell events which
concern the universal welfare, to be divinely inspired, - yea, to reach
the range of fetterless Mind.

The Mind unbounded

To understand that Mind is infinite, not bounded by corporeality, not
dependent upon the ear and eye for sound or sight nor upon muscles and
bones for locomotion, is a step towards the Mindscience by which we
discern man's nature and existence. This true conception of being
destroys the belief of spiritualism at its very inception, for without
the concession of material personalities called spirits, spiritualism
has no basis upon which to build.

Scientific foreknowing

All we correctly know of Spirit comes from God, divine Principle, and is
learned through Christ and Christian Science. If this Science has been
thoroughly learned and properly digested, we can know the truth more
accurately than the astronomer can read

<span id="pg_85">p. 85</span>

the stars or calculate an eclipse. This Mind-reading is the opposite of
clairvoyance. It is the illumination of the spiritual understanding
which demonstrates the capacity of Soul, not of material sense. This
Soul-sense comes to the human mind when the latter yields to the divine
Mind.

Value of intuition

Such intuitions reveal whatever constitutes and perpetuates harmony,
enabling one to do good, but not evil. You will reach the perfect
Science of healing when you are able to read the human mind after this
manner and discern the error you would destroy. The Samaritan woman
said: "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not
this the Christ?"

It is recorded that Jesus, as he once journeyed with his students, "knew
their thoughts," - read them scientifically. In like manner he discerned
disease and healed the sick. After the same method, events of great
moment were foretold by the Hebrew prophets. Our Master rebuked the lack
of this power when he said: "O ye hypocrites! ye can discern the face of
the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?"

Hyprocrisy condemned

Both Jew and Gentile may have had acute corporeal senses, but mortals
need spiritual sense. Jesus knew the generation to be wicked and
adulterous, seeking the material more than the spiritual. His thrusts at
materialism were sharp, but needed. He never spared hypocrisy the
sternest condemnation.. He said : "These ought ye to have done, and not
to leave the other undone." The great Teacher knew both cause and
effect, knew that truth communicates itself but never imparts error.

<span id="pg_86 ">p. 86</span>

Mental contact

Jesus once asked, "Who touched me?" Supposing this inquiry to be
occasioned by physical contact alone, his disciples answered, "The
multitude throng thee." Jesus knew, as others did not, that it was not
matter, but mortal mind, whose touch called for aid. Repeating his
inquiry, he was answered by the faith of a sick woman. His quick
apprehension of this mental call illustrated his spirituality. The
disciples' misconception of it uncovered their materiality. Jesus
possessed more spiritual susceptibility than the disciples. Opposites
come from contrary directions, and produce unlike results.

Images of thought

Mortals evolve images of thought. These may appear to the ignorant to be
apparitions; but they are mysterious only because it is unusual to see
thoughts, though we can always feel their influence. Haunted houses,
ghostly voices, unusual noises, and apparitions brought out in dark
seances either involve feats by tricksters, or they are images and
sounds evolved involuntarily by mortal mind. Seeing is no less a quality
of physical sense than feeling. Then why is it more difficult to see a
thought than to feel one? Education alone determines the difference. In
reality there is none.

Phenomena explained

Portraits, landscape-paintings, fac-similes of penmanship, peculiarities
of expression, recollected sentences, can all be taken from pictorial
thought and memory as readily as from objects cognizable by the senses.
Mortal mind sees what it believes as certainly as it believes what it
sees. It feels, hears, and sees its own thoughts. Pictures are mentally
formed before the artist can convey them to canvas. So is it

<span id="pg_87">p. 87</span>

with all material conceptions. Mind-readers perceive these pictures of
thought. They copy or reproduce them, even when they are lost to the
memory of the mind in which they are discoverable.

Mental environment

It is needless for the thought or for the person holding the transferred
picture to be individually and consciously present. Though individuals
have passed away, their mental environment re- mains to be discerned,
described, and transmitted. Though bodies are leagues apart and their
associations forgotten, their associations float in the general
atmosphere of human mind.

Second sight

The Scotch call such vision "second sight", when really it is first
sight instead of second, for it presents primal facts to mortal mind.
Science enables one to read the human mind, but not as a clairvoyant. It
enables one to heal through Mind, but not as a mesmerist.

Buried secrets

The mine knows naught of the emeralds within its rocks; the sea is
ignorant of the gems within its caverns, of the corals, of its sharp
reefs, of the tall ships that float on its bosom, or of the bodies which
lie buried in its sands: yet these are all there. Do not suppose that
any mental concept is gone because you do not think of it. The true
concept is never lost. The strong impressions produced on mortal mind by
friendship or by any intense feeling are lasting, and mindreaders can
perceive and reproduce these impressions.

Recollected friends

Memory may reproduce voices long ago silent. We have but to close the
eyes, and forms rise before us, which are thousands of miles away or
altogether gone from physical sight and sense, and

<span id="pg_88 ">p. 88</span>

this not in dreamy sleep. In our day-dreams we can recall that for which
the poet Tennyson expressed the heart's desire,    the touch of a
vanished hand,    And the sound of a voice that is still. The mind may
even be cognizant of a present flavor and odor, when no viand touches
the palate and no scent salutes the nostrils.

Illusions not ideas

How are veritable ideas to be distinguished from illusions? By learning
the origin of each. Ideas are emanations from the divine Mind. Thoughts,
proceeding from the brain or from matter, are offshoots of mortal mind;
they are mortal material beliefs. Ideas are spiritual, harmonious, and
eternal. Beliefs proceed from the so-called material senses, which at
one time are supposed to be substance-matter and at another are called
spirits.

To love one's neighbor as one's self, is a divine idea; but this idea
can never be seen, felt, nor understood through the physical senses.
Excite the organ of veneration or religious faith, and the individual
manifests profound adoration. Excite the opposite development, and he
blasphemes. These effects, however, do not proceed from Christianity,
nor are they spiritual phenomena, for both arise from mortal belief.

Trance speaking illusion

Eloquence re-echoes the strains of Truth and Love. It is due to
inspiration rather than to erudition. It shows the possibilities derived
from divine Mind, though it is said to be a gift whose endowment is
obtained from books or received from the impulsion of departed spirits.
When eloquence proceeds from the belief that a departed spirit is
speaking, who

<span id="pg_89">p. 89</span>

can tell what the unaided medium is incapable of knowing or uttering?
This phenomenon only shows that the beliefs of mortal mind are loosed.
Forgetting her ignorance in the belief that another mind is speaking
through her, the devotee may become unwontedly eloquent. Having more
faith in others than in herself, and believing that somebody else
possesses her tongue and mind, she talks freely.

Destroy her belief in outside aid, and her eloquence disappears. The
former limits of her belief return. She says, " I am incapable of words
that glow, for I am uneducated." This familiar instance reaffirms the
Scriptural word concerning a man, "As he thinketh in his heart, so is
he." If one believes that he cannot be an orator without study or a
superinduced condition, the body responds to this belief, and the tongue
grows mute which before was eloquent.

Scientific improvisation

Mind is not necessarily dependent upon educational processes. It
possesses of itself all beauty and poetry, and the power of expressing
them. Spirit, God, is heard when the senses are silent. We are all
capable of more than we do. The influence or action of Soul confers a
freedom, which explains the phenomena of improvisation and the fervor of
untutored lips.

Divine origination

Matter is neither intelligent nor creative. The tree is not the author
of itself. Sound is not the originator of music, and man is not the
father of man. Cain very naturally concluded that if life was in the
body, and man gave it, man had the right to take it away. This incident
shows that the belief of life in matter was "a murderer from the
beginning."

If seed is necessary to produce wheat, and wheat to

<span id="pg_90">p. 90</span>

produce flour, or if one animal can originate another, how then can we
account for their primal origin? How were the loaves and fishes
multiplied on the shores of Galilee,--and that, too, without meal or
monad from which loaf or fish could come?

Mind is substance

The earth's orbit and the imaginary line called the equator are not
substance. The earth's motion and position are sustained by Mind alone.
Divest yourself of the thought that there can be substance in matter,
and the movements and transitions now possible for mortal mind will be
found to be equally possible for the body. Then being will be recognized
as spiritual, and death will be obsolete, though now some insist that
death is the necessary prelude to immortality.

Mortal delusions

In dreams we fly to Europe and meet a far-off friend. The looker-on sees
the body in bed, but the supposed inhabitant of that body carries it
through the air and over the ocean. This shows the possibilities of
thought. Opium and hashish eaters mentally travel far and work wonders,
yet their bodies stay in one place. This shows what mortal mentality and
knowledge are.

Scientific finalities

The admission to one's self that man is God's own likeness sets man free
to master the infinite idea. This conviction shuts the door on death,
and opens it wide towards immortality. The understanding and recognition
of Spirit must finally come, and we may as well improve our time in
solving the mysteries of being through an apprehension of divine
Principle. At present we know not what man is, but we certainly shall
know this when man reflects God.

<span id="pg_91">p. 91</span>

The Revelator tells us of "a new heaven and a new earth." Have you ever
pictured this heaven and earth, inhabited by beings under the control of
supreme wisdom?

Let us rid ourselves of the belief that man is separated from God, and
obey only the divine principle, Life and Love. Here is the great point
of departure for all true spiritual growth.

Man's genuine being

It is difficult for the sinner to accept divine Science, because Science
exposes his nothingness; but the sooner error is reduced to its native
nothingness, the sooner man's great reality will appear and his genuine
being will be understood. The destruction of error is by no means the
destruction of Truth or Life, but is the acknowledgment of them.
Absorbed in material selfhood we discern and reflect but faintly the
substance of Life or Mind. The denial of material selfhood aids the
discernment of man's spiritual and eternal individuality, and destroys
the erroneous knowledge gained from matter or through what are termed
the material senses.

Erroneous postulates

Certain erroneous postulates should be here considered in order that the
spiritual facts may be better apprehended. The first erroneous postulate
of belief is, that substance, life, and intelligence are something apart
from God.

The second erroneous postulate is, that man is both mental and material.

The third erroneous postulate is, that mind is both evil and good;
whereas the real Mind cannot be evil nor the medium of evil, for Mind is
God.

The fourth erroneous postulate is, that matter is in

<span id="pg_92 ">p. 92</span>

telligent, and that man has a material body which is part of himself.

The fifth erroneous postulate is, that matter holds in itself the issues
of life and death,--that matter is not only capable of experiencing
pleasure and pain, but also capable of imparting these sensations. From
the illusion implied in this last postulate arises the decomposition of
mortal bodies in what is termed death.

Mind is not an entity within the cranium with the power of sinning now
and forever.

Knowledge of good and evil

In old Scriptural pictures we see a serpent coiled around the tree of
knowledge and speaking to Adam and Eve. This represents the serpent in
the act of commending to our first parents the knowledge of good and
evil, a knowledge gained from matter, or evil, instead of from Spirit.
The portrayal is still graphically accurate, for the common conception
of mortal man--a burlesque of God's man--is an outgrowth of human
knowledge or sensuality, a mere offshoot of material sense.

Opposing power

Uncover error, and it turns the lie upon you. Until the fact concerning
error - namely, its nothingness appears, the moral demand will not be
met, and the ability to make nothing of error will be wanting. We should
blush to call that real which is only a mistake. The foundation of evil
is laid on a belief in something besides God. This belief tends to
support two opposite powers, instead of urging the claims of Truth
alone. The mistake of thinking that error can be real, when it is merely
the absence of truth, leads to belief in the superiority of error.

The age's privilege

Do you say the time has not yet come in which to

<span id="pg_93">p. 93</span>

recognize Soul as substantial and able to control the body? Remember
Jesus, who nearly nineteen centuries ago demonstrated the power of
Spirit and said, "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he
do also," and who also said, "But the hour cometh, and now is, when the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth."
"Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation,"
said Paul.

Logic and revelation

Divine logic and revelation coincide. If we believe otherwise, we may be
sure that either our logic is at fault or that we have misinterpreted
revelation. Good never causes evil, nor creates aught that can cause
evil.

Good does not create a mind susceptible of causing evil, for evil is the
opposing error and not the truth of creation. Destructive electricity is
not the offspring of infinite good. Whatever contradicts the real nature
of the divine Esse, though human faith may clothe it with angelic
vestments, is without foundation.

Derivatives of spirit

The belief that Spirit is finite as well as infinite has darkened all
history. In Christian Science, Spirit, as a proper noun, is the name of
the Supreme Being. It means quantity and quality, and applies
exclusively to God. The modifying derivatives of the word spirit refer
only to quality, not to God. Man is spiritual. He is not God, Spirit. If
man were Spirit, then men would be spirits, gods. Finite spirit would be
mortal, and this is the error embodied in the belief that the infinite
can be contained in the finite. This belief tends to becloud our
apprehension of the kingdom of heaven and of the reign of harmony in the
Science of being.

<span id="pg_94">p. 94</span>

Scientific man

Jesus taught but one God, one Spirit, who makes man in the image and
likeness of Himself,--of Spirit, not of matter. Man reflects infinite
Truth, Life, and Love. The nature of man, thus understood, includes all
that is implied by the terms "image" and "likeness" as used in
Scripture. The truly Christian and scientific statement of personality
and of the relation of man to God, with the demonstration which
accompanied it, incensed the rabbis, and they said: "Crucify him,
crucify him . . . by our law he ought to die, because he made himself
the Son of God."

The eastern empires and nations owe their false government to the
misconceptions of Deity there prevalent. Tyranny, intolerance, and
bloodshed, wherever found, arise from the belief that the infinite is
formed after the pattern of mortal personality, passion, and impulse.

Ingratitude and denial

The progress of truth confirms its claims, and our Master confirmed his
words by his works. His healingpower evoked denial, ingratitude, and
betrayal, arising from sensuality. Of the ten lepers whom Jesus healed,
but one returned to give God thanks,--that is, to acknowledge the divine
Principle which had healed him.

Spiritual insight

Our Master easily read the thoughts of mankind, and this insight better
enabled him to direct those thoughts aright; but what would be said at
this period of an infidel blasphemer who should hint that Jesus used his
incisive power injuriously? Our Master read mortal mind on a scientific
basis, that of the omnipresence of Mind. An approximation of this
discernment indicates spiritual growth and union with the infinite
capacities of the one Mind. Jesus could injure no one by his
Mind-reading.

<span id="pg_95">p. 95</span>

The effect of his Mind was always to heal and to save, and this is the
only genuine Science of reading mortal mind. His holy motives and aims
were traduced by the sinners of that period, as they would be to-day if
Jesus were personally present. Paul said, "To be spiritually minded is
life." We approach God, or Life, in proportion to our spirituality, our
fidelity to Truth and Love; and in that ratio we know all human need and
are able to discern the thought of the sick and the sinning for the
purpose of healing them. Error of any kind cannot hide from the law of
God.

Whoever reaches this point of moral culture and goodness cannot injure
others, and must do them good. The greater or lesser ability of a
Christian Scientist to discern thought scientifically, depends upon his
genuine spirituality. This kind of mind-reading is not clairvoyance, but
it is important to success in healing, and is one of the special
characteristics thereof.

Christ's reappearance

We welcome the increase of knowledge and the end of error, because even
human invention must have its day, and we want that day to be succeeded
by Christian Science, by divine reality. Midnight foretells the dawn.
Led by a solitary star amid the darkness, the Magi of old foretold the
Messiahship of Truth. Is the wise man of to-day believed, when he
beholds the light which heralds Christ's eternal dawn and describes its
effulgence?

Spiritual awakening

Lulled by stupefying illusions, the world is asleep in the cradle of
infancy, dreaming away the hours. Material sense does not unfold the
facts of existence; but spiritual sense lifts human consciousness into
eternal Truth. Humanity advances

<span id="pg_96">p. 96</span>

slowly out of sinning sense into spiritual understanding; unwillingness
to learn all things rightly, binds Christendom with chains.

The darkest hours of all

Love will finally mark the hour of harmony, and spiritualization will
follow, for Love is Spirit. Before error is wholly destroyed, there will
be interruptions of the general material routine. Earth will become
dreary and desolate, but summer and winter, seedtime and harvest (though
in changed forms), will continue unto the end,--until the final
spiritualization of all things. "The darkest hour precedes the dawn."

Arena of contest

This material world is even now becoming the arena for conflicting
forces. On one side there will be discord and dismay; on the other side
there will be Science and peace. The breaking up of material beliefs may
seem to be famine and pestilence, want and woe, sin, sickness, and
death, which assume new phases until their nothingness appears. These
disturbances will continue until the end of error, when all discord will
be swallowed up in spiritual Truth.

Mortal error will vanish in a moral chemicalization. This mental
fermentation has begun, and will continue until all errors of belief
yield to understanding. Belief is changeable, but spiritual
understanding is changeless.

Millennial glory

As this consummation draws nearer, he who has shaped his course in
accordance with divine Science will endure to the end. As material
knowledge diminishes and spiritual understanding increases, real objects
will be apprehended mentally instead of materially.

During this final conflict, wicked minds will endeavor to find means by
which to accomplish more evil; but

<span id="pg_97">p. 97</span>

those who discern Christian Science will hold crime in check. They will
aid in the ejection of error. They will maintain law and order, and
cheerfully await the certainty of ultimate perfection.

Dangerous resemblances

In reality, the more closely error simulates truth and so-called matter
resembles its essence, mortal mind, the more impotent error becomes as a
belief. According to human belief, the lightning is fierce and the
electric current swift, yet in Christian Science the flight of one and
the blow of the other will become harmless. The more destructive matter
becomes, the more its nothingness will appear, until matter reaches its
mortal zenith in illusion and forever disappears. The nearer a false
belief approaches truth without passing the boundary where, having been
destroyed by divine Love, it ceases to be even an illusion, the riper it
becomes for destruction. The more material the belief, the more obvious
its error, until divine Spirit, supreme in its domain, dominates all
matter, and man is found in the likeness of Spirit, his original being.

The broadest facts array the most falsities against themselves, for they
bring error from under cover. It requires courage to utter truth; for
the higher Truth lifts her voice, the louder will error scream, until
its inarticulate sound is forever silenced in oblivion.

"He uttered His voice, the earth melted." This Scripture indicates that
all matter will disappear before the supremacy of Spirit.

Christianity still rejected

Christianity is again demonstrating the Life that is Truth, and the
Truth that is Life, by the apostolic work of casting out error and
healing the sick. Earth has no repayment for the persecutions which

<span id="pg_98 ">p. 98</span>

attend a new step in Christianity; but the spiritual recompense of the
persecuted is assured in the elevation of existence above mortal discord
and in the gift of divine Love.

Spiritual foreshadowings

The prophet of to-day beholds in the mental horizon the signs of these
times, the reappearance of the Christianity which heals the sick and
destroys error, and no other sign shall be given. Body cannot be saved
except through Mind. The Science of Christianity is misinterpreted by a
material age, for it is the healing influence of Spirit (not spirits)
which the material senses cannot comprehend, which can only be
spiritually discerned. Creeds, doctrines, and human hypotheses do not
express Christian Science; much less can they demonstrate it.

Revelation of Science

Beyond the frail premises of human beliefs, above the loosening grasp of
creeds, the demonstration of Christian Mind-healing stands a revealed
and practical Science. It is imperious throughout all ages as Christ's
revelation of Truth, of Life, and of Love, which remains inviolate for
every man to understand and to practise.

Science as foreign to all religion

For centuries--yea, always--natural science has not been considered a
part of any religion, Christianity not excepted. Even now multitudes
consider that which they call science has no proper connection with
faith and piety. Mystery does not enshroud Christ's teachings, and they
are not theoretical and fragmentary, but practical and complete; and
being practical and complete, they are not deprived of their essential
vitality.

Key to the kingdom

The way through which immortality and life are learned is not
ecclesiastical but Christian, not human but divine,

<span id="pg_99">p. 99</span>

not physical but metaphysical, not material but scientifically
spiritual. Human philosophy, ethics, and superstition afford no
demonstrable divine Principle by which mortals can escape from sin; yet
to escape from sin, is what the Bible demands. "Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling," says the apostle, and he straightway
adds: "for it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of His
good pleasure" (Philippians ii. 12, 13). Truth has furnished the key to
the kingdom, and with this key Christian Science has opened the door of
the human understanding. None may pick the lock nor enter by some other
door. The ordinary teachings are material and not spiritual. Christian
Science teaches only that which is spiritual and divine, and not human.
Christian Science is unerring and Divine; the human sense of things errs
because it is human.

Those individuals, who adopt theosophy, spiritualism, or hypnotism, may
possess natures above some others who eschew their false beliefs.
Therefore my contest is not with the individual, but with the false
system. I love mankind, and shall continue to labor and to endure.

The calm, strong currents of true spirituality, the manifestations of
which are health, purity, and selfimmolation, must deepen human
experience, until the beliefs of material existence are seen to be a
bald imposition, and sin, disease, and death give everlasting place to
the scientific demonstration of divine Spirit and to God's spiritual,
perfect man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V - Animal Magnetism Unmasked](sah05.md) 
