[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sah16)  [Next](sah18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter XVII - Glossary

<span id="pg_579">p. 579</span>

These things saith He that is holy, He that is true, He that hath the
key of David, He that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no
man openeth; I know thy works : behold, I have set before thee an open
door, and no man can shut it.--REVELATION.

In Christian Science we learn that the substitution of the spiritual for
the material definition of a Scriptural word often elucidates the
meaning of the inspired writer. On this account this chapter is added.
It contains the metaphysical interpretation of Bible terms, giving their
spiritual sense, which is also their original meaning.

ABEL. Watchfulness; self-offering; surrendering to the creator the early
fruits of experience.

ABRAHAM. Fidelity; faith in the divine Life and in the eternal Principle
of being.

This patriarch illustrated the purpose of Love to create trust in good,
and showed the life-preserving power of spiritual understanding.

ADAM. Error; a falsity; the belief in "original sin," sickness, and
death; evil; the opposite of good,--of God and His creation; a curse; a
belief in intelligent matter,

<span id="pg_580">p. 580</span>

finiteness, and mortality; "dust to dust;" red sandstone; nothingness;
the first god of mythology; not God's man, who represents the one God
and is His own image and likeness; the opposite of Spirit and His
creations; that which is not the image and likeness of good, but a
material belief, opposed to the one Mind, or Spirit; a so-called finite
mind, producing other minds, thus making "gods many and lords many" (I
Corinthians viii. 5); a product of nothing as the mimicry of something;
an unreality as opposed to the great reality of spiritual existence and
creation; a so-called man, whose origin, substance, and mind are found
to be the antipode of God, or Spirit; an inverted image of Spirit; the
image and likeness of what God has not created, namely, matter, sin,
sickness, and death; the opposer of Truth, termed error; Life's
counterfeit, which ultimates in death; the opposite of Love, called
hate; the usurper of Spirit's creation, called self-creative matter;
immortality's opposite, mortality; that of which wisdom saith, "Thou
shalt surely die."

The name Adam represents the false supposition that Life is not eternal,
but has beginning and end; that the infinite enters the finite, that
intelligence passes into nonintelligence, and that Soul dwells in
material sense; that immortal Mind results in matter, and matter in
mortal mind; that the one God and creator entered what He created, and
then disappeared in the atheism of matter.

ADVERSARY. An adversary is one who opposes, denies, disputes, not one
who constructs and sustains reality and Truth. Jesus said of the devil,
"He was a murderer from the beginning, . . . he is a liar and the father
of it."

<span id="pg_581">p. 581</span>

This view of Satan is confirmed by the name often conferred upon him in
Scripture, the "adversary."

ALMIGHTY. All-power; infinity; omnipotence.

ANGELS. God's thoughts passing to man; spiritual intuitions, pure and
perfect; the inspiration of goodness, purity, and immortality,
counteracting all evil, sensuality, and mortality.

ARK. Safety; the idea, or reflection, of Truth, proved to be as immortal
as its Principle; the understanding of Spirit, destroying belief in
matter.

God and man coexistent and eternal; Science showing that the spiritual
realities of all things are created by Him and exist forever. The ark
indicates temptation overcome and followed by exaltation.

ASHER (Jacob's son). Hope and faith; spiritual compensation; the ills of
the flesh rebuked.

BABEL. Self-destroying error; a kingdom divided against itself, which
cannot stand; material knowledge.

The higher false knowledge builds on the basis of evidence obtained from
the five corporeal senses, the more confusion ensues, and the more
certain is the downfall of its structure.

BAPTISM. Purification by Spirit; submergence in Spirit.

We are "willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present
with the Lord." (II Corinthians v. 8.)

<span id="pg_582">p. 582</span>

BELIEVING. Firmness and constancy; not a faltering nor a blind faith,
but the perception of spiritual Truth. Mortal thoughts, illusion.

BENJAMIN (Jacob's son). A physical belief as to life, substance, and
mind; human knowledge, or so-called mortal mind, devoted to matter;
pride; envy; fame; illusion; a false belief; error masquerading as the
possessor of life, strength, animation, and power to act.

Renewal of affections; self-offering; an improved state of mortal mind;
the introduction of a more spiritual origin; a gleam of the infinite
idea of the infinite Principle; a spiritual type; that which comforts,
consoles, and supports.

BRIDE. Purity and innocence, conceiving man in the idea of God; a sense
of Soul, which has spiritual bliss and enjoys but cannot suffer.

BRIDEGROOM. Spiritual understanding; the pure consciousness that God,
the divine Principle, creates man as His own spiritual idea, and that
God is the only creative power.

BURIAL. Corporeality and physical sense put out of sight and hearing;
annihilation. Submergence in Spirit; immortality brought to light.

CANAAN (the son of Ham). A sensuous belief; the testimony of what is
termed material sense; the error which would make man mortal and would
make mortal mind a slave to the body.

CHILDREN. The spiritual thoughts and representatives of Life, Truth, and
Love.

<span id="pg_583">p. 583</span>

Sensual and mortal beliefs; counterfeits of creation, whose better
originals are God's thoughts, not in embryo, but in maturity; material
suppositions of life, substance, and intelligence, opposed to the
Science of being.

CHILDREN OF ISRAEL. The representatives of Soul, not corporeal sense;
the offspring of Spirit, who, having wrestled with error, sin, and
sense, are governed by divine Science; some of the ideas of God beheld
as men, casting out error and healing the sick; Christ's offspring.

CHRIST. The divine manifestation of God, which comes to the flesh to
destroy incarnate error.

CHURCH. The structure of Truth and Love; whatever rests upon and
proceeds from divine Principle.

The Church is that institution, which affords proof of its utility and
is found elevating the race, rousing the dormant understanding from
material beliefs to the apprehension of spiritual ideas and the
demonstration of divine Science, thereby casting out devils, or error,
and healing the sick.

CREATOR. Spirit; Mind; intelligence; the animating divine Principle of
all that is real and good; self-existent Life, Truth, and Love; that
which is perfect and eternal; the opposite of matter and evil, which
have no Principle; God, who made all that was made and could not create
an atom or an element the opposite of Himself.

DAN (Jacob's son). Animal magnetism; so-called mortal mind controlling
mortal mind; error, working out the designs of error; one belief preying
upon another.

<span id="pg_584 ">p. 584</span>

DAY. The irradiance of Life; light, the spiritual idea of Truth and
Love.

"And the evening and the morning were the first day." (Genesis i. 5.)
The objects of time and sense disappear in the illumination of spiritual
understanding, and Mind measures time according to the good that is
unfolded. This unfolding is God's day, and "there shall be no night
there."

DEATH. An illusion, the lie of life in matter; the unreal and untrue;
the opposite of Life.

Matter has no life, hence it has no real existence. Mind is immortal.
The flesh, warring against Spirit; that which frets itself free from one
belief only to be fettered by another, until every belief of life where
Life is not yields to eternal Life. Any material evidence of death is
false, for it contradicts the spiritual facts of being.

DEVIL. Evil; a lie; error; neither corporeality nor mind; the opposite
of Truth; a belief in sin, sickness, and death; animal magnetism or
hypnotism; the lust of the flesh, which saith: " I am life and
intelligence in matter. There is more than one mind, for I am mind, a
wicked mind, self-made or created by a tribal god and put into the
opposite of mind, termed matter, thence to reproduce a mortal universe,
including man, not after the image and likeness of Spirit, but after its
own image."

DOVE. A symbol of divine Science; purity and peace; hope and faith.

DUST. Nothingness; the absence of substance, life, or intelligence.

<span id="pg_585">p. 585</span>

EARS. Not organs of the so-called corporeal senses, but spiritual
understanding.

Jesus said, referring to spiritual perception, "Having ears, hear ye
not?" (Mark viii. 18.)

EARTH. A sphere; a type of eternity and immortality, which are likewise
without beginning or end.

To material sense, earth is matter; to spiritual sense, it is a compound
idea.

ELIAS. Prophecy; spiritual evidence opposed to material sense; Christian
Science, with which can be discerned the spiritual fact of whatever the
material senses behold; the basis of immortality.

"Elias truly shall first come and restore all things." (Matthew xvii.
11.)

ERROR. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 472.

EUPHRATES (river). Divine Science encompassing the universe and man; the
true idea of God; a type of the glory which is to come; metaphysics
taking the place of physics; the reign of righteousness. The atmosphere
of human belief before it accepts sin, sickness, or death; a state of
mortal thought, the only error of which is limitation; finity; the
opposite of infinity.

EVE. A beginning; mortality; that which does not last forever; a finite
belief concerning life, substance, and intelligence in matter; error;
the belief that the human race originated materially instead of
spiritually, that man started first from dust, second from a rib, and
third from an egg.

<span id="pg_586">p. 586</span>

EVENING. Mistiness of mortal thought; weariness of mortal mind; obscured
views; peace and rest.

EYES. Spiritual discernment,--not material but mental.

Jesus said, thinking of the outward vision, "Having eyes, see ye not?"
(Mark viii. 18.)

FAN. Separator of fable from fact; that which gives action to thought.

FATHER. Eternal Life; the one Mind; the divine Principle, commonly
called God.

FEAR. Heat; inflammation; anxiety; ignorance; error; desire; caution.

FIRE. Fear; remorse; lust; hatred; destruction; affliction purifying and
elevating man.

FIRMAMENT. Spiritual understanding; the scientific line of demarcation
between Truth and error, between Spirit and so-called matter.

FLESH. An error of physical belief; a supposition that life, substance,
and intelligence are in matter; an illusion; a belief that matter has
sensation.

GAD (Jacob's son). Science; spiritual being understood; haste towards
harmony.

GETHSEMANE. Patient woe; the human yielding to the divine; love meeting
no response, but still remaining love.

<span id="pg_587">p. 587</span>

GHOST. An illusion; a belief that mind is outlined and limited; a
supposition that spirit is finite.

GIHON (river). The rights of woman acknowledged morally, civilly, and
socially.

GOD. The great I AM; the all-knowing, all-seeing, all-acting, all-wise,
all-loving, and eternal; Principle; Mind; Soul; Spirit; Life; Truth;
Love; all substance; intelligence.

GODS. Mythology; a belief that life, substance, and intelligence are
both mental and material; a supposition of sentient physicality; the
belief that infinite Mind is in finite forms; the various theories that
hold mind to be a material sense, existing in brain, nerve, matter;
supposititious minds, or souls, going in and out of matter, erring and
mortal; the serpents of error, which say, "Ye shall be as gods."

God is one God, infinite and perfect, and cannot become finite and
imperfect.

GOOD. God; Spirit; omnipotence; omniscience; omnipresence; omni-action.

HAM (Noah's son). Corporeal belief; sensuality; slavery; tyranny.

HEART. Mortal feelings, motives, affections, joys, and sorrows.

HEAVEN. Harmony; the reign of Spirit; government by divine Principle;
spirituality; bliss; the atmosphere of Soul.

<span id="pg_588">p. 588</span>

HELL. Mortal belief; error; lust; remorse; hatred; revenge; sin;
sickness; death; suffering and self-destruction, self-imposed agony;
effects of sin; that which "worketh abomination or maketh a lie."

HIDDEKEL (river). Divine Science understood and acknowledged.

HOLY GHOST. Divine Science; the development of eternal Life, Truth, and
Love.

I, or EGO. Divine Principle; Spirit; Soul; incorporeal, unerring,
immortal, and eternal Mind.

There is but one I, or Us, but one divine Principle, or Mind, governing
all existence; man and woman unchanged forever in their individual
characters, even as numbers which never blend with each other, though
they are governed by one Principle. All the objects of God's creation
reflect one Mind, and whatever reflects not this one Mind, is false and
erroneous, even the belief that life, substance, and intelligence are
both mental and material.

I AM. God; incorporeal and eternal Mind; divine Principle; the only Ego.

IN. A term obsolete in Science if used with reference to Spirit, or
Deity.

INTELLIGENCE. Substance; self-existent and eternal Mind; that which is
never unconscious nor limited.

See chapter on Recapitulation, page 469.

<span id="pg_589">p. 589</span>

ISSACHAR (Jacob's son). A corporeal belief; the offspring of error;
envy; hatred; selfishness; self-will; lust.

JACOB. A corporeal mortal embracing duplicity, repentance, sensualism.
Inspiration; the revelation of Science, in which the so-called material
senses yield to the spiritual sense of Life and Love.

JAPHET (Noah's son). A type of spiritual peace, flowing from the
understanding that God is the divine Principle of all existence, and
that man is His idea, the child of His care.

JERUSALEM. Mortal belief and knowledge obtained from the five corporeal
senses; the pride of power and the power of pride; sensuality; envy;
oppression; tyranny. Home, heaven.

JESUS. The highest human corporeal concept of the divine idea, rebuking
and destroying error and bringing to light man's immortality.

JOSEPH. A corporeal mortal; a higher sense of Truth rebuking mortal
belief, or error, and showing the immortality and supremacy of Truth;
pure affection blessing its enemies.

JUDAH. A corporeal material belief progressing and disappearing; the
spiritual understanding of God and man appearing.

<span id="pg_590">p. 590</span>

KINGDOM OF HEAVEN. The rein of harmony in divine Science; the realm of
unerring, eternal, and omnipotent Mind; the atmosphere of Spirit, where
Soul is supreme.

KNOWLEDGE. Evidence obtained from the five corporeal senses; mortality;
beliefs and opinions; human theories, doctrines, hypotheses; that which
is not divine and is the origin of sin, sickness, and death; the
opposite of spiritual Truth and understanding.

LAMB OF GOD. The spiritual idea of Love; self-immolation; innocence and
purity; sacrifice.

LEVI (Jacob's son). A corporeal and sensual belief; mortal man; denial
of the fulness of God's creation; ecclesiastical despotism.

LIFE. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 468.

LORD. In the Hebrew, this term is sometimes employed as a title, which
has the inferior sense of master, or ruler. In the Greek, the word
kurios almost always has this lower sense, unless specially coupled with
the name God. Its higher signification is Supreme Ruler.

LORD GOD. Jehovah.

This double term is not used in the first chapter of Genesis, the record
of spiritual creation. It is introduced in the second and following
chapters, when the spiritual sense of God and of infinity is
disappearing from the recorder's thought,--when the true scientific
statements of the Scriptures become clouded through a

<span id="pg_591">p. 591</span>

physical sense of God as finite and corporeal. From this follow idolatry
and mythology,--belief in many gods, or material intelligences, as the
opposite of the one Spirit, or intelligence, named Elohim, or God.

MAN. The compound idea of infinite Spirit; the spiritual image and
likeness of God; the full representation of Mind.

MATTER. Mythology; mortality; another name for mortal mind; illusion;
intelligence, substance, and life in non-intelligence and mortality;
life resulting in death, and death in life; sensation in the
sensationless; mind originating in matter; the opposite of Truth; the
opposite of Spirit; the opposite of God; that of which immortal Mind
takes no cognizance; that which mortal mind sees, feels, hears, tastes,
and smells only in belief.

MIND. The only I, or Us; the only Spirit, Soul, divine Principle,
substance, Life, Truth, Love; the one God; not that which is in man, but
the divine Principle, or God, of whom man is the full and perfect
expression; Deity, which outlines but is not outlined.

MIRACLE. That which is divinely natural, but must be learned humanly; a
phenomenon of Science.

MORNING. Light; symbol of Truth; revelation and progress.

MORTAL MIND. Nothing claiming to be something, for Mind is immortal;
mythology; error creating other errors; a suppositional material sense,
alias the belief

<span id="pg_592">p. 592</span>

that sensation is in matter, which is sensationless; a belief that life,
substance, and intelligence are in and of matter; the opposite of
Spirit, and therefore the opposite of God, or good; the belief that life
has a beginning and therefore an end; the belief that man is the
offspring of mortals; the belief that there can be more than one
creator; idolatry; the subjective states of error; material senses; that
which neither exists in Science nor can be recognized by the spiritual
sense; sin; sickness; death.

MOSES. A corporeal mortal; moral courage; a type of moral law and the
demonstration thereof; the proof that, without the gospel, - the union
of justice and affection,--there is something spiritually lacking, since
justice demands penalties under the law.

MOTHER. God; divine and eternal Principle; Life, Truth, and Love.

NEW JERUSALEM. Divine Science; the spiritual facts and harmony of the
universe; the kingdom of heaven, or reign of harmony.

NIGHT. Darkness; doubt; fear.

NOAH. A corporeal mortal; knowledge of the nothingness of material
things and of the immortality of all that is spiritual.

OIL. Consecration; charity; gentleness; prayer; heavenly inspiration.

PHARISEE. Corporeal and sensuous belief; self-righteousness; vanity;
hypocrisy.

<span id="pg_593">p. 593</span>

PISON (river). The love of the good and beautiful, and their
immortality.

PRINCIPLE. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 465.

PROPHET. A spiritual seer; disappearance of material sense before the
conscious facts of spiritual Truth.

PURSE. Laying up treasures in matter; error.

RED DRAGON. Error; fear; inflammation; sensuality; subtlety; animal
magnetism; envy; revenge.

RESURRECTION. Spiritualization of thought; a new and higher idea of
immortality, or spiritual existence; material belief yielding to
spiritual understanding.

REUBEN (Jacob's son). Corporeality; sensuality; delusion; mortality;
error.

RIVER. Channel of thought.

When smooth and unobstructed, it typifies the course of Truth; but
muddy, foaming, and dashing, it is a type of error.

ROCK. Spiritual foundation; Truth. Coldness and stubbornness.

SALVATION. Life, Truth, and Love understood and demonstrated as supreme
over all; sin, sickness, and death destroyed.

SEAL. The signet of error revealed by Truth

<span id="pg_594">p. 594</span>

SERPENT (ophis, in Greek; nacash, in Hebrew). Subtlety; a lie; the
opposite of Truth, named error; the first statement of mythology and
idolatry; the belief in more than one God; animal magnetism; the first
lie of limitation; finity; the first claim that there is an opposite of
Spirit, or good, termed matter, or evil; the first delusion that error
exists as fact; the first claim that sin, sickness, and death are the
realities of life. The first audible claim that God was not omnipotent
and that there was another power, named evil, which was as real and
eternal as God, good.

SHEEP. Innocence; inoffensiveness; those who follow their leader.

SHEM (Noah's son). A corporeal mortal; kindly affection; love rebuking
error; reproof of sensualism.

SON. The Son of God, the Messiah or Christ. The son of man, the
offspring of the flesh. " Son of a year."

SOULS. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 466.

SPIRIT. Divine substance; Mind; divine Principle; all that is good; God;
that only which is perfect, everlasting, omnipresent, omnipotent,
infinite.

SPIRITS. Mortal beliefs; corporeality; evil minds; supposed
intelligences, or gods; the opposites of God; errors; hallucinations.
(See page 466.)

SUBSTANCE. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 594-26 468.

<span id="pg_595">p. 595</span>

SUN. The symbol of Soul governing man,--of Truth, Life, and Love.

SWORD. The idea of Truth; justice. Revenge; anger.

TARES. Mortality; error; sin; sickness; disease; death.

TEMPLE. Body; the idea of Life, substance, and intelligence; the
superstructure of Truth; the shrine of Love; a material superstructure,
where mortals congregate for worship.

THUMMIM. Perfection; the eternal demand of divine Science.

The Urim and Thummim, which were to be on Aaron's breast when he went
before Jehovah, were holiness and purification of thought and deed,
which alone can fit us for the office of spiritual teaching.

TIME. Mortal measurements; limits, in which are summed up all human
acts, thoughts, beliefs, opinions, knowledge; matter; error; that which
begins before, and continues after, what is termed death, until the
mortal disappears and spiritual perfection appears.

TITHE. Contribution; tenth part; homage; gratitude. A sacrifice to the
gods.

UNCLEANLINESS. Impure thoughts; error; sin; dirt.

UNGODLINESS. Opposition to the divine Principle and its spiritual idea.

<span id="pg_596">p. 596</span>

UNKNOWN. That which spiritual sense alone comprehends, and which is
unknown to the material senses.

Paganism and agnosticism may define Deity as "the great unknowable;" but
Christian Science brings God much nearer to man, and makes Him better
known as the All-in-all, forever near.

Paul saw in Athens an altar dedicated "to the unknown God." Referring to
it, he said to the Athenians: "Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, Him
declare I unto you." (Acts xvii. 23.)

URIM. Light.

The rabbins believed that the stones in the breastplate of the
high-priest had supernatural illumination, but Christian Science reveals
Spirit, not matter, as the illuminator of all. The illuminations of
Science give us a sense of the nothingness of error, and they show the
spiritual inspiration of Love and Truth to be the only fit preparation
for admission to the presence and power of the Most High.

VALLEY. Depression; meekness; darkness.

"Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil." (Psalm xxiii. 4.)

Though the way is dark in mortal sense, divine Life and Love illumine
it, destroy the unrest of mortal thought, the fear of death, and the
supposed reality of error. Christian Science, contradicting sense,
maketh the valley to bud and blossom as the rose.

VEIL. A cover; concealment; hiding; hypocrisy. The Jewish women wore
veils over their faces in token

<span id="pg_597">p. 597</span>

of reverence and submission and in accordance with Pharisaical notions.

The Judaic religion consisted mostly of rites and ceremonies. The
motives and affections of a man were of little value, if only he
appeared unto men to fast. The great Nazarene, as meek as he was mighty,
rebuked the hypocrisy, which offered long petitions for blessings upon
material methods, but cloaked the crime, latent in thought, which was
ready to spring into action and crucify God's anointed. The martyrdom of
Jesus was the culminating sin of Pharisaism. It rent the veil of the
temple. It revealed the false foundations and superstructures of
superficial religion, tore from bigotry and superstition their
coverings, and opened the sepulchre with divine Science, - immortality
and Love.

WILDERNESS. Loneliness; doubt; darkness. Spontaneity of thought and
idea; the vestibule in which a material sense of things disappears, and
spiritual sense unfolds the great facts of existence.

WILL. The motive-power of error; mortal belief; animal power. The might
and wisdom of God.

"For this is the will of God." (I Thessalonians iv. 3.)

Will, as a quality of so-called mortal mind, is a wrongdoer; hence it
should not be confounded with the term as applied to Mind or to one of
God's qualities.

WIND. That which indicates the might of omnipotence and the movements of
God's spiritual government, encompassing all things. Destruction; anger;
mortal passions.

<span id="pg_598">p. 598</span>

The Greek word for wind (pneuma) is used also for spirit, as in the
passage in John's Gospel, the third chapter, where we read: "The wind
\[pneuma\] bloweth where it listeth. . . . So is every one that is born
of the Spirit \[pneuma\]." Here the original word is the same in both
cases, yet it has received different translations, as in other passages
in this same chapter and elsewhere in the New Testament. This shows how
our Master had constantly to employ words of material significance in
order to unfold spiritual thoughts. In the record of Jesus' supposed
death, we read: "He bowed his head, and gave up the ghost;" but this
word ghost is pneuma. It might be translated wind or air, and the phrase
is equivalent to our common statement, "He breathed his last." What
Jesus gave up was indeed air, an etherealized form of matter, for never
did he give up Spirit, or Soul.

WINE. Inspiration; understanding. Error; fornication; temptation;
passion.

YEAR. A solar measurement of time; mortality; space for repentance.

"One day is with the Lord as a thousand years." (II Peter iii. 8.)

One moment of divine consciousness, or the spiritual understanding of
Life and Love, is a foretaste of eternity. This exalted view, obtained
and retained when the Science of being is understood, would bridge over
with life discerned spiritually the interval of death, and man would be
in the full consciousness of his immortality and eternal harmony, where
sin, sickness, and death are unknown. Time is a mortal thought, the
divisor of which

<span id="pg_599">p. 599</span>

is the solar year. Eternity is God's measurement of Soulfilled years.

YOU. As applied to corporeality, a mortal; finity.

ZEAL. The reflected animation of Life, Truth, and Love. Blind
enthusiasm; mortal will.

ZION. Spiritual foundation and superstructure; inspiration; spiritual
strength. Emptiness; unfaithfulness; desolation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII - Fruitage](sah18) 
