[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sah13)  [Next](sah15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter XIV - Recapitulation

<span id="pg_465">p. 465</span>

For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line,
line upon line; here a little, and there a little.--ISAIAH.

THIS chapter is from the first edition of the author's class-book,
copyrighted in 1870. After much labor and increased spiritual
understanding, she revised that treatise for this volume in 1875.
Absolute Christian Science pervades its statements, to elucidate
scientific metaphysics.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Question.--What is God? Answer.--God is incorporeal, divine, supreme,
infinite Mind, Spirit, Soul, Principle, Life, Truth, Love.

Question.--Are these terms synonymous? Answer.--They are. They refer to
one absolute God. They are also intended to express the nature, essence,
and wholeness of Deity. The attributes of God are justice, mercy,
wisdom, goodness, and so on.

Question.--Is there more than one God or Principle? Answer.--There is
not. Principle and its idea is one, and this one is God, omnipotent,
omniscient, and omni

<span id="pg_466">p. 466</span>

present Being, and His reflection is man and the universe. Omni is
adopted from the Latin adjective signifying all. Hence God combines
all-power or potency, all-science or true knowledge, all-presence. The
varied manifestations of Christian Science indicate Mind, never matter,
and have one Principle.

Real versus unreal

Question.--What are spirits and souls? Answer.--To human belief, they
are personalities constituted of mind and matter, life and death, truth
and error, good and evil; but these contrasting pairs of terms represent
contraries, as Christian Science reveals, which neither dwell together
nor assimilate. Truth is immortal; error is mortal. Truth is limitless;
error is limited. Truth is intelligent; error is non-intelligent.
Moreover, Truth is real, and error is unreal. This last statement
contains the point you will most reluctantly admit, although first and
last it is the most important to understand.

Mankind redeemed

The term souls or spirits is as improper as the term gods. Soul or
Spirit signifies Deity and nothing else. There is no finite soul nor
spirit. Soul or Spirit means only one Mind, and cannot be rendered in
the plural. Heathen mythology and Jewish theology have perpetuated the
fallacy that intelligence, soul, and life can be in matter; and idolatry
and ritualism are the outcome of all man-made beliefs. The Science of
Christianity comes with fan in hand to separate the chaff from the
wheat. Science will declare God aright, and Christianity will
demonstrate this declaration and its divine Principle, making mankind
better physically, morally, and spiritually.

<span id="pg_467">p. 467</span>

Two chief commands

Question.--What are the demands of the Science of Soul? Answer.--The
first demand of this Science is, "Thou shalt have no other gods before
me." This me is Spirit. Therefore the command means this: Thou shalt
have no intelligence, no life, no substance, no truth, no love, but that
which is spiritual. The second is like unto it, "Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself." It should be thoroughly understood that all men
have one Mind, one God and Father, one Life, Truth, and Love. Mankind
will become perfect in proportion as this fact becomes apparent, war
will cease and the true brotherhood of man will be established. Having
no other gods, turning to no other but the one perfect Mind to guide
him, man is the likeness of God, pure and eternal, having that Mind
which was also in Christ.

Soul not confined in body

Science reveals Spirit, Soul, as not in the body, and God as not in man
but as reflected by man. The greater cannot be in the lesser. The belief
that the greater can be in the lesser is an error that works ill. This
is a leading point in the Science of Soul, that Principle is not in its
idea. Spirit, Soul, is not confined in man, and is never in matter. We
reason imperfectly from effect to cause, when we conclude that matter is
the effect of Spirit; but a priori reasoning shows material existence to
be enigmatical. Spirit gives the true mental idea. We cannot interpret
Spirit, Mind, through matter. Matter neither sees, hears, nor feels.

Sinlessness of Mind, Soul

Reasoning from cause to effect in the Science of Mind, we begin with
Mind, which must be understood through the idea which expresses it and
cannot be learned from its opposite, matter. Thus we

<span id="pg_468">p. 468</span>

arrive at Truth, or intelligence, which evolves its own unerring idea
and never can be coordinate with human illusions. If Soul sinned, it
would be mortal, for sin is mortality's self, because it kills itself.
If Truth is immortal, error must be mortal, because error is unlike
Truth. Because Soul is immortal, Soul cannot sin, for sin is not the
eternal verity of being.

Question.--What is the scientific statement of being? Answer. - There is
no life, truth, intelligence, nor substance in matter. All is infinite
Mind and its infinite manifestation, for God is All-in-all. Spirit is
immortal Truth; matter is mortal error. Spirit is the real and eternal;
matter is the unreal and temporal. Spirit is God, and man is His image
and likeness. Therefore man is not material; he is spiritual.

Spiritual synonyms

Question.--What is substance? Answer. - Substance is that which is
eternal and incapable of discord and decay. Truth, Life, and Love are
substance, as the Scriptures use this word in Hebrews: "The substance of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." Spirit, the synonym
of Mind, Soul, or God, is the only real substance. The spiritual
universe, including individual man, is a compound idea, reflecting the
divine substance of Spirit.

Eternity of Life

Question.--What is Life? Answer.--Life is divine Principle, Mind, Soul,
Spirit. Life is without beginning and without end. Eternity, not time,
expresses the thought of Life, and time is no part of eternity. One
ceases in proportion as the other is recognized. Time is finite;

<span id="pg_469">p. 469</span>

eternity is forever infinite. Life is neither in nor of matter. What is
termed matter is unknown to Spirit, which includes in itself all
substance and is Life eternal. Matter is a human concept. Life is divine
Mind. Life is not limited. Death and finiteness are unknown to Life. If
Life ever had a beginning, it would also have an ending.

Question.--What is intelligence? Answer.--Intelligence is omniscience,
omnipresence, and omnipotence. It is the primal and eternal quality of
infinite Mind, of the triune Principle,--Life, Truth, and Love,--named
God.

True sense of infinitude

Question.--What is Mind? Answer.--Mind is God. The exterminator of error
is the great truth that God, good, is the only Mind, and that the
supposititious opposite of infinite Mind - called devil or evil--is not
Mind, is not Truth, but error, without intelligence or reality. There
can be but one Mind, because there is but one God; and if mortals
claimed no other Mind and accepted no other, sin would be unknown. We
can have but one Mind, if that one is infinite. We bury the sense of
infinitude, when we admit that, although God is infinite, evil has a
place in this infinity, for evil can have no place, where all space is
filled with God.

The sole governor

We lose the high signification of omnipotence, when after admitting that
God, or good, is omnipresent and has all-power, we still believe there
is another power, named evil. This belief that there is more than one
mind is as pernicious to divine theology as are ancient mythology and
pagan idolatry. With

<span id="pg_470">p. 470</span>

one Father, even God, the whole family of man would be brethren; and
with one Mind and that God, or good, the brotherhood of man would
consist of Love and Truth, and have unity of Principle and spiritual
power which constitute divine Science. The supposed existence of more
than one mind was the basic error of idolatry. This error assumed the
loss of spiritual power, the loss of the spiritual presence of Life as
infinite Truth without an unlikeness, and the loss of Love as ever
present and universal.

The divine standard of perfection

Divine Science explains the abstract statement that there is one Mind by
the following self-evident proposition: If God, or good, is real, then
evil, the unlikeness of God, is unreal. And evil can only seem to be
real by giving reality to the unreal. The children of God have but one
Mind. How can good lapse into evil, when God, the Mind of man, never
sins? The standard of perfection was originally God and man. Has God
taken down His own standard, and has man fallen?

Indestructible relationship

God is the creator of man, and, the divine Principle of man remaining
perfect, the divine idea or reflection, man, remains perfect. Man is the
expression of God's being. If there ever was a moment when man did not
express the divine perfection, then there was a moment when man did not
express God, and consequently a time when Deity was unexpressed - that
is, without entity. If man has lost perfection, then he has lost his
perfect Principle, the divine Mind. If man ever existed without this
perfect Principle or Mind, then man's existence was a myth.

The relations of God and man, divine Principle and

<span id="pg_471">p. 471</span>

idea, are indestructible in Science; and Science knows no lapse from nor
return to harmony, but holds the divine order or spiritual law, in which
God and all that He creates are perfect and eternal, to have remained
unchanged in its eternal history.

Celestial evidence

The unlikeness of Truth, - named error, - the opposite of Science, and
the evidence before the five corporeal senses, afford no indication of
the grand facts of being; even as these so-called senses receive no
intimation of the earth's motions or of the science of astronomy, but
yield assent to astronomical propositions on the authority of natural
science. The facts of divine Science should be admitted, although the
evidence as to these facts is not supported by evil, by matter, or by
material sense,--because the evidence that God and man coexist is fully
sustained by spiritual sense. Man is, and forever has been, God's
reflection. God is infinite, therefore ever present, and there is no
other power nor presence. Hence the spirituality of the universe is the
only fact of creation. "Let God be true, but every \[material\] man a
liar."

The test of experience

Question.--Are doctrines and creeds a benefit to man? Answer.--The
author subscribed to an orthodox creed in early youth, and tried to
adhere to it until she caught the first gleam of that which interprets
God as above mortal sense. This view rebuked human beliefs, and gave the
spiritual import, expressed through Science, of all that proceeds from
the divine Mind. Since then her highest creed has been divine Science,
which, reduced to human apprehension, she has named Christian Science.
This Science

<span id="pg_472">p. 472</span>

teaches man that God is the only Life, and that this Life is Truth and
Love; that God is to be understood, adored, and demonstrated; that
divine Truth casts out suppositional error and heals the sick.

God's law destroys evil

The way which leads to Christian Science is straight and narrow. God has
set His signet upon Science, making it coordinate with all that is real
and only with that which is harmonious and eternal. Sickness, sin, and
death, being inharmonious, do not originate in God nor belong to His
government. His law, rightly understood, destroys them. Jesus furnished
proofs of these statements.

Evanescent materiality

Question.--What is error? Answer.--Error is a supposition that pleasure
and pain, that intelligence, substance, life, are existent in matter.
Error is neither Mind nor one of Mind's faculties. Error is the
contradiction of Truth. Error is a belief without understanding. Error
is unreal because untrue. It is that which seemeth to be and is not. If
error were true, its truth would be error, and we should have a
self-evident absurdity--namely, erroneous truth. Thus we should continue
to lose the standard of Truth.

Unrealities that seem real

Question.--Is there no sin? Answer. - All reality is in God and His
creation, harmonious and eternal. That which He creates is good, and He
makes all that is made. Therefore the only reality of sin, sickness, or
death is the awful fact that unrealities seem real to human, erring
belief, until God strips off their disguise. They are not true, because
they are not of God. We learn in Christian

<span id="pg_473">p. 473</span>

Science that all inharmony of mortal mind or body is illusion,
possessing neither reality nor identity though seeming to be real and
identical.

Christ the ideal Truth

The Science of Mind disposes of all evil. Truth, God, is not the father
of error. Sin, sickness, and death are to be classified as effects of
error. Christ came to destroy the belief of sin. The Godprinciple is
omnipresent and omnipotent. God is everywhere, and nothing apart from
Him is present or has power. Christ is the ideal Truth, that comes to
heal sickness and sin through Christian Science, and attributes all
power to God. Jesus is the name of the man who, more than all other men,
has presented Christ, the true idea of God, healing the sick and the
sinning and destroying the power of death. Jesus is the human man, and
Christ is the divine idea; hence the duality of Jesus the Christ.

Jesus not God

In an age of ecclesiastical despotism, Jesus introduced the teaching and
practice of Christianity, affording the proof of Christianity's truth
and love; but to reach his example and to test its unerring Sci- ence
according to his rule, healing sickness, sin, and death, a better
understanding of God as divine Principle, Love, rather than personality
or the man Jesus, is required.

Jesus not understood

Jesus established what he said by demonstration, thus making his acts of
higher importance than his words. He proved what he taught. This is the
Science of Christianity. Jesus proved the Principle, which heals the
sick and casts out error, to be divine. Few, however, except his
students understood in the least his teachings and their glorious

<span id="pg_474">p. 474</span>

proofs, - namely, that Life, Truth, and Love (the Principle of this
unacknowledged Science) destroy all error, evil, disease, and death.

Miracles rejected

The reception accorded to Truth in the early Christian era is repeated
to-day. Whoever introduces the Science of Christianity will be scoffed
at and scourged with worse cords than those which cut the flesh. To the
ignorant age in which it first appears, Science seems to be a
mistake,--hence the misinterpretation and consequent maltreatment which
it receives. Christian marvels (and marvel is the simple meaning of the
Greek word rendered miracle in the New Testament) will be misunderstood
and misused by many, until the glorious Principle of these marvels is
gained.

Divine fulfilment

If sin, sickness, and death are as real as Life, Truth, and Love, then
they must all be from the same source; God must be their author. Now
Jesus came to destroy sin, sickness, and death yet the Scriptures aver,
"I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil." Is it possible, then, to
believe that the evils which Jesus lived to destroy are real or the
offspring of the divine will?

Truth destroys falsity

Despite the hallowing influence of Truth in the destruction of error,
must error still be immortal? Truth spares all that is true. If evil is
real, Truth must make it so; but error, not Truth, is the author of the
unreal, and the unreal vanishes, while all that is real is eternal. The
apostle says that the mission of Christ is to "destroy the works of the
devil." Truth destroys falsity and error, for light and darkness cannot
dwell together. Light extinguishes the

<span id="pg_475">p. 475</span>

darkness, and the Scripture declares that there is "no night there." To
Truth there is no error,--all is Truth. To infinite Spirit there is no
matter,--all is Spirit, divine Principle and its idea.

Fleshly factors unreal

Question.--What is man? Answer.--Man is not matter; he is not made up of
brain, blood, bones, and other material elements. The Scriptures inform
us that man is made in the image and likeness of God. Matter is not that
likeness. The likeness of Spirit cannot be so unlike Spirit. Man is
spiritual and perfect; and because he is spiritual and perfect, he must
be so understood in Christian Science. Man is idea, the image, of Love;
lie is not physique. He is the compound idea of God, including all right
ideas; the generic term for all that reflects God's image and likeness;
the conscious identity of being as found in Science, in which man is the
reflection of God, or Mind, and therefore is eternal; that which has no
separate mind from God; that which has not a single quality underived
from Deity; that which possesses no life, intelligence, nor creative
power of his own, but reflects spiritually all that belongs to his
Maker.

And God said: "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the
air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth."

Man unfallen

Man is incapable of sin, sickness, and death. The real man cannot depart
from holiness, nor can God, by whom man is evolved, engender the
capacity or freedom to sin. A mortal sinner is not

<span id="pg_476">p. 476</span>

God's man. Mortals are the counterfeits of immortals. They are the
children of the wicked one, or the one evil, which declares that man
begins in dust or as a material embryo. In divine Science, God and the
real man are inseparable as divine Principle and idea.

Mortals are not immortals

Error, urged to its final limits, is self-destroyed. Error will cease to
claim that soul is in body, that life and intelligence are in matter,
and that this matter is man. God is the Principle of man, and man is the
idea of God. Hence man is not mortal nor material. Mortals will
disappear, and immortals, or the children of God, will appear as the
only and eternal verities of man. Mortals are not fallen children of
God. They never had a perfect state of being, which may subsequently be
regained. They were, from the beginning of mortal history, "conceived in
sin and brought forth in iniquity." Mortality is finally swallowed up in
immortality. Sin, sickness, and death must disappear to give place to
the facts which belong to immortal man.

Imperishable identity

Learn this, O mortal, and earnestly seek the spiritual status of man,
which is outside of all material selfhood. Remember that the Scriptures
say of mortal man: "As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of
the field, so he flourisheth. For the wind passeth over it, and it is
gone; and the place thereof shall know it no more."

The kingdom within

When speaking of God's children, not the children of men, Jesus said,
"The kingdom of God is within you;" that is, Truth and Love reign in the
real man, showing that man in God's image is unfallen and eternal. Jesus
beheld in Science the per

<span id="pg_477">p. 477</span>

fect man, who appeared to him where sinning mortal man appears to
mortals. In this perfect man the Saviour saw God's own likeness, and
this correct view of man healed the sick. Thus Jesus taught that the
kingdom of God is intact, universal, and that man is pure and holy. Man
is not a material habitation for Soul; he is himself spiritual. Soul,
being Spirit, is seen in nothing imperfect nor material.

Material body never God's idea

Whatever is material is mortal. To the five corporeal senses, man
appears to be matter and mind united; but Christian Science reveals man
as the idea of God, and declares the corporeal senses to be mortal and
erring illusions. Divine Science shows it to be impossible that a
material body, though interwoven with matter's highest stratum, misnamed
mind, should be man,--the genuine and perfect man, the immortal idea of
being, indestructible and eternal. Were it otherwise, man would be
annihilated.

Reflection of Spirit

Question.--What are body and Soul? Answer. - Identity is the reflection
of Spirit, the reflection in multifarious forms of the living Principle,
Love. Soul is the substance, Life, and intelligence of man, which is
individualized, but not in matter. Soul can never reflect anything
inferior to Spirit.

Man inseparable from Spirit

Man is the expression of Soul. The Indians caught some glimpses of the
underlying reality, when they called a certain beautiful lake "the smile
of the Great Spirit." Separated from man, who expresses Soul, Spirit
would be a nonentity; man, divorced from Spirit, would lose his entity.
But there is,

<span id="pg_478">p. 478</span>

there can be, no such division, for man is coexistent with God.

A vacant domicile

What evidence of Soul or of immortality have you within mortality? Even
according to the teachings of natural science, man has never beheld
Spirit or Soul leaving a body or entering it. What basis is there for
the theory of indwelling spirit, except the claim of mortal belief? What
would be thought of the declaration that a house was inhabited, and by a
certain class of persons, when no such persons were ever seen to go into
the house or to come out of it, nor were they even visible through the
windows? Who can see a soul in the body?

Harmonious functions

Question.--Does brain think, and do nerves feel, and is there
intelligence in matter? Answer.--No, not if God is true and mortal man a
liar. The assertion that there can be pain or pleasure in matter is
erroneous. That body is most harmonious in which the discharge of the
natural functions is least noticeable. How can intelligence dwell in
matter when matter is non-intelligent and brain-lobes cannot think?
Matter cannot perform the functions of Mind. Error says, "I am man;" but
this belief is mortal and far from actual. From beginning to end,
whatever is mortal is composed of material human beliefs and of nothing
else. That only is real which reflects God. St. Paul said, "But when it
pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me by
His grace, . . . I conferred not with flesh and blood."

Immortal birthright

Mortal man is really a self-contradictory phrase, for man is not mortal,
"neither indeed can be;" man is im

<span id="pg_479">p. 479</span>

mortal. If a child is the offspring of physical sense and not of Soul,
the child must have a material, not a spiritual origin. With what truth,
then, could the Scriptural rejoicing be uttered by any mother, "I have
gotten a man from the Lord"? On the contrary, if aught comes from God,
it cannot be mortal and material; it must be immortal and spiritual.

Matter's supposed selfhood

Matter is neither self-existent nor a product of Spirit. An image of
mortal thought, reflected on the retina, is all that the eye beholds.
Matter cannot see, feel, hear, taste, nor smell. It is not
selfcognizant,--cannot feel itself, see itself, nor understand itself.
Take away so-called mortal mind, which constitutes matter's supposed
selfhood, and matter can take no cognizance of matter. Does that which
we call dead ever see, hear, feel, or use any of the physical senses?

Chaos and darkness

"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth
was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep."
(Genesis i. 1, 2.) In the vast forever, in the Science and truth of
being, the only facts are Spirit and its innumerable creations. Darkness
and chaos are the imaginary opposites of light, understanding, and
eternal harmony, and they are the elements of nothingness.

Spiritual reflection

We admit that black is not a color, because it reflects no light. So
evil should be denied identity or power, because it has none of the
divine hues. Paul says: "For the invisible things of Him, from the
creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made." (Romans i. 20.)

<span id="pg_480">p. 480</span>

When the substance of Spirit appears in Christian Science, the
nothingness of matter is recognized. Where the spirit of God is, and
there is no place where God is not, evil becomes nothing, - the opposite
of the something of Spirit. If there is no spiritual reflection, then
there remains only the darkness of vacuity and not a trace of heavenly
tints.

Harmony from Spirit

Nerves are an element of the belief that there is sensation in matter,
whereas matter is devoid of sensation. Consciousness, as well as action,
is governed by Mind, - is in God, the origin and governor of all that
Science reveals. Material sense has its realm apart from Science in the
unreal. Harmonious action proceeds from Spirit, God. inharmony has no
Principle; its action is erroneous and presupposes man to be in matter.
Inharmony would make matter the cause as well as the effect of
intelligence, or Soul, thus attempting to separate Mind from God.

Evil non-existent

Man is not God, and God is not man. Again, God, or good, never made man
capable of sin. It is the opposite of good--that is, evil--which seems
to make men capable of wrong-doing. Hence, evil is but an illusion, and
it has no real basis. Evil is a false belief. God is not its author. The
supposititious parent of evil is a lie.

Vapor and nothingness

The Bible declares: "All things were made by Him \[the divine Word\];
and without Him was not anything, made that was made." This is the
eternal verity of divine Science. If sin, sickness, death were
understood as nothingness, they would disappear. As vapor melts before
the sun, so evil would vanish before the reality of good. One must hide
the

<span id="pg_481">p. 481</span>

other. How important, then, to choose good as the reality! Man is
tributary to God, Spirit, and to nothing else. God's being is infinity,
freedom, harmony, and boundless bliss. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty." Like the archpriests of yore, man is free "to enter
into the holiest,"--the realm of God.

The fruit forbidden

Material sense never helps mortals to understand Spirit, God. Through
spiritual sense only, man comprehends and loves Deity. The various con-
tradictions of the Science of Mind by the material senses do not change
the unseen Truth, which remains forever intact. The forbidden fruit of
knowledge, against which wisdom warns man, is the testimony of error,
declaring existence to be at the mercy of death, and good and evil to be
capable of commingling. This is the significance of the Scripture
concerning this "tree of the knowledge of good and evil,"--this growth
of material belief, of which it is said: "In the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shalt surely die." Human hypotheses first assume the
reality of sickness, sin, and death, and then assume the necessity of
these evils because of their admitted actuality. These human verdicts
are the procurers of all discord.

Sense and pure Soul

If Soul sins, it must be mortal. Sin has the elements of
self-destruction. It cannot sustain itself. If sin is supported, God
must uphold it, and this is impossible, since Truth cannot support
error. Soul is the divine Principle of man and never sins, hence the
immortality of Soul. In Science we learn that it is material sense, not
Soul, which sins; and it will be found that it is the sense of sin which
is lost, and not a sinful soul. When reading the Scriptures, the
substitu

<span id="pg_482">p. 482</span>

tion of the word sense for soul gives the exact meaning in a majority of
cases.

Soul defined

Human thought has adulterated the meaning of the word soul through the
hypothesis that soul is both an evil and a good intelligence, resident
in matter. The proper use of the word soul can always be gained by
substituting the word God, where the deific meaning is required. In
other cases, use the word sense, and you will have the scientific
signification. As used in Christian Science, Soul is properly the
synonym of Spirit, or God; but out of Science, soul is identical with
sense, with material sensation.

Sonship of Jesus

Question. - Is it important to understand these explanations in order to
heal the sick? Answer.--It is, since Christ is "the way" and the truth
casting out all error. Jesus called himself "the Son of man," but not
the son of Joseph. As woman is but a species of the genera, he was
literally the Son of Man. Jesus was the highest human concept of the
perfect man. He was inseparable from Christ, the Messiah,--the divine
idea of God outside the flesh. This enabled Jesus to demonstrate his
control over matter. Angels announced to the Wisemen of old this dual
appearing, and angels whisper it, through faith, to the hungering heart
in every age.

Sickness erroneous

Sickness is part of the error which Truth casts out. Error will not
expel error. Christian Science is the law of Truth, which heals the
sick, on the basis of the one Mind or God. It can heal in no other way,
since the human, mortal mind so-called is not a healer, but causes the
belief in disease.

<span id="pg_483">p. 483</span>

True healing transcendent

Then comes the question, how do drugs, hygiene, and animal magnetism
heal? It may be affirmed that they do not heal, but only relieve
suffering temporarily, exchanging one disease for another. We classify
disease as error, which nothing but Truth or Mind can heal, and this
Mind must be divine, not human. Mind transcends all other power, and
will ultimately supersede all other means in healing. In order to heal
by Science, you must not be ignorant of the moral and spiritual demands
of Science nor disobey them. Moral ignorance or sin affects your
demonstration, and hinders its approach to the standard in Christian
Science.

Terms adopted by the author

After the author's sacred discovery, she affixed the name "Science" to
Christianity, the name "error" to corporeal sense, and the name
"substance" to Mind. Science has called the world to battle over this
issue and its demonstration, which heals the sick, destroys error, and
reveals the universal harmony. To those natural Christian Scientists,
the ancient worthies, and to Christ Jesus, God certainly revealed the
spirit of Christian Science, if not the absolute letter.

Science the way

Because the Science of Mind seems to bring into dishonor the ordinary
scientific schools, which wrestle with material observations alone, this
Science has met with opposition; but if any system honors God, it ought
to receive aid, not opposition, from all thinking persons. And Christian
Science does honor God as no other theory honors Him, and it does this
in the way of His appointing, by doing many wonderful works through the
divine name and nature. One must fulfil one's mission without timidity
or dissimulation, for to be well done, the work must be done
unselfishly. Christianity

<span id="pg_484">p. 484</span>

will never be based on a divine Principle and so found to be unerring,
until its absolute Science is reached. When this is accomplished,
neither pride, prejudice, bigotry, nor envy can wash away its
foundation, for it is built upon the rock, Christ.

Mindless methods

Question.--Does Christian Science, or metaphysical healing, include
medication, material hygiene, mesmerism, hypnotism, theosophy, or
spiritualism? Answer. - Not one of them is included in it. In divine
Science, the supposed laws of matter yield to the law of Mind. What are
termed natural science and material laws are the objective states of
mortal mind. The physical universe expresses the conscious and
unconscious thoughts of mortals. Physical force and mortal mind are one.
Drugs and hygiene oppose the supremacy of the divine Mind. Drugs and
inert matter are unconscious, mindless. Certain results, supposed to
proceed from drugs, are really caused by the faith in them which the
false human consciousness is educated to feel.

Animal magnetism error

Mesmerism is mortal, material illusion. Animal magnetism is the
voluntary or involuntary action of error in all its forms; it is the
human antipode of divine Science. Science must triumph over material
sense, and Truth over error, thus putting an end to the hypotheses
involved in all false theories and practices.

Error only ephemeral

Question. - Is materiality the concomitant of spirituality, and is
material sense a necessary preliminary to the understanding and
expression of Spirit?

<span id="pg_485">p. 485</span>

Answer.--If error is necessary to define or to reveal Truth, the answer
is yes; but not otherwise. Material sense is an absurd phrase, for
matter has no sensation. Science declares that Mind, not matter, sees,
hears, feels, speaks. Whatever contradicts this statement is the false
sense, which ever betrays mortals into sickness, sin, and death. If the
unimportant and evil appear, only soon to disappear because of their
uselessness or their iniquity, then these ephemeral views of error ought
to be obliterated by Truth. Why malign Christian Science for instructing
mortals how to make sin, disease, and death appear more and more unreal?

Scientific translations

Emerge gently from matter into Spirit. Think not to thwart the spiritual
ultimate of all things, but come naturally into Spirit through better
health and morals and as the result of spiritual growth. Not death, but
the understanding of Life, makes man immortal. The belief that life can
be in matter or soul in body, and that man springs from dust or from an
egg, is the result of the mortal error which Christ, or Truth, destroys
by fulfilling the spiritual law of being, in which man is perfect, even
as the "Father which is in heaven is perfect." If thought yields its
dominion to other ' powers, it cannot outline on the body its own
beautiful images, but it effaces them and delineates foreign agents,
called disease and sin.

Material beliefs

The heathen gods of mythology controlled war and agriculture as much as
nerves control sensation or muscles measure strength. To say that
strength is in matter, is like saying that the power is in the lever.
The notion of any life or intelli

<span id="pg_486">p. 486</span>

gence in matter is without foundation in fact, and you can have no faith
in falsehood when you have learned falsehood's true nature.

Sense versus Soul

Suppose one accident happens to the eye, another to the ear, and so on,
until every corporeal sense is quenched. What is man's remedy? To die,
that he may regain these senses? Even then he must gain spiritual
understanding and spiritual sense in order to possess immortal
consciousness. Earth's preparatory school must be improved to the
utmost. In reality man never dies. The belief that he dies will not
establish his scientific harmony. Death is not the result of Truth but
of error, and one error will not correct another.

Death an error

Jesus proved by the prints of the nails, that his body was the same
immediately after death as before. If death restores sight, sound, and
strength to man, then death is not an enemy but a better friend than
Life. Alas for the blindness of belief, which makes harmony conditional
upon death and matter, and yet supposes Mind unable to produce harmony!
So long as this error of belief remains, mortals will continue mortal in
belief and subject to chance and change.

Permanent sensibility

Sight, hearing, all the spiritual senses of man, are eternal. They
cannot be lost. Their reality and immortality are in Spirit and
understanding, not in matter,--hence their permanence. If this were not
so, man would be speedily annihilated. If the five corporeal senses were
the medium through which to understand God, then palsy, blindness, and
deafness would place man in a terrible situation, where he would be like
those "having no hope, and without God in the world;" but as a matter of
fact, these calamities often

<span id="pg_487">p. 487</span>

drive mortals to seek and to find a higher sense of happiness and
existence.

Exercise of Mind-faculties

Life is deathless. Life is the origin and ultimate of man, never
attainable through death, but gained by walking in the pathway of Truth
both before and after that which is called death. There is more
Christianity in seeing and hearing spiritually than materially. There is
more Science in the perpetual exercise of the Mind-faculties than in
their loss. Lost they cannot be, while Mind remains. The apprehension of
this gave sight to the blind and hearing to the deaf centuries ago, and
it will repeat the wonder.

Understanding versus belief

Question.--You speak of belief. Who or what is it that believes?
Answer.--Spirit is all-knowing; this precludes the need of believing.
Matter cannot believe, and Mind understands. The body cannot believe.
The believer and belief are one and are mortal. Christian evidence is
founded on Science or demonstrable Truth, flowing from immortal Mind,
and there is in reality no such thing as mortal mind. Mere belief is
blindness without Principle from which to explain the reason of its
hope. The belief that life is sentient and intelligent matter is
erroneous.

The Apostle James said, "Show me thy faith without thy works, and I will
show thee my faith by my works." The understanding that Life is God,
Spirit, lengthens our days by strengthening our trust in the deathless
reality of Life, its almightiness and immortality.

Confirmation by healing

This faith relies upon an understood Principle. This Principle makes
whole the diseased, and brings out the

<span id="pg_488">p. 488</span>

enduring and harmonious phases of things. The result of our teachings is
their sufficient confirmation. When, on the strength of these
instructions, you are able to banish a severe malady, the cure shows
that you understand this teaching, and therefore you receive the
blessing of Truth.

Belief and firm trust

The Hebrew and Greek words often translated belief differ somewhat in
meaning from that conveyed by the English verb believe; they have more
the significance of faith, understanding, trust, constancy, firmness.
Hence the Scriptures often appear in our common version to approve and
endorse belief, when they mean to enforce the necessity of
understanding.

All faculties from Mind

Question.--Do the five corporeal senses constitute man?
Answer.--Christian Science sustains with immortal proof the
impossibility of any material sense, and defines these so-called senses
as mortal beliefs, the testimony of which cannot be true either of man
or of his Maker. The corporeal senses can take no cognizance of
spiritual reality and immortality. Nerves have no more sensation, apart
from what belief bestows upon them, than the fibres of a plant. Mind
alone possesses all faculties, perception, and comprehension. Therefore
mental endowments are not at the mercy of organization and
decomposition,--otherwise the very worms could unfashion man. If it were
possible for the real senses of man to be injured, Soul could reproduce
them in all their perfection; but they cannot be disturbed nor
destroyed, since they exist in immortal Mind, not in matter.

<span id="pg_489">p. 489</span>

Possibilities of Life

The less mind there is manifested in matter the better. When the
unthinking lobster loses its claw, the claw grows again. If the Science
of Life were understood, it would be found that the senses of Mind are
never lost and that matter has no sensation. Then the human limb would
be replaced as readily as the lobster's claw,--not with an artificial
limb, but with the genuine one. Any hypothesis which supposes life to be
in matter is an educated belief. In infancy this belief is not equal to
guiding the hand to the mouth; and as consciousness develops, this
belief goes out,--yields to the reality of everlasting Life.

Decalogue disregarded

Corporeal sense defrauds and lies; it breaks all the commands of the
Mosaic Decalogue to meet its own demands. How then can this sense be the
Godgiven channel to man of divine blessings or understanding? How can
man, reflecting God, be dependent on material means for knowing,
hearing, seeing? Who dares to say that the senses of man can be at one
time the medium for sinning against God, at another the medium for
obeying God? An affirmative reply would contradict the Scripture, for
the same fountain sendeth not forth sweet waters and bitter.

Organic construction valueless

The corporeal senses are the only source of evil or error. Christian
Science shows them to be false, because matter has no sensation, and no
organic construction can give it hearing and sight nor make it the
medium of Mind. Outside the material sense of things, all is harmony. A
wrong sense of God, man, and creation is non-sense, want of sense.
Mortal belief would have the material senses sometimes good and
sometimes bad. It assures mortals that there

<span id="pg_490">p. 490</span>

is real pleasure in sin; but the grand truths of Christian Science
dispute this error.

Will-power an animal propensity

Will-power is but a product of belief, and this belief commits
depredations on harmony. Human will is an animal propensity, not a
faculty of Soul. Hence it cannot govern man aright. Christian Science
reveals Truth and Love as the motive-powers of man. Will - blind,
stubborn, and headlong--cooperates with appetite and passion. From this
cooperation arises its evil. From this also comes its powerlessness,
since all power belongs to God, good.

Theories helpless

The Science of Mind needs to be understood. Until it is understood,
mortals are more or less deprived of Truth. Human theories are helpless
to make man harmonious or immortal, since he is so already, according to
Christian Science. Our only need is to know this and reduce to practice
the real man's divine Principle, Love

True nature and origin

"Quench not the Spirit. Despise not prophesyings." Human belief--or
knowledge gained from the so-called material senses - would, by fair
logic, annihilate man along with the dissolving elements of clay. The
scientifically Christian explanations of the nature and origin of man
destroy all material sense with immortal testimony. This immortal
testimony ushers in the spiritual sense of being, which can be obtained
in no other way.

Sleep an illusion

Sleep and mesmerism explain the mythical nature of material sense. Sleep
shows material sense as either oblivion, nothingness, or an illusion or
dream. Under the mesmeric illusion of belief, a man will think that he
is freezing when he is warm, and that he

<span id="pg_491">p. 491</span>

is swimming when he is on dry land. Needle-thrusts will not hurt him. A
delicious perfume will seem intolerable. Animal magnetism thus uncovers
material sense, and shows it to be a belief without actual foundation or
validity. Change the belief, and the sensation changes. Destroy the
belief, and the sensation disappears.

Man linked with Spirit

Material man is made up of involuntary and voluntary error, of a
negative right and a positive wrong, the latter calling itself right.
Man's spiritual individuality is never wrong. It is the likeness of
man's Maker. Matter cannot connect mortals with the true origin and
facts of being, in which all must end. It is only by acknowledging the
supremacy of Spirit, which annuls the claims of matter, that mortals can
lay off mortality and find the indissoluble spiritual link which
establishes man forever in the divine likeness, inseparable from his
creator.

Material man as a dream

The belief that matter and mind are one, - that matter is awake at one
time and asleep at another, sometimes presenting no appearance of mind,
this belief culminates in another belief, that man dies. Science reveals
material man as never the real being. The dream or belief goes on,
whether our eyes are closed or open. In sleep, memory and consciousness
are lost from the body, and they wander whither they will apparently
with their own separate embodiment. Personality is not the individuality
of man. A wicked man may have an attractive personality.

Spiritual existence the one fact

When we are awake, we dream of the pains and pleasures of matter. Who
will say, even though he does not understand Christian Science, that
this dream--rather than the dreamer--may not be mortal man? Who can
rationally say otherwise,

<span id="pg_492">p. 492</span>

when the dream leaves mortal man intact in body and thought, although
the so-called dreamer is unconscious? For right reasoning there should
be but one fact before the thought, namely, spiritual existence. In
reality there is no other existence, since Life cannot be united to its
unlikeness, mortality.

Mind one and all

Being is holiness, harmony, immortality. It is already proved that a
knowledge of this, even in small degree, will uplift the physical and
moral standard of mortals, will increase longevity, will purify and
elevate character. Thus progress will finally destroy all error, and
bring immortality to light. We know that a statement proved to be good
must be correct. New thoughts are constantly obtaining the floor. These
two contradictory theories--that matter is something, or that all is
Mind--will dispute the ground, until one is acknowledged to be the
victor. Discussing his campaign, General Grant said: "I propose to fight
it out on this line, if it takes all summer." Science says: All is Mind
and Mind's idea. You must fight it out on this line. Matter can afford
you no aid.

Scientific ultimatum

The notion that mind and matter commingle in the human illusion as to
sin, sickness, and death must eventually submit to the Science of Mind,
which denies this notion. God is Mind, and God is infinite; hence all is
Mind. On this statement rests the Science of being, and the Principle of
this Science is divine, demonstrating harmony and immortality.

Victory for Truth

The conservative theory, long believed, is that there are two factors,
matter and mind, uniting on some impossible basis. This theory would
keep truth and error always at war. Victory would perch on neither
banner.

<span id="pg_493">p. 493</span>

On the other hand, Christian Science speedily shows Truth to be
triumphant. To corporeal sense, the sun appears to rise and set, and the
earth to stand still; but astronomical science contradicts this, and
explains the solar system as working on a different plan. All the
evidence of physical sense and all the knowledge obtained from physical
sense must yield to Science, to the immortal truth of all things.

Mental preparation

Question,--Will you explain sickness and show how it is to be healed?
Answer. - The method of Christian Science Mind-healing is touched upon
in a previous chapter entitled Christian Science Practice. A full answer
to the above question involves teaching, which enables the healer to
demonstrate and prove for himself the Principle and rule of Christian
Science or metaphysical healing.

Mind destroys all ills

Mind must be found superior to all the beliefs of the five corporeal
senses, and able to destroy all ills. Sickness is a belief, which must
be annihilated by the divine Mind. Disease is an experience of so-called
mortal mind. It is fear made manifest on the body. Christian Science
takes away this physical sense of discord, just as it removes any other
sense of moral or mental inharmony. That man is material, and that
matter suffers,--these propositions can only seem real and natural in
illusion. Any sense of soul in matter is not the reality of being. If
Jesus awakened Lazarus from the dream, illusion, of death, this proved
that the Christ could improve on a false sense. Who dares to doubt this
consummate test of the power and willingness of divine Mind to hold man
forever

<span id="pg_494">p. 494</span>

intact in his perfect state, and to govern man's entire action? Jesus
said: "Destroy this temple \[body\], and in three days I \[Mind\] will
raise it up;" and he did this for tired humanity's reassurance.

Inexhaustible divine Love

Is it not a species of infidelity to believe that so great a work as the
Messiah's was done for himself or for God, who needed no help from
Jesus' example to preserve the eternal harmony? But mortals did need
this help, and Jesus pointed the way for them. Divine Love always has
met and always will meet every human need. It is not well to imagine
that Jesus demonstrated the divine power to heal only for a select
number or for a limited period of time, since to all mankind and in
every hour, divine Love supplies all good.

Reason and Science

The miracle of grace is no miracle to Love. Jesus demonstrated the
inability of corporeality, as well as the infinite ability of Spirit,
thus helping erring human sense to flee from its own convictions and
seek safety in divine Science. Reason, rightly directed, serves to
correct the errors of corporeal sense; but sin, sickness, and death will
seem real (even as the experiences of the sleeping dream seem real)
until the Science of man's eternal harmony breaks their illusion with
the unbroken reality of scientific being.

Which of these two theories concerning man are you ready to accept? One
is the mortal testimony, changing, dying, unreal. The other is the
eternal and real evidence, bearing Truth's signet, its lap piled high
with immortal fruits.

Followers of Jesus

Our Master cast out devils (evils) and healed the sick. It should be
said of his followers also, that they cast fear and all evil out of
themselves and others and heal the sick.

<span id="pg_495">p. 495</span>

God will heal the sick through man, whenever man is governed by God.
Truth casts out error now as surely as it did nineteen centuries ago.
All of Truth is not understood; hence its healing power is not fully
demonstrated.

Destruction of all evil

If sickness is true or the idea of Truth, you cannot destroy sickness,
and it would be absurd to try. Then classify sickness and error as our
Master did, when he spoke of the sick, "whom Satan hath bound," and find
a sovereign antidote for error in the lifegiving power of Truth acting
on human belief, a power which opens the prison doors to such as are
bound, and sets the captive free physically and morally.

Steadfast and calm trust

When the illusion of sickness or sin tempts you, cling steadfastly to
God and His idea. Allow nothing but His likeness to abide in your
thought. Let neither fear nor doubt overshadow your clear sense and calm
trust, that the recognition of life harmonious--as Life eternally
is--can destroy any painful sense of, or belief in, that which Life is
not. Let Christian Science, instead of corporeal sense, support your
understanding of being, and this understanding will supplant error with
Truth, replace mortality with immortality, and silence discord with
harmony.

Rudiments and growth

Question.--How can I progress most rapidly in the understanding of
Christian Science? Answer.--Study thoroughly the letter and imbibe the
spirit. Adhere to the divine Principle of Christian Science and follow
the behests of God, abiding steadfastly in wisdom, Truth, and Love. In
the Science of Mind, you will soon ascertain

<span id="pg_496">p. 496</span>

that error cannot destroy error. You will also learn that in Science
there is no transfer of evil suggestions from one mortal to another, for
there is but one Mind, and this ever-present omnipotent Mind is
reflected by man and governs the entire universe. You will learn that in
Christian Science the first duty is to obey God, to have one Mind, and
to love another as yourself.

Condition of progress

We all must learn that Life is God. Ask yourself: Am I living the life
that approaches the supreme good? Am I demonstrating the healing power
of Truth and Love? If so then the way will grow brighter "unto the
perfect day." Your fruits will prove what the understanding of God
brings to man. Hold perpetually this thought,--that it is the spiritual
idea, the Holy Ghost and Christ, which enables you to demonstrate, with
scientific certainty, the rule of healing, based upon its divine
Principle, Love, underlying, overlying, and encompassing all true being.

Triumph over death

"The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law,"--the
law of mortal belief, at war with the facts of immortal Life, even with
the spiritual law which says to the grave, "Where is thy victory?" But
"when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal
shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory."

Question.--Have Christian Scientists any religious creed? Answer.--They
have not, if by that term is meant doctrinal beliefs. The following is a
brief exposition of

<span id="pg_497">p. 497</span>

the important points, or religious tenets, of Christian Science: 1. As
adherents of Truth, we take the inspired Word of the Bible as our
sufficient guide to eternal Life. 2. We acknowledge and adore one
supreme and infinite God. We acknowledge His Son, one Christ; the Holy
Ghost or divine Comforter; and man in God's image and likeness. 3. We
acknowledge God's forgiveness of sin in the destruction of sin and the
spiritual understanding that casts out evil as unreal. But the belief in
sin is punished so long as the belief lasts. 4. We acknowledge Jesus'
atonement as the evidence of divine, efficacious Love, unfolding man's
unity with God through Christ Jesus the Way-shower; and we acknowledge
that man is saved through Christ, through Truth, Life, and Love as
demonstrated by the Galilean Prophet in healing the sick and overcoming
sin and death. 5. We acknowledge that the crucifixion of Jesus and his
resurrection served to uplift faith to understand eternal Life, even the
allness of Soul, Spirit, and the nothingness of matter. 6. And we
solemnly promise to watch, and pray for that Mind to be in us which was
also in Christ Jesus; to do unto others as we would have them do unto
us; and to be merciful, just, and pure.

KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES

These things saith He that is holy, He that is true, He that hath the
key of David, He that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no
man openeth; I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open
door, and no man can shut it.--REVELATION.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV - Genesis](sah15) 
