[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod04)  [Next](eod06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### CHAPTER I.

### INCENSE AND LIBATIONS. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

*The dragon was primarily a personification of the life giving and
life-destroying powers of water. This chapter is concerned with the
genesis of this biological theory of water and its relationship to the
other germs of civilization*.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is commonly assumed that many of the
elementary practices of civilization, such as the erection of rough
stone buildings, whether houses, tombs, or temples, the crafts of the
carpenter and the stonemason, the carving of statues, the customs of
pouring out libations or burning incense, are such simple and obvious
procedures that any people might adopt them without prompting or contact
of any kind with other populations who do the same sort of things. But
if such apparently commonplace acts be investigated they will be found
to have a long and complex history. None of these things that seem so
obvious to us was attempted until a multitude of diverse circumstances
became focussed in some particular community, and constrained some
individual to make the discovery. Nor did the quality of obviousness
become apparent even when the enlightened discoverer had gathered up the
threads of his predecessor's ideas and woven them into the fabric of a
new invention. For he had then to begin the strenuous fight against the
opposition of his fellows before he could induce them to accept his
discovery. He had, in fact, to contend against their preconceived ideas
and their lack of appreciation of the significance of the progress he
had made before he could persuade them of its "obviousness". That is the
history of most inventions since the world began. But it is begging the
question to pretend that because tradition has made such inventions seem
simple and obvious to us it is unnecessary to inquire into their history
or to assume that any people or any individual simply did these things
without any instruction when the spirit moved it or him so to do.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

The customs of burning incense and making libations in religious
ceremonies are so widespread and capable of being explained in such
plausible, though infinitely diverse, ways that it has seemed
unnecessary to inquire more deeply into their real origin and
significance. For example, Professor Toy <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) disposes of these questions in relation to
incense in a summary fashion. He claims that "when burnt before the
deity" it is "to be regarded as food, though in course of time, when the
recollection of this primitive character was lost, a conventional
significance was attached to the act of burning. A more refined period
demanded more refined food for the gods, such as ambrosia and nectar,
but these also were finally given up."

This, of course, is a purely gratuitous assumption, or series of
assumptions, for which there is no real evidence. Moreover, even if
there were any really early literature to justify such statements, they
explain nothing. Incense-burning is just as mysterious if Prof. Toy's
claim be granted as it was before.

But a bewildering variety of other explanations, for all of which the
merit of being "simple and obvious" is claimed, have been suggested. The
reader who is curious about these things will find a luxurious crop of
speculations by consulting a series of encyclopædias. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) I shall content myself by quoting only one
more. "Frankincense and other spices were indispensable in temples where
bloody sacrifices formed part of the religion. The atmosphere of
Solomon's temple must have been that of a sickening slaughter-house, and
the fumes of incense could alone enable the priests and worshippers to
support it. This would apply to thousands of other temples through Asia,
and doubtless the palaces of kings and nobles suffered from
uncleanliness and insanitary arrangements and required an antidote to
evil smells to make them endurable." <span id="fr_5"></span>[3](#fn_5)

It is an altogether delightful anachronism to imagine that religious
ritual in the ancient and aromatic East was inspired by such
squeamishness as a British sanitary inspector of the twentieth century
might experience!

<span id="img_fig01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 1.THE
CONVENTIONAL EGYPTIAN REPRESENTATION OF THE BURNING OF INCENSE AND THE
POURING OF LIBATIONS (Period of the New Empire)after
Lepsius](tn/fig01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig01.jpg)  
FIG. 1.—THE CONVENTIONAL EGYPTIAN REPRESENTATION OF THE BURNING OF
INCENSE AND THE POURING OF LIBATIONS (Period of the New Empire)—after
Lepsius  
</span>

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

But if there are these many diverse and mutually destructive reasons in
explanation of the origin of incense-burning, it follows that the
meaning of the practice cannot be so "simple and obvious". For scholars
in the past have been unable to agree as to the sense in which these
adjectives should be applied.

But no useful purpose would be served by enumerating a collection of
learned fallacies and exposing their contradictions when the true
explanation has been provided in the earliest body of literature that
has come down from antiquity. I refer to the Egyptian "Pyramid Texts".

Before this ancient testimony is examined certain general principles
involved in the discussion of such problems should be considered. In
this connexion it is appropriate to quote the apt remarks made, in
reference to the practice of totemism, by Professor Sollas. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) "If it is difficult to conceive how such
ideas … originated at all, it is still more difficult to understand how
they should have arisen repeatedly and have developed in much the same
way among races evolving independently in different environments. It is
at least simpler to suppose that all \[of them\] have a common source …
and may have been carried … to remote parts of the world."

I do not think that anyone who conscientiously and without bias examines
the evidence relating to incense-burning, the arbitrary details of the
ritual and the peculiar circumstances under which it is practised in
different countries, can refuse to admit that so artificial a custom
must have been dispersed throughout the world from some one centre where
it was devised.

The remarkable fact that emerges from an examination of these so-called
"obvious explanations" of ethnological phenomena is the failure on the
part of those who are responsible for them to show any adequate
appreciation of the nature of the problems to be solved. They know that
incense has been in use for a vast period of time, and that the practice
of burning it is very widespread. They have been so familiarized with
the custom and certain more or less vague excuses for its perpetuation
that they show no realization of how strangely irrational and devoid of
obvious meaning the procedure is. The reasons usually given in
explanation of its use are for the most part merely paraphrases of the
traditional meanings that in the course of

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

history have come to be attached to the ritual act or the words used to
designate it. Neither the ethnologist nor the priestly apologist will,
as a rule, admit that he does not know why such ritual acts as pouring
out water or burning incense are performed, and that they are wholly
inexplicable and meaningless to him. Nor will they confess that the real
inspiration to perform such rites is the fact of their predecessors
having handed them down as sacred acts of devotion, the meaning of which
has been entirely forgotten during the process of transmission from
antiquity. Instead of this they simply pretend that the significance of
such acts is obvious. Stripped of the glamour which religious emotion
and sophistry have woven around them, such pretended explanations become
transparent subterfuges, none the less real because the apologists are
quite innocent of any conscious intention to deceive either themselves
or their disciples. It should be sufficient for them that such ritual
acts have been handed down by tradition as right and proper things to
do. But in response to the instinctive impulse of all human beings, the
mind seeks for reasons in justification of actions of which the real
inspiration is unknown.

It is a common fallacy to suppose that men's actions are inspired mainly
by reason. The most elementary investigation of the psychology of
everyday life is sufficient to reveal the truth that man is not, as a
rule, the pre-eminently rational creature he is commonly supposed to
be. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) He is impelled to most of his acts
by his instincts, the circumstances of his personal experience, and the
conventions of the society in which he has grown up. But once he has
acted or decided upon a course of procedure he is ready with excuses in
explanation and attempted justification of his motives. In most cases
these are not the real reasons, for few human beings attempt to analyse
their motives or in fact are competent without help to understand their
own feelings and the real significance of their actions. There is
implanted in man the instinct to interpret for his own satisfaction his
feelings and sensations, *i.e.* the meaning of his experience. But of
necessity this is mostly of the nature of rationalizing, *i.e.*
providing satisfying interpretations of thoughts and decisions the real
meaning of which is hidden.

Now it must be patent that the nature of this process of rationalization
will depend largely upon the mental make-up of the individual—

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

of the body of knowledge and traditions with which his mind has become
stored in the course of his personal experience. The influences to which
he has been exposed, daily and hourly, from the time of his birth
onward, provide the specific determinants of most of his beliefs and
views. Consciously and unconsciously he imbibes certain definite ideas,
not merely of religion, morals, and politics, but of what is the correct
and what is the incorrect attitude to assume in most of the
circumstances of his daily life. These form the staple currency of his
beliefs and his conversation. Reason plays a surprisingly small part in
this process, for most human beings acquire from their fellows the
traditions of their society which relieves them of the necessity of
undue thought. The very words in which the accumulated traditions of his
community are conveyed to each individual are themselves charged with
the complex symbolism that has slowly developed during the ages, and
tinges the whole of his thoughts with their subtle and, to most men,
vaguely appreciated shades of meaning. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)
During this process of acquiring the fruits of his community's beliefs
and experiences every individual accepts without question a vast number
of apparently simple customs and ideas. He is apt to regard them as
obvious, and to assume that reason led him to accept them or be guided
by them, although when the specific question is put to him he is unable
to give their real history.

Before leaving these general considerations <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9) I want to emphasize certain elementary facts
of psychology which are often ignored by those who investigate the early
history of civilization.

First, the multitude and the complexity of the circumstances that are
necessary to lead men to make even the simplest invention render the
concatenation of all of these conditions wholly independently on a
second occasion in the highest degree improbable. Until very definite
and conclusive evidence is forthcoming in any individual case it can
safely be assumed that no ethnologically significant innovation in
customs or beliefs has ever been made twice.

Those critics who have recently attempted to dispose of this claim by
referring to the work of the Patent Office thereby display a singular

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

lack of appreciation of the real point at issue. For the ethnological.
problem is concerned with different populations who are assumed *not* to
share any common heritage of acquired knowledge, nor to have had any
contact, direct or indirect, the one with the other. But the inventors
who resort to the Patent Office are all of them persons supplied with
information from the storehouse of our common civilization; and the
inventions which they seek to protect from imitation by others are
merely developments of the heritage of all civilized peoples. Even when
similar inventions are made apparently independently under such
circumstances, in most cases they can be explained by the fact that two
investigators have followed up a line of advance which has been
determined by the development of the common body of knowledge.

This general discussion suggests another factor in the working of the
human mind.

When certain vital needs or the force of circumstances compel a. man to
embark upon a certain train of reasoning or invention the results to
which his investigations lead depend upon a great many circumstances.
Obviously the range of his knowledge and experience and the general
ideas he has acquired from his fellows will play a large part in shaping
his inferences. It is quite certain that even in the simplest problem of
primitive physics or biology his attention will be directed only to some
of, and not all, the factors involved, and that the limitations of his
knowledge will permit him to form a wholly inadequate conception even of
the few factors that have obtruded themselves upon his attention. But he
may frame a working hypothesis in explanation of the factors he had
appreciated, which may seem perfectly exhaustive and final, as well as
logical and rational to him, but to those who come after him, with a
wider knowledge of the properties of matter and the nature of living
beings, and a wholly different attitude towards such problems, the
primitive man's solution may seem merely a ludicrous travesty.

But once a tentative explanation of one group of phenomena has been made
it is the method of science no less than the common tendency of the
human mind to buttress this theory with analogies and fancied
homologies. In other words the isolated facts are built up into a
generalisation. It is important to remember that in most cases this
mental process begins very early; so that the analogies play a very
obtrusive part in the building up of theories. As a rule a multitude

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

of such influences play a part consciously or unconsciously in shaping
any belief. Hence the historian is faced with the difficulty, often
quite insuperable, of ascertaining (among scores of factors that
definitely played some part in the building up of a great
generalization) the real foundation upon which the vast edifice has been
erected. I refer to these elementary matters here for two reasons.
First, because they are so of ten overlooked by ethnologists; and
secondly, because in these pages I shall have to discuss a series of
historical events in which a bewildering number of factors played their
part. In sifting out a certain number of them, I want to make it clear
that I do not pretend to have discovered more than a small minority of
the most conspicuous threads in the complex texture of the fabric of
early human thought.

Another fact that emerges from these elementary psychological
considerations is the vital necessity of guarding against the
misunderstandings necessarily involved in the use of words. In the
course of long ages the originally simple connotation of the words used
to denote many of our ideas has become enormously enriched with a
meaning which in some degree reflects the chequered history of the
expression of human aspirations. Many writers who in discussing ancient
peoples make use of such terms, for example, as "soul," "religion," and
"gods," without stripping them of the accretions of complex symbolism
that have collected around them within more recent times, become
involved in difficulty and misunderstanding.

For example, the use of the terms "soul" or "soul-substance" in much of
the literature relating to early or relatively primitive people is
fruitful of misunderstanding. For it is quite clear from the context
that in many cases such people meant to imply nothing more than "life"
or "vital principle," the absence of which from the body for any
prolonged period means death. But to translate such a word simply as
"life" is inadequate because all of these people had some theoretical
views as to its identity with the "breath" or to its being in the nature
of a material substance or essence. It is naturally impossible to find
any one word or phrase in our own language to express the exact idea,
for among every people there are varying shades of meaning which cannot
adequately express the symbolism distinctive of each place and society.
To meet this insuperable difficulty perhaps the term "vital essence" is
open to least objection.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

In my last Rylands lecture <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) I
sketched in rough outline a tentative explanation of the world-wide
dispersal of the elements of the civilization that is now the heritage
of the world at large, and referred to the part played by Ancient Egypt
in the development of certain arts, customs, and beliefs. On the present
occasion I propose to examine certain aspects of this process of
development in greater detail, and to study the far-reaching influence
exerted by the Egyptian practice of mummification, and the ideas that
were suggested by it, in starting new trains of thought, in stimulating
the invention of arts and crafts that were unknown before then, and in
shaping the complex body of customs and beliefs that were the outcome of
these potent intellectual ferments.

In speaking of the relationship of the practice of mummification to the
development of civilization, however, I have in mind not merely the
influence it exerted upon the moulding of culture, but also the part
played by the trend of philosophy in the world at large in determining
the Egyptian's conceptions of the wider significance of embalming, and
the reaction of these effects upon the current doctrines of the meaning
of natural phenomena.

No doubt it will be asked at the outset, what possible connexion can
there be between the practice of so fantastic and gruesome an art as the
embalming of the dead and the building up of civilization? Is it
conceivable that the course of the development of the arts and crafts,
the customs and beliefs, and the social and political organizations—in
fact any of the essential elements of civilization—has been deflected a
hair's breadth to the right or left as the outcome, directly or
indirectly, of such a practice?

In previous essays and lectures <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11) I
have indicated how intimately this custom was related, not merely to the
invention of the arts and crafts of the carpenter and stonemason and all
that is implied in the building up of what Professor Lethaby has called
the "matrix of civilization," but also to the shaping of religious
beliefs and ritual practices,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

which developed in association with the evolution of the temple and the
conception of a material resurrection. I have also suggested the
far-reaching significance of an indirect influence of the practice of
mummification in the history of civilization. It was mainly responsible
for prompting the earliest great maritime expeditions of which the
history has been preserved. <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) For many
centuries the quest of resins and balsams for embalming and for use in
temple ritual, and wood for coffin-making, continued to provide the
chief motives which induced the Egyptians to undertake sea-trafficking
in the Mediterranean and the Red Sea. The knowledge and experience thus
acquired ultimately made it possible for the Egyptians and their pupils
to push their adventures further afield. It is impossible adequately to
estimate the vastness of the influence of such intercourse, not merely
in spreading abroad throughout the world the germs of our common
civilization, but also, by bringing into close contact peoples of varied
histories and traditions, in stimulating progress. Even if the practice
of mummification had exerted no other noteworthy effect in the history
of the world, this fact alone would have given it a pre-eminent place.

Another aspect of the influence of mummification I have already
discussed, and do not intend to consider further in this lecture. I
refer to the manifold ways in which it affected the history of medicine
and pharmacy. By accustoming the Egyptians, through thirty centuries, to
the idea of cutting the human corpse, it made it possible for Greek
physicians of the Ptolemaic and later ages to initiate in Alexandria the
systematic dissection of the human body which popular prejudice forbade
elsewhere, and especially in Greece itself. Upon this foundation the
knowledge of anatomy and the science of medicine has been built
up. <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13) But in many other ways the
practice of mummification exerted far-reaching effects, directly and
indirectly, upon the development of medical and pharmaceutical knowledge
and methods. <span id="fr_14"></span>[3](#fn_14)

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

There is then this *prima-facie* evidence that the Egyptian practice of
mummification was closely related to the development of architecture,
maritime trafficking, and medicine. But what I am chiefly concerned with
in the present lecture is the discussion of the much vaster part it
played in shaping the innermost beliefs of mankind and directing the
course of the religious aspirations and the scientific opinions, not
merely of the Egyptians themselves, but also of the world at large, for
many centuries afterward.

It had a profound influence upon the history of human thought. The vague
and ill-defined ideas of physiology and psychology, which had probably
been developing since Aurignacian times <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) in Europe, were suddenly crystallized into
a coherent structure and definite form by the musings of the Egyptian
embalmer. But at the same time, if the new philosophy did not find
expression in the invention of the first deities, it gave them a much
more concrete form than they had previously presented, and played a
large part in the establishment o the foundations upon which all
religious ritual was subsequently built up, and in the initiation of a
priesthood to administer the rites which were suggested by the practice
of mummification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:1](eod05.htm#fr_2) An elaboration of a Lecture
on the relationship of the Egyptian practice of mummification to the
development of civilization delivered in the John Rylands Library, on 9
February, 1916.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2:1](eod05.htm#fr_3) Introduction to the History
of Religions," p. 486.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2:2](eod05.htm#fr_4) He might start upon this
journey of adventure by reading the article on "Incense" in Hastings’
*Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics*.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[2:3](eod05.htm#fr_5) Samuel Laing, "Human
Origins," Revised by Edward Clodd, 1903, p. 38.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[3:1](eod05.htm#fr_6) "Ancient Hunters," 2nd
Edition, pp. 234 and 235.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[4:1](eod05.htm#fr_7) On this subject see Elliot
Smith and Pear, "Shell Shock and its Lessons," Manchester University
Press, 1917, p. 59.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[5:1](eod05.htm#fr_8) An interesting discussion
of this matter by the late Professor William James will be found in his
"Principles of Psychology," Vol. I, pp. 261 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[5:2](eod05.htm#fr_9) 2 For a fuller discussion
of certain phases of this matter see my address on "Primitive Man," in
the *Proceedings of the British Academy*, 1917, especially pp. 23-50.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[8:1](eod05.htm#fr_10) "The Influence of Ancient
Egyptian Civilization in the East and in America," *The Bulletin of the
John Rylands Library*, Jan.-March, 1916.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[8:2](eod05.htm#fr_11) "The Migrations of Early
Culture," 1915, Manchester University Press: "The Evolution of the
Rock-cut Tomb and the Dolmen," *Essays and Studies Presented to William
Ridgeway*, Cambridge, 1913, p. 493: "Oriental Tombs and Temples,"
*Journal of the Manchester Egyptian and Oriental Society*, 1914-1915, p.
55.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[9:1](eod05.htm#fr_12) "Ships as Evidence of the
Migrations of Early Culture," Manchester University Press, 1917, p. 37.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[9:2](eod05.htm#fr_13) "Egyptian Mummies,"
*Journal of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol. I, Part III, July, 1914, p. 189.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[9:3](eod05.htm#fr_14) Such, for example, as its
influence in the acquisition of the means of preserving the tissues of
the body, which has played so large a part in the development of the
sciences of anatomy, pathology, and in fact biology in general. The
practice of mummification was largely responsible for the attainment of
a knowledge of the properties of many drugs and especially <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> of those which restrain putrefactive changes.
But it was not merely in the acquisition of a knowledge of material
facts that mummification exerted its influence. The humoral theory of
pathology and medicine, which prevailed for so many centuries and the
effects of which are embalmed for all time in our common speech, was
closely related in its inception to the ideas which I shall discuss in
these pages. The Egyptians themselves did not profit to any appreciable
extent from the remarkable opportunities which their practice of
embalming provided for studying human anatomy. The sanctity of these
ritual acts was fatal to the employment of such opportunities to gain
knowledge. Nor was the attitude of mind of the Egyptians such as to
permit the acquisition of a real appreciation of the structure of the
body.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[10:1](eod05.htm#fr_15) See my address,
"Primitive Man," *Proc. Brit. Academy*, 1917.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Beginning of Stone-Working](eod06)
