[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod11)  [Next](eod13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

#### THE BREATH OF LIFE.

Although the pouring of libations and the burning of incense played so
prominent a part in the ritual of animating the statue or the mummy, the
most important incident in the ceremony was the "opening of the mouth,"
which was regarded as giving it the breath of life.

Elsewhere <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) I have suggested that the
conception of the heart and blood as the vehicles of life, feeling,
volition, and knowledge may have been extremely ancient. It is not known
when or under what circumstances the idea of the breath being the "life"
was first entertained. The fact that in certain primitive systems of
philosophy the breath was supposed to have something to do with the
heart suggests that these beliefs may be a constituent element of the
ancient heart-theory. In some of the rock-pictures in America,
Australia, and elsewhere the air-passages are represented leading to the
heart. But there can be little doubt that the practice of mummification
gave greater definiteness to the ideas regarding the "heart" and
"breath," which eventually led to a differentiation between their
supposed functions. <span id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_68) As the heart and
the blood were obviously present in the dead body they could no longer
be regarded as the "life". The breath was clearly the "element" the lack
of which rendered the body inanimate. It was therefore regarded as
necessary to set the heart working. The heart then came to be looked
upon as the seat of knowledge, the organ that feels and wills during
waking life. All the pulsating motions of the body seem to have been
regarded, like the act of respiration, as expressions of the vital
principle or "life," which Dutch ethnological writers refer to as "soul
substance". The neighbourhood of certain joints where the pulse can be
felt most readily, and the top of the head, where pulsation can be felt
in the infant's fontanelle, were therefore regarded by some Asiatic
peoples as the places where the substance of life could leave or enter
the body.

It is possible that in ancient times this belief was more widespread

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

than it is now. It affords an explanation of the motive for trephining
the skull among ancient peoples, to afford a more ready passage for the
"vital essence" to and from the skull.

In his lecture on "The Socratic Doctrine of the Soul," <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) Professor John Burnet has expounded the
meaning of early Greek conceptions of the soul with rare insight and
lucidity. Originally, the word ψυχή meant "breath," but, by historical
times, it had already been specialized in two distinct ways. It had come
to mean *courage* in the first place, and secondly the *breath of life*,
the presence or absence of which is the most obvious distinction between
the animate and the inanimate, the "ghost" which a man "gives up" at
death. But it may also quit the body temporarily, which explains the
phenomenon of swooning (λιποψυχία). It seemed natural to suppose it was
also the thing that can roam at large when the body is asleep, and even
appear to another sleeping person in his dream. Moreover, since we can
dream of the dead, what then appears to us must be just what leaves the
body at the moment of death. These considerations explain the world-wide
belief in the "soul" as a sort of double of the real bodily man, the
Egyptian *ka*, <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70) the Italian *genius*,
and the Greek ψυχή.

Now this double is not identical with whatever it is in us that feels
and wills during our waking life. That is generally supposed to be blood
and not breath.

What we feel and perceive have their seat in the heart: they belong to
the body and perish with it.

 

It is only when the shades have been allowed to drink blood that
consciousness returns to them for a while.

At one time the ψυχή was supposed to dwell with the body in the grave,
where it had to be supported by the offerings of the survivors,
especially by libations (χοαί).

An Egyptian psychologist has carried the story back long before the
times of which Professor Burnet writes. He has explained "his conception
of the functions of the 'heart (mind) and tongue'. 'When

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

the eyes see, the ears hear, and the nose breathes, they transmit to the
heart. It is he (the heart) who brings forth every issue and it is the
tongue which repeats the thought of the heart.'" <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71)

"There came the saying that Atum, who created the gods, stated
concerning Ptah-Tatenen: 'He is the fashioner of the gods. … He made
likenesses of their bodies to the satisfaction of their hearts. Then the
gods entered into their bodies of every wood and every stone and every
metal.'" <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72)

That these ideas are really ancient is shown by the fact that in the
Pyramid Texts Isis is represented conveying the breath of life to Osiris
by "causing a wind with her wings." <span id="fr_73"></span>[3](#fn_73)
The ceremony of opening the mouth" which aimed at achieving this
restoration of the breath of life was the principal part of the ritual
procedure before the statue or mummy. As I have already mentioned ([p.
25](eod09.htm#page_25)), the sculptor who modelled the portrait statue
was called "he who causes to live," and the word "to fashion" a statue
is identical with that which means "to give birth". The god Ptah created
man by modelling his form in clay. Similarly the life-giving sculptor
made the portrait which was to be the means of securing a perpetuation
of existence, when it was animated by the "opening of the mouth," by
libations and incense.

As the outcome of this process of rationalization in Egypt a vast crop
of creation-legends came into existence, which have persisted with
remarkable completeness until the present day in India, Indonesia,
China, America, and elsewhere. A statue of stone, wood, or clay is
fashioned, and the ceremony of animation is performed to convey to it
the breath of life, which in many places is supposed to be brought down
from the sky. <span id="fr_74"></span>[4](#fn_74)

In the Egyptian beliefs, as well as in most of the world-wide legends
that were derived from them, the idea assumed a definite form that the
vital principle (often referred to as the "soul," "soul-substance," or
"double") could exist apart from the body. Whatever

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

the explanation, it is clear that the possibility of the existence of
the vital principle apart from the body was entertained. It was supposed
that it could return to the body and temporarily reanimate it. It could
enter into and dwell within the stone representation of the deceased.
Sometimes this so-called "soul" was identified <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) with the breath of life, which could enter
into the statue as the result of the ceremony of "opening the mouth".

It has been commonly assumed by Sir Edward Tylor and those who accept
his theory of animism that the idea of the "soul" was based upon the
attempts to interpret the phenomena of dreams and shadows, to which
Burnet has referred in the passage quoted above. The fact that when a
person is sleeping he may dream of seeing absent people and of having a
variety of adventures is explained by many peoples by the hypothesis
that these are real experiences which befell the "soul" when it wandered
abroad during its owner's sleep. A man's shadow or his reflection in
water or a mirror has been interpreted as his double. But what these
speculations leave out of account is the fact that these dream- and
shadow-phenomena were probably merely the predisposing circumstances
which helped in the development of (or the corroborative details which
were added to and, by rationalization, incorporated in) the
"soul-theory," which other circumstances were responsible for
creating. <span id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76)

I have already called attention ([p. 5](eod05.htm#page_5)) to the fact
that in many of the psychological speculations in ethnology too little
account is taken of the enormous complexity of the factors which
determine even the simplest and apparently most obvious and rational
actions of men. I must again remind the reader that a vast multitude of
influences, many of them of a subconscious and emotional nature, affect
men's decisions and opinions. But once some definite state of feeling
inclines a man to a certain conclusion, he will call up a host of other
circumstances to buttress his decision, and weave them into a complex
net of rationalization. Some such process undoubtedly took place in the
development of "animism"; and though it is not possible yet to

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

reconstruct the whole history of the growth of the idea, there can be no
question that these early strivings after an understanding of the nature
of life and death, and the attempts to put the theories into practice to
reanimate the dead, provided the foundations upon which has been built
up during the last fifty centuries a vast and complex theory of the
soul. In the creation of this edifice the thoughts and the aspirations
of countless millions of peoples have played a part: but the foundation
was laid down when the Egyptian king or priest claimed that he could
restore to the dead the "breath of life" and, by means of the wand which
he called "the great magician," <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77)
could enable the dead to be born again. The wand is supposed by some
scholars <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78) to be a conventionalized
representation of the uterus, so that its power of giving birth is
expressed with literal directness. Such beliefs and stories of the
"magic wand" are found to-day in scattered localities from the Scottish
Highlands to Indonesia and America.

In this sketch I have referred merely to one or two aspects of a
conception of vast complexity. But it must be remembered that, once the
mind of man began to play with the idea of a vital essence capable of
existing apart from the body and to identify it with the breath of life,
an illimitable field was opened up for speculation. The vital principle
could manifest itself in all the varied expressions of human
personality, as well as in all the physiological indications of life.
Experience of dreams led men to believe that the "soul" could also leave
the body temporarily and enjoy varied experiences. But the
concrete-minded Egyptian demanded some physical evidence to buttress
these intangible ideas of the wandering abroad of his vital essence. He
made a statue for it to dwell in after his death, because he was not
able to make an adequately life-like reproduction of the dead man's
features upon the mummy itself or its wrappings. Then he gradually
persuaded himself that the life-substance could exist apart from the
body as a "double" or "twin" which animated the statue.

Searching for material evidence to support his faith primitive man not
unnaturally turned to the contemplation of the circumstances of his
birth. All his beliefs concerning the nature of life can ultimately be
referred back to the story of his own origin, his birth or creation.

When an infant is born it is accompanied by the after-birth or

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

placenta to which it is linked by the umbilical cord. The full
comprehension of the significance of these structures is an achievement
of modern science. To primitive man they were an incomprehensible
marvel. But once he began to play with the idea that he had a double, a
vital essence in his own shape which could leave the sleeping body and
lead a separate existence, the placenta obviously provided tangible
evidence of its reality. The considerations set forth by Blackman, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) supplementing those of Moret, Murray and
Seligman, and others, have been claimed as linking the placenta with the
*ka*.

Much controversy has waged around the interpretation of the Egyptian
word *ka*, especially during recent years. An excellent summary of the
arguments brought forward by the various disputants up to 1912 will be
found in Moret's "Mystères Égyptiens". Since then more or less
contradictory views have been put forward by Alan Gardiner, Breasted,
and Blackman. It is not my intention to intervene in a dispute as to the
meaning of certain phrases in ancient literature; but there are certain
aspects of the problems at issue which are so intimately related to my
main theme as to make some reference to them unavoidable.

The development of the custom of making statues of the dead necessarily
raised for solution the problem of explaining the deceased's two bodies,
his actual mummy and his portrait statue. During life on earth his vital
principle dwelt in the former, except on those occasions when the man
was asleep. His actual body also gave expression to all the varied
attributes of his personality. But after death the statue became the
dwelling place of these manifestations of the spirit of vitality.

Whether or not the conception arose out of the necessities unavoidably
created by the making of statues, it seems clear that this custom must
have given more concrete shape to the belief that all of those elements
of the dead man's individuality which left his body at the time of death
could shift as a shadowy double into his statue.

At the birth of a king he is accompanied by a comrade or twin exactly
reproducing all his features. This double or *ka* is intimately
associated throughout life and in the life to come with the king's
welfare.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In fact Breasted
claims that the *ka* "was a kind of superior genius intended to guide
the fortunes of the individual in the hereafter" … there "he had his
abode and awaited the coming of his earthly companion". <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) At death the deceased "goes to his *ka*,
to the sky". The *ka* controls and protects the deceased: he brings him
food which they eat together.

It is important clearly to keep in mind the different factors involved
in the conception of the *ka:*—

(*a*) The statue of the deceased is animated by restoring to it the
breath of life and all the other vital attributes of which the early
Egyptian physiologist took cognisance.

(*b*) At the time of birth there came into being along with the child a
"twin" whose destinies were closely linked with the child's.

(*c*) As the result of animating the statue the deceased also has
restored to him his character, "the sum of his attributes," his
individuality, later raised to the position of a protecting genius or
god, a Providence who watches over his well-being. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81)

The *ka* is not simply identical with the breath of life or *animus*, as
Burnet supposes (*op. cit. supra*), but has a wider significance. The
adoption of the conception of the *ka* as a sort of guardian angel which
finds its appropriate habitation in a statue that has been animated does
not necessarily conflict with the view so concretely and unmistakably
represented in the tomb-pictures that the *ka* is also a double who is
born along with the individual.

This material conception of the *ka* as a double who is born with and
closely linked to the individual is, as Blackman has emphasized, <span
id="fr_82"></span>[3](#fn_82) very suggestive of Baganda beliefs and
rites connected with the placenta. At death the circumstances of the act
of birth are reconstituted, and for this rebirth the placenta which
played an essential part in the original process is restored to the
deceased. May not the original meaning of the expression "he goes to his
*ka*" be a literal description of this reunion with his placenta? The
identification of the *ka* with the moon, the guardian of the dead man's
welfare, may have enriched the symbolism.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

Blackman makes the suggestion that "on the analogy of the beliefs
entertained by the Hamitic ruling caste in Uganda," according to Roscoe,
"the placenta, <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83) or rather its ghost,
would have been supposed by the Ancient Egyptians to be closely
connected with the individual's personality, as "he maintains was also
the case with the god or protecting genius of the Babylonians. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84) "Unless united with his twin's \[*i.e.*
his placenta's\] ghost the dead king was an imperfect deity, *i.e.* his
directing intelligence was impaired or lacking," presumably because the
placenta was composed of blood, which was regarded as the material of
consciousness and intelligence.

In China, as the quotations from de Groot (see footnote) show, the
placenta when placed under felicitous circumstances is able to ensure
the child a long life and to control his mental and physical welfare.

In view of the claims put forward by Blackman to associate the placenta
with the *ka*, it is of interest to note Moret's suggestion concerning
the fourteen forms of the *ka*, to which von Bissing assigns

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

the general significance "nourishment or offerings". He puts the
question whether they do not "personify the elements of material and
intellectual prosperity, all that is necessary for the health of body
and spirit" (*op. cit*. p. 209).

The placenta is credited with all the varieties of life-giving potency
that are attributed to the Mother-Goddess. It therefore controls the
welfare of the individual and, like all maternal amulets (*vide supra*),
ensures his good fortune. But, probably by virtue of its supposed
derivation from and intimate association with blood, it also ministered
to his mental welfare.

In my last Rylands Lecture I referred to the probability that the
essential elements of Chinese civilization were derived from the West. I
had hoped that, before the present statement went to the printer, would
have found time to set forth in detail the evidence in substantiation of
the reality of that diffusion of culture.

Briefly the chain of proof is composed of the following links: (*a*) the
intimate cultural contact between Egypt, Southern Arabia, Sumer, and
Elam from a period at least as early as the First Egyptian Dynasty;
(*b*) the diffusion of Sumerian and Elamite culture in very early times
at least as far north as Russian Turkestan and as far east as
Baluchistan; (*e*) at some later period the quest of gold, copper,
turquoise, and jade led the Babylonians (and their neighbours) as far
north as the Altai and as far east as Khotan and the Tarim Valley, where
their pathways were blazed with the distinctive methods of cultivation
and irrigation; (*d*) at some subsequent period there was an easterly
diffusion of culture from Turkestan into the Shensi Province of China
proper; and (*e*) at least as early as the seventh century B.C. there
was also a spread of Western culture to China by sea. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85)

I have already referred to some of the distinctively Egyptian traits in
Chinese beliefs concerning the dead. Mingled with them are other equally
definitely Babylonian ideas concerning the liver.

It must be apparent that in the course of the spread of a complex system
of religious beliefs to so great a distance, only certain of their
features would survive the journey. Handed on from people to people,
each of whom would unavoidably transform them to some

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

extent, the tenets of the Western beliefs would become shorn of many of
their details and have many excrescences added to them before the
Chinese received them. In the crucible of the local philosophy they
would be assimilated with Chinese ideas until the resulting compound
assumed a Chinese appearance. When these inevitable circumstances are
recalled the value of any positive evidence of Western influence is of
special significance.

According to the ancient Chinese, man has two souls, the *kwei* and the
*shen*. The former, which according to de Groot is definitely the more
ancient of the two (p. 8), is the material, substantial soul, which
emanates from the terrestrial part of the universe, and is formed of
*yin* substance. In living man it operates under the name of *p‘oh*, and
on his death it returns to the earth and abides with the deceased in his
grave.

The *shen* or immaterial soul emanates from the ethereal celestial part
of the cosmos and consists of *yang* substance. When operating actively
in the living human body, it is called *khi* or "breath," and *hwun*;
when separated from it after death it lives forth as a refulgent spirit,
styled *ming*. <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86)

But the *shen* also, in spite of its sky-affinities, hovers about the
grave and may dwell in the inscribed grave-stone (p. 6). There may be a
multitude of *shen* in one body and many "soul-tablets" may be provided
for them (p. 74).

Just as in Egypt the *ka* is said to "symbolize the force of life which
resides in nourishment" (Moret, p. 212), so the Chinese refer to the
ethereal part of the food as its *khi*, *i.e.* the "breath" of its
*shen*.

The careful study of the mass of detailed evidence so lucidly set forth
by de Groot in his great monograph reveals the fact that, in spite of
many superficial differences and apparent contradictions, the early
Chinese conceptions of the soul and its functions are essentially
identical with the Egyptian, and must have been derived from the same
source.

From the quotations which I have already given in the foregoing pages,
it appears that the Chinese entertain views regarding the functions of
the placenta which are identical with those of the Baganda, and a
conception of the souls of man which presents unmistakable analogies
with Egyptian beliefs. Yet these Chinese references do

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

not shed any clearer light than Egyptian literature does upon the
problem of the possible relationship between the *ka* and the
*placenta*.

In the Iranian domain, however, right on the overland route from the
Persian Gulf to China, there seems to be a ray of light. According to
the late Professor Moulton, "The later Parsi books tell us that the
Fravashi is a part of a good man's identity, living in heaven and
reuniting with the soul at death. It is not exactly a guardian angel,
for it shares in the development or deterioration of the rest of the
man." <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87)

In fact the Fravashi is not unlike the Egyptian *ka* on the one side and
the Chinese shen on the other. "They are the Manes, 'the good folk'" (p.
144): they are connected with the stars in their capacity as spirits of
the dead (p. 143), and they "showed their paths to the sun, the moon,
the sun, and the endless lights," just as the *kas* guide the dead in
the hereafter.

The Fravashis play a part in the annual All Soul's feast (p. 144), for
which Breasted has provided an almost exact parallel in Egypt during the
Middle Kingdom: <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88) All the
circumstances of the two ceremonies are essentially identical.

Now Professor Moulton suggests that the word Fravashi may be derived
from the Avestan root *var*, "to impregnate," and *fravaši* mean
"birth-promotion" (p. 142). As he associates this with childbirth the
possibility suggests itself whether the "birth-promoter" may not be
simply the placenta.

Loret (quoted by Moret, p. 202), however, derives the word *ka* from a
root signifying "to beget," so that the Fravashi may be nothing more
than the Iranian homologue of the Egyptian *ka*.

The connecting link between the Iranian and Egyptian conceptions may be
the Sumerian instances given to Blackman <span
id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_89) by Dr. Langdon.

The whole idea seems to have originated out of the belief that the sum
of the individual attributes or vital expressions of a man's personality
could exist apart from the physical body. The contemplation of the
phenomena of sleep and death provided the evidence in corroboration of
this.

At birth the newcomer carne into the world physically connected with the
placenta, which was accredited with the attributes of the life-giving
and birth-promoting Great Mother and intimately related

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

to the moon and the earliest totem. It was obviously, also, closely
concerned in the nutrition of the embryo, for was it not the stalk upon
which the latter was growing like some fruit on its stem? It was a not
unnatural inference to suppose that, as the elements of the personality
were not indissolubly connected with the body, they were brought into
existence at the time of birth and that the placenta was their vehicle.

The Egyptians' own terms of reference to the sculptor of a statue show
that the ideas of birth were uppermost in their minds when the custom of
statue-making was first devised. Moret has brought together (*op. cit.
supra*) a good deal of evidence to suggest the far-reaching significance
of the conception of ritual rebirth in early Egyptian religious
ceremonial. With these ideas in his mind the Egyptian would naturally
attach great importance to the placenta in any attempt to reconstruct
the act of rebirth, which would be regarded in a literal sense. The
placenta which played an essential part in the original act would have
an equally important rôle in the ritual of rebirth. \[For a further
comment upon the problem discussed in the preceding ten pages, see
Appendix A, [p. 73](eod17.htm#page_73)\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[41:1](eod12.htm#fr_67) "Primitive Man,"
*Proceedings of the British Academy*, 1917, p. 41.

It is important to remember that the real meaning of respiration was
quite unknown until modern science revealed the part played by oxygen.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[41:2](eod12.htm#fr_68) The enormous complexity
and intricacy of the interrelation between the functions of the "heart,"
and the "breath" is revealed in Chinese philosophy (see de t root, *op.
cit.* Chapter vii. *inter alia*).

<span id="fn_69"></span>[42:1](eod12.htm#fr_69) Second Annual
Philosophical Lecture, Henriette Hertz Trust, *Proceedings of the
British Academy*, Vol. VII, 26 Jan., 1916.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[42:2](eod12.htm#fr_70) The Egyptian *ka*,
however, was a more complex entity than this comparison suggests.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[43:1](eod12.htm#fr_71) Breasted, *op. cit.* pp.
44 and 45.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[43:2](eod12.htm#fr_72) *Op. cit.* pp. 45 and
46.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[43:3](eod12.htm#fr_73) *Ibid*. p. 28.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[43:4](eod12.htm#fr_74) W. J. Perry has
collected the evidence preserved in a remarkable series of Indonesian
legends in his recent book, "The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia". But
the fullest exposition of the whole subject is provided in the Chinese
literature summarized by de Groot (*op. cit.*).

<span id="fn_75"></span>[44:1](eod12.htm#fr_75) See, however, the
reservations in the subsequent pages.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[44:2](eod12.htm#fr_76) The thorough analysis of
the beliefs of any people makes this abundantly clear. De Groot's
monograph is an admirable illustration of this (*op. cit.* Chapter
vii.). Both in Egypt and China the conceptions of the significance of
the shadow are later and altogether subsidiary.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[45:1](eod12.htm#fr_77) Alan H. Gardiner, Davies
and Gardiner, *op. cit.* p. 59.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[45:2](eod12.htm#fr_78) F. Ll. Griffith, "A
Collection of Hieroglyphs," 1898, p. 60.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[46:1](eod12.htm#fr_79) Aylward M. Blackman,
"Some Remarks on an Emblem upon the Head of an Ancient Egyptian
Birth-Goddess," *Journal of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol. III, Part III,
July, 1916, p. 199; and "The Pharaoh's Placenta and the Moon-God Khons,"
*ibid*. Part IV, Oct., 1916, p. 235.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[47:1](eod12.htm#fr_80) "Religion and Thought in
Ancient Egypt," p. 52. Breasted denies that the *ka* was an element of
the personality.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[47:2](eod12.htm#fr_81) For an abstruse
discussion of this problem see Alan H. Gardiner, "Personification
(Egyptian)," Hastings’ *Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics*, pp. 790
and 792.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[47:3](eod12.htm#fr_82) *Op. cit. supra*.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[48:1](eod12.htm#fr_83) Mr. Blackman is puzzled
to explain what "possible connexion there could be between the Pharaoh's
placenta and the moon beyond the fact that it is the custom in Uganda to
expose the king's placenta each new moon and anoint it with butter.

To those readers who follow my argument in the later pages of this
discussion the reasoning at the back of this association should be plain
enough. The moon was regarded as the controller of menstruation. The
placenta (and also the child) was considered to be formed of menstrual
blood. The welfare of the placenta was therefore considered to be under
the control of the moon.

The anointing with butter is an interesting illustration of the close
connexion of these lunar and maternal phenomena with the cow.

The placenta was associated with the moon also in China, as the fol.
lowing quotation shows.

According to de Groot (*op. cit.* p. 396), "in the *Siao ’rh fang* or
Medicament for Babies, by the hand of Ts‘ui Hing-kung \[died 674 A.D.\],
it is said: 'The placenta should be stored away in a felicitous spot
under the salutary influences of the sky or the moon … in order that the
child may be ensured a long life'". He then goes on to explain how any
interference with the placenta will entail mental or physical trouble to
the child.

The placenta also is used as the ingredient of pills to increase
fertility, facilitate parturition, to bring back life to people on the
brink of death and it is the main ingredient "in medicines for lunacy,
convulsions, epilepsy, etc." (p. 397). "It gives rest to the heart,
nourishes the blood, increases the breath, and strengthens the *tsing*"
(p. 396).

These attributes of the placenta indicate that the beliefs of the
Baganda are not merely local eccentricities, but widespread and sharply
defined interpretations of the natural phenomena of birth.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[48:2](eod12.htm#fr_84) *Op. cit.* p. 241.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[49:1](eod12.htm#fr_85) See "The Origin of Early
Siberian Civilization," now being published in the *Memoirs and
Proceedings of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[50:1](eod12.htm#fr_86) De Groot, p. 5.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[51:1](eod12.htm#fr_87) *Early Religious Poetry
of Persia*, p. 145.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[51:2](eod12.htm#fr_88) *Op. cit.* p. 264.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[51:3](eod12.htm#fr_89) *Ibid*. p. 240.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Power of the Eye](eod13)
