[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod14)  [Next](eod16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE WORSHIP OF THE COW.

Intimately linked with the subjects I have been discussing is the
worship of the cow. It would lead me too far afield to enter into the
details of the process by which the earliest Mother-Goddesses became so
closely associated or even identified with the cow, and why the cow's
horns became associated with the moon among the emblems

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of Hathor. But it is essential that reference should be made to certain
aspects of the subject.

I do not think there is any evidence to justify the common theory that
the likeness of the crescent moon to a cow's horns was the reason for
the association. On the other hand, it is clear that both the moon and
the cow became identified with the Mother-Goddess quite independently
the one of the other, and at a very remote period.

It is probable that the fundamental factor in the development of this
association of the cow and the Mother-Goddess was the fact of the use of
milk as food for human beings. For if the cow could assume this maternal
function she was in fact a sort of foster-mother of mankind; and in
course of time she came to be regarded as the actual mother of the human
race and to be identified with the Great Mother.

Many other considerations helped in this process of assimilation. The
use of cattle not merely as meat for the sustenance of the living but as
the usual and most characteristic life-giving food for the dead
naturally played a part in conferring divinity upon the cow, just as an
analogous relationship made incense a holy substance and was responsible
for the personification of the incense-tree as a goddess. This influence
was still further emphasized in the case of cattle because they also
supplied the blood which was used for the ritual purpose of bestowing
consciousness upon the dead, and in course of time upon the gods also,
so that they might hear and attend to the prayers of supplicants.

Other circumstances emphasize the significance attached to the cow: but
it is difficult to decide whether they contributed in any way to the
development of these beliefs or were merely some of the practices which
were the result of the divination of the cow. The custom of placing
butter in the mouths of the dead, in Egypt, Uganda, and India, the
various ritual uses of milk, the employment of a cow's hide as a
wrapping for the dead in the grave, and also in certain mysterious
ceremonies, <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102.md) all indicate the
intimate connexion between the cow and the means of attaining a rebirth
in the life to come.

I think there are definite reasons for believing that once the cow
became identified with the Mother-Goddess as the parent of mankind

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the first step was taken in the development of the curious system of
ideas now known as "totemism".

This, however, is a complex problem which I cannot stay to discuss here.

When the cow became identified with the Great Mother and the moon was
regarded as the dwelling or the personification of the same goddess, the
Divine Cow by a process of confused syncretism came to be regarded as
the sky or the heavens, to which the dead were raised up on the cow's
back. When Re became the dominant deity, he was identified with the sky,
and the sun and moon were then regarded as his eyes. Thus the moon, as
the Great Mother as well as the Eye of Re, was the bond of
identification of the Great Mother with an eye. This was probably how,
the eye acquired the animating powers of the Giver of Life.

A whole volume might be written upon the almost world-wide diffusion of
these beliefs regarding the cow, as far as Scotland and Ireland in the
west, and in their easterly migration probably as far as America, to the
confusion alike of its ancient artists and its modern
ethnologists. <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md)

As an illustration of the identification of the cow's attributes with
those of the life-giving Great Mother, I might refer to the late
Professor Moulton's commentary <span id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_104.md) on
the ancient Iranian Gâthâs, where cow's flesh is given to mortals by
Yima to make them immortal. "May we connect it with another legend
whereby at the Regeneration Mithra is to make men immortal by giving
them to eat the fat of the … primeval Cow from whose slain body,
according to the Aryan legends adopted by Mithraism, mankind was first
created?" <span id="fr_105"></span>[3](#fn_105.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[60:1](eod15.htm#fr_102.md) See A. Moret, *op.
cit.* p. 81, *inter alia*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[61:1](eod15.htm#fr_103.md) See the Copan
sculptured monuments described by Maudslay in Godman and Salvin's
"Biologia Centrali-Americana," Archæology, Plate 46, representing "Stela
D," with two serpents in the places occupied by the Indian elephants in
Stela B—concerning which see *Nature*, November 25, 1915. To one of
these intertwined serpents is attached a cow-headed human dæmon. Compare
also the Chiriqui figure depicted [by](errata.htm#2.md) MacCurdy, "A Study
of Chiriquian Antiquities," Yale University Press, 1911, fig. 361, p.
209.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[61:2](eod15.htm#fr_104.md) "Early Religious
Poetry of Persia," pp. 42 and 43.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[61:3](eod15.htm#fr_105.md) *Op. cit.* p. 43. But
I think these legends accredited to the Aryans owe their parentage to
the same source as the Egyptian beliefs concerning the cow, and
especially the remarkable mysteries upon which Moret has been
endeavouring to throw some light—"Mystères Égyptiens," p. 43.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Diffusion of Culture](eod16.md)
