[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod18)  [Next](eod20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### APPENDIX B.

I should like to emphasize the fact that my protest (on [p.
63](eod16.htm#page_63)) was directed against the claim that the custom
of offering food and drink to the dead was inspired *primarily* to
prevent them from troubling the living. Its original purpose was to
sustain and reanimate the dead; but, of course, when its real meaning
was forgotten, it was explained in a great variety of ways by the people
who made a practice of presenting offerings to the dead without really
knowing why they did so.

Dr. Alan Gardiner himself has made a statement which casual readers
(*i.e.*, those who do not discriminate between the motive for the
invention of a procedure and the reasons subsequently given for its
continuance) might regard as a contradiction of my quotation from his
writings on [p. 62](eod16.htm#page_62). Thus he says: "Any god could
doubtless attack human beings, but savage and malicious deities, like
Seth \[Set\], the murderer of Osiris, or Sakhmet, \[Sekhet\], the 'lady
of pestilence' (*nb-t ’idw*), were doubtless most to be feared." \[This
attitude of the malignant goddesses is revealed in a most obtrusive form
in the village deities of the Dravidians of Southern India.\] "The dead
were specially to be feared; nor was it only those dead who were unhappy
or unburied that might torment the living, for the magician sometimes
warns them that their tombs are endangered" (Article "Magic (Egyptian),"
*Hastings’ Encycl. Ethics and Religion*, p. 264).

But it is important to bear in mind, as the same scholar has explained
elsewhere \["Life and Death (Egyptian)," *Hastings’ Encycl.*, p. 23\]:
"Nothing could be farther from the truth \[than the statement that 'the
funerary rites and practices of the Egyptians were in the main
precautionary measures serving to protect the living against the dead\];
it is of fundamental importance to realize that the vast stores of
wealth and thought expended by the Egyptians on their tombs—that wealth
and that thought which created not only the pyramids, but also the
practice of mummification and a very extensive funerary literature—were
due to the anxiety of each member of the community with regard to his
own individual future welfare, and not to feelings of respect, or fear,
or duty felt towards the other dead."

It was only in response to certain binding obligations that the living
observed all those costly and troublesome rules which were believed to
insure the welfare of the deceased. But this recognition of the primary
and real purpose of the food offerings as sustenance for the dead or the
gods

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

must not be allowed to blind us to the fact that there is widespread
throughout the world a real fear of the dead and ghosts, and that in
many places food-offerings are made for the specific purpose "of
appeasing the fairies".

Mr. Donald Mackenzie tells me that offerings of milk and porridge are
made at the stone monuments in Scotland, and children carry meal in
their pockets to protect themselves from the fairies. For the dead went
to Fairyland.

Beliefs of a similar kind can be collected from most parts of the world:
but the point I specially want to emphasize is that they are secondary
rationalizations of a custom which originally had an utterly different
significance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix C](eod20)
