[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod24)  [Next](eod26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE THUNDER-WEAPON. <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_202)

In the development of the dragon-story we have seen that the instruments
of destruction were of a most varied kind. Each of the three primary
deities, Hathor, Osiris and Horus can be a destructive power as well as
a giver of life and of all kinds of boons. Every homologue or surrogate
of these three deities can become a weapon for dragon-destroying, such
as the moon or the lotus of Hathor, the water

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

or the beer of Osiris, the sun or the falcon of Horus. Originally Hathor
used a flint knife or axe: then she did the execution as "the Eye of
Re," the moon, the fiery bolt from heaven: Osiris sent the destroying
flood and the intoxicating beer, each of which, like the knife, axe and
moon of Hathor, were animated by the deity. Then Horus came as the
winged disk, the falcon, the sun, the lightning and the thunderbolt. As
the dragon-story was spread abroad in the world any one of these
"weapons" was confused with any of (or all) the rest. The Eye of Re was
the fire-spitting uræus-serpent; and foreign people, like the Greeks,
Indians and others, gave the Egyptian verbal simile literal expression
and converted it into an actual Cyclopean eye planted in the forehead,
which shot out the destroying fire.

The warrior god of Babylonia is called the bright one, <span
id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_203) the sword or lightning of Ishtar, who
was herself called both the sword or lightning of heaven.

In the Ægean area also the sons of Zeus and the progeny of heaven may be
axes, stone implements, meteoric stones and thunderbolts. In a Swahili
tale the hero's weapon is "a sword like a flash of lightning".

According to Bergaigne, <span id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_204) the myth
of the celestial drink *soma*, brought down from heaven by a bird
ordinarily called *çyena*, "eagle," is parallel to that of Agni, the
celestial fire brought by Mâtariçvan. This parallelism is even expressly
stated in the Rig Veda, verse 6 of hymn 1 to Agni and Soma. Mâtariçvan
brought the one from heaven, the eagle brought the other from the
celestial mountain.

Kuhn admits that the eagle represents Indra; and Lehmann regards the
eagle who takes the fire as Agni himself. It is patent that both Indra
and Agni are in fact merely specialized forms of Horus of the Winged
Disk Saga, in one of which the warrior sun-god is represented, in the
other the living fire. The elixir of life of the Egyptian story is
represented by the soma, which by confusion is associated with the
eagle: in other words, the god Soma is the homologue not only of Osiris,
but also of Horus.

Other incidents in the same original version are confused in the Greek
story of Prometheus. He stole the fire from heaven and brought

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

it to earth: but, in place of the episode of the elixir, which is
adopted in the Indian story just mentioned, the creation of men from
clay is accredited by the Greeks to the "flaming one," the "fire eagle"
Prometheus.

The double axe was the homologue of the winged disk which fell, or
rather flew, from heaven as the tangible form of the god. This fire from
heaven inevitably came to be identified with the lightning. According to
Blinkenberg (*op. cit.*, p. 19) "many points go to prove that the
double-axe is a representation of the lightning (see Usener, p. 20)". He
refers to the design on the famous gold ring from Mycenæ where "the sun,
the moon, a double curved line presumably representing the rainbow, and
the double-axe, *i.e.* the lightning": but "the latter is placed lower
than the others, probably because it descends from heaven to earth,"
like Horus when he assumed the form of the winged disk and flew down to
earth as a fiery bolt to destroy the enemies of Re.

The recognition of the homology of the winged disk with the double axe
solves a host of problems which have puzzled classical scholars within
recent years. The form of the double axe on the Mycenæan ring <span
id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205) and the painted sarcophagus from Hagia
Triada in Crete (and especially the oblique markings upon the axe) is
probably a suggestion of the double series of feathers and the outlines
of the individual feathers respectively on the wings. The position of
the axe upon a symbolic tree is not intended, as Blinkenberg claims
(*op. cit.*, p. 21), as "a ritual representation of the trees struck by
lightning": but is the familiar scene of the Mesopotamian culture-area,
the tree of life surmounted by the winged disk. <span
id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206)

The bird poised upon the axe in the Cretan picture is the homologue of
the falcon of Horus: it is in fact a second representation of the winged
disk itself. This interpretation is not affected by the consideration
that the falcon may be replaced by the eagle, pigeon, woodpecker or
raven, for these substitutions were repeatedly made by the ancient
priesthoods in flagrant defiance of the proprieties of ornithological
homologies. The same phenomenon is displayed even more obtrusively in
Central America and Mexico, where the ancient sculptors

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

and painters represented the bird perched upon the tree of life as a
falcon, an eagle, a vulture, a macaw or even a turkey. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_207)

The incident of the winged disk descending to effect the sun-god's
purposes upon earth probably represents the earliest record of the
recognition of thunder and lightning and the phenomena of rain as
manifestations of the god's powers. All gods of thunder, lightning, rain
and clouds derive their attributes, and the arbitrary graphic
representation of them, from the legend which the Egyptian scribe has
preserved for us in the Saga of the Winged Disk.

The sacred axe of Crete is represented elsewhere as a sword which became
the visible impersonation of the deity. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[2](#fn_208) There is a Hittite story of a
sword-handle coming to life. Hose and McDougall refer to the same
incident in certain Sarawak legends; and the story is true to the
original in the fact that the sword fell from the sun. <span
id="fr_209"></span>[3](#fn_209)

Sir Arthur Evans describes as "the aniconic image of the god" a stone
pillar on which crude pictures of a double axe have been scratched.
These representations of the axe in fact serve the same purpose as the
winged disk in Egypt, and, as we shall see subsequently, there was an
actual confusion between the Egyptian symbol and the Cretan axe.

The obelisk at Abusir was the aniconic representative of the sun-god Re,
or rather, the support of the pyramidal apex, the gilded surface of
which reflected the sun's rays and so made manifest the god's presence
in the stone.

The Hittites seem to have substituted the winged disk as a
representation of the sun: for in a design copied from a seal <span
id="fr_210"></span>[4](#fn_210) we find the Egyptian symbol borne upon
the apex of a cone.

The transition from this to the great double axe from Hagia Triada in
the Candia Museum <span id="fr_211"></span>[5](#fn_211) is a relatively
easy one, which was materially helped, as we shall see, by the fact that
the winged disk was actually homologized with an axe or knife as
alternative weapons used by the sun-god for the destruction of mankind.

In Dr. Seligman's account of the Dinka rain-maker (*supra*, [p.
113](eod24.htm#page_113))

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

we have already seen that the Soudanese Osiris was identified with a
spear and falling stars.

According to Dr. Budge <span id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_212) the
Egyptian hieroglyph used as the determinative of the word *neter*,
meaning god or spirit, is the axe with a handle. Mr. Griffith, however,
interprets it as a roll of yellow cloth ("Hieroglyphics," p. 46). On
Hittite seals the axe sometimes takes the place of the god Teshub. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[2](#fn_213)

Sir Arthur Evans endeavours to explain these conceptions by a vague
appeal to certain natural phenomena (*op. cit.*, pp. 20 and 21); but the
identical traditions of widespread peoples are much too arbitrary and
specific to be interpreted by any such speculations.

Sanchoniathon's story of Baetylos being the son of Ouranos is merely a
poetical way of saying that the sun-god fell to earth in the form of a
stone or a weapon, as a Zeus Kappôtas or a Horus in the form of a winged
disk, flying down from heaven to destroy the enemies of Re.

"The idea of their \[the weapons\] flying through the air or falling
from heaven, and their supposed power of burning with inner fire or
shining in the nighttime," was not primarily suggested, as Sir Arthur
Evans claims (*op. cit.*, p. 21), "by the phenomena associated with
meteoric stones," but was a rationalization of the events described in
the early Egyptian and Babylonian stories.

They "shine at night" because the original weapon of destruction was the
moon as the Eye of Re. They "burn with inward fire," like the Babylonian
Marduk, when in the fight with the dragon Tiamat "he filled his body
with burning flame" (King, *op. cit.*, p. 71), because they *were* fire,
the fire of the sun and of lightning, the fire spat out by the Eye of
Re.

Further evidence in corroboration of these views is provided by the fact
that in the Ægean area the double-axe replaces the moon between the
cow's horns (Evans, *op. cit.*, Fig. 3, p. 9).

In King's "Babylonian Religion" (pp. 70 and 71) we are told how the gods
provided Marduk with an invincible weapon in preparation for the combat
with the dragon: and the ancient scribe himself sets forth a series of
its homologues:—

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

He made ready his bow …*  
*He slung a spear …*  
*The bow and quiver …*  
*He set the lightning in front of him,*  
*With burning flame he filled his body.

</div>

An ancient Egyptian writer has put on record further identifications of
weapons. In the 95th Chapter of the Book of the Dead, the deceased is
reported to have said: "I am he who sendeth forth terror into the powers
of rain and thunder.… I have made to flourish my knife which is in the
hand of Thoth in the powers of rain and thunder" (Budge, "Gods of the
Egyptians," vol. i., p. 414).

The identification of the winged disk with the thunderbolt which emerges
so definitely from these homologies is not altogether new, for it was
suggested some years ago by Count d’Alviella <span
id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_214) in these words:—

"On seeing some representations of the Thunderbolt which recall in a
remarkable manner the outlines of the Winged Globe, it may be asked if
it was not owing to this latter symbol that the Greeks transformed into
a winged spindle the Double Trident derived from Assyria. At any rate
the transition, or, if it be preferred, the combination of the two
symbols is met with in those coins from Northern Africa where Greek art
was most deeply impregnated with Phœnician types. Thus on coins of
Bocchus II, King of Mauretania, figures are found which M. Lajard
connected with the Winged Globe, and M. L. Müller calls Thunderbolts,
but which are really the result of crossing between these two emblems".

The thunderbolt, however, is not always, or even commonly, the direct
representative of the winged disk. It is more often derived from
lightning or some floral design. <span id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_215)

According to Count d’Alviella <span id="fr_216"></span>[3](#fn_216) "the
Trident of Siva at times exhibits the form of a lotus calyx depicted in
the Egyptian manner".

"Perhaps other transformations of the *trisula* might still be found at
Boro-Budur \[in Java\]. … The same Disk which, when transformed into a
most complicated ornament, is sometimes crowned by a Trident, is also
met with between two serpents—which brings us back to the origin of the
Winged Circle—the Globe of Egypt with the

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

uræi" (see d’Alviella's Fig. 158). "Moreover this ornament, between
which and certain forms of the *trisula* the transition is easily
traced, commonly surmounts the entrance to the pagodas depicted in the
bas-reliefs—in exactly the same manner as the Winged Globe adorns the
lintel of the temples in Egypt and Phœnicia."

Thus we find traces of a blending of the two homologous designs, derived
independently from the lotus and the winged disk, which acquired the
same symbolic significance.

The weapon of Poseidon, the so-called "Trident of Neptune," is
"sometimes crowned with a trilobate lotus flower, or with three lotus
buds; in other cases it is depicted in a shape that may well represent a
fishing spear" (Blinkenberg, *op. cit.*, pp. 53 and 54).

"Even if Jacobsthal's interpretation of the flower as a common Greek
symbol for fire be not accepted, the conventionalization of the trident
as a lotus blossom is quite analogous to the change, on Greek soil, of
the Assyrian thunderweapon to two flowers pointing in opposite
directions" (p. 54).

But the conception of a flower as a symbol of fire cannot thus summarily
be dismissed. For Sir Arthur Evans has collected all the stages in the
transformation of Egyptian palmette pillars into the rayed pillars of
Cyprus, in which the leaflets of the palmette become converted (in the
Cypro-Mycenæan derivatives) into the rays which he calls "the natural
concomitant of divinities of light". <span
id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_217)

The underlying motive which makes such a transference easy is the
Egyptian conception of Hathor as a sacred lotus from which the sun-god
Horus is born. The god of light is identified with the water-plant,
whether lotus, iris or lily; and the lotus form of Horus can be
correlated with its Hellenic surrogate, Apollo Hyakinthos. "The
fleur-de-lys type now takes its place beside the sacred lotus" (*op.
cit.*, p. 50). The trident and the fleur-de-lys are thunderweapons
because they represent forms of Horus or his mother.

The classical keraunos is still preserved in Tibet as the *dorje*, which
is identified with Indra's thunderbolt, the *vajra*. <span
id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_218) This word is also applied to the
diamond, the "king of stones," which in turn acquired many of the
attributes of the pearl, another of the Great

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mother's
surrogates, which is reputed to have fallen from heaven like the
thunderbolt. <span id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_219)

The Tibetan *dorje*, like its Greek original, is obviously a
conventionalized flower, the leaf-design about the base of the corona
being quite clearly defined.

The influence of the Winged-Disk Saga is clearly revealed in such Greek
myths as that relating to Ixion. "Euripides is represented by
Aristophanes as declaring that *Aithér* at the creation devised

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The eye to mimic the wheel of the sun." <span
id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_220)

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When we read of
Zeus in anger binding Ixion to a winged wheel made of fire, and sending
him spinning through the air, we are merely dealing with a Greek variant
of the Egyptian myth in which Re despatched Horus as a winged disk to
slay his enemies. In the Hellenic version the sky-god is angry with the
father of the centaurs for his ill-treatment of his father-in-law and
his behaviour towards Hera and her cloud-manifestation: but though
distorted all the incidents reveal their original inspiration in the
Egyptian story and its early Aryan variants.

It is remarkable that Mr. A. B. Cook, who compared the wheel of Ixion
with the Egyptian winged disk (pp. 205-10), did not look deeper for a
common origin of the two myths, especially when he got so far as to
identify Ixion with the sun-god (p. 211).

Blinkenberg sums up the development of the thunder-weapon thus: "From
the old Babylonian representation of the lightning, *i.e.* two or three
zigzag lines representing flames, a tripartite thunder-weapon was
evolved and carried east and west from the ancient seat of civilization.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Together with the
axe (in Western Asia Minor the double-edged, and towards the centre of
Asia the single-edged, axe) it became a regular attribute of the Asiatic
thunder-gods. ... The Indian trisula and the Greek triaina are both its
descendants" (p. 57).

Discussing the relationship of the sun-god to thunder, Dr. Rendel Harris
refers to the fact that Apollo's "arrows are said to be lightnings," and
he quotes Pausanias, Apollodorus and Mr. A. B. Cook in substantiation of
his statements. <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) Both sons of Zeus,
Dionysus and Apollo, are "concerned with the production of fire".

According to Hyginus, Typhon was the son of Tartarus and the Earth: he
made war against Jupiter for dominion, and, being struck by lightning,
was thrown flaming to the earth, where Mount Ætna was placed upon
him. <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_222)

In this curious variant of the story of the winged disk, the conflict of
Horus with Set is merged with the Destruction, for the son of Tartarus
\[Osiris\] and the Earth \[Isis\] here is not Horus but his hostile
brother Set. Instead of fighting for Jupiter (Re) as Horus did, he is
against him. The lightning (which is Horus in the form of the winged
disk) strikes Typhon and throws him flaming to earth. The episode of
Mount (Etna is the antithesis of the incident in the Indian legend of
the churning of the ocean: Mount Meru is placed in the sea upon the
tortoise *avatar* of Vishnu and is used to churn the food of immortality
for the gods. In the Egyptian story the red ochre brought from
Elephantine is pounded with the barley.

The story told by Hyginus leads up to the vision in Revelations (xii., 7
*et seq*.): "There was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought
against the dragon; and the dragon fought, and his angels, and prevailed
not, neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great
dragon was cast out, that old serpent called the Devil and Satan, which
deceiveth the whole world: he was cast into the earth, and his angels
were cast out with him."

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

In the later variants the original significance of the Destruction of
Mankind seems to have been lost sight of. The life-giving Great Mother
tends to drop out of the story and her son Horus takes her place. He
becomes the warrior-god, but he not only assumes his mother's rôle but
he also adopts her tactics. Just as she attacked Re's enemies in the
capacity of the sky-god's "Eye," so Horus as the other "Eye," the sun,
to which he gave his own falcon's wings, attacked in the form of the
winged disk. The winged disk, like the other "Eye of Re," was not merely
the sky weapon which shot down to destroy mankind, but also was the god
Horus himself. This early conception involved the belief that the
thunderbolt and lightning represented not merely the fiery weapon but
the actual god.

The winged disk thus exhibits the same confusion of attributes as we
have already noticed in Osiris and Hathor. It is the commonest symbol of
life-giving and beneficent protective power: yet it is the weapon used
to slaughter mankind. It is in fact the healing caduceus as well as the
baneful thunder-weapon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[121:1](eod25.htm#fr_202) The history of the
thunder-weapon cannot wholly be ignored in discussing the dragon-myth
because it forms an integral part of the story. It was animated both by
the dragon and the dragon-slayer. But an adequate account of the weapon
would be so highly involved and complex as to be unintelligible without
a very large series of illustrations. Hence I am referring here only to
certain aspects of the subject. Pending the preparation of a monograph
upon the thunder-weapon, I may refer the reader to the works of
Blinkenberg, d’Alviella, Ward, Evans and A. B. Cook (to which frequent
reference is made in these pages) for material, especially in the form
of illustrations, to supplement my brief and unavoidably involved
summary.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[122:1](eod25.htm#fr_203) As in Egypt Osiris is
described as "a ray of light" which issued from the moon (Hathor),
*i.e.* was born of the Great Mother.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[122:2](eod25.htm#fr_204) "Religion védique,"
i., p. 173, quoted by S. Reinach, "Ætos Prometheus," *Revue
archéologique*, 4<sup>ie</sup> série, tome x., 1917, p. 72.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[123:1](eod25.htm#fr_205) Evans, *op. cit.*,
Fig. 4, p. 10.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[123:2](eod25.htm#fr_206) William Hayes Ward,
"The Seal Cylinders of Western Asia," chapter xxxviii.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[124:1](eod25.htm#fr_207) Seler, "Codex
Vaticanus, No. 3773," vol. i., p. 77 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[124:2](eod25.htm#fr_208) Evans, *op. cit.*, p.
8.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[124:3](eod25.htm#fr_209) "The Pagan Tribes of
Borneo," 1912, vol. ii., p. 137.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[124:4](eod25.htm#fr_210) Evans, *op. cit.*,
Fig. 8, c, p. 17.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[124:5](eod25.htm#fr_211) There is an excellent
photograph of this in Donald McKenzie's "Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic
Europe," facing p. 160.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[125:1](eod25.htm#fr_212) "The Gods of the
Egyptians," vol. i., pp. 63 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[125:2](eod25.htm#fr_213) See, for example,
Ward, *op. cit.*, p. 411.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[126:1](eod25.htm#fr_214) "The Migration of
Symbols," pp. 220 and 221.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[126:2](eod25.htm#fr_215) Blinkenberg, *op.
cit.*, p. 53.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[126:3](eod25.htm#fr_216) *Op. cit.*, p. 256.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[127:1](eod25.htm#fr_217) "Mycenæan Tree and
Pillar Cult," pp. 51 and 52.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[127:2](eod25.htm#fr_218) See Blinkenberg, *op.
cit.*, pp. 45-8.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[128:1](eod25.htm#fr_219) I must defer
consideration of the part played by certain of the Great Mother's
surrogates in the development of the thunder-weapon's symbolism and the
associated folk-lore. I have in mind especially the influence of the
octopus and the cow. The former was responsible in part for the use of
the spiral as a thunder-symbol; and the latter for the beliefs in the
special protective power of thunderstones over cows (see Blinkenberg,
*op. cit.*). The thunderstone was placed over the lintel of the cow-shed
for the same purpose as the winged disk over the door of an Egyptian
temple. Until the relations of the octopus to the dragon have been set
forth it is impossible adequately to discuss the question of the
seven-headed dragon, which ranges from Scotland to Japan and from
Scandinavia to the Zambesi. In "The Birth of Aphrodite" I shall call
attention to the basal factors in its evolution.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[128:2](eod25.htm#fr_220) A. B. Cook, "Zeus,"
vol. i., p. 198.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[129:1](eod25.htm#fr_221) "The Ascent of
Olympus," p. 32.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[129:2](eod25.htm#fr_222) Tartarus ex Terra
procreavit Typhonem, immani magnitudine, specieque portentosa, cui
centum capita draconum ex humeris enata erant. Hic Jovem provocavit, si
vellet secum de regno centare. Jovis fulmine ardenti pectus ejus
percussit. Cui cum flagraret, montem Ætnam, qui est in Siciliâ, super
eum imposuit; qui ex eo adhuc ardere dicitur" (Hyginus, fab. 152).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Deer](eod26)
