[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod23)  [Next](eod25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE DRAGON MYTH.

The most important and fundamental legend in the whole history of
mythology is the story of the "Destruction of Mankind". "It was
discovered, translated, and commented upon by Naville ("La Destruction
des hommes par les Dieux," in the *Transactions of the Society of
Biblical Archæology*, vol. iv., pp. 1-19, reproducing Hay's copies made
at the beginning of \[the nineteenth\] century; and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "L’inscription de
la Destruction des hommes dans le tombeau de Ramsès III," in the
*Transactions*, vol. viii., pp. 412-20); afterwards published anew by
Herr von Bergmann (*Hieroglyphische Inscriften*, pls. lxxv.–lxxxii., and
pp. 55, 56); completely translated by Brugsch (*Die neue Weltordnung
nach Vernichtung des sündigen Menschengeschlechts nach einer
Altägyptischen Ueber lieferung*, 1881); and partly translated by Lauth
(*Aus Ægyptens Vorzeit*, pp. 70-81) and by Lefèbure ("Une chapitre de la
chronique solaire," in the *Zeitschrift für Ægyptische Sprache*, 1883,
pp. 32, 33)" <span id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_177)

Important commentaries upon this story have been published also by
Brugsch and Gauthier. <span id="fr_178"></span>[2](#fn_178)

As the really important features of the story consist of the incoherent
and contradictory details, and it would take up too much space to
reproduce the whole legend here, I must refer the reader to Maspero's
account of it (*op. cit.*), or to the versions given by Erman in his
"Life in Ancient Egypt" (p. 267, from which I quote) or Budge in "The
Gods of the Egyptians," vol. i., p. 388.

Although the story as we know it was not written down until the time of
Seti I (*circa* 1300 B.C.), it is very old and had been circulating as a
popular legend for more than twenty centuries before that time. The
narrative itself tells its own story because it is composed of many
contradictory interpretations of the same incidents flung together in a
highly confused and incoherent form.

The other legends to which I shall have constantly to refer are "The
Saga of the Winged Disk," "The Feud between Horus and Set," "The
Stealing of Re's Name by Isis," and a series of later variants and
confusions of these stories. <span id="fr_179"></span>[3](#fn_179)

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

The Egyptian legends cannot be fully appreciated unless they are studied
in conjunction with those of Babylonia and Assyria, <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180) the mythology of Greece, <span
id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_181) Persia, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[3](#fn_182) India, <span
id="fr_183"></span>[4](#fn_183) China, <span
id="fr_184"></span>[5](#fn_184) Indonesia, <span
id="fr_185"></span>[6](#fn_185) and America. <span
id="fr_186"></span>[7](#fn_186)

For it will be found that essentially the same stream of legends was
flowing in all these countries, and that the scribes and painters have
caught and preserved certain definite phases of this verbal currency.
The legends which have thus been preserved are not to be regarded as
having been directly derived the one from the other but as collateral
phases of a variety of waves of story spreading out from one centre.
Thus the comparison of the whole range of homologous legends is
peculiarly instructive and useful; because the gaps in the Egyptian
series, for example, can be filled in by necessary phases which are
missing in Egypt itself, but are preserved in Babylonia or Greece,
Persia or India, China or Britain, or even Oceania and America.

The incidents in the Destruction of Mankind may be briefly summarized:—

As Re grows old "the men who were begotten of his eye" <span
id="fr_187"></span>[8](#fn_187) show signs of rebellion. Re calls a
council of the gods and they advise him

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

to "shoot forth his Eye <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_188) that it
may slay the evil conspirators. … Let the goddess Hathor descend \[from
heaven\] and slay the men on the mountains \[to which they had fled in
fear\]." As the goddess complied she remarked: "it will be good for me
when I subject mankind," and Re replied, "I shall subject them and slay
them". Hence the goddess received the additional name of *Sekhmet* from
the word "to subject". The destructive Sekhmet <span
id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_189) *avatar* of Hathor is represented as a
fierce lion-headed goddess of war wading in blood. For the goddess set
to work slaughtering mankind and the land was flooded with blood. <span
id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_190) Re became alarmed and determined to save
at least some remnant of mankind. For this purpose he sent messengers to
Elephantine to obtain a substance called *d’d’* in the Egyptian text,
which he gave to the god Sektet of Heliopolis to grind up in a mortar.
When the slaves had crushed barley to make beer the powdered *d’d’* was
mixed with it so as to make it red like human blood. Enough of this
blood-coloured beer was made to fill 7000 jars. At nighttime this was
poured out upon the fields, so that when the goddess came to resume her
task of destruction in the morning she found the fields inundated and
her face was mirrored in the fluid. She drank of the fluid and became
intoxicated so that she no longer recognized mankind. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[4](#fn_191)

Thus Re saved a remnant of mankind from the bloodthirsty, terrible
Hathor. But the god was weary of life on earth and withdrew to heaven
upon the back of the Divine Cow.

There can be no doubt as to the meaning of this legend, highly confused
as it is. The king who was responsible for introducing irrigation

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

came to be himself identified with the life-giving power of water. He
was the river: his own vitality was the source of all fertility and
prosperity. Hence when he showed signs that his vital powers were
failing it became a logical necessity that he should be killed to
safeguard the welfare of his country and people. <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192)

The time came when a king, rich in power and the enjoyment of life,
refused to comply with this custom. When he realized that his virility
was failing he consulted the Great Mother, as the source and giver of
life, to obtain an elixir which would rejuvenate him and obviate the
necessity of being killed. The only medicine in the pharmacopoeia of
those times that was believed to be useful in minimizing danger to life
was human blood. Wounds that gave rise to severe hæmorrhage were known
to produce unconsciousness and death. If the escape of

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the blood of life could produce these results it was not altogether
illogical to assume that the exhibition of human blood could also add to
the vitality of living men and so "turn back the years from their old
age," as the Pyramid Texts express it.

Thus the Great Mother, the giver of life to all mankind, was faced with
the dilemma that, to provide the king with the elixir to restore his
youth, she had to slay mankind, to take the life she herself had given
to her own children. Thus she acquired an evil reputation which was to
stick to her throughout her career. She was not only the beneficent
creator of all things and the bestower of all blessings: but she was
also a demon of destruction who did not hesitate to slaughter even her
own children.

In course of time the practice of human sacrifice was abandoned and
substitutes were adopted in place of the blood of mankind. Either the
blood of cattle, <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193) who by means of
appropriate ceremonies could be transformed into human beings (for the
Great Mother herself was the Divine Cow and her offspring cattle), was
employed in its stead; or red ochre was used to colour a liquid which
was used ritually to replace the blood of sacrifice. When this phase of
culture was reached the goddess provided for the king an elixir of life
consisting of beer stained red by means of red ochre, so as to simulate
human blood.

But such a mixture was doubly potent, for the barley from which the beer
was made and the drink itself was supposed to be imbued with the
life-giving powers of Osiris, and the blood-colour reinforced its
therapeutic usefulness. The legend now begins to become involved and
confused. For the goddess is making the rejuvenator for the king, who in
the meantime has died and become deified as Osiris; and the beer, which
is the vehicle of the life-giving powers of Osiris, is now being used to
rejuvenate his son and successor, the living king Horus, who in the
version that has come down to us is replaced by the sun-god Re.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

It is Re who is king and is growing old: he asks Hathor, the Great
Mother, to provide him with the elixir of life. But comparison with some
of the legends of other countries suggests that Re has usurped the place
previously occupied by Horus and originally by Osiris, who as the real
personification of the life-giving power of water is obviously the
appropriate person to be slain when his virility begins to fail. Dr. C.
G. Seligman's account of the Dinka rain-maker Lerpiu, which I have
already quoted ([p. 113](#page_113)) from Sir James Frazer's "Dying
God," suggests that the slain king or god was originally Osiris.

The introduction of Re into the story marks the beginning of the belief
in the sky-world or heaven. Hathor was originally nothing more than an
amulet to enhance fertility and vitality. Then she was personified as a
woman and identified with a cow. But when the view developed that the
moon controlled the powers of life-giving in women and exercised a
direct influence upon their life-blood, the Great Mother was identified
with the moon. But how was such a conception to be brought into harmony
with the view that she was also a cow? The human mind displays an
irresistible tendency to unify its experience and to bridge the gaps
that necessarily exist in its broken series of scraps of knowledge and
ideas. No break is too great to be bridged by this instinctive impulse
to rationalize the products of diverse experience. Hence, early man,
having identified the Great Mother both with a cow and the moon, had no
compunction in making "the cow jump over the moon" to become the sky.
The moon then became the "Eye" of the sky and the sun necessarily became
its other "Eye". But, as the sun was clearly the more important "Eye,"
seeing that it determined the day and gave warmth and light for man's
daily work, it was the more important deity. Therefore Re, at first the
Brother-Eye of Hathor, and afterwards her husband, became the supreme
sky-deity, and Hathor merely one of his Eyes.

When this stage of theological evolution was reached, the story of the
"Destruction of Mankind" was re-edited, and Hathor was called the "Eye
of Re". In the earlier versions she was called into consultation solely
as the giver of life and, to obtain the life-blood, she cut men's
throats with a knife.

But as the Eye of Re she was identified with the fire-spitting
uræus-serpent which the king or god wore on his forehead. She was both
the moon and the fiery bolt which shot down from the sky to slay

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

the enemies of Re. For the men who were originally slaughtered to
provide the blood for an elixir now became the enemies of Re. The reason
for this was that, human sacrifice having been abandoned and substitutes
provided to replace the human blood, the story-teller was at a loss to
know why the goddess killed mankind. A reason had to be found—and the
rationalization adopted was that men had rebelled against the gods and
had to be killed. This interpretation was probably the result of a
confusion with the old legend of the fight between Horus and Set, the
rulers of the two kingdoms of Egypt. The possibility also suggests
itself that a pun made by some priestly jester may have been the real
factor that led to this mingling of two originally separate stories. In
the "Destruction of Mankind" the story runs, according to Budge, <span
id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194) that Re, referring to his enemies, said:
*mā-ten set uār er set*, "Behold ye them (*set*) fleeing into the
mountain (*set*)". The enemies were thus identified with the mountain or
stone and with Set, the enemy of the gods. <span
id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_195)

In Egyptian hieroglyphics the symbol for stone is used as the
determinative for Set. When the "Eye of Re" destroyed mankind and the
rebels were thus identified with the followers of Set, they were
regarded as creatures of "stone". In other words the Medusa-eye
petrified the enemies. From this feeble pun on the part of some ancient
Egyptian scribe has arisen the world-wide stories of the influence of
the "Evil Eye" and the petrification of the enemies of the gods. <span
id="fr_196"></span>[3](#fn_196) As the name for Isis in Egyptian is
"*Set*," it is possible that the confusion of the Power of Evil with the
Great Mother may also have been facilitated by an extension of the same
pun.

It is important to recognize that the legend of Hathor descending from
the moon or the sky in the form of destroying fire had nothing whatever
to do, in the first instance, with the phenomena of lightning

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

and meteorites. It was the result of verbal quibbling after the
destructive goddess came to be identified with the moon, the sky and the
"Eye of Re". But once the evolution of the story on these lines prepared
the way, it was inevitable that in later times the powers of destruction
exerted by the fire from the sky should have been identified with the
lightning and meteorites.

When the destructive force of the heavens was attributed to the "Eye of
Re" and the god's enemies were identified with the followers of Set, it
was natural that the traditional enemy of Set who was also the more
potent other "Eye of Re" should assume his mother's rôle of punishing
rebellious mankind. That Horus did in fact take the place at first
occupied by Hathor in the story is revealed by the series of trivial
episodes from the "Destruction of Mankind" that reappear in the "Saga of
the Winged Disk". The king of Lower Egypt (Horus) was identified with a
falcon, as Hathor was with the vulture (Mut): like her, he entered the
sun-god's boat <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197) and sailed up the
river with him: he then mounted up to heaven as a winged disk, *i.e.*
the sun of Re equipped with his own falcon's wings. The destructive
force displayed by Hathor as the Eye of Re was symbolized by her
identification with Tefnut, the fire-spitting uræus-snake. When Horus
assumed the form of the winged disk he added to his insignia two
fire-spitting serpents to destroy Re's enemies. The winged disk was at
once the instrument of destruction and the god himself. It swooped (or
flew) down from heaven like a bolt of destroying fire and killed the
enemies of Re. By a confusion with Horus's other fight against the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

followers of Set, the enemies of Re become identified with Set's army
and they are transformed into crocodiles, hippopotami and all the other
kinds of creatures whose shapes the enemies of Osiris assume.

In the course of the development of these legends a multitude oft other
factors played a part and gave rise to transformations of the meaning of
the incidents.

The goddess originally slaughtered mankind, or perhaps it would be truer
to say, made *a* human sacrifice, to obtain blood to rejuvenate the
king. But, as we have seen already, when the sacrifice was no longer a
necessary part of the programme, the incident of the slaughter was not
dropped out of the story, but a new explanation of it was framed.
Instead of simply making a human sacrifice, mankind as a whole was
destroyed for rebelling against the gods, the act of rebellion being
murmuring about the king's old age and loss of virility. The elixir soon
became something more than a rejuvenator: it was transformed into the
food of the gods, the ambrosia that gave them their immortality, and
distinguished them from mere mortals. Now when the development of the
story led to the replacement of the single victim by the whole of
mankind, the blood produced by the wholesale slaughter was so abundant
that the fields were flooded by the life-giving elixir. By the sacrifice
of men the soil was renewed and refertilized. When the blood-coloured
beer was substituted for the actual blood the conception was brought
into still closer harmony with Egyptian ideas, because the beer was
animated with the life-giving powers of Osiris. But Osiris was the Nile.
The blood-coloured fertilizing fluid was then identified with the annual
inundation of the red-coloured waters of the Nile. Now the Nile waters
were supposed to come from the First Cataract at Elephantine. Hence by a
familiar psychological process the previous phase of the legend was
recast, and by confusion the red ochre (which was used to colour the
beer red) was said to have come from Elephantine. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198)

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

Thus we have arrived at the stage where, by a distortion of a series of
phases, the new incident emerges that by means of a human sacrifice the
Nile flood can be produced. By a further confusion the goddess, who
originally did the slaughter, becomes the victim. Hence the story
assumed the form that by means of the sacrifice of a beautiful and
attractive maiden the annual inundation can be produced. As the most
potent symbol of life-giving it is essential that the victim should be
sexually attractive, *i.e.* that she should be a virgin and the most
beautiful and desirable in the land. When the practice of human
sacrifice was abandoned a figure or an animal was substituted for the
maiden in ritual practice, and in legends the hero rescued the maiden,
as Andromeda was saved from the dragon. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_199) The dragon is the personification of the
monsters that dwell in the waters as well as the destructive forces of
the flood itself. But the monsters were no other than the followers of
Set; they were the victims of the slaughter who became identified with
the god's other traditional enemies, the followers of Set. Thus the
monster from whom Andromeda is rescued is merely another representative
of herself!

But the destructive forces of the flood now enter into the programme. In
the phases we have so far discussed it was the slaughter of mankind
which caused the inundation: but in the next phase it is the flood
itself which causes the destruction, as in the later Egyptian and the
borrowed Sumerian, Babylonian, Hebrew—and in fact the
world-wide—versions. Re's boat becomes the ark; the winged disk which
was despatched by Re from the boat becomes the dove and the other birds
sent out to spy the land, as the winged Horus spied the enemies of Re.

Thus the new weapon of the gods—we have already noted Hathor's knife and
Horus's winged disk, which is the fire from heaven, the lightning and
the thunderbolt—is the flood. Like the others it can be either a
beneficent giver of life or a force of destruction.

But the flood also becomes a weapon of another kind. One of the earlier
incidents of the story represents Hathor in opposition to Re. The
goddess becomes so maddened with the zest of killing that the god
becomes alarmed and asks her to desist and spare some representatives of
the race. But she is deaf to entreaties. Hence the god is,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

said to have sent to Elephantine for the red ochre to make a sedative
draught to overcome her destructive zeal. We have already seen that this
incident had an entirely different meaning—it was merely intended to
explain the obtaining of the colouring matter wherewith to redden the
sacred beer so as to make it resemble blood as an elixir for the god. It
was brought from Elephantine, because the red waters of inundation of
the Nile were supposed by the Egyptians to come from Elephantine.

But according to the story inscribed in Seti I<sup>st's</sup> tomb, the
red ochre was an essential ingredient of the sedative mixture (prepared
under the direction of Re by the Sekti <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200) of Heliopolis) to calm Hathor's
murderous spirit.

It has been claimed that the story simply means that the goddess became
intoxicated with beer and that she became genially inoffensive solely as
the effect of such inebriation. But the incident in the Egyptian story
closely resembles the legends of other countries in which some herb is
used specifically as a sedative. In most books on Egyptian mythology the
word (*d’d’*) for the substance put into the drink to colour it is
translated "mandragora," from its resemblance to the Hebrew word
*dudaim* in the Old Testament, which is often translated "mandrakes" or
"love-apples". But Gauthier has clearly demonstrated that the Egyptian
word does not refer to a vegetable but to a mineral substance, which he
translates "red clay" <span id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_201). Mr. F. Ll.
Griffith tells me, however, that it is "red ochre". In any case,
mandrake is not found at Elephantine (which, however, for the reasons I
have already given, is a point of no importance so far as the
identification of the substance is concerned), nor in fact anywhere in
Egypt.

But if some foreign story of the action of a sedative drug had become
blended with and incorporated in the highly complex and composite
Egyptian legend the narrative would be more intelligible. The mandrake
is such a sedative as might have been employed to calm the murderous
frenzy of a maniacal woman. In fact it is closely allied to hyoscyamus,
whose active principle, hyoscin, is used in modern medicine precisely
for such purposes. I venture to suggest that a folk-tale describing the
effect of opium or some other "drowsy syrup" has been absorbed into the
legend of the Destruction of Mankind, and has provided the starting
point of all those incidents in the dragon-story in which poison or some

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

sleep-producing drug plays a part. For when Hathor defies Re and
continues the destruction, she is playing the part of her Babylonian
representative Tiamat, and is a dragon who has to be vanquished by the
drink which the god provides.

The red earth which was pounded in the mortar to make the elixir of life
and the fertilizer of the soil also came to be regarded as the material
out of which the new race of men was made to replace those who were
destroyed.

The god fashioned mankind of this earth and, instead of the red ochre
being merely the material to give the blood-colour to the draught of
immortality, the story became confused: actual blood was presented to
the clay images to give them life and consciousness.

In a later elaboration the remains of the former race of mankind were
ground up to provide the material out of which their successors were
created. This version is a favourite story in Northern Europe, and has
obviously been influenced by an intermediate variant which finds
expression in the Indian legend of the Churning of the Ocean of Milk.
Instead of the material for the elixir of the gods being pounded by the
Sekti of Heliopolis and incidentally becoming a sedative for Hathor, it
is the milk of the Divine Cow herself which is churned to provide the
*amrita*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_177"></span>[110:1](eod24.htm#fr_177) G. Maspero, "The Dawn
of Civilization," p. 164.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[110:2](eod24.htm#fr_178) H. Brugsch, "Die
Alraune als altägyptische Zauberpflanze," *Zeit. f. Ægypt. Sprache*, Bd.
29, 1891, pp. 31-3; and Henri Gauthier, "Le nom hiéroglyphique de
l’argile rouge d’Éléphantine," Revue Égyptologique, t. xi<sup>e</sup>,
Nos. i.–ii., 1904, p. 1.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[110:3](eod24.htm#fr_179) These legends will be
found in the works by Maspero, Erman and Budge, to which I have already
referred. A very useful digest will be found in Donald A. Mackenzie's
"Egyptian Myth and Legend". Mr. Mackenzie does not claim to have any
first-hand knowledge of the subject, but his exceptionally wide and
intimate knowledge of Scottish folk-lore, which has preserved a
surprisingly large part of the same legends, has enabled him to present
the Egyptian stories with exceptional clearness and <span
id="page_111">p. 111</span> sympathetic insight. But I refer to his book
specially because he is one of the few modern writers who has made the
attempt to compare the legends of Egypt, Babylonia, Crete, India and
Western Europe. Hence the reader who is not familiar with the mythology
of these countries will find his books particularly useful as works of
reference in following the story I have to unfold: "Teutonic Myth and
Legend," "Egyptian Myth and Legend," "Indian Myth and Legend," "Myths of
Babylonia and Assyria" and "Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe".

<span id="fn_180"></span>[111:1](eod24.htm#fr_180) See Leonard W. King,
"Babylonian Religion," 1899.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[111:2](eod24.htm#fr_181) For a useful
collection of data see A. B. Cook, "Zeus".

<span id="fn_182"></span>[111:3](eod24.htm#fr_182) Albert J. Carnoy,
"Iranian Views of Origins in connexion with Similar Babylonian Beliefs,"
*Journal of the American Oriental Society*, vol. xxxvi., 1916, pp.
300-20; and "The Moral Deities of Iran and India and their Origins,"
*The American Journal of Theology*, vol. xxi., No. i., January, 1917.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[111:4](eod24.htm#fr_183) Hopkins, "Religions
of India".

<span id="fn_184"></span>[111:5](eod24.htm#fr_184) De Groot, "The
Religious System of China".

<span id="fn_185"></span>[111:6](eod24.htm#fr_185) Perry, "The
Megalithic Culture of Indonesia," Manchester, 1918.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[111:7](eod24.htm#fr_186) T H. Beuchat, "Manuel
d’ Archéologie Américaine," Paris, 1912; T. A. Joyce, "Mexican
Archæology," and especially the memoir by Seler on the "Codex Vaticanus"
and his articles in the *Zeitschrift für Ethnologie* and elsewhere.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[111:8](eod24.htm#fr_187) I.e. the offspring of
the Great Mother of gods and men, Hathor, the "Eye of Re".

<span id="fn_188"></span>[112:1](eod24.htm#fr_188) That is, Hathor, who
as the moon is the "Eye of Re".

<span id="fn_189"></span>[112:2](eod24.htm#fr_189) Elsewhere in these
pages I have used the more generally adopted spelling "Sekhet".

<span id="fn_190"></span>[112:3](eod24.htm#fr_190) Mr. F. Ll. Griffith
tells me that the translation "flooding the land" is erroneous and
misleading. Comparison of the whole series of stories, however, suggests
that the amount of blood shed rapidly increased in the development of
the narrative: at first the blood of a single victim; then the blood of
mankind; then 7000 jars of a substitute for blood; then the red
inundation of the Nile.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[112:4](eod24.htm#fr_191) This
[version](errata.htm#5) I have quoted mainly from Erman, *op. cit.*, pp.
267-9, but with certain alterations which I shall mention later. In
another version of the legend wine replaces the beer and is made out of
"the blood of those who formerly fought against the gods," cf. Plutarch,
De Iside (ed. Parthey) 6.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[113:1](eod24.htm#fr_192) It is still the
custom in many places, and among them especially the regions near the
headwaters of the Nile itself, to regard the king or rain-maker as the
impersonation of the life-giving properties of water and the source of
all fertility. When his own vitality shows signs of failing he is
killed, so as not to endanger the fruitfulness of the community by
allowing one who is weak in life-giving powers to control its destinies.
Much of the evidence relating to these matters has been collected by Sir
James Frazer in "The Dying God," 1911, who quotes from Dr. Seligman the
following account of the Dinka "Osiris":

"While the mighty spirit Lerpiu is supposed to be embodied in the
rain-maker, it is also thought to inhabit a certain hut which serves as
a shrine. In front of the hut stands a post to which are fastened the
horns of many bullocks that have been sacrificed to Lerpiu; and in the
hut is kept a very sacred spear which bears the name of Lerpiu and is
said to have fallen from heaven six generations ago. As fallen stars are
also called Lerpiu, we may suspect that an intimate connexion is
supposed to exist between meteorites and the spirit which animates the
rain-maker" (Frazer, *op. cit.*, p. 32). Here then we have a house of
the dead inhabited by Lerpiu, who can also enter the body of the
rain-maker and animate him, as well as the ancient spear and the falling
stars, which are also animate forms of the same god, who obviously is
the homologue of Osiris, and is identified with the spear and the
falling stars.

In spring when the April moon is a few days old bullocks are sacrificed
to Lerpiu. "Two bullocks are led twice round the shrine and afterwards
tied by the rain-maker to the post in front of it. Then the drums beat
and the people, old and young, men and women, dance round the shrine and
sing, while the beasts are being sacrificed, 'Lerpiu, our ancestor, we
have brought you a sacrifice. Be pleased to cause rain to fall.' The
blood of the bullocks is collected in a gourd, boiled in a pot on the
fire, and eaten by the old and important people of the clan. The horns
of the animals are attached to the post in front of the shrine" (pp. 32
and 33).

<span id="fn_193"></span>[114:1](eod24.htm#fr_193) In Northern Nigeria
an official who bore the title of Killer of the Elephant throttled the
king "as soon as he showed signs of failing health or growing
infirmity". The king-elect was afterwards conducted to the centre of the
town, called Head of the Elephant, where he was made to lie down on a
bed. Then a black ox was slaughtered and its blood allowed to pour all
over his body. Next the ox was flayed, and the remains of the dead king,
which had been disembowelled and smoked for seven days over a slow fire,
were wrapped up in the hide and dragged along to the place of burial,
where they were interred in a circular pit" (Frazer, *op. cit.*, p. 35).

<span id="fn_194"></span>[116:1](eod24.htm#fr_194) "Gods of the
Egyptians," vol. i., p. 392.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[116:2](eod24.htm#fr_195) The eye of the
sun-god, which was subsequently called the eye of Horus and identified
with the Uræus-snake on the forehead of Re and of the Pharaohs, the
earthly representatives of Re, finally becoming synonymous with the
crown of Lower Egypt, was a mighty goddess, Uto or Buto by name" (Alan
Gardiner, Article "Magic (Egyptian)" in Hastings’ *Encyclopædia of
Religion and Ethics*, p. 268, quoting Sethe.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[116:3](eod24.htm#fr_196) "For an account of
the distribution of this story see E. Sidney Hartland, "The Legend of
Perseus"; also W. J. Perry, "The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia".

<span id="fn_197"></span>[117:1](eod24.htm#fr_197) The original "boat of
the sky" was the crescent moon, which, from its likeness to the earliest
form of Nile boat, was regarded as the vessel in which the moon (seen as
a faint object upon the crescent), or the goddess who was supposed to be
personified in the moon, travelled across the waters of the heavens. But
as this "boat" was obviously part of the moon itself, it also was
regarded as an animate form of the goddess, the "Eye of Re". When the
Sun, as the other "Eye," assumed the chief rôle, Re was supposed to
traverse the heavens in his own "boat," which was also brought into
relationship with the actual boat used in the Osirian burial ritual.

The custom of employing the name "dragon" in reference to a boat is
found in places as far apart as Scandinavia and China. It is the direct
outcome of these identifications of the sun and moon with a boat
animated by the respective deities. In India the *Makara*, the prototype
of the dragon, was sometimes represented as a boat which was looked upon
as the fish-*avatar* of Vishnu, Buddha or some other deity.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[118:1](eod24.htm#fr_198) This is an instance
of the well-known tendency of the human mind to blend numbers of
different incidents into one story. An episode of one experience, having
been transferred to an earlier one, becomes rationalized in adaptation
to its different environment. This process of psychological transference
is the explanation of the reference to Elephantine as the source of the
*d’d’*, and has no relation to actuality. The naïve efforts of Brugsch
and Gauthier to study the natural products of Elephantine for the
purpose of identifying *d’d’* were therefore wholly misplaced.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[119:1](eod24.htm#fr_199) In Hartland's "Legend
of Perseus" a collection of variants of this story will be found.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[120:1](eod24.htm#fr_200) In the version I have
quoted from Erman he refers to "the god Sektet".

<span id="fn_201"></span>[120:2](eod24.htm#fr_201) *Op. cit.*, *supra*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Thunder-Weapon](eod25)
