[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod28)  [Next](eod30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE ETHICAL ASPECT.

So far in this discussion I have been dealing mainly with the problems
of the dragon's evolution, the attainment of his or her distinctive
anatomical features and physiological attributes. But during this
process of development a moral and ethical aspect of the dragon's
character was also emerging.

Now that we have realized the fact of the dragon's homology with the
moon-god it is important to remember that one of the primary functions
of this deity, which later became specialized in the Egyptian

<span id="img_fig16"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 16.THE GOD
OF THUNDER&lt;br&gt; (From a Chinese drawing (? 17th Century) in the
John Rylands Library)](tn/fig16.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig16.jpg)  
FIG. 16.—THE GOD OF THUNDER  
(From a Chinese drawing (? 17th Century) in the John Rylands Library)  
</span>

<span id="img_fig17"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 17.FROM
JOANNES DE TURRECREMATA'S MEDITATIONES SEU CONTEMPLATIONES. Rome;
Ulrich Han, 1467](tn/fig17.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig17.jpg)  
FIG. 17.—FROM JOANNES DE TURRECREMATA'S “MEDITATIONES SEU
CONTEMPLATIONES”. Rome; Ulrich Han, 1467  
</span>

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

god Thoth, was the measuring of time and the keeping of records. The
moon, in fact, was the controller of accuracy, of truth, and order, and
therefore the enemy of falsehood and chaos. The identification of the
moon with Osiris, who from a dead king eventually developed into a king
of the dead, conferred upon the great Father of Waters the power to
exact from men respect for truth and order. For even if at first these
ideas were only vaguely adumbrated and not expressed in set phrases, it
must have been an incentive to good discipline when men remembered that
the record-keeper and the guardian of law and order was also the deity
upon whose tender mercies they would have to rely in the life after
death. Set, the enemy of Osiris, who is the real prototype of the evil
dragon, was the antithesis of the god of justice: he was the father of
falsehood and the symbol of chaos. He was the prototype of Satan, as
Osiris was the first definite representative of the Deity of which any
record has been preserved.

The history of the evil dragon is not merely the evolution of the devil,
but it also affords the explanation of his traditional peculiarities,
his bird-like features, his horns, his red colour, his wings and cloven
hoofs, and his tail. They are all of them the dragon's distinctive
features; and from time to time in the history of past ages we catch
glimpses of the reality of these identifications. In one of the earliest
woodcuts (Pl. VI.) found in a printed book Satan is depicted as a monk
with the bird's feet of the dragon. A most interesting intermediate
phase is seen in a Chinese water-colour in the John Rylands Library, in
which the thunder-dragon is represented in a form almost exactly
reproducing that of the devil of European tradition (Pl. VII.).

Early in the Christian era, when ancient beliefs in Egypt became
disguised under a thin veneer of Christianity, the story of the conflict
between Horus and Set was converted into a conflict between Christ and
Satan. M. Clermont-Ganneau has described an interesting bas-relief in
the Louvre in which a hawk-headed St. George, clad in Roman military
uniform and mounted on a horse, is slaying a dragon which is represented
by Set's crocodile. <span id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_232) But the
Biblical references to Satan leave no doubt as to his identity with the
dragon, who is

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

specifically mentioned in the Book of Revelations as "the old serpent,
which is the Devil and Satan" (xx. 2).

The devil Set was symbolic of disorder and darkness, while the god
Osiris was the maintainer of order and the giver of light. Although the
moon-god, in the form of Osiris, Thoth and other deities, thus came to
acquire the moral attributes of a just judge, who regulated the
movements of the celestial bodies, controlled the waters upon the earth,
and was responsible for the maintenance of order in the Universe, the
ethical aspect of his functions was in large measure disguised by the
material importance of his duties. In Babylonia similar views were held
with respect to the beneficent water-god Ea, who was the giver of
civilization, order and justice, and Sin, the moon-god, who "had
attained a high position in the Babylonian pantheon," as "the guide of
the stars and the planets, the overseer of the world at night". "From
that conception a god of high moral character soon developed." "He is an
extremely beneficent deity, he is a king, he is the ruler of men, he
produces order and stability, like Shamash and like the Indian Varuṇa
and Mitra, but besides that, he is also a judge, he loosens the bonds of
the imprisoned, like Varuṇa. His light, like that of Varuṇa, is the
symbol of righteousness. ... Like the Indian Varuṇa and the Iranian
Mazdâh, he is a god of wisdom."

When these Egyptian and Babylonian ideas were borrowed by the Aryans,
and the Iranian Mazdâh and the Indian Varuna assumed the rôle of the
beneficent deity of the former more ancient civilizations, the material
aspect of the functions of the moon-god became less obtrusive; and there
gradually emerged the conception, to which Zarathushtra first gave
concrete expression, of the beneficent god Ahura Mazdâh as "an
omniscient protector of morality and creator of marvellous power and
knowledge". "He is the most-knowing one, and the most-seeing one. No one
can deceive him. He watches with radiant eyes everything that is done in
open or in secret." "Although he has a strong personality he has no
anthropomorphic features." He has shed the material aspects which loomed
so large in his Egyptian, Babylonian and earlier Aryan prototypes, and a
more ethereal conception of a God of the highest ethical qualities has
emerged.

The whole of this process of transformation has been described with deep
insight and lucid exposition by Professor Cumont, from whose important

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

and convincing memoir I have quoted so freely in the foregoing
paragraphs. <span id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233)

The creation of a beneficent Deity of such moral grandeur inevitably
emphasized the baseness and the malevolence of the "Power of Evil". No
longer are the gods merely glorified human beings who can work good or
evil as they will; but there is now an all-powerful God controlling the
morals of the universe, and in opposition to Him "the dragon, the old
serpent, which is the Devil and Satan".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[137:1](eod29.htm#fr_232) "Horus et St. George
d’après un bas-relief inedit du Louvre," *Revue Archéologique*, Nouvelle
Série, t. xxxii., 1876, p. 196, pl. xviii. It is right to explain that
M. Clermont-Ganneau's interpretation of this relief has not been
accepted by all scholars.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[139:1](eod29.htm#fr_233) Albert J. Carnoy,
"The Moral Deities of Iran and India and their Origins," The American
Journal of Theology, vol. xxi., No. 1, Jan. 1917, p. 58.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](eod30)
