[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod20)  [Next](eod22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### DRAGONS AND RAIN GODS. <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129)

<span class="smallcaps">An</span> adequate account of the development of
the dragon-legend would represent the history of the expression of
mankind's aspirations and fears during the past fifty centuries and
more. For the dragon was evolved along with civilization itself. The
search for the elixir of life, to turn back the years from old age and
confer the boon of immortality, has been the great driving force that
compelled men to build up the material and the intellectual fabric of
civilization. The dragon-legend is the history of that search which has
been preserved by popular tradition: it has grown up and kept pace with
the constant struggle to grasp the unattainable goal of men's desires;
and the story has been constantly growing in complexity, as new
incidents were drawn within its scope and confused with old incidents
whose real meaning was forgotten or distorted. It has passed through all
the phases with which the study of the spreading of rumours or the
development of dreams has familiarized students of psychology. The
simple original stories, which become blended and confused, their
meaning distorted and reinterpreted by the rationalizing of incoherent
incidents, are given the dramatic form with which the human mind invests
all stories that make a strong appeal to its emotions, and then
secondarily elaborated with a wealth of circumstantial detail. This is
the history of popular legends and the development of rumours. But these
phenomena are displayed in their most emphatic form in dreams. <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130) In his waking state man restrains his
roving fancies and exercises what Freud has called a "censorship" over
the stream of his thoughts: but when he falls asleep, the "censor" dozes
also; and free rein is given to his unrestrained

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

fancies to make a hotch-potch of the most varied and unrelated
incidents, and to create a fantastic mosaic built up from fragments of
his actual experience, bound together by the cement of his aspirations
and fears. The myth resembles the dream because it has developed without
any consistent and effective censorship. The individual who tells one
particular phase of the story may exert the controlling influence of his
mind over the version he narrates: but as it is handed on from man to
man and generation to generation the "censorship" also is constantly
changing. This lack of unity of control implies that the development of
the myth is not unlike the building-up of a dream-story. But the
dragon-myth is vastly more complex than any dream, because mankind as a
whole has taken a hand in the process of shaping it; and the number of
centuries devoted to this work of elaboration has been far greater than
the years spent by the average individual in accumulating the stuff of
which most of his dreams have been made. But though the myth is
enormously complex, so vast a mass of detailed evidence concerning every
phase and every detail of its history has been preserved, both in the
literature and the folk-lore of the world, that we are able to submit it
to psychological analysis and determine the course of its development
and the significance of every incident in its tortuous rambling.

In instituting these comparisons between the development of myths and
dreams, I should like to emphasize the fact that the interpretation of
the *myth* proposed in these pages is almost diametrically opposed to
that suggested by Freud, and pushed to a *reductio ad absurdum* by his
more reckless followers, and especially by [Jung](errata.htm#3).

The dragon has been described as "the most venerable symbol employed in
ornamental art and the favourite and most highly decorative motif in
artistic design". It has been the inspiration of much, if not most, of
the world's great literature in every age and clime, and the nucleus
around which a wealth of ethical symbolism has accumulated throughout
the ages. The dragon-myth represents also the earliest doctrine or
systematic theory of astronomy and meteorology.

In the course of its romantic and chequered history the dragon has been
identified with all of the gods and all of the demons of every religion.
But it is most intimately associated with the earliest stratum of
divinities, for it has been homologized with each of the members of the
earliest Trinity, the Great Mother, the Water God, and the

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Warrior Sun God,
both individually and collectively. To add to the complexities of the
story, the dragon-slayer is also represented by the same deities, either
individually or collectively; and the weapon with which the hero slays
the dragon is also homologous both with him and his victim, for it is
animated by him who wields it, and its powers of destruction make it a
symbol of the same power of evil which it itself destroys.

Such a fantastic paradox of contradictions has supplied the materials
with which the fancies of men of every race and land, and every stage of
knowledge and ignorance, have been playing for all these centuries. It
is not surprising, therefore, that an endless series of variations of
the story has been evolved, each decked out with topical allusions and
distinctive embellishments. But throughout the complex tissue of this
highly embroidered fabric the essential threads of the web and woof of
its foundation can be detected with surprising constancy and regularity.

Within the limits of such an account as this it is obvious that I can
deal only with the main threads of the argument and leave the
interesting details of the local embellishments until some other time.

The fundamental element in the dragon's powers is the control of water.
Both in its beneficent and destructive aspects water was regarded as
animated by the dragon, who thus assumed the rôle of Osiris or his enemy
Set. But when the attributes of the Water God became confused with those
of the Great Mother, and her evil *avatar*, the lioness (Sekhet) form of
Hathor in Egypt, or in Babylonia the destructive Tiamat, became the
symbol of disorder and chaos, the dragon became identified with her
also.

Similarly the third member of the Earliest Trinity also became the
dragon. As the son and successor of the dead king Osiris the living king
Horus became assimilated with him. When the belief became more and more
insistent that the dead king had acquired the boon of immortality and
was really alive, the distinction between him and the actually living
king Horus became correspondingly minimized. This process of
assimilation was advanced a further stage when the king became a god and
was thus more closely identified with his father and predecessor. Hence
Horus assumed many of the functions of Osiris; and amongst them those
which in foreign lands contributed to making a dragon of the Water God.
But if the distinction between

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Horus and Osiris
became more and more attenuated with the lapse of time, the
identification with his mother Hathor (Isis) was more complete still.
For he took her place and assumed many of her attributes in the later
versions of the great saga which is the nucleus of all the literature of
mythology—I refer to the story of "The Destruction of Mankind".

The attributes of these three members of the Trinity, Hathor, Osiris,
and Horus, thus became intimately linked the one with the other; and in
Susa, where the earliest pictorial representation of a real dragon
developed, it received concrete form ([Fig. 1](#img_07900)) as a monster
compounded of the lioness of Hathor (Sekhet) with the falcon (or eagle)
of Horus, but with the human attributes and water-controlling powers
which originally belonged to Osiris. In some parts of Africa

<span id="img_07900"></span> ![FIG. I.EARLY REPRESENTATION OF A
DRAGON COMPOUNDED OF THE FOREPART OF AN EAGLE AND THE HINDPART OF A
LION(from an Archaic Cylinder-seal from Susa, after
Jequier).](img/07900.jpg)  
FIG. I.—EARLY REPRESENTATION OF A “DRAGON” COMPOUNDED OF THE FOREPART OF
AN EAGLE AND THE HINDPART OF A LION—(from an Archaic Cylinder-seal from
Susa, after Jequier).

<span id="img_07901"></span> ![FIG. 2.THE EARLIEST BABYLONIAN
CONCEPTION OF THE DRAGON TIAMAT (from a Cylinder-seal in the British
Museum, after L. W. King).](img/07901.jpg)  
FIG. 2.—THE EARLIEST BABYLONIAN CONCEPTION OF THE DRAGON TIAMAT (from a
Cylinder-seal in the British Museum, after L. W. King).

the earliest "dragon" was nothing more than Hathor's cow or the gazelle
or antelope of Horus (Osiris) or of Set.

But if the dragon was compounded of all three deities, who was the
slayer of the evil dragon?

The story of the dragon-conflict is really a recital of Horus's vendetta
against Set, intimately blended and confused with different versions of
"The Destruction of Mankind". <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131) The
commonplace incidents of the originally prosaic stories were distorted
into an almost unrecognizable form, then secondarily elaborated without
any attention to their original meaning, but with a wealth of
circumstantial embellishment, in accordance with the usual methods of
the human mind that I have already mentioned. The history of the legend
is in fact the most complete, because it is the oldest and the most
widespread, illustration of those instinctive tendencies of the human
spirit to bridge the

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

gaps in its disjointed experience, and to link together in a kind of
mental mosaic the otherwise isolated incidents in the facts of daily
life and the rumours and traditions that have been handed down from the
story-teller's predecessors.

In the "Destruction of Mankind," which I shall discuss more fully in the
following pages ([p. 109](eod23.htm#page_109) *et seq*.), Hathor does
the slaying: in the later stories Horus takes his mother's place and
earns his spurs as the Warrior Sun-god: <span
id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132) hence confusion was inevitably
introduced between the enemies of Re, the original victims in the
legend, and Horus's traditional enemies, the followers of Set. Against
the latter it was Osiris himself who fought originally; and in many of
the non-Egyptian variants of the legend it is the rain-god himself who
is the warrior.

Hence all three members of the Trinity were identified, not only with
the dragon, but also with the hero who was the dragon-slayer.

But the weapon used by the latter was also animated by the same Trinity,
and in fact identified with them. In the Saga of the Winged Disk, Horus
assumed the form of the sun equipped with the wings of his own falcon
and the fire-spitting uræus serpents. Flying down from heaven in this
form he was at the same time the god and the god's weapon. As a fiery
bolt from heaven he slew the enemies of Re, who were now identified with
his own personal foes, the followers of Set. But in the earlier versions
of the myth (*i.e.* the "Destruction of Mankind"), it was Hathor who was
the "Eye of Re" and descended from heaven to destroy mankind with fire;
she also was the vulture (Mut); and in the earliest version she did the
slaughter with a knife or an axe with which she was animistically
identified.

But Osiris also was the weapon of destruction, both in the form of the
flood (for he was the personification of the river) and the rain-storms
from heaven. But he was also an instrument for vanquishing the demon,
when the intoxicating beer or the sedative drink (the potency of which
was due to the indwelling spirit of the god) was the chosen means of
overcoming the dragon.

This, in brief, is the framework of the dragon-story. The early Trinity
as the hero, armed with the Trinity as weapon, slays the

<span id="img_fig07"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 7.A MEDIÆVAL
PICTURE OF A CHINESE DRAGON UPON ITS CLOUD (After the late Professor W.
Anderson)](tn/fig07.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig07.jpg)  
FIG. 7.—A MEDIÆVAL PICTURE OF A CHINESE DRAGON UPON ITS CLOUD (After the
late Professor W. Anderson)  
</span>

<span id="img_fig08"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 8.A CHINESE
DRAGON (After de Groot)](tn/fig08.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig08.jpg)  
FIG. 8.—A CHINESE DRAGON (After de Groot)  
</span>

<span id="img_fig09"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG. 9.DRAGON
FROM THE ISHTAR GATE OF BABYLON](tn/fig09.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig09.jpg)  
FIG. 9.—DRAGON FROM THE ISHTAR GATE OF BABYLON  
</span>

<span id="img_fig10"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
10.BABYLONIAN WEATHER GOD](tn/fig10.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig10.jpg)  
FIG. 10.—BABYLONIAN WEATHER GOD  
</span>

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

dragon, which again is the same Trinity. With its illimitable
possibilities for dramatic development and fantastic embellishment with
incident and ethical symbolism, this theme has provided countless
thousands of story-tellers with the skeleton which they clothed with the
living flesh of their stories, representing not merely the earliest
theories of astronomy and meteorology, but all the emotional conflicts
of daily life, the struggle between light and darkness, heat and cold,
right and wrong, justice and injustice, prosperity and adversity, wealth
and poverty. The whole gamut of human strivings and emotions was drawn
into the legend until it became the great epic of the human spirit and
the main theme that has appealed to the interest of all mankind in every
age.

An ancient Chinese philosopher, Wang Fu, writing in the time of the Han
Dynasty, enumerates the "nine resemblances" of the dragon. "His horns
resemble those of a stag, his head that of a camel, his eyes those of a
demon, his neck that of a snake, his belly that of a clam, his scales
those of a carp, his claws those of an eagle, his soles those of a
tiger, his ears those of a cow." <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133)
But this list includes only a small minority of the menagerie of diverse
creatures which at one time or another have contributed their quota to
this truly astounding hotchpotch.

This composite wonder-beast ranges from Western Europe to the Far East
of Asia, and as we shall see, also even across the Pacific to America.
Although in the different localities a great number of most varied
ingredients enter into its composition, in most places where the dragon
occurs the substratum of its anatomy consists of a serpent or a
crocodile, usually with the scales of a fish for covering, and the feet
and wings, and sometimes also the head, of an eagle, falcon, or hawk,
and the forelimbs and sometimes the head of a lion. An association of
anatomical features of so unnatural and arbitrary a nature can only mean
that all dragons are the progeny of the same ultimate ancestors.

But it is not merely a case of structural or anatomical similarity, but
also of physiological identity, that clinches the proof of the
derivation of this fantastic brood from the same parents. Wherever the
dragon is found, it displays a special partiality for water. It controls
the rivers or seas, dwells in pools or wells, or in the clouds on the
tops

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

of mountains, regulates the tides, the flow of streams, or the rainfall,
and is associated with thunder and lightning. Its home is a mansion at
the bottom of the sea, where it guards vast treasures, usually pearls,
but also gold and precious stones. In other instances the dwelling is
upon the top of a high mountain; and the dragon's breath forms the
rain-clouds. It emits thunder and lightning. Eating the dragon's heart
enables the diner to acquire the knowledge stored in this "organ of the
mind" so that he can understand the language of birds, and in fact of
all the creatures that have contributed to the making of a dragon.

It should not be necessary to rebut the numerous attempts that have been
made to explain the dragon-myth as a story relating to extinct monsters.
Such fantastic claims can be made only by writers devoid of any
knowledge of palæontology or of the distinctive features of the dragon
and its history. But when the Keeper of the Egyptian and Assyrian
Antiquities in the British Museum, in a book that is not intended to be
humorous, <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134) seriously claims Dr.
Andrews' discovery of a gigantic fossil snake as "proof" of the former
existence of "the great serpent-devil Āpep," it is time to protest.

Those who attempt to derive the dragon from such living creatures as
lizards like *Draco volans* or *Moloch horridus* <span
id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_135) ignore the evidence of the composite and
unnatural features of the monsters.

"Whatever be the origin of the Northern dragon, the myths, when they
first became articulate for us, show him to be in all essentials the
same as that of the South and East. He is a power of evil, guardian of
hoards, the greedy withholder of good things from men; and the slaying
of a dragon is the crowning achievement of heroes—of Siegmund, of
Beowulf, of Sigurd, of Arthur, of [Tristram](errata.htm#4)—even of
Lancelot, the *beau ideal* of mediæval chivalry" (*Encyclopædia
Britannica*, vol. viii., p. 467). But if in the West the dragon is
usually a "power of evil," in the far East he is equally emphatically a
symbol of beneficence. He is identified with emperors and kings; he is
the son of heaven, the bestower of all bounties, not merely to mankind
directly, but also to the earth as well.

Even in our country his symbolism is not always wholly malevolent,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

otherwise—if for the moment we shut our eyes to the history of the
development of heraldic ornament—dragons would hardly figure as the
supporters of the arms of the City of London, and as the symbol of many
of our aristocratic families, among which the Royal House of Tudor is
included. It is only a few years since the Red Dragon of Cadwallader was
added as an additional badge to the achievement of the Prince of Wales.
But, "though a common ensign in war, both in the East and the West, as
an ecclesiastical emblem his opposite qualities have remained
consistently until the present day. Whenever the dragon is represented,
it symbolizes the power of evil, the devil and his works. Hell in
mediæval art is a dragon with gaping jaws, belching fire."

And in the East the dragon's reputation is not always blameless. For it
figures in some disreputable incidents and does not escape the sort of
punishment that tradition metes out to his European cousins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[76:1](eod21.htm#fr_129) An elaboration of a
Lecture delivered in the John Rylands Library on 8 November, 1916.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[76:2](eod21.htm#fr_130) In his lecture,
"Dreams and Primitive Culture," delivered at the John Rylands Library on
10 April, 1918, Dr. Rivers has expounded the principles of
dream-development.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[79:1](eod21.htm#fr_131) *Vide infra*, [p.
109](eod23.htm#page_109) *et seq*.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[80:1](eod21.htm#fr_132) Hence soldiers killed
in battle and women dying in childbirth receive special consideration in
the exclusive heaven of (Osiris s) Horus's Indian and American
representatives, Indra and Tlaloc.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[81:1](eod21.htm#fr_133) M. W. de Visser, "The
Dragon in China and Japan," *Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van
Wetenschappen te Amsterdam*, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Deel XIII, No. 2,
1913, p. 70.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[82:1](eod21.htm#fr_134) E. A. Wallis Budge,
"The Gods of the Egyptians," 1904, vol. i., p. 11.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[82:2](eod21.htm#fr_135) Gould's "Mythical
Monsters," 1886.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dragon in America and Eastern Asia](eod22)
