[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod29)  [Next](eod31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

### CHAPTER III.

### THE BIRTH OF APHRODITE. <span id="fr_234"></span>[1](#fn_234.md)

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> may seem ungallant to discuss the
birth of Aphrodite as part of the story of the evolution of the dragon.
But the other chapters of this book, in which frequent references have
been made to the early history of the Great Mother, have revealed how
vital a part she played in the development of the dragon. The earliest
real dragon was Tiamat, one of the forms assumed by the Great Mother;
and an even earlier prototype was the lioness (Sekhet) manifestation of
Hathor.

Thus it becomes necessary to enquire more fully (than has been done in
the other chapters) into the circumstances of the Great Mother's birth
and development, and to investigate certain aspects of her ontogeny to
which only scant attention has been paid in the preceding pages.

Several reasons have led me to select Aphrodite from the vast legion of
Great Mothers for special consideration. In spite of her high
specialization in certain directions the Greek goddess of love retains
in greater measure than any of her sisters some of the most primitive
associations of her original parent. Like vestigial structures in
biology, these traits afford invaluable evidence, not only of
Aphrodite's own ancestry and early history, but also of that of the
whole family of goddesses of which she is only a specialized type. For
Aphrodite's connexion with shells is a survival of the circumstances
which called into existence the first Great Mother and made her not only
the Creator of mankind and the universe, but also the parent of all
deities, as she was historically the first to be created by human
inventiveness. In this lecture I propose to deal with the more general
aspects of the evolution of all these daughters of the Great Mother:

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

but I have used Aphrodite's name in the title because her
shell-associations can be demonstrated more clearly and definitely than
those of any of her sisters.

In the past a vast array of learning has been brought to bear upon the
problems of Aphrodite's origin; but this effort has, for the most part,
been characterized by a narrowness of vision and a lack of adequate
appreciation of the more vital factors in her embryological history. In
the search for the deep human motives that found specific expression in
the great goddess of love, too little attention has been paid to
primitive man's psychology, and his persistent striving for an elixir of
life to avert the risk of death, to renew youth and secure a continuance
of existence after death. On the other hand, the possibility of
obtaining any real explanation has been dashed aside by most scholars,
who have been content simply to juggle with certain stereotyped
catch-phrases and baseless assumptions, simply because the traditions of
classical scholarship have made these devices the pawns in a rather
aimless game.

It is unnecessary to cite specific illustrations in support of this
statement. Reference to any of the standard works on classical
archæology, such as Roscher's "Lexikon," will testify to the truth of my
accusation. In her "Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion" Miss
Jane Harrison devotes a chapter (VI) to "The Making of a Goddess," and
discusses "The Birth of Aphrodite". But she strictly observes the
traditions of the classical method; and assumes that the meaning of the
myth of Aphrodite's birth from the sea—the germs of which are at least
fifty centuries old can be decided by the omission of any representation
of the sea in the decoration of a pot made in the fifth century B.C.!

But apart from this general criticism, the lack of resourcefulness and
open mindedness, certain more specific factors have deflected classical
scholars from the true path. In the search for the ancestry of
Aphrodite, they have concentrated their attention too exclusively upon
the Mediterranean area and Western Asia, and so ignored the most ancient
of the historic Great Mothers, the African Hathor, with whom (as Sir
Arthur Evans <span id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_235.md) clearly demonstrated
more than fifteen years ago) the Cypriote goddess has much closer
affinities than with

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

any of her Asiatic sisters. Yet no scholar, either on the Greek or
Egyptian side, has seriously attempted to follow up this clue and really
investigate the nature of the connexions between Aphrodite and Hathor,
and the history of the development of their respective specializations
of functions. <span id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_236.md)

But some explanation must be given for my temerity in venturing to
invade the intensively cultivated domains of Aphrodite "with a mind
undebauched by classical learning". I have already explained how the
study of Libations and Dragons brought me face to face with the problems
of the Great Mother's attributes. At that stage of the enquiry two
circumstances directed my attention specifically to Aphrodite. Mr.
Wilfrid Jackson was collecting the data relating to the cultural uses of
shells, which he has since incorporated in a book. <span
id="fr_237"></span>[2](#fn_237.md) As the results of his search
accumulated, the fact soon emerged that

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

the original Great Mother was nothing more than a cowry-shell used as a
life-giving amulet; and that Aphrodite's shell-associations were a
survival of the earliest phase in the Great Mother's history. At this
psychological moment Dr. Rendel Harris <span
id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_238.md) claimed that Aphrodite was a
personification of the mandrake. But the magical attributes of the
mandrake, which he claimed to have been responsible for converting the
amulet into a goddess, were identical with those which Jackson's
investigations had previously led me to regard as the reasons for
deriving Aphrodite from the cowry. The mandrake was clearly a surrogate
of the shell or vice versa. <span id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_239.md) The
problem to be solved was to decide which amulet was responsible for
suggesting the process of life-giving. The goddess Aphrodite was closely
related to Cyprus; the mandrake was a magical plant there; and the cowry
is so intimately associated with the island as to be called *Cypræa*. So
far as is known, however, the shell-amulet is vastly more ancient than
the magical reputation of the plant. Moreover, we know why the cowry was
regarded as feminine and accredited with life-giving attributes. There
are no such reasons for assigning life-giving powers or the female sex
to the mandrake. The claim that its magical properties are due to the
fancied resemblance of its root to a human being is wholly
untenable. <span id="fr_240"></span>[3](#fn_240.md) The roots of many
plants are at least as manlike; and, even if this character was the
exclusive property of the mandrake, how does it help to explain the
remarkable [repertory](errata.htm#6.md) of quite arbitrary and fantastic
properties and the female sex assigned to the plant? Sir James Frazer's
claim <span id="fr_241"></span>[4](#fn_241.md) that "such beliefs and
practices illustrate the primitive tendency to personify nature" is a
gratuitous and quite irrelevant assumption, which offers no explanation
whatsoever of the specific and arbitrary nature of the form assumed by
the personification. But when we investigate the historical development
of the peculiar

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

attributes of the cowry-shell, and appreciate why and how they were
acquired, any doubt as to the source from which the mandrake obtained
its "magic" is removed; and with it the fallacy of Sir James Frazer's
wholly unwarranted claims is also exposed.

If we ignore Sir James Frazer's naïve speculations we can make use of
the compilations of evidence which he makes with such remarkable
assiduity. But it is more profitable to turn to the study of the
remarkable lectures which Dr. Rendel Harris has been delivering in this
room <span id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_242.md) during the last few years.
Our genial friend has been cultivating his garden on the slopes of
Olympus, <span id="fr_243"></span>[2](#fn_243.md) and has been plucking the
rich fruits of his ripe scholarship and nimble wit. At the same time,
with rougher implements and cruder methods, I have been burrowing in the
depths of the earth, trying to recover information concerning the habits
and thoughts of mankind many centuries before Dionysus and Apollo, and
Artemis and Aphrodite, were dreamt of.

In the course of these subterranean gropings no one was more surprised
than I was to discover that I was getting entangled in the roots of the
same plants whose golden fruit Dr. Rendel Harris was gathering from his
Olympian heights. But the contrast in our respective points of view was
perhaps responsible for the different appearance the growths assumed.

To drop the metaphor, while he was searching for the origins of the
deities a few centuries before the Christian era began, I was finding
their more or less larval forms flourishing more than twenty centuries
before the commencement of his story. For the gods and goddesses of his
narrative were only the thinly disguised representatives of much more
ancient deities decked out in the sumptuous habiliments of Greek
culture.

In his lecture on Aphrodite, Dr. Rendel Harris claimed that the goddess
was a personification of the mandrake; and I think he made out a good
prima facie case in support of his thesis. But other scholars have set
forth equally valid reasons for associating Aphrodite with the argonaut,
the octopus, the purpura, and a variety of other shells, both univalves
and bivalves. <span id="fr_244"></span>[3](#fn_244.md)

The goddess has also been regarded as a personification of water,

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

the ocean, or its foam. <span id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_245.md) Then again
she is closely linked with pigs, cows, lions, deer, goats, rams,
dolphins, and a host of other creatures, not forgetting the dove, the
swallow, the partridge, the sparling, the goose, and the swan. <span
id="fr_246"></span>[2](#fn_246.md)

The mandrake theory does not explain, or give adequate recognition to,
any of these facts. Nor does Dr. Rendel Harris suggest why it is so
dangerous an operation to dig up the mandrake which he identifies with
the goddess, or why it is essential to secure the assistance of a
dog <span id="fr_247"></span>[3](#fn_247.md) in the process. The
explanation of this fantastic fable gives an important clue to
Aphrodite's antecedents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_234"></span>[140:1](eod30.htm#fr_234.md) An elaboration of a
lecture delivered at the John Rylands Library, on 14 November, 1917.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[141:1](eod30.htm#fr_235.md) "Mycenæan Tree and
Pillar Cult," p. 52. Compare also A. E. W. Budge, "The Gods of the
Egyptians," Vol. I, p. 435.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[142:1](eod30.htm#fr_236.md) With a strange
disregard of Sir Arthur Evans's "Mycenæan Tree and Pillar Cult," Mr. H.
R. Hall makes the following remarks in his "Ægean Archæology" (p. 150):
"The origin of the goddess Aphrodite has long been taken for granted. It
has been regarded as a settled fact that she was Semitic, and came to
Greece from Phœnicia or Cyprus. But the new discoveries have thrown
this, like other received ideas, into the melting-pot, for the Minoans
undoubtedly worshipped an Aphrodite. We see her, naked and with her
doves, on gold plaques from one of the Mycenæan shaft-graves
(Schuchhardt, *Schliemann*, Figs. 180, 181), which must be as old as the
First Late Minoan period (*c*. 1600-1500 B.C.), and not rising from the
foam, but sailing over it—in a boat, naked, on the lost gold ring from
Mochlos. It is evident now that she was not only a Canaanitish-Syrian
goddess, but was common to all the people of the Levant. She is
Aphrodite-Paphia in Cyprus, Ashtaroth-Astarte in Canaan, Atargatis in
Syria, Derketo in Philistria, Hathor in Egypt; what the Minoans called
her we do not know, unless she was Britomartis. She must take her place
by the side of Rhea-Diktynna in the Minoan pantheon."

It is not without interest to note that on the Mochlos ring the goddess
is sailing in a papyrus float of Egyptian type, like the moon-goddess in
her crescent moon.

The association of this early representative of Aphrodite with doves is
of special interest in view of Highnard's attempt ("Le Mythe de Venus,"
*Annales du Musée Guimet*, T. 1, 1880, p. 23) to derive the name of "la
déesse à la colombe" from the Chaldean and Phœnician *phrit* or *phrut*
meaning "a dove".

Mr. Hall might have extended his list of homologues to Mesopotamia,
Iran, and India, to Europe and Further Asia, to America, and, in fact,
every part of the world that harbours goddesses.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[142:2](eod30.htm#fr_237.md) "Shells as Evidence
of the Migration of Early Culture."

<span id="fn_238"></span>[143:1](eod30.htm#fr_238.md) "The Ascent of
Olympus."

<span id="fn_239"></span>[143:2](eod30.htm#fr_239.md)A striking
confirmation of the fact that the mandrake is really a surrogate of the
cowry is afforded by the practice in modern Greece of using the mandrake
carried in a leather bag in the same way (and for the same magical
purpose as a love philtre) as the Baganda of East Africa use the cowry
(in a leather bag) at the present time.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[143:3](eod30.htm#fr_240.md) Old Gerade was frank
enough to admit that he "never could perceive shape of man or woman"
(quoted by Rendel Harris, *op. cit.*, p. 110).

<span id="fn_241"></span>[143:4](eod30.htm#fr_241.md) "Jacob and the
Mandrakes," *Proceedings of the British Academy*, Vol. VIII, p. 22.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[144:1](eod30.htm#fr_242.md) The John Rylands
Library.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[144:2](eod30.htm#fr_243.md) "The Ascent of
Olympus."

<span id="fn_244"></span>[144:3](eod30.htm#fr_244.md) See the memoirs by
Tümpel, Jahn, Houssay, and Jackson, to which reference is made elsewhere
in these pages.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[145:1](eod30.htm#fr_245.md) The well-known
circumstantial story told in Hesiod's theogony.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[145:2](eod30.htm#fr_246.md) See the article
"Aphrodite" in Roscher's "Lexikon".

<span id="fn_247"></span>[145:3](eod30.htm#fr_247.md) Sir James Frazer's
claim that the incident of the ass in a late Jewish story of Jacob and
the mandrakes (*op. cit.*, p. 20) "helps us to understand the function
of the dog," is quite unsupported. The learned guardian of the Golden
Bough does not explain how it helps us to understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Search for the Elixir of Life. Blood as Life.](eod31.md)
