[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod31)  [Next](eod33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE COWRY AS A GIVER OF LIFE.

Blood and its substitutes, however, were not the only materials that had
acquired a reputation for vitalizing qualities in the Reindeer Epoch.
For there is a good deal of evidence to suggest that shells also were
regarded, even in that remote time, as life-giving amulets.

If the loss of blood was at first the only recognized cause of death,
the act of birth was clearly the only process of life-giving. The portal
by which a child entered the world was regarded, therefore, not only as
the channel of birth, but also as the actual giver of life. <span
id="fr_257"></span>[2](#fn_257) The large Red Sea cowry-shell, which
closely simulates this "giver of life," then came to be endowed by
popular imagination with the same powers. Hence the shell was used in
the same way as red ochre or carnelian: it was placed in the grave to
confer vitality on the dead, and worn on bracelets and necklaces to
secure good luck by using the "giver of life" to avert the risk of
danger to life. Thus the general life-giving properties of blood, blood
substitutes, and shells, came to be assimilated the one with the
other. <span id="fr_258"></span>[3](#fn_258)

At first it was probably its more general power of averting death or
giving vitality to the dead that played the more obtrusive part in the
magical use of the shell. But the circumstances which led to the

<span id="img_fig18"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
18](tn/fig18.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig18.jpg)  
Fig. 18  
</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Fig</span>. 18.—(*a*) <span
class="smallcaps">The Archaic Egyptian slate palette of Narmer showing,
perhaps, the earliest design of Hathor (at the upper corners of the
palette) as a woman with cow's horns and ears (compare Flinders Petrie,
"The Royal Tombs of the First Dynasty," Part I, 1900, Plate xxvii, Fig.
71). The pharaoh is wearing a belt from which are suspended four
cow-headed Hathor figures in place of the cowry-amulets of more
primitive peoples. This affords corroboration of the view that Hathor
assumed the functions originally attributed to the cowry-shell.</span>

(*b*) <span class="smallcaps">The king's *Sporran*, where
Hathor-heads</span> (*H*) <span class="smallcaps">take the place of the
cowries of the primitive girdle.</span>

<span id="img_fig19"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
19](tn/fig19.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig19.jpg)  
Fig. 19  
</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Fig</span>. 19.—<span class="smallcaps">The
front of Stela B (famous for the realistic representations of the Indian
elephant at its upper corners), one of the ancient Maya monuments at
Copan, Central America (after Maudslay's photograph and diagram)</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">The girdle of the chief figure is decorated both
with shells (*Oliva* or *Conus*) and amulets representing human faces
corresponding to the Hathor-heads on the Narmer palette (Fig.
18).</span>

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

development of the shell's symbolism naturally and inevitably conferred
upon the cowry special power over women. It was the surrogate of the
life-giving organ. It became an amulet to increase the fertility of
women and to help them in childbirth. It was, therefore, worn by girls
suspended from a girdle, so as to be as near as possible to the organ it
was supposed to simulate and whose potency it was believed to be able to
reinforce and intensify. Just as bracelets and necklaces of carnelian
were used to confer on either sex the vitalizing virtues of blood, which
it was supposed to simulate, so also cowries, or imitations of them made
of metal or stone, were worn as bracelets, necklaces, or hair-ornaments,
to confer health and good luck in both sexes. But these ideas received a
much further extension.

As the giver of life, the cowry came to have attributed to it by some
people definite powers of creation. It was not merely an amulet to
increase fertility: it was itself the actual parent of mankind, the
creator of all living things; and the next step was to give these
maternal functions material expression, and personify the cowry as an
actual woman in the form of a statuette with the distinctly feminine
characters grossly exaggerated; <span id="fr_259"></span>[1](#fn_259)
and in the domain of belief to create the image of a Great Mother, who
was the parent of the universe.

Thus gradually there developed out of the cowry-amulet the conception of
a creator, the giver of life, health, and good luck. This Great Mother,
at first with only vaguely defined traits, was probably the first deity
that the wit of man devised to console him with her watchful care over
his welfare in this life and to give him assurance as to his fate in the
future.

At this stage I should like to emphasize the fact that these beliefs had
taken shape long before any definite ideas had been formulated as to the
physiology of animal reproduction and before agriculture was practised.

Man had not yet come to appreciate the importance of vegetable
fertility, nor had he yet begun to frame theories of the fertilizing
powers of water, or give specific expression to them by creating the god
Osiris in his own image,

Nor had he begun to take anything more than the most casual

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

interest in the sun, the moon, and the stars. He had not yet devised a
sky-world nor created a heaven. When, for reasons that I have already
discussed, <span id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_260) the theory of the
fertilizing and the animating power of water was formulated, the beliefs
concerning this element were assimilated with those which many ages
previously had grown up in explanation of the potency of blood and
shells. In addition to fertilizing the earth, water could also animate
the dead. The rivers and the seas were in fact a vast reservoir of this
animating substance. The powers of the cowry, as a product of the sea,
were rationalized into an expression of the great creative force of the
water.

A bowl of water became the symbol of the fruitfulness of woman. Such
symbolism implied that woman, or her uterus, was a receptacle into which
the seminal fluid was poured and from which a new being emerged in a
flood of amniotic fluid.

The burial of shells with the dead is an extremely ancient practice, for
cowries have been found upon human skeletons of the so-called "Upper
Palæolithic Age" of Southern Europe.

At Laugerie-Basse (Dordogne) Mediterranean cowries were found arranged
in pairs upon the body; two pairs on the forehead, one near each arm,
four in the region of the thighs and knees, and two upon each foot.
Others were found in the Mentone caves, and are peculiarly important,
because, upon the same stratum as the skeleton with which they were
associated, was found part of a *Cassis rufa*, a shell whose habitat
does not extend any nearer than the Indian Ocean. <span
id="fr_261"></span>[2](#fn_261)

These facts are very important. In the first place they reveal the great
antiquity of the practice of burying shells with the dead, presumably
for the purpose of "life-giving". Secondly, they suggest the possibility
that their magical value as givers of life may be more ancient than
their specific use as intensifiers of the fertility of women. Thirdly,
the association of these practices with the use of the shell *Cassis
rufa* indicates a very early cultural contact between the people living
upon the North-Western shores of the Mediterranean in the Reindeer Age
and the dwellers on the coasts of the Indian Ocean; and the probability

<span id="img_fig20"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
20](tn/fig20.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig20.jpg)  
Fig. 20  
</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Fig</span>. 20.—<span class="smallcaps">Diagrams
illustrating the form of cowry-belts worn in</span> (*a*) <span
class="smallcaps">East Africa and</span> (*b*) Oceania respectively.

(*c*) <span class="smallcaps">Ancient Indian girdle from the figure of
Sirima Devata on the Bharat Tope), consisting of strings of pearls and
precious stones, and what seem to be fourth row from the top) models of
cowries.</span>

(*d*) <span class="smallcaps">The Copan girdle (from Fig. 19) in which
both shells and heads of deities are represented. the two objects
suspended from the belt between the heads recall Hathor's sistra</span>.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

that these special uses of shells by the former were inspired by the
latter.

This hint assumes a special significance when we first get a clear view
of the more fully-developed shell-cults of the Eastern Mediterranean
many centuries later. <span id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_262) For then we
find definite indications that the cultural uses of shells were
obviously borrowed from the Erythræan area.

Long before the shell-amulet became personified as a woman the
Mediterranean people had definitely adopted the belief in the cowry's
ability to give life and birth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_256"></span>[150:1](eod31.htm#fr_256) Davies and Gardiner,
"The Tomb of Amenemhet," p. 112.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[150:2](eod32.htm#fr_257) As it is still called
in the Semitic languages. In the Egyptian Pyramid Texts there is a
reference to a new being formed "by the vulva of Tefnut" (Breasted).

<span id="fn_258"></span>[150:3](eod32.htm#fr_258) Many customs and
beliefs of primitive peoples suggest that this correlation of the
attributes of blood and shells went much deeper than the similarity of
their use in burial ceremonies and for making necklaces and bracelets.
The fact that the monthly effusion of blood in women ceased during
pregnancy seems to have given rise to the theory, that the new life of
the child was actually formed from the blood thus retained. The beliefs
that grew up in explanation of the placenta form part of the system of
interpretation of these phenomena: for the placenta was regarded as a
mass of clotted blood (intimately related to the child which was
supposed to be derived from part of the same material) which harboured
certain elements of the child's mentality (because blood was the
substance of consciousness).

<span id="fn_259"></span>[151:1](eod32.htm#fr_259) See S. Reinach, "Les
Déesses Nues dans l’Art Oriental et dans l’Art Grec," *Revue Archéol.*,
T. XXVI, 1895, p. 367. Compare also the figurines of the so-called Upper
Palæolithic Period in Europe.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[152:1](eod32.htm#fr_260) Chapter I.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[152:2](eod32.htm#fr_261) The literature
relating to these important discoveries has been summarized by Wilfrid
Jackson in his "Shells as Evidence of the Migrations of Early Culture,"
pp. 135-7.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[153:1](eod32.htm#fr_262) Cowries were obtained
in Neolithic sites at Hissarlik and Spain (Siret, *op. cit.*, p. 18).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Origin of Clothing](eod33)
