[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod36)  [Next](eod38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE SWASTIKA.

Houssay (*op. cit. supra*) has made the interesting suggestion that the
swastika may have been derived from such conventionalized
representations of the octopus as are shown in [Fig.
23](eod36.htm#img_fig23). This series of sketches is taken from Tümpel's
memoir, which provided the foundation for Houssay's hypothesis.

A vast amount of attention has been devoted to this lucky symbol, <span
id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_314) which still enjoys a widespread vogue at
the present day, after a history of several thousand years. Although so
much has been written in attempted explanation of the swastika since
Houssay made his suggestion, so far as I am aware no one has paid the
slightest attention to his hypothesis or made even a passing reference
to his memoir. <span id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_315) Fantastic and
far-fetched though it may seem at first sight (though surely not more so
than the strictly orthodox solar theory advocated by Mr. Cook or Mrs.
Nuttall's astral speculations) Houssay's suggestion offers an
explanation of some of the salient attributes of the swastika on which
the alternative hypotheses shed little or no light.

Among the earliest known examples of the symbol are those

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

engraved upon the so-called "owl-shaped" (but, as Houssay has
conclusively demonstrated, really octopus-shaped) vases and a metal
figurine found by Schliemann in his excavations of the hill at
Hissarlik. <span id="fr_316"></span>[1](#fn_316) The swastika is
represented upon the *mons Veneris* of these figures, which represent
the Great Mother in her form as a woman or as a pot, which is an
anthropomorphized octopus, one of the *avatars* of the Great Mother. The
symbol seems to have been intended as a fertility amulet like the cowry,
either suspended from a girdle or depicted upon a pubic shield or
conventionalized fig-leaf.

Wherever it is found the swastika is supposed to be an amulet to confer
"good luck" and long life. Both this reputation and the association with
the female organs of reproduction link up the symbol with the cowry, the
*Pterocera*, and the octopus. It is clear then that the swastika has the
same reputation for magic and the same attributes and associations as
the octopus; and it may be a conventionalized representation of it, as
Houssay has suggested.

It must not be assumed that the identification of the swastika with the
Great Mother and her powers of giving life and resurrection
*necessarily* invalidates the solar and astral theories recently
championed by Mr. Cook and Mrs. Nuttall respectively. I have already
called attention to the fact that the Sun-god derived his existence and
all his attributes from his mother. The whole symbolism of the Winged
Disk and the Wheel of the Sun and their reputation for life-giving and
destruction were adopted from the Great Mother. These well-established
facts should prepare us to recognize that the admission of the truth of
Houssay's suggestion would not necessarily invalidate the more widely
accepted solar significance of the swastika.

Tümpel called attention to the fact that, when they set about
conventionalizing the octopus, the Mycenæan artists often resorted to
the practice of representing pairs of "arms" as units and so making
four-limbed and three-limbed forms ([Fig. 23](eod36.htm#img_fig23)),
which Houssay regards as the prototypes of the swastika and the triskele
respectively. That such a process may have played a part in the
development of the symbol is further suggested by the form of a
Transcaucasian swastika found by Rössler, <span
id="fr_317"></span>[2](#fn_317) who assigns it to the Late Bronze or
Early Iron Age. Each

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

of the four limbs is bifurcated at its extremity. Moreover they exhibit
the series of spots, so often found upon or alongside the limbs of the
symbol, which suggest the conventional way of representing the suckers
of the octopus in the Mycenæan designs ([Fig. 23](eod36.htm#img_fig23)).

Another remarkable picture of a swastika-like emblem has been found in
America. <span id="fr_318"></span>[1](#fn_318) The elephant-headed god
sits in the centre and four pairs of arms radiate from him, each of them
equipped with definite suckers.

Another possible way in which the design of a four-limbed swastika may
have been derived from an octopus is suggested by the gypsum weight
found in 1901 by Sir Arthur Evans <span id="fr_319"></span>[2](#fn_319)
in the West Magazine of the palace at Knossos (*circa* 1500 B.C.). Upon
the surface of this weight the form of an octopus has been depicted,
four of the arms of which stand out in much stronger relief than the
others.

The number four has a peculiar mystical significance (*vide infra*, [p.
206](eod40.htm#page_206)) and is especially associated with the Sun-god
Horus. This fact may have played some part in the process of reduction
of the number of limbs of the octopus to four; or alternatively it may
have helped to emphasize the solar associations of the symbol, which
other considerations were responsible for suggesting. The designs upon
the pots from Hissarlik show that at a relatively early epoch the
swastika was confused with the sun's disc represented as a wheel with
four spokes. <span id="fr_320"></span>[3](#fn_320) But the solar
attributes of the swastika are secondary to those of life-giving and
luck-bringing, with which it was originally endowed as a form of the
Great Mother.

The only serious fact which arouses some doubt as to the validity of
Houssay's theory is the discovery of an early painted vase at Susa
decorated with an unmistakable swastika. Edmond Pottier, who has
described the ceramic ware from Susa, <span
id="fr_321"></span>[4](#fn_321) regards this pot as Proto-Elamite of the
earliest period. If Pottier's claim is justified we have in this
isolated specimen from Susa the earliest example of the swastika.
Moreover, it comes from a region in which the symbol was supposed to be
wholly absent.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

This raises a difficult problem for solution. Is the Proto-Elamite
swastika the prototype of the symbol whose world-wide migrations have
been studied by Wilson (*op. cit. supra*)? Or is it an instance of
independent evolution? If it falls within the first category and is
really the parent of the early Anatolian swastikas, how is it to be
explained? Was the conventionalization of the octopus design much more
ancient than the earliest Trojan examples of the symbol? Or was the
Susian design adopted in the West and given a symbolic meaning which it
did not have before then?

These are questions which we are unable to answer at present because the
necessary information is lacking. I have enumerated them merely to
suggest that any hasty inferences regarding the bearing of the Susian
design upon the general problem are apt to be misleading. Vincent <span
id="fr_322"></span>[1](#fn_322) claims that the fact of the swastika
having been in use by ceramic artists in Crete and Susiana many
centuries before the appearance of Mycenæan art is fatal to Houssay's
hypothesis. But I think it is too soon to make such an assumption. The
swastika was already a rigidly conventionalized symbol when we first
know it both in the Mediterranean and in Susiana. It may therefore have
a long history behind it. The octopus may possibly have begun to play a
part in the development of this symbolism before the Egyptian Bes (*vide
supra*, [p. 171](eod36.htm#page_171)) was evolved, perhaps even before
the time of the Coptos statues of Min (*supra*, [p.
169](eod36.htm#page_169)), or in the early days of Sumerian history when
the conventional form of the water-pot was being determined (*infra*,
[p. 179](eod38.htm#page_179)). These are mere conjectures, which I
mention merely for the purpose of suggesting that the time is not yet
ripe for using such arguments as Vincent's finally to dispose of
Houssay's octopus-theory.

There can be no doubt that the symbolism of the Mycenæan spiral and the
volute is closely related to the octopus. In fact, the evidence provided
by Minoan paintings and Mycenæan decorative art demonstrates that the
spiral as a symbol of life-giving was definitely derived from the
octopus. The use of the volute on Egyptian scarabs <span
id="fr_323"></span>[2](#fn_323) and also in the decoration of an early
Thracian statuette of a nude

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

goddess <span id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_324) indicate that it was
employed like the spiral and octopus as a life-symbol.

In Spanish graves of the Early and Middle Neolithic types M. Siret found
cowry-shells in association with a series of flint implements, crude
idols, and pottery almost precisely reproducing the forms of similar
objects found with cowries and pecten shells at Hissarlik. <span
id="fr_325"></span>[2](#fn_325) But when the Æneolithic phase of culture
dawned in Spain, and the Ægean octopus-motif made its appearance there,
the culture as a whole reveals unmistakable evidence of a predominantly
Egyptian inspiration.

M. Siret claims, however, that, even in the Neolithic phase in Spain,
the crude idols represent forms derived from the octopus in the Eastern
Mediterranean (p. 59 *et seq.*). He regards the octopus as "a
conventional symbol of the ocean, or, more precisely, of the fertilizing
watery principle" (p. 19). He elucidates a very interesting feature of
the Æneolithic representation of the octopus in Spain. The spiral-motif
of the Ægean gives place to an angular design, which he claims to be due
to the influence of the conventional Egyptian way of representing water
(p. 40). If this interpretation is correct—and, in spite of the
slenderness of the evidence, I am inclined to accept it—it affords a
remarkable illustration of the effects of culture-contact in the
conventionalization of designs, to which Dr. Rivers has called
attention. <span id="fr_326"></span>[3](#fn_326) Whatever explanation
may be provided of this method of representing the arms of the octopus
with its angularly bent extremities, it seems to have an important
bearing on Houssay's hypothesis of the swastika's origin. For it would
reveal the means by which the spiral or volute shape of the limbs of the
swastika became transformed into the angular form, which is so
characteristic of the conventional symbol. <span
id="fr_327"></span>[4](#fn_327)

The significance of the spiral as a form of the Great Mother inevitably
led to its identification with the thunder weapon, like all her

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

other surrogates. I have already referred (Chapter II, [p.
98](eod22.htm#page_98)) to the association of the spiral with thunder
and lightning in Eastern Asia. But other factors played a significant
part in determining this specialization. In Egypt the god Amen was
identified with the ram; and this creature's spirally curved horn became
the symbol of the thunder-god throughout the Mediterranean area, <span
id="fr_328"></span>[1](eod38.htm#fn_328) and then further afield in
Europe, Africa, and Asia, where, for instance, we see Agni's ram with
the characteristic horn. This blending of the influence of the octopus-
and the ram's-horn-motifs made the spiral a conventional representation
of thunder. This is displayed in its most definite form in China, Japan,
Indonesia, and America, where we find the separate spiral used as a
thunder-symbol, and the spiral appendage on the side of the head as a
token of the god of thunder. <span
id="fr_329"></span>[2](eod38.htm#fn_329)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_314"></span>[173:2](eod37.htm#fr_314) Thomas Wilson ("The
Swastika, the Earliest Known Symbol, and its Migrations; with
Observations on the Migration of Certain Industries in Prehistoric
Times," *Report of the U. S. National Museum* for 1894, Washington,
1896) has given a full and well-illustrated summary of most of the
literature: further information is provided by Count d’Alviella (*op.
cit. supra*), "The Migration of Symbols"; by Zelia Nuttall ("The
Fundamental Principles of Old and New World Civilizations,"
*Archæological and Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum*,
Cambridge, Mass., 1901); and Arthur Bernard Cook ("Zeus, A Study in
Ancient Religion," Vol. I, Cambridge, 1914, pp. 472 *et seq*.).

<span id="fn_315"></span>[173:3](eod37.htm#fr_315) Since this has been
printed Mr. W. J. Perry has called my attention to a short article by
René Croste ("Le Svastika," *Bull. Trimestriel de la Société Bayonnaise
d’Études Regionales*," 1918), in which Houssay's hypothesis is mentioned
as having been adopted by Guilleminot ("Les Nouveaux Horizons de la
Science").

<span id="fn_316"></span>[174:1](eod37.htm#fr_316) Wilson (*op. cit.*,
pp. 829-33 and Figs. 125, 128, and 129) has collected the relevant
passages and illustrations from Schliemann's writings.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[174:2](eod37.htm#fr_317) *Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie*, Bd. 37, p. 148.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[175:1](eod37.htm#fr_318) Seler, *Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie*, Bd., 41, p. 409.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[175:2](eod37.htm#fr_319) *Corolla
Numismatica*, 1906, p. 342.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[175:3](eod37.htm#fr_320) A. B. Cook, "Zeus,"
pp. 198 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[175:4](eod37.htm#fr_321) "Etude Historique et
Chronologique sur les Vases Peints de l’Acropole de Suse," *Mémoires de
la Délégation en Perse*, T. XIII, *Rech. Archèol.*, 5<sup>e</sup> série,
1912, Plate XLI, Fig. 3.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[176:1](eod37.htm#fr_322) "Canaan," p. 340,
footnote.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[176:2](eod37.htm#fr_323) Alice Grenfell,
*Journal of Egyptian Archæology*, Vol. II, 1915, p. 217: and *Ancient
Egypt*, 1916, Part I, p. 23.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[177:1](eod37.htm#fr_324) S. Reinach, *Revue
Archéol.*, T. XXVI, 1895, p. 369.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[177:2](eod37.htm#fr_325) L. Siret, "Questions
de Chronologie et d’Ethnographie Ibériques," 1913, p. 18, Fig. 3.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[177:3](eod37.htm#fr_326) Rivers, "History of
Melanesian Society," Vol. II, p. 374; also *Report Brit. Association*,
1912, p. 599.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[177:4](eod37.htm#fr_327) M. Siret assigns the
date of the appearance in Spain of the highly conventionalized angular
form of octopus to the time between the fifteenth and the twelfth
centuries B.C.; and he attributes it to Phœnician influence (p. 63).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mother Pot](eod38)
