[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eod40)  [Next](eod42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434685950/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG48/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Evolution of the Dragon*, by G. Elliot Smith, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE MEASUREMENT OF TIME.

It was the similarity of the periodic phases of the moon and of
womankind that originally suggested the identification of the Great
Mother with the moon, and originated the belief that the moon was the
regulator of human beings. <span id="fr_398"></span>[1](#fn_398) This
was the starting-point of the system of astrology and the belief in
Fates. The goddess of birth and death controlled and measured the lives
of mankind.

But incidentally the moon determined the earliest subdivision of time
into months; and the moon-goddess lent the sanctity of her divine
attributes to the number twenty-eight.

The sun was obviously the determiner of day and night, and its rising
and setting directed men's attention to the east and the west as
cardinal points intimately associated with the daily birth and death of
the sun. We have no certain clue as to the factors which first brought
the north and the south into prominence. But it seems probable that the
direction of the river Nile, <span id="fr_399"></span>[2](#fn_399) which
was the guide to the orientation of the corpse in its grave, may have
been responsible for giving special sanctity to these other cardinal
points. The association of the direction of the deceased's head with the
position of the original homeland and the eventual home of the dead
would have made the south a "divine" region in Predynastic times. For
similar reasons the north may have acquired special significance in the
Early Dynastic period. <span id="fr_400"></span>[3](#fn_400)

When the north and the south were added to the other two cardinal points
the intimate association of the east and the west with the measurement
of time would be extended to include all the four cardinal points. <span
id="fr_401"></span>[4](#fn_401) Four became a sacred number associated
with time-measurement, and especially with the sun. <span
id="fr_402"></span>[5](#fn_402)

Many other factors played a part in the establishment of the

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

sanctity of the number four. Professor Lethaby has suggested <span
id="fr_403"></span>[1](#fn_403) that the four-sided building was
determined by certain practical factors, such as the desirability of
fashioning a room to accommodate a woven mat, which was necessarily of a
square or oblong form. But the study of the evolution of the early
Egyptian grave and tomb-superstructures suggests that the early use of
slabs of stone, wooden boards, and mud-bricks helped in the process of
determining the four-sided form of house and room.

When, out of these rude beginnings, the vast four-sided pyramid was
developed, the direction of its sides was brought into relationship with
the four cardinal points; and there was a corresponding development and
enrichment of the symbolism of the number four. The form of the divine
house of the dead king, who was the god, was thus assimilated to the
form of the universe, which was conceived as an oblong area at the four
corners of which pillars supported the sky, as the four legs supported
the Celestial Cow.

Having invested the numbers four and twenty-eight with special sanctity
and brought them into association with the measurement of time, it was a
not unnatural proceeding to subdivide the month into f our parts and so
bring the number seven into the sacred scheme. Once this was done the
moon's phases were used to justify and rationalize this procedure, and
the length of the week was incidentally brought into association with
the moon-goddess, who had seven *avatars*, perhaps originally one for
each day of the week. At a later period the number seven was arbitrarily
brought into relationship with the Pleiades.

The seven Hathors were not only mothers but fates also. Aphrodite was
chief of the fates.

The number seven is associated with the pots used by Hathor's
priestesses at the celebration inaugurating the new year; and it plays a
prominent part in the Story of the Flood. In Babylonia the sanctity of
the number received special recognition. When the goddess became the
destroyer of mankind, the device seems to have been adopted of
intensifying her powers of destruction by representing her at times as
seven demons. <span id="fr_404"></span>[2](#fn_404)

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

But the Great Mother was associated not only with the week and month but
also with the year. The evidence at our disposal seems to suggest that
the earliest year-count was determined by the annual inundation of the
river. The annual recurrence of the alternation of winter and summer
would naturally suggest in a vague way such a subdivision of time as the
year; but the exact measurement of that period and the fixing of an
arbitrary commencement, a New Year's day, were due to other reasons. In
the Story of the Destruction of Mankind it is recorded that the incident
of the soothing of Hathor by means of the blood-coloured beer (which, as
I have explained elsewhere, <span id="fr_405"></span>[1](#fn_405) is a
reference to the annual Nile flood) was celebrated annually on New
Year's day.

Hathor was regarded in tradition as the cause of the inundation. She
slaughtered mankind and so caused the original "flood": in the next
phase she was associated with the 7000 jars of red beer; and in the
ultimate version with the red-coloured river flood, which in another
story was reputed to be "the tears of Isis".

Hathor's day was in fact the date of the commencement of the inundation
and of the year; and the former event marked the beginning-of the year
and enabled men for the first time to measure its duration. Thus
Hathor <span id="fr_406"></span>[2](#fn_406) was the measurer of the
year, the month, and the week; while her son Horus (Chronus) was the
day-measurer.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

In Tylor's "Early History of Mankind" (pp. 352 *et seq*.) there is a
concise summary of some of the widespread stories of the Fountain of
Youth which restores youthfulness to the aged who drank of it or bathed
in it. He cites instances from India, Ethiopia, Europe, Indonesia,
Polynesia, and America. "The Moslem geographer, Ibn-el-Wardi, places the
Fountain of Life in the dark south-western regions of the earth" (p.
353).

The star Sothis rose heliacally on the first day of the Egyptian New
Year. <span id="fr_407"></span>[1](#fn_407) Hence it became "the second
sun in heaven," and was identified with the goddess of the New Year's
Day. The identification of Hathor with this second sun" <span
id="fr_408"></span>[2](#fn_408) may explain why the goddess is said to
have entered Re's boat. She took her place as a crown upon his forehead,
which afterwards was assumed by her surrogate, the fire-spitting
uræus-serpent. When Horus took his mother's place in the myth, he also
entered the sun-god's boat, and became the prototype of Noah seeking
refuge from the Flood in the ship the Almighty instructed him to make.

In memory of the beer-drinking episode in the Destruction of Mankind,
New Year's Day was celebrated by Hathor's priestesses in wild orgies of
beer drinking.

This event was necessarily the earliest celebration of an anniversary,
and the prototype of all the incidents associated with some special day
in the year which have been so many milestones in the historical
progress of civilization.

The first measurement of the year also naturally forms the
starting-point in the framing of a calendar.

Similar celebrations took place to inaugurate the commencement of the
year in all countries which came, either directly or indirectly, under
Egyptian influence.

The month Ἀφροδίσα (so-called from the festival of the goddess) began
the calendar of Bithynia, Cyprus, and Iasos, just as Hathor's feast was
a New Year's celebration in Egypt.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

In the celebration of these anniversaries the priestesses of Aphrodite
worked themselves up in a wild state of frenzy; and the term
ὑστήρια <span id="fr_409"></span>[1](#fn_409) became identified with the
state of emotional derangement associated with such orgies. The common
belief that the term "hysteria" is derived directly from the Greek word
for uterus is certainly erroneous. The word ὑστήρια was used in the same
sense as Ἀφροδίσα, that is, as a synonym for the festivals of the
goddess. The "hysteria" was the name for the orgy in celebration of the
goddess on New Year's day: then it was applied to the condition produced
by these excesses; and ultimately it was adopted in medicine to apply to
similar emotional disturbances. Thus both the terms "hysteria" and
"lunacy" <span id="fr_410"></span>[2](#fn_410) are intimately associated
with the earliest phases in the moon-goddess's history; and their
survival in modern medicine is a striking tribute to the strong hold of
effete superstition in this branch of the diagnosis and treatment of
disease. <span id="fr_411"></span>[3](#fn_411)

I have already referred to the association of Artemis with the portal of
birth and rebirth. As the guardian of the door her Roman representative
Diana and her masculine *avatar* Dianus or Janus gave the name to the
commencement of the year. The Great Mother not only initiated the
measurement of the year, but she (or her representative) lent her name
to the opening of the year in various countries.

But the story of the Destruction of Mankind has preserved the record not
only of the circumstances which were responsible for originating the
measurement of the year and the making of a calendar, but also of the
materials out of which were formed the mythical epochs preserved

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

in the legends of Greece and India and many other countries further
removed from the original centre of civilization When the elaboration of
the early story involved the destruction of mankind, it became necessary
to provide some explanation of the continued existence of man upon the
earth. This difficulty was got rid of by creating a new race of men from
the fragments of the old or from the clay into which they had been
transformed (*supra*, [p. 196](eod40.htm#page_196)). In course of time
this *secondary* creation became the basis of the familiar story of the
*original* creation of mankind. But the story also became transformed in
other ways. Different versions of the process of destruction were
blended into one narrative, and made into a series of catastrophes and a
succession of acts of creation. I shall quote (from Mr. T. A. Joyce's
"Mexican Archæology," p. 50) one example of these series of mythical
epochs or world ages to illustrate the method of synthesis:—

When all was dark Tezcatlipoca transformed himself into the sun to give
light to men.

1\. This sun terminated in the destruction of mankind, including a race
of giants, by *jaguars*.

2\. The second sun was Quetzalcoatl, and his age terminated in a
terrible *hurricane*, during which mankind was transformed into monkey
s.

3\. The third sun was Tlaloc, and the destruction came by a *rain of
fire*.

4\. The fourth was Chalchintlicue, and mankind was finally destroyed by
a *deluge*, during which they became fishes.

The first episode is clearly based upon the story of the lioness-form of
Hathor destroying mankind: the second is the Babylonian story of Tiamat,
modified by such Indian influences as are revealed in the *Ramayana:*
the third is inspired by the Saga of the Winged Disk; and the fourth by
the story of the Deluge.

Similar stories of world ages have been preserved in the mythologies of
Eastern Asia, India, Western Asia, and Greece, and no doubt were derived
from the same original source.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_398"></span>[206:1](eod41.htm#fr_398) The Greek Chronus was
the son of Selene.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[206:2](eod41.htm#fr_399) Or possibly the
situations of Upper and Lower Egypt.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[206:3](eod41.htm#fr_400) See G. Elliot Smith,
"The Ancient Egyptians".

<span id="fn_401"></span>[206:4](eod41.htm#fr_401) The association of
north and south with the primary subdivision of the state probably led
to the inclusion of the other two cardinal points to make the
subdivision four-fold.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[206:5](eod41.htm#fr_402) The number four was
associated with the sun-god. There were four "children of Horus" and
four spokes to the wheel of the sun.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[207:1](eod41.htm#fr_403) "Architecture," p.
24.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[207:2](eod41.htm#fr_404) See the chapter on
"Magic" in Jevons, "Comparative Religion". In his article "Magic
(Egyptian)," in Hastings’ *Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics* (p.
266), Dr. Alan Gardiner makes the following statement: <span
id="page_208">p. 208</span> "The mystical potency attaching to certain
*numbers* doubtless originated in associations of thought that to us are
obscure. The number seven, in Egyptian magic, was regarded as
particularly efficacious. Thus we find references to the seven Hathors:
cf. αἰ ἑππὰ Τύχαι τοῦ οὐρανοῦ (A. Dieterich, *Eine Mithrasliturgie*,
Leipzig, 1910, p. 71): 'the seven daughters of Re,' who 'stand and weep
and make seven knots in their seven tunics'; and similarly 'the seven
hawks who are in front of the barque of Re'."

Are the seven daughters of Re the seven days of the week, or the
representatives of Hathor corresponding to the seven days?

<span id="fn_405"></span>[208:1](eod41.htm#fr_405) Chapter II, [p.
118](eod24.htm#page_118).

<span id="fn_406"></span>[208:2](eod41.htm#fr_406) We have already seen
that the primitive aspect of life-giving that played an essential part
in the development of the story we are considering was the search for
the means by which youth could be restored. It is significant that
Hathor's reputed ability to restore youth is mentioned in the Pyramid
Texts in association with her functions as the measurer of years: for
she is said "to turn back the years from King Teti," so that they pass
over him without increasing his age (Breasted, "Thought and Religion in
Ancient Egypt," p. 124).

<span id="fn_407"></span>[209:1](eod41.htm#fr_407) Breasted ("Religion
and Thought in Ancient Egypt," p. 22) states that as the inundation
began at the rising of Sothis, the star of Isis, sister of Osiris, they
said to him \[*i.e.* Osiris\]: "The beloved daughter, Sothis, makes thy
fruits (rnpwt) in her name of 'Year' (rnpt)".

<span id="fn_408"></span>[209:2](eod41.htm#fr_408) The Great Mother was
identified with the moon, but when she became specialized, her
representative adopted Sothis or Venus as her star.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[210:1](eod41.htm#fr_409) "At Argos the
principal fête of Aphrodite was called ὑστήρια because they offered
sacrifices of pigs ("Athen." III, 49, 96; "Clem. Alex. Protr."
33)"—Article "Aphrodisia," *Dict. des Antiquités*, p. 308. The Greek
word for pig had the double significance of "pig" and "female organs of
reproduction".

<span id="fn_410"></span>[210:2](eod41.htm#fr_410) Aphrodite sends
Aphrodisiac "mania" (see Tümpel, *op. cit.*, pp. 394 and 395).

<span id="fn_411"></span>[210:3](eod41.htm#fr_411) There is still widely
prevalent the belief in the possibility of being "moonstruck," and many
people, even medical men who ought to know better, solemnly expound to
their students the influence of the moon in producing "lunacy". If it
were not invidious one could cite instances of this from the writings of
certain teachers of psychological medicine in this country within the
last few months. The persistence of these kinds of traditions is one of
the factors that make it so difficult to effect any real reform in the
treatment of mental disease in this country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seven-Headed Dragon](eod42)
