[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sig02)  [Next](sig04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0827600607/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Selected Religious Poems of Solomon ibn Gabirol*, tr. by Israel
Zangwill, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

### ON TRANSLATING GABIROL

#### I

In his well-known "Romanzero" the greatest modern poet of Jewish birth,
Heinrich Heine, satirizing the ignorance of Hebrew literature, wrote—I
cite an early translation of my own which preserves the metre of the
original—

Jewish girls of wealth and fashion,  
Future mothers of free burghers,  
Culling all the latest knowledge  
In the dearest Paris *pensions*,

Know by heart the names of mummies,  
All the stuffed Egyptian Pharaohs,  
Merovingian shadow-monarchs  
Whose perukes were yet unpowdered,

Also pig-tailed Kings of China,  
Porcelain-pagoda princes,  
Pat from tongue it all comes tripping.  
Clever girls! But oh, good heavens!

Should you ask about the famous  
Names that formed the golden triad  
Of our Jewish constellation,  
Our Arabic-Spanish singers, <span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

These three stars if you should ask of,  
Our Jehuda ben Halevi,  
Or our Solomon Gabirol,  
Or our Moses Ibn Ezra,

Should you bring up names of that sort,  
Then with large eyes will regard you  
All the girls, the pretty darlings,  
Dumb-struck, mud-stuck, disconcerted.

Later in the same poem, Ibn Gabirol is singled out as the thinker among
poets, and the poet for thinkers; and finally our eleventh-century
singer is compared to that troubadour, that mediæval nightingale, who
delicately in the dusk of the Dark Ages sang "The Romance of the Rose."
Gabirol, says Heine, is the nightingale of piety, the consecrated
Minnesinger whose rose was God.

#### II

The present volume of translations from this rare singer of the Ghetto
limits itself to such of his poems as have been incorporated in or
designed for the liturgy of the Synagogue, though it is far from
exhausting even these. But Gabirol is not exclusively a devotional poet.

All the arts began with religion, and in Gabirol we catch sight of
Hebrew poetry in its period of transition when it was passing from a
purely

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

devotional to a secular character. Even the devotional begins to root
itself not in tradition but in the individual experience. In a
remarkable poem beginning "Three witnesses have I," Gabirol speaks of
the starry world without and the moral law within almost with the modern
cosmic mysticism of a Kant or a Wordsworth. There is thus a double
movement by which the devotional is freeing itself from the hypnotism of
the Biblical and liturgical *Anschauung* and taking on a personal
quality, while at the same time the subject-matter is enlarging itself
with elegies, epigrams, and Horatian epistles. Gabirol’s Hiawatha-like
jingle on the meanness of his host who failed to give him wine—

"May the man, his son or daughter  
 Be for ever doomed to water!"

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —is sometimes
cited as the first secular lyric in Hebrew poetry; but although this is
not accurate, little that is prior has been preserved except versified
mnemonics about the calendar, or grammar, and verse of a gnomic if not a
pious character. While the Bible itself is full of matchless poetry,
both primitive and cultured, the purely profane element was so
discountenanced in this thesaurus of national

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

literature that "the Song of Solomon" slipped in only as a religious
allegory, "Ecclesiastes" scraped through under the ægis of Solomon,
while "Job" was ascribed to Moses. And this tendency to make Hebrew
literature synonymous with sacred literature was aggravated by the
limitations of Jewish life in the Diaspora, whose sole organ of common
consciousness was the Synagogue with its holy lore.

The Jew, living as a "Son of the Law," and continuing to live only
because he was a "Son of the Law," did not readily develop a lay
literature. Life circled round the Bible. And Torah, not wine, woman, or
song, was the poet’s expected theme. Luther’s trio of themes came along
more copiously in Moses Ibn Ezra and Judah ha-Levi; in al-Ḥarizi we get
a semi-burlesque Hudibras method, modelled on the *Makamat* of Ḥariri,
and in our own day this evolution from liturgical literature has reached
its climax in the nature-poetry of a Jacob Cohen, the sensuous strains
of a Shneor or the massive bitterness of a Byalik.

But in the Spanish-Hebrew period we see the poet, like some tropical
lung-fish that can breathe either in air or water, moving equally
between the sacred and the profane. Gabirol is the first Hebrew poet to
use the secular image of

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

the Muse, which he figures as a dove, white as a lily of Sharon, with
golden wings and a bell-like voice. He is the first to paint the sunset
or the autumn, and in a Shelley-like image to show us Night spreading
her wings over the tired Day. And he is the first Hebrew poet to handle
philosophy.

If he is not also the first to handle rhyme, he is the first great
singer to cramp himself with that exhilarating restriction. Rhyme was
not an element of Hebrew poetry at its Biblical period. And as Joseph
Jacobs has pointed out, Hebrew lends itself less freely to rhyme than
Arabic, having fewer of those primitive inflections which smooth the
poet’s path, with the result that much of Hebrew rhyming is in *o* or
*im* or *os* in damnable iteration. 'Rhyme,' to quote from my book, *The
Voice of Jerusalem*, 'was not introduced into Hebrew poetry before the
seventh century, when it appears in the Piyyutim of Yannai. Milton calls
rhyme "that barbarous invention to set off lame metre"; but there was
not even metre in Hebrew then. That was not brought in till three
centuries later, by Dunash ibn Labrat, a young poet of Bagdad origin,
who probably picked it up from the Fez poets. "Such a thing hath
hitherto been unknown in Israel," said Saadia, the great Gaon

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

of Sura, when Dunash showed him Hebrew jigging to Arab measures.'

Without rhyme or metre, what was it that constituted Hebrew poetry? Some
say parallelism. But even parallelism was not an indispensable element.
The only indispensable element of Hebrew poetry was accent. In short
what we now call free verse is closest to the old Hebrew form of
expression. Sincerity, not art, is the first quest of the young poet of
to-day. Art was never in the thought of a Biblical singer, so consumed
was he by sincerity. And thus in free verse do the ends of the ages
meet.

But Gabirol cumbers himself both with rhyme and metre, for he is almost
Swinburnian in his technical mastery, in his power of dancing in
fetters—witness the amazing virtuosity of his versified Hebrew grammar.
I have made no effort to follow his exact verse-schemes, well content if
I could get an analogous effect by the use of English measures
appropriate to his theme. To translate him into bare prose seems to me
the only license unpermissible, for poetry is largely verbal
enchantment, and to leave out the singing element is to falsify the
original even more badly than by mistranslation. But the effort to
reproduce this singing element literally, especially the effort to
render the exact Hebrew

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

rhyme-scheme, would equally conduce to falsification. Butler shrewdly
pointed out in "Hudibras" that

"Rhyme the rudder is of verses  
 By which like ships they steer their courses."

Even if Gabirol himself never had to deviate from his meaning or from
lucidity to steer round rhyming point, it is almost impossible for
translators not to tack or divagate, with the result that many versified
versions of Hebrew poetry are so padded out for rhyme’s sake as
occasionally to conceal altogether the structure of the original. I do
not suppose I have always escaped this reef, but only in one
poem—"Benediction"—have I permitted myself any marked expansion of the
theme, and here the original seemed to be swelling gloriously with the
implied but unsaid.

#### III

In translating the *Keter Malkut*, I have regarded a rhyme-scheme as apt
to mislead me from my original. It is noteworthy that in this his
greatest poem, Gabirol, though he conserves rhyme largely, throws over
the jingle of a fixed metre, as if to give sincerity and spontaneousness

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

freer scope. It is as loose as the Arabic *Makamat*, and each stanza
being a law to itself, the poet can follow the ebb and flow of his mood,
trammelled only by the need of rhyme. If, then, I rid him of his last
fetters, I bring back his poem to a truer Hebraism.

It will be a great proof of Gabirol’s domination of rhyme if, when
stripped of it, he is seen to have kept his meaning undistorted by it,
and to recall at times the great note of his Old Testament predecessors.
For, trammelled by neither rhyme nor metre, and aiming only at this Old
Testament simplicity, I have escaped all temptation to eke out the
poet’s plain meaning. You might use me as a crib. And where Gabirol—as
so often—is quoting, I have generally adopted the ultra-accurate version
of the Bible which we owe to the Jewish scholars of America.

This trick of quotation, which is almost, though not quite, unknown in
other poetic literature—even Wordsworth uses it—may puzzle a hearer
unfamiliar with neo-Hebrew poetry. It is not like our own decaying
practice of classical or of Shakespearean quotation, a mere illumination
of the argument, nor is it that rich literary allusiveness of a Hazlitt
or a Lamb; it rests upon the Bible almost as on a foundation, to the
cramping and even the distorting of the poet’s

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

own vision. To the mediaeval Jew the quotation with which Gabirol closed
every stanza of his *Keter Malkut* seemed only an additional beauty. The
Bible, regarded as a uniform whole, everywhere inspired and inspiring,
about which you could move *per saltum*, skipping from Genesis to Micah,
or from Job to Chronicles, was "familiar in our mouths as household
words." And this familiarity bred not contempt but enhanced delight. The
quotation seemed to form the climax up to which the whole stanza was
built, and the more unexpected the application, or rather the
misapplication, and the more it was applied to a context or a category
of ideas with which it had originally no connection, the more *double
entendre*, so to speak, the greater the pleasure, as at a crowning
stroke of wit. It is as if *Punch* speaking of Joseph Chamberlain should
say "a generation arose that knew not Joseph." This sort of punning,
legitimate enough in a Hudibras-like work such as al-Ḥarizi’s
*Taḥkemoni*, becomes grotesque in a poem of the sublimity of the *Keter
Malkut*, and it reaches its acme of bad taste when "that white bright
spot" mentioned in the Levitical diagnosis of leprosy is used as an
image of the moon—Shelley’s "orbèd maiden with white fire laden."

It says much for Gabirol’s genius that despite

<span id="page_liv">p. liv</span>

the familiarity with every nook and cranny of the Old Testament, which
his quotations evince, he was yet able to add so much of his own to
these second-hand thoughts, and to keep such a personal vision of the
universe.

These quotations cannot, of course, be eliminated from my version. But
there is one last feature of Gabirol’s poetry which I have had to
disregard—the alphabetical acrostic. An English book in my possession,
called "Literary Frivolities," not unjustifiably includes acrostic
verses among them. I fear that Gabirol’s acrostical frivolity cannot be
attributed, like his rhymes, to the Arab environment, for it seems
pan-Semitic, being found in Babylonian, Samaritan and Syrian literature,
as well as in copious and curious passages of the Old Testament, notably
Psalm CXIX and the first four chapters of Lamentations.

I remember, in the remote period of my courtship, composing, with
possibly hereditary Semitism, a sonnet on my future wife, the first
letters of each line forming her name. She was much touched by the
contents of the poem till I proudly pointed out the acrostic, when her
emotion changed to disgust. She could not realize that a genuine feeling
could be expressed with such ingenuity. A similar suspicion haunts us

<span id="page_lv">p. lv</span>

when we read the mediaeval Hebrew poems that run from Aleph to Tav,
or—worse still—ostentate the author’s name. It is fortunate that in my
love-poem I at least put the lady’s name and not my own. Yet that is
what Gabirol is always doing, though the object of his love is God.
There is a whole sheaf of poems by him with the acrostic "*Shlomoh*" or
"*Ani Shlomoh*" (like "Here we are again"), sometimes modestly varied by
"Shlomoh ha-Katon "("Solomon the Small").

And yet all art consists in conquering the material difficulties of the
medium. Just as Michael Angelo in the Sistine Chapel succeeded in
expressing the noble poetry of creation, though he had to do it on the
ceiling, and paint awkwardly upwards, so Gabirol, like Swinburne, has
triumphed over the limitations set by his own pride of craftsmanship.
Consider only that spiritual gem, "At the Dawn," which nobody would
guess was in the original a Solomonian acrostic.

It is now in the New Year’s Service, and who shall deny its right to
that pride of place, even though the familiar Shlomoh skips from stanza
to stanza? A similar triumph was won in the sixteenth century by the
author of *Lechah Dodi*, which, despite its inclusion of Solomon
ha-Levi’s name and its intricate rhyme-scheme, has been translated into
German by Herder and Heine,

<span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span>

and is characterized by Schechter as "perhaps one of the finest pieces
of religious poetry in existence." This Poetry of Ingenuity, with its
quotations, acrostics and over-rhymings, of which Kalir was the greatest
exemplar, though not the initiator, has been aptly compared by Rabbi
Cohen of Sydney to the "Emblem" poetry in the seventeenth century
English literature, the wings, cups, harps and crosses into which true
poets like Quarles, Wither and George Herbert fashioned their verses.

Fortunately the *Keter Malkut* is singularly free from Gabirol’s
acrostical ingeniosity. He falls into it only with his *Ashamnu
Bagadnu*—that alphabetical confession of Sin which is the poet’s sole
sin against sincerity of art. And yet there is something to be said for
the effect of completeness which the poet aimed at by sinning his sin
with an *Aleph*, and a *Beth*, till sin exhausted itself in the *ultima
Thule* of the Tav. It has been alleged that the acrostic in the Psalms
was designed to aid the worshipper’s memory in the days before
prayer-books. I am more inclined to regard it as inspired by this same
desire to express completeness—what was the object of the alliteration
of the *Echah* but to express the totality of desolation? Compare, too,
the alphabetical Piyyutim which render the greatness of

<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God. But whether
the justification be æsthetic or mnemonic, Gabirol’s confessional in the
*Keter Malkut* may plead either ground.

#### IV

As the astronomic portions of the *Keter Malkut* seem to be omitted, as
if in shame, from modern German versions of the poem, it may be as well
to set its science in its historic perspective. Gabirol was a
contemporary and fellow-countryman of the Cid, Spain’s national hero.
Born about 1020, the astronomy he absorbed in Saragossa was the
astronomy of the eleventh century. And Copernicus did not publish his
system till the middle of the sixteenth. Dante in the thirteenth century
gives us in his *Convito* Ten Heavens, each symbolizing a branch of
study, and the last corresponding to the Divine Science, Theology. These
Ten Heavens reappear in his *Paradiso*, nine revolving round the earth,
with a fixed all-encircling Empyrean. Gabirol’s chart of the celestial
vault is of the same order as the Tuscan poet’s, and his poetry in its
æsthetic aspect is as little affected by the inaccuracy of his
astronomy—if indeed in these days of Einstein there is anything but a
relative inaccuracy.

Maimonides, born half-way between Gabirol and Dante, in his introduction
to the Mishnah

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tractate
*Zera‘im*, remarks on the astonishment of the ignorant on learning that
the sun, which appears to them as a small flat sphere, is a round body
one hundred and sixty-six and three-eighths times greater than the
earth, and the philosopher himself is amazed at the unerring science
which can calculate celestial dimensions even to a three-eighths. We now
believe that "unerring science" was wrong by considerably over a
million; not unlike a modern Chancellor of the Exchequer. But the
religious emotion which the poet desires to evoke by his figures is as
little impaired by such errors as the beauty of his poetry: on the
contrary the emotion is augmented by our enhanced sense of the vastness
and mystery of the universe. If a sun, one hundred and seventy times as
large as the earth sufficed to arouse Gabirol’s cosmic rapture, how much
more overwhelming is a sun over a million and a quarter times the volume
of the globe that holds our petty fortunes, a sun down one of whose
rifts, as a Royal Society lecturer said the other day, the earth could
be dropped and lost like a boy’s marble.

Nor need we be put off by the poet’s astrology, that pseudo-science
which has still not been slain outright, and of which our *Mazzol tob*
is a survival. In Gabirol’s day, and long after, it occupied

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

no less proud a place than astronomy, and Jews, owing to their Chaldean
origin, were regarded as peculiarly awesome Masters of the horoscope.
And in truth they both produced famous astrologers of their own and
translated the Arabic astrologers into Hebrew or Spanish. A century
after Gabirol, Maimonides derided astrology, but a century after
Maimonides, Dante is found still ranking it as the science of the
seventh heaven, above Grammar, Music, .and even Geometry. Indeed,
Gabirol and Dante are at one in their conception of science, which
differs literally *toto caelo* from the modern. For if Gabirol admits
planetary influences, these are but secondary agencies: to our poet the
force that set the planets in motion has never abdicated, and he still
salutes, like the great last line of the Divine Comedy,

"The love that moves the heaven and all the stars."

ISRAEL ZANGWILL

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. At the Dawn](sig04.md)
