[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ftu01)  [Next](ftu03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*From the Upanishads*, by Charles Johnston, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### FOREWORD

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">When the scanty shores are full  
With Thought's perilous, whirling pool;  
When frail Nature can no more,  
Then the Spirit strikes the hour:  
My servant Death, with solving rite,  
Pours finite into infinite.  
                                  R.W. EMERSON.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### FOREWORD.

<span id="img_iinit"></span> ![](img/iinit.jpg)IT is admitted, by common
consent, that the works of Emerson stand at the head of American
literature. The cause of their pre-eminence, it might well be added, is
the rebirth, in them, of the thoughts and ideals of the most ancient
Upanishads. Emerson himself was perfectly aware of this affinity; he
found no fitter illustration of his understanding of immortality than
the teaching of Death, with which I have begun this volume. His words
may well be repeated:

"Within every man's thought is a higher thought; within the character he
exhibits to-day, a higher character. The youth puts off the illusions of
the child; the man puts off the ignorance and tumultuous passions of
youth; proceeding thence, puts off the egotism of manhood, and becomes
at last a public and universal soul. He is rising to greater heights,
but also rising to realities; the other relations

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

and circumstances dying out, he entering deeper into God, God into him,
until the last garment of egotism falls, and he is with God; shares the
will and immensity of the First Cause. It is curious to find the
selfsame feeling, that it is not immortality but eternity, not duration
but a state of abandonment to the Highest, and so the sharing of His
perfection, appearing in the farthest east and west. The human mind
takes no account of geography, language, or legends, but in all utters
the same instinct. Yams, the lord of Death, promised Nachiketas, the son
of Gautama, to grant him three boons at his own choice"—and then follows
the teaching, as I have given it

The central thought, and almost the very words of the second Upanishad
here translated, concerning the worlds, and their putting forth by the
Divine, are faithfully imaged in another of Emerson's essays:

"But when, following the invisible steps of thought, we come to enquire,
whence is matter? and whereto? many truths arise out of the recesses of
consciousness. We learn that the highest is present to the soul of man;

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

that the dread universal essence, which is not wisdom, or love, or
beauty, or power, but all in one, and each entirely, is that for which
all things exist, and that by which they are; that spirit creates; that
behind nature, throughout nature, spirit is present As a plant upon the
earth, so a man rests upon the bosom of God; he is nourished by
unfailing fountains, and draws, at his need, inexhaustible power."

To cite all the passages in which Emerson bears testimony to the truth
contained in the third passage I have rendered: that the soul of man is
one with the immemorial Soul that wove the worlds, would be, to repeat
the greater part of what he has written; for this, more than anything
else, is the heart of his message. One passage, out of many, will be
enough:

"The soul gives itself, alone original and pure, to the Lonely, Original
and Pure, who, on that condition, gladly inhabits, leads, and speaks
through it. Then it is glad, young, and nimble. Behold, it saith, I am
born into the great, the universal mind. I, the imperfect, adore my own
perfect.

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I am somehow
recipient of the great soul, and thereby I do overlook the sun and the
stars, and feel them to be the fair accidents and effects which change
and pass. More and more the surges of everlasting nature enter into me,
and I become public and human in my regards and actions. So I come .to
live in thoughts, and act with energies, which are immortal."

Let me add, to these three, one more passage, which shows the same
primeval power, that gave birth to the imagery of ancient wisdom, once
more actively creative; a passage, more eloquent, perhaps, than all else
that Emerson has written:

"There is no chance, and no anarchy, in the universe. All is system and
gradation. Every god is there, sitting in his sphere. The young mortal
enters the hall of the firmament; there, he is alone with them alone;
they pouring on him benedictions and gifts, and beckoning him up to
their thrones. On the instant, and incessantly, fall snow-storms of
illusions. He fancies himself in a vast crowd which sways this way and
that, and whose movements and doings he

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

must obey; he fancies himself poor, orphaned, insignificant. The mad
crowd drives hither and thither, now furiously commanding this thing to
be done, now that. What is he that he should resist their will, and
think or act for himself? Every moment new changes and new showers of
deceptions to baffle and distract him. And when by and by, for an
instant, the air clears, and the loud lifts a little, there are the gods
still sitting around him on their thrones; they alone, with him alone."

C. J.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To G. W. Russell](ftu03)
