[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dow03)  [Next](dow05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

# Introduction

THE mythology of the Indians of California goes back much farther than
our mythology: it goes back to the time of the FIRST PEOPLE--curious
beings who inhabited the country for a long period before man was
created.

The myths of the Mewan tribes abound in magic, and many of them suggest
a moral. They tell of the doings of the FIRST PEOPLE--of their search
for fire; of their hunting exploits; of their adventures, including
battles with giants and miraculous escapes from death; of their personal
attributes, including selfishness and jealousy and their consequences;
of the creation of Indian people by a divinity called Coyote-man; and
finally of the transformation of the FIRST PEOPLE into animals and other
objects of nature.

Some explain the origin of thunder, lightning, the rainbow, and other
natural phenomena; some tell of a flood, when only the tops of the
highest mountains broke the waves; others of a cheerless period of cold
and darkness before the acquisition of the coveted heat and light-giving
substance, which finally was stolen and brought home to the people.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

### FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS OF MEWAN MYTHOLOGY

The more important features of Mewan Mythology may be summarized as
follows:

The existence of a FIRST PEOPLE, beings who differed materially from the
present Indians, and who, immediately before the present Indians were
created, were transformed into animals, trees, rocks, and in some cases
into stars and other celestial bodies or forces--for even *Sah'-win-ne*
the Hail, and *Nuk'-kah* the Rain were FIRST PEOPLE.

The preëxistence of Coyote-man, the Creator, a divinity of unknown
origin and fabulous 'magic,' whose influence was always for good. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

The existence (in some cases preëxistence) of other divinities, notably
*Wek'-wek* the Falcon, grandson and companion of Coyote-man, *Mol'-luk*
the Condor, father of *Wek'-wek*, and *Pe-tā'-le* the Lizard, who,
according to several tribes, assisted Coyote-man in the creation of
Indian people.

The possession of supernatural powers or magic by Coyote-man,
*Wek'-wek*, and others of the early divinities, enabling them to perform
miracles.

The prevalence of universal darkness, which in the beginning overspread
the world and continued for a very long period.

The existence at a great distance of a primordial heat and light giving
substance indifferently called fire, sun, or morning--for in the early
myths these were considered identical or at least
interconvertible. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

The presence of a keeper or guardian of the fire, it being

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

foreseen by its first possessors that because of its priceless value
efforts would be made to steal it.

The theft of fire, which in all cases was stolen from people or
divinities living at a great distance.

The preservation of the stolen fire by implanting it in the *oo'-noo* or
buckeye tree, where it was and still is, accessible to all.

The power of certain personages or divinities--as *Ke'-lok* the North
Giant, *Sah'-te* the Weasel-man, and *O-wah'-to* the Big-headed
Lizard--to use fire as a weapon by sending it to pursue and overwhelm
their enemies.

The conception of the sky as a dome-shaped canopy resting on the earth
and perforated, on the sides corresponding to the cardinal points, with
four holes which are continually opening and closing. A fifth hole, in
the center of the sky, directly overhead, is spoken of by some tribes.

The existence, at or near the north hole in the sky, of Thunder
Mountain, a place of excessive cold.

The presence of people on top of or beyond the sky.

The presence of people on the underside of the earth. (This belief may
not be held by all the tribes.)

The existence of Rock Giants, who dwelt in caves and carried off and
devoured people.

The tendency of the dead to rise and return to life on the third or
fourth day after death.

The prevention of the rising of the dead and their return to life by
Meadowlark-man, who would not permit immortality.

The creation of real people, the ancestors of the present Indians, by
the transformation of feathers, sticks, or clay. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) Of these beliefs, origin from feathers is
the most distinctive

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

and widespread, reaching from Fresno Creek north to Clear Lake. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

The completion and perfection of newly created man by the gift of five
fingers from *Pe-tā'-le* the Lizard-man, who, having five himself,
understood their value.

### MINOR BELIEFS

In addition to the more fundamental elements of Mewan Mythology there
are numerous beliefs which, while equally widespread, vary with the
tribe and are of less importance. Among these are the tales of the
elderberry tree--the source of music and other beneficent gifts to the
people. In the beginning of the world the elderberry tree, as it swayed
to and fro in the breeze, made sweet music for the Star-maidens and kept
them from falling asleep; its wood served *Tol'-le-loo* for a flute when
he put the Valley People to sleep so that he might steal the fire; and
today it serves for flutes and clapper-sticks in nearly all the tribes
and plays a vital part in their ceremonial observances.

Other widespread beliefs are that the great hunters of the FIRST PEOPLE
were the Raven, Cougar, and Gray Fox; that Mermaids or Water-women, who
sometimes harm people, dwell in the ocean

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

and in certain rivers; that the echo is the Lizard-man talking back;
that certain divinities have the magic power of accomplishing their
desires by wishing; and that the red parts of birds--as the chin of the
Humming-bird, the underside of the wings and tail of the western
Flicker, the breast of the Robin, and the red head of the Mountain
Tanager and certain others, indicate that these parts have been in
contact with the fire.

### LOCAL OR TRIBAL MYTHS

There are also numerous local beliefs, confined to particular tribes or
groups of tribes. Thus the Inneko tribes, those living north of San
Francisco Bay, tell of a flood; the two coast tribes say that in the
beginning the Divinity Coyote-man came to America from the west by
crossing the Pacific Ocean on a raft; the Northern Mewuk believe that
they came from the Cougar-man and Grizzly Bear-woman; the
*Tu'-le-yo'-me* say that when *Sah'-te* set the world on fire,
Coyote-man made the flood and put out the fire. Other local myths are
that *Wek'-wek* was born of a rock; that *Chā'-ke* the Tule-wren, a poor
despised orphan boy, shot out the sun, leaving the world in total
darkness; that *His'-sik* the Skunk, whose greed and oppression were
intolerable, was destroyed by the superior cunning of *Too'-wik* the
Badger; that *He'-koo-lās* the Sun-woman owed her brilliancy to a coat
of resplendent abalone shells; that the *We'-ke-wil'-lah* brothers, tiny
Shrews, stole the fire from *Kah'-kah-te* 

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the Crow and by touching a bug to the spark made the first firefly.
Numerous others will be found in the tales--in fact every tribe has
myths of its own. Furthermore, in the general mythologies, each band or
subtribe has slight variants, so that even the creation myths, as
related by different bands, present minor differences.

The repeated mention in the mythologies of certain objects and practices
(as the ceremonial roundhouse, the use of the stone mortar and pestle
for grinding acorns, the use of baskets for cooking, the use of the bow
and arrow and sling in hunting, the practice of gambling by means of the
hand-game, and many others) proves that these objects and observances
are not of recent introduction but were among the early possessions and
practices of the Mewan tribes.

It is important to discriminate between the real mythology of a people,
the tales that deal with personages and events of the very remote past,
and present day myths, which deal with happenings of the hour or of the
very recent past. Some of the present day myths of the Mewan tribes may
be found in a separate chapter at the end of the volume.

### CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FIRST PEOPLE PERPETUATED IN THEIR FINAL FORMS

The names of individual personages among the FIRST PEOPLE were carried
on to the animals, objects, or forces which these people became at the

time of their final transformation, and are still borne by them. Hence
in the accompanying stories the names of the various animals and objects
should not be understood as referring to them as they exist today but to
their remote ancestors among the FIRST PEOPLE. Whatever their original
form*--*and the Indian conception seems to picture them as half
human--the distinctive attributes of the FIRST PEOPLE were in the main
handed down to the animals and objects they finally became.

Thus *Oo-soom'-ma-te's* fondness for acorns was not diminished by her
transformation into the Grizzly Bear; *Yu'-wel's* skill as a hunter did
not forsake him when he turned into the Gray Fox; *He-le'-jah's* prowess
as a deer slayer lost nothing when he changed to the Cougar; and
*Too'-pe's* nocturnal ways were not abandoned when she became the
Kangaroo Rat. Similarly, *Ko-to'-lah's* habit of jumping into the water
is perpetuated by the Frog; *Too'-wek's* preëminence as a digger is
still conspicuous in the Badger; *To-to'-ka-no's* loud penetrating voice
is even now a signal characteristic of the Sandhill Crane; while the
swiftness of flight of *Wek'-wek*, *Hoo-loo'-e*, and *Le'-che-che* who
could shoot through the holes in the sky, ever opening and closing with
lightning rapidity, are today marked attributes of the Falcon, Dove, and
Humming-bird. So it is also with *Nuk'-kah* the Shower and *Sah'-win-ne*
the Hail, who were sent to overtake and capture a fleeing enemy and who

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

to this day are noted for the velocity and force of their movements.
Such cases might be multiplied almost indefinitely.

### DISTRIBUTION OF THE MEWAN INDIANS <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

The territory of the Mewan tribes comprised the lower slopes and
foothills of the Sierra Nevada between the Cosumnes River on the north
and Fresno Creek on the south, with the adjacent plain from the
foothills to Suisun Bay, and also two smaller disconnected areas north
of San Francisco Bay--one in the interior, reaching from Pope Valley to
the south end of Clear Lake, the other on the coast, from Golden Gate
northerly nearly to the mouth of Russian River. (See [accompanying
map](#img_map).)

At present the vanishing remnants of the Mewuk tribes are scattered over
their old territory on the west flank of the Sierra; the handful that
remain of the Tuleyome tribe are gathered in a small rancheria on Putah
Creek in Lake County; while the sole survivors of the Hookooeko and
Olamentko tribes (in each case a single person) still cling to their
original homes on Tomales and Bodega Bays.

### DIFFERENCES IN LANGUAGE

The California tribes are stationary, not nomadic; they have lived for
thousands of years in the places they now occupy, or did occupy until
driven

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

 

<span id="img_map"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Distribution of the
Mewan Stock](tn/map.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/map.jpg)  
Distribution of the Mewan Stock  
</span>

 

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

away by the whites; and during this long period of isolation they have
evolved different languages for even among tribes of the same linguistic
group the differences in language are often so great that members of one
tribe cannot understand the speech of another. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

As the languages of the tribes composing the Mewan stock show varying
degrees of kinship, so their myths exhibit varying relationships. Those
of the Sierra region are the most closely interrelated; those of the San
Francisco Bay region and northward the most divergent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[18:1](dow04.htm#fr_0) Partial exceptions,
doubtless a result of contact with neighboring stocks, occur in two
tribes: the *Wi'-pa* say that Coyote-man boasted beyond his powers; and
the *Northern Mewuk* say that he was selfish.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[18:2](dow04.htm#fr_1) A partial exception is the
belief of the Hoo-koo-e-ko of Tomales Bay who say that in the beginning
the source of light was *He'-koo-las* the Sun-woman, whose body was
covered with shining abalone shells.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[19:3](dow04.htm#fr_2) A single exception has
been found: The Northern Mewuk account for people by the gradual
evolution of the offspring of the Cougar-man and his wives, the Grizzly
Bear-woman and the Raccoon-woman.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[20:4](dow04.htm#fr_3) The widespread belief in
the origin of people from feathers accounts for the reverence shown
feathers by some of the tribes. This feeling sometimes manifests itself
in a great fear or dread lest the failure to show proper respect for
feathers, or to observe punctiliously certain prescribed acts in
connection with the use of feather articles on ceremonious occasions, be
followed by illness or disaster. This awe of feathers, I have observed
among the *Hoo'-koo-e'-ko* of Tomales Bay, the *Tu'-le-yo'-me* of Lake
County, and the Northern *Mewuk* of Calaveras County.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[24:5](dow04.htm#fr_4) For a detailed account of
the distribution of these tribes see my article entitled, "Distribution
and Classification of the Mewan stock of California," *American
Anthropologist*, vol. ix, 338-357.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[27:6](dow04.htm#fr_5) Hence in the accompanying
myths the name of the same personage or animal differs according to the
tribe speaking. Thus Coyote-man may be *Ah-hā'-le*, *Os-sā'-le*,
*O-lā'-choo*, *O-lā'-nah*, *O-let'-te*, *Ol'-le*, or *O'-ye*. Similarly,
the Humming-bird may be *Koo-loo'-loo*, *Koo-loo'-pe*, or *Le'-che-che*.
The Falcon or Duck-hawk, on the other hand, is *Wek'-wek* in all the
tribes. This is because his name is derived from his cry. Many other
Indian names of mammals and birds have a similar origin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note](dow05)
