[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](dow14)  [Next](dow16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

# Ke'-lok and his Han-na'-boo

WHEN *Wek'-wek* and *O-let'-te* were out hunting one day they went to
*Tah-lah'-wit* the North and came to a rocky hill where they saw a great
and powerful giant named *Ke'-lok*, sitting by his *han-nā'-boo* or
roundhouse. *Wek'-wek* flew close to him and saw him well.

That night, when they had gone home, *Wek'-wek* said to *O-let'-te*,
"Grandfather, I want to play *al'-leh* (the hand-game) with
*Ke'-lok*." <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md)

When *O-let'-te* heard *Wek'-wek* say he wanted to play *al'-leh* with
*Ke'-lok* he laughed and said,

"You! play hand-game with the Giant *Ke'-lok*!"

"Yes," answered *Wek'-wek*, "I want to play hand-game with *Ke'-lok*."

Then his grandfather told him that *Ke'-lok* was his elder brother.

"All right," said *Wek'-wek*, "I'm going to play *al'-leh* with my
brother."

After a while *Wek'-wek* arrived at *Ke'-lok's* *han-nā'-boo*, and when
*Ke'-lok* came out, said to him, "Brother, I have come to play hand-game
with you."

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

"All right," answered *Ke'-lok*, and he at once built a fire and put
eight round rocks in it and heated them until they were red hot. Then he
said, "My young brother, you begin first."

"No," replied *Wek'-wek*, "I want to see you play first; you begin."

"All right," said *Ke'-lok*, and he immediately sprang up and darted up
into the sky, for he was great and powerful and could do all things. As
he went up he made a loud noise. Then he came down in a zig-zag course,
and as he came, sang a song.

Then *Wek'-wek* began to throw hot rocks at him but purposely missed
him, for he did not want to kill his brother. His grandfather
*O-let'-te* the Coyote-man, called out to him from the south that if he
hit *Ke'-lok* in his body it would not kill him, but that his heart
(*wus'-ke*) was in his arm, under a white spot on the underside of the
arm, and that if he hit that spot it would kill him; that was the only
place on his body where a blow would kill him.

*Wek'-wek* answered, "I can easily hit that, but I don't want to kill
him."

So he threw all the hot stones but took care not to hit the white spot
under the arm. When he had fired all the rocks he picked them up and put
them back in the fire to heat again.

Then it was *Ke'-lok's* turn.

When *Ke'-lok* was ready, *Wek'-wek* said, "All right, I will go now,"
and he shot up into the sky,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

 

<span id="img_07700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The Giant
&lt;i&gt;Ke'-lok&lt;/i&gt; hurling hot Rocks at
&lt;i&gt;Wek'-wek&lt;/i&gt;](tn/07700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07700.jpg.md)  
The Giant *Ke'-lok* hurling hot Rocks at *Wek'-wek*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

making a great noise, just as *Ke'-lok* had done. Then he came down
slowly, singing a song, and came toward *Ke'-lok's* roundhouse.

Then *Ke'-lok* began to throw the hot rocks at him and tried hard to hit
him. But *Wek'-wek* dodged them easily and called out to *O-let'-te* his
grandfather: "He can't hit me unless I let him; see me let him hit
me"--for he thought he would not really be killed, believing that the
magic of *O-let'-te* would keep him alive. So he let *Ke'-lok* hit him
with the last rock.

*Ke'-lok* did hit him and he fell dead. Then *Ke'-lok* picked him up and
hung him on his *ha-nā'-boo*.

*Ke'-lok's* place was at *Tah-lah'-wit*, the north. When *Wek'-wek* set
out to go there, his grandfather *O-let'-te* had told him to pluck out
and take with him one of his father's long wing-feathers and stand it up
on top of *Ke'-lok's* *han-nā'-boo* so it could be seen a long way off.
*O-let'-te* said the feather would stand so long as *Wek'wek* was alive,
but if he was killed it would fall. While the hand-game was going on
*O-let'-te* watched the feather, and when *Wek'-wek* was hit he saw it
fall. Then he felt very sad and cried and told *Mol'-luk*, *Wek'-wek's*
father, and they both mourned and cried.

Then *O-let'-te* said to *Mol'-luk*, "I'm going to play hand-game with
*Ke'-lok*." So he took a long walking stick with a sharp point at one
end and set out on the far journey to *Tah-lah'-wit*. When

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

he arrived at *Ke'lok's* *han-nā'-boo* he said, "Well, how are you
getting along?"

*Ke'-lok* answered, "I'm getting along all right."

Then *O-let'-te* said, "I have come to play hand-game."

"All right," replied *Ke'-lok*; and he built a fire and heated the rocks
red hot, just as he had done before. When the rocks were hot he asked,
"Who will play first?"

*O-let'-te* answered, "I'm an old man, but I'll go first." So he shot up
into the sky with a great noise, just as *Ke'-lok* and *Wek'-wek* had
done before; and then circled around and came down slowly, singing a
song of his own-different from the songs the others had sung.

Then *Ke'-lok* began picking up the hot rocks and throwing them at him.
But *O-let'-te*, in spite of his age, was very agile and dodged all of
the eight rocks so that not one hit him.

When *Ke'-lok* had fired all the rocks he said to himself, "Maybe my
grandfather will beat me after all; I feel now that I am done for," and
he was afraid.

*O-let'-te*, who was still in the air, then came down and said, "I'm old
and tired of playing that way. Do you think old people can beat young
people? I don't know, but I'll try anyhow."

It was now *Ke'-lok's* turn to go up and *O-let'-te's* turn to throw the
hot rocks. *Ke'-lok* sprang up in the same way as before, and came down
in the same

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

way, singing his own song. *O-let'-te* picked up the hot stones and
threw them at *Ke'-lok*, one after the other, until he had thrown four,
but did not try to hit him. He then looked toward *Ke'-lok's*
*han-nā'-boo* and saw *Wek'-wek* hanging there, and was very angry. When
he picked up the fifth stone he said, "Now I am going to hit the white
spot on his arm, over his heart," and he fired the rock straight and hit
the white spot, and *Ke'-lok* fell dead.

As soon as *Ke'-lok* was dead his fire sprang up and began to burn and
spread. Then *O-let'-te* went to *Wek'-wek* and took him in his hands.
*Wek'-wek's* feathers moved a little; then his head drew in a little;
then his eyes opened and he stood up and came to life and exclaimed,
"The country is burning!"

And so it was, for the fire was now sweeping fiercely over the land,
spreading swiftly to the east and west and south, roaring with a mighty
roar, consuming everything in its way and filling the air with flame and
smoke.

*O-let'-te* directed *Wek'-wek* to fly quickly to the ocean and dive
under the water, where he had two sisters named *Hoo-soo'-pe* <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) (the Mermaids.md), and stay with them while
the world was burning. So *Wek'-wek* went into the ocean and found his
sisters and remained with them until the fire had burnt over all the
land and had burnt itself out. While with them he killed a great many
ducks. His

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

sisters did not like him to kill ducks, so after they had spoken to him
he killed only what he needed to eat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[75:11](dow15.htm#fr_10.md) Nowadays *al'-leh* is a
guessing game, played with two small bones, one wrapped or 'dressed' to
distinguish it from the other. But in those days it was different, for
*al'-leh* was played by hurling rocks with intent to kill.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[81:12](dow15.htm#fr_11.md) See the story of
*Ho-hā'-pe*, page [238](dow75.htm#page_238.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Creation of Man](dow16.md)
