[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dow10)  [Next](dow12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

# WHY THE LIZARD MAN DID NOT RESTORE DEAD PEOPLE TO LIFE

Outline of Creation Myth of the Northern Mewuk as related at Wal'le in
the upper foothills immediately south of the Mokelumne River

PERSONAGES

*Oo-soo'-ma-te* the Grizzly Bear-woman

*Hoi-ah'-ko* the First People

*Pe-ta'-lit-te* the Little Lizard-man

*Suk'-ka-de* the Black Lizard-man

*Yu'-kah-loo* the Meadowlark-man

Followed by a corresponding myth of the *Pā'-we-nan* tribe of Midoo
stock from *Poo-soo'-ne*, at the junction of the American River with the
Sacramento.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### WHY THE LIZARD MAN DID NOT RESTORE DEAD PEOPLE TO LIFE

OO-SOO'-MA-TE the Grizzly Bear and *Hoi-ah'-ko* the First People made
the first Mewuk \[Indian people\]. When the Mewuk were made they had no
hands to take hold of things. Then *Pe-tā'-lit-te* the Little Lizard and
*Suk'-ka-de* the Black Lizard gave them hands with five fingers.

When the first Mewuk \[Indian\] died, *Suk'-ka-de* the Black Lizard was
sorry and set to work to bring him back to life. But *Yu'-kah-loo* the
Meadowlark came and drove him away, saying, "*Mewuk ut'-tud-dah, Mewuk
tuk'-tuk-ko*"--meaning, People no good, people smell.

NOTE--The *Pā'-we-nan*, who lived on the Sacramento and Feather Rivers
from the junction of American River northward nearly to the Yuba, hold a
belief which, while in some respects strikingly similar, is in other
respects widely different. They say:

In the beginning *Hi'-kaht* the great chief said that when a person
died, he should come to life on the fourth day thereafter, and should
live again.

Then *Hool* the Meadowlark-man said No; he

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

did not want *Nis'-se-nan'* \[people\] to live again after they were
dead. He said *Nis'-se-nan'* were no good and by and by would smell;
they had better stay dead.

*Yawm* the Coyote-man agreed with Hool the Meadowlark-man--he did not
want people to live again; he wanted them to stay dead.

*Yawm* the Coyote-man had a daughter of whom he was very fond.

*Hi'-kaht* the great chief, after hearing *Yawm* say that he wanted
people to stay dead after they died, went out into the brush and took a
branch of a plant called *Sak-ki-ak* and laid it in the trail. In the
night the plant turned into *Koi'-maw* the rattlesnake. The next morning
*Yawm's* daughter came along the trail and *Koi'-maw* bit her and she
died.

*Yawm* the Coyote-man found the dead body of his daughter and felt
badly. He picked her up and said, "In four days you will come to life
again."

But *Hi'-kaht* replied, "No, she will not come to life again. You said
that when people died you wanted them to stay dead. So your daughter
will stay dead and will not live again."

This is the reason why everybody stays dead after they die and nobody
lives again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Coyote and the Lizard](dow12)
