[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dow09)  [Next](dow11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

# HOW TOL'-LE-LOO GOT THE FIRE FOR THE MOUNTAIN PEOPLE

A TALE OF THE NORTHERN MEWUK

The Mountain People lived in the Sierra near the Mokelumne River, which
they called *Ut'-ta Wah-kah'-loo*, meaning big river. They had no fire
and the world was dark.

The Valley People lived on the San Joaquin Plain, which they called
*Ol-law'-win*. Their roundhouse was not far from the spot now occupied
by the city of Stockton. They had a small fire in the middle of the
roundhouse and *Wit'-tab-bah* the Robin was its keeper.

PERSONAGES

*O-lā-choo* the Coyote-man

*Tol'-le-loo* the flute-player who became the White-footed Mouse

*Wek'-wek* a Chief of the Valley People, who became the Falcon

*We-pi-ah'-gah* a Chief of the Valley People, who became the Golden
Eagle

*Mol'-luk* who became the Condor

*Hoo'-a-zoo* who became the Turkey Buzzard

*Hoo-loo'-e* who became the Dove

*Te-wi'-yu* who became the Red-shafted Flicker

*Wit'-tab-bah* Keeper of the Fire, who became the Robin

*Hah-ki'-ah* who became the Elk

*Hal'-loo-zoo* who became the Antelope

*Sahk'-mum-chah* who became the Cinnamon Bear

*Le'-che-che* who became the Humming-bird

*Le-che-koo'-tah-mah* who became another small bird with a long bill.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

### HOW TOL'-LE-LOO GOT THE FIRE FOR THE MOUNTAIN PEOPLE

WEK'-WEK the Falcon and *We'-pi-ah'-gah* the Golden Eagle were Chiefs of
the Valley People. Among the members of their tribe were *Mol'-luk* the
Condor; *Hoo'-a-zoo* the Turkey Buzzard; *Hoo-loo'-e* the Dove;
*Te-wi'-yu* the Red-shafted Flicker, who must have been very close to
the fire--as any one can see from the red under his wings and tail, and
*Wit'-tab-bah* the red-breasted Robin, who was keeper of the fire. There
were also *Hah-ki'-ah* the Elk, *Hal'-loo-zoo* the Antelope,
*Sahk'-mum-chah* the Cinnamon Bear, and others.

The Mountain People were in darkness and wanted fire but did not know
where it was or how to get it. *O-lā-choo* the Coyote-man tried hard to
find it but did not succeed. After a while *Tol'-le-loo* the
White-footed Mouse discovered the fire and the Mountain People sent him
to steal it.

*Tol'-le-loo* took his flute (*loo'-lah*) of elderberry wood and went
down into the Valley and found the big roundhouse of *Wek'-wek* and
*We-pi-ah'-gah* and began to play. The people liked the music and asked
him to come inside. So he went in and played for them. Soon all the
people felt

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

sleepy. *Wit'-tab-bah* the Robin was sure that *Tol'-le-loo* had come to
steal the fire, so he spread himself over it and covered it all up in
order to hide it, and it turned his breast red. But *Tol'-le-loo* kept
on playing his flute*--*and in a little while all the people were sound
asleep; even *Wit'-tab-bah* could not keep awake.

Then *Tol'-le-loo* ran up to *Wit'-tab-bah* and cut a little hole in his
wing and crawled through and stole the fire and put it inside his flute.
When he had done this he ran out with it and climbed up to the top of
the high mountain called *Oo'-yum-bel'-le* (Mount Diablo) and made a
great fire which lighted up all the country till even the blue mountains
far away in the east \[the Sierra Nevada range\] could be seen. Before
this all the world was dark.

When *Wek'-wek* awoke he saw the fire on *Oo'-yum-bel'-le* and knew that
*Tol'-le-loo* had stolen it. So he ran out and followed him and after a
while caught him.

*Tol'-le-loo* said, "Look and see if I have the fire."

*Wek'-wek* looked but could not find it, for it was inside the flute.
Then *Wek'-wek* pitched *Tot'-le-loo* into the water and let him go.

*Tol'-le-loo* got out and went east into the mountains and carried the
fire in his flute to the Mountain People; then he took it out of the
flute and put it on the ground and covered it with leaves and pine
needles and tied it up in a small bundle.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

 

<span id="img_05100"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![&lt;i&gt;Tol'-le-loo&lt;/i&gt; the Mouse playing his flute and
putting the Valley People to sleep so he can steal the
Fire](tn/05100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05100.jpg)  
*Tol'-le-loo* the Mouse playing his flute and putting the Valley People
to sleep so he can steal the Fire  
</span>

 

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *O-lā'-choo* the
Coyote smelled it and wanted to steal it. He came up and pushed it with
his nose and was going to swallow it when it suddenly shot up into the
sky and became the Sun.

*O-lā'-choo* sent *Le'-che-che* the Humming-bird, and another bird,
named *Le-che-koo'-tah-mah*, who also had a long bill, after it, but
they could not catch it and came back without it.

The people took the fire that was left and put it into two trees,
*oo'-noo* the buckeye and *mon'-o-go* the incense cedar, where it still
is and where it can be had by anyone who wants it.

NOTE--This story has been told me by several Mewuk Indians
independently. The only variation of consequence is that, in one
version, *Wek'-wek* and *We-pi-ah'-gah* gave a feast and invited the
Mountain People to come; and it was while they were there that
*Tol'-le-loo* put the Valley People to sleep with his flute and ran off
with the fire. The story is called *Oo'-ten-nas'-se-sa*, though of
course this is only a part.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Why the Lizard Man did not Restore Dead People to Life](dow11)
