[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](dow15)  [Next](dow17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

# The Creation of Man

AFTER a while the world cooled off and *Wek'-wek* came back to
*Oo'-yum-bel'-le* (Mount Diablo) to see his father *Mol'-luk* and his
grandfather *O-let'te*. He said to *Mol'-luk*, "O father;" and
*Mol'-luk* answered, "What is it my son?"

*Wek'-wek* asked, "How can we make *Mew'-ko* (Indian people) and have
them in the country?"

His father replied, "I cannot tell you; ask your grandfather, he can
tell you."

So *Wek'-wek* asked his grandfather, *O-let'-te*, how they were going to
make people.

*O-let'-te* answered, "Hah-hah, it will take you a good while to do
that. If you are going to do that you must have a head. If people are
coming you must first put out \[provide\] everything everywhere so they
can live. If you want to do this I will think about it."

"I want to see it done," answered *Wek'-wek*.

"All right," said *O-let'-te*, "I know how. I must catch the three
birds--*Choo'-hoo* the Turkey Buzzard, *Kok'-kol* the Raven, and
*Ah-wet'-che* the Crow. The only way to catch these birds is to
make-believe dead."

So *Wek'-wek* and *O-let'-te* went out on the plain

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

together and *O-let'-te* lay down on the ground and pretended he was
dead. He opened his mouth and let his tongue out and relaxed himself so
*Choo'-hoo* the Buzzard would think he was dead. He told *Wek'-wek* he
would call if he caught the birds; and *Wek'-wek* went away.

Soon *Choo'-hoo* the Turkey Buzzard came sailing over and saw the dead
Coyote-man and circled around and lit on the ground beside him.
*Kok'-kol* the Raven and *Ah-wet'-che* the Crow saw *Choo'-hoo* go down
and knew that he had found something to eat, so they too hastened to the
place. just as all three began to eat, *O-let'-te* suddenly sprang up
and caught them. He then called *Wek'-wek* to come, and told him to pick
off the feathers and be careful not to lose a single one. This
*Wek'-wek* did; he picked all the feathers from the three birds and.
took them all home.

Then he asked his grandfather, "What are we going to do next?"

"Make people," answered *O-let'-te*.

"All right," said *Wek'-wek*, "do you know how?"

"Yes," answered *O-let'-te*.

*Wek'-wek* then told *Mol'-luk* his father that they were going to make
people. *Mol'-luk* answered, "All right."

Next morning *O-let'-te* and *Wek'-wek* took the feathers and traveled
over all the country. They picked out the places where they wanted
Indian villages to be, and in each place stuck up three

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

feathers--one for *Chā'-kah* the Chief, one for *Mi'-yum*, the head
woman or Woman Chief, and one for *Soo-lā-too* the poor. And they gave
each place its name--the name it has always had and bears today.

The next morning the three feathers at each place stood up and came to
life and became *Mew'-ko* \[Indian People\]. This is the way people were
made in the beginning and this is the way all the different rancherias
or villages were named.

After that *O-let'-te* said to *Wek'-wek*, "Now we also are going to
change; I am going to be a hunting animal and you are going to be a
hunting bird." So *O-let'-te* the Coyote-man, whose form up to this time
we do not know, changed to the Coyote, a furry hunting animal and became
the first furry animal. And *Wek'-wek* changed to the Falcon, a hunting
bird.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How they got the Fire](dow17.md)
