[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dow13)  [Next](dow15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

# THE BIRTH OF WEK'-WEK AND THE CREATION OF MAN

THE HOOL-POOM'-NE STORY OF CREATION

The Hool-poom'-ne lived on the east side of the lower Sacramento River,
beginning a few miles below the place where the city of Sacramento now
stands. They are now extinct.

PERSONAGES

*O-let'-te* Coyote-man, the Creator *Mol'-luk* the Condor, father of
*Wek'-wek*

*Wek'-wek* the Falcon, son of *Mol'-luk* and grandson of *O-let'-te*

*Hul'-luk mi-yum'-ko* the two beautiful women chiefs of the Star-people

*Os-so-so'-li* Pleiades, one of the Star-women

*Ke'-lok* the North Giant

*Hoo-soo'-pe* the Mermaids or Water-maidens, sisters of *Wek'-wek*

*Choo'-hoo* the Turkey Buzzard

*Kok'-kol* the Raven

*Ah-wet'-che* the Crow

*Koo-loo'-loo* the Humming-bird

FRAGMENT OF VERSION TOLD BY THE HOO'-KOO-E-KO OF TOMALES BAY

PERSONAGES

*O'-ye* the Coyote-man

*Wek'-wek* the Falcon

*Koo-loo'-pis* the Humming-bird

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

### THE BIRTH OF WEK'-WEK AND THE CREATION OF MAN

IN the beginning there was a huge bird of the vulture kind whose name
was *Mol'-luk*, the California Condor. His home was on the mountain
called *Oo'-yum-bel'-le* (Mount Diablo), whence he could look out over
the world--westerly over San Francisco Bay and the great ocean; easterly
over the tules and the broad flat Joaquin Valley.

Every morning *Mol'-luk* went off to hunt, and every evening he came
back to roost on a large rock on the east side of the mountain. One
morning he noticed that something was the matter with the rock, but did
not know what the trouble was, or what to do for it. So he went off to
consult the doctors. The doctors were brothers, two dark snipe-like
little birds who lived on a small creek near the foot of the mountain.
He told them his rock was sick and asked them to go with him, and led
them to it. When they saw the rock they said, "The rock is your wife;
she is going to give you a child;" and added, "we must make a big fire."
Then all three set to work packing wood; they worked hard and brought a
large quantity and made a big fire. Then they took hold of the rock,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

tore it loose, rolled it into the fire, and piled more wood around it.
When the rock became hot, it burst open with a great noise, and from the
inside out darted *Wek'-wek* the Falcon. As he came out he said '*wek*'
and passed on swiftly without stopping. He flew over all the
country--north, south, east, and west--to see what it was like.

At that time there were no people. And there were no elderberry trees
except a single one far away to the east in the place where the Sun gets
up. There, in a den of rattlesnakes on a round topped hill grew
*lah'-pah* the elderberry tree. Its branches, as they swayed in the
wind, made a sweet musical sound. The tree sang; it sang all the time,
day and night, and the song was good to hear. *Wek'-wek* looked and
listened and wished he could have the tree. Near by he saw two
*Hol-luk'-ki* or Star-people, and as he looked he perceived that they
were the *Hul-luk mi-yum'-ko*--the great and beautiful women-chiefs of
the Star-people. One was the Morning Star, the other Pleiades
*Os-so-so'-li*. They were watching and working close by the elderberry
tree. *Wek'-wek* liked the music and asked the Star-women about it. They
told him that the tree whistled songs that kept them awake all day and
all night so they could work all the time and never grow sleepy. They
had the rattlesnakes to keep the birds from carrying off the
elderberries.

Then *Wek'-wek* returned to his home on *Oo-yum-bel'-le* (Mount Diablo)
and told *Mol'-luk* his

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

 

<span id="img_06900"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![&lt;i&gt;Mol'-luk&lt;/i&gt; the Condor looking off over the World
from his Rock on Mount Diablo](tn/06900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06900.jpg)  
*Mol'-luk* the Condor looking off over the World from his Rock on Mount
Diablo  
</span>

 

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

father what he had seen. He said he had seen the beautiful Star-women
and had heard the soft whistling song of the elderberry tree that keeps
one from feeling sleepy. He asked his father how they could get the
music tree and have it at their home on *Oo'-yum-bel'-le*.

*Mol'-luk* answered, "My son, I do not know; I am not very wise; you
will have to ask your grandfather; he knows everything."

"Where is my grandfather?" asked *Wek'-wek*.

"He is by the ocean," *Mol'-luk* replied.

"I never saw him," said *Wek'-wek*.

His father asked, "Didn't you see something like a stump bobbing in the
water and making a noise as it went up and down?"

"Yes," said *Wek'-wek*, "I saw that."

"Well," replied *Mol'-luk*, "that is your grandfather."

"How can I get him?" asked *Wek'-wek*.

"You can't get all of him, but perhaps you can break off a little piece
and in that way get him."

So *Wek'-wek* flew off to the ocean, found the stump bobbing in the
water, and tore off a little piece and brought it home. When he awoke
next morning the little piece had changed into *O-let'-te*, the
Coyote-man, who was already living in a little house of his own on top
of the mountain. *O-let'-te* told *Wek'-wek* that he was his
grandfather.

*Wek'-wek* told *Mol'-luk* his father and added, "Now I've got my
grandfather."

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

*Mol'-luk* replied, "Ask him what you want to know; he knows
everything."

So *Wek'-wek* asked *O-let'-te*, "How are we going to get the elderberry
music?"

"Ho-ho," answered *O-let'-te*, "that is very difficult; you might have
bad luck and might be killed."

But *Wek'-wek* continued, "I want it."

Then the wise *O-let'-te* said: "All right, go and buy it, but mind what
I tell you or you will be killed. You will find the Star-women pleasant
and pretty. They will want you to stay and play with them. If you do so,
you will die. Go and do as I tell you."

So *Wek'-wek* went. He flew fast and far--far away to the east, to the
place where the Sun gets up. There he found *Hul-luk mi-yum'-ko* the
Star-women and *lah'-pah* the elderberry tree. The Star-women were
people of importance; both were chiefs. *Wek'-wek* had taken with him
long strings of *haw'-wut*, the shell money, which as he flew streamed
out behind. This he gave them for the elderberry music. The Star-women
liked the *haw'-wut* and accepted it and led *Wek'wek* to the elderberry
tree and told him to break off a little piece and take it home and he
would have all. But when he reached the tree the rattlesnakes stood up
all around and hissed at him to frighten him, for he was a stranger. The
Star-women told him not to be afraid, they would drive the snakes away.
So they scolded the snakes and sent them down into

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

their holes. Then *Wek'-wek* took his *soo'-pe* \[digging stick\] and
pried off a piece of the tree. The Star-women began to play with him and
wanted him to stay with them, but remembering what *O-let'-te* his
grandfather had told him, he paid no attention to them but took the
piece of elderberry tree and carried it swiftly home to *Oo-yum-bel'le*.

When he arrived he said to *O-let'-te*, "Grandfather, I've brought the
music-tree; what shall we do with it so we can have the music?"

*O-let'-te* laughed as he replied, "Do you really think you have it?"

"Yes," answered *Wek'-wek*, "here it is."

Then *O-let'-te* said, "We must put it in the ground over all the
country to furnish music for the *Mew'-ko* \[Indian people\] we are
going to make, for pretty soon we shall begin to make the people."

*Wek'-wek* answered "Yes," but thought he would wait and see who was the
smarter, himself or *O-let'-te*-for he felt very proud because he had
brought the music tree.

Then they went out and traveled over' all the country and planted the
elderberry tree so that by and by it would furnish music and food and
medicine for the Indian people they were going to make. *O-let'-te* told
*Wek'-wek* that the berries would make food, the roots and blossoms
medicine, and the hollow branches music.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: *Ke'-lok* and his *Han-na'-boo*](dow15)
