[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](dow22)  [Next](dow24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

# THE GREED OF HIS'-SIK THE SKUNK

A TALE OF THE SOUTHERN MEWUK

As told by the Mariposa Mewuk

*His'-sik* the Skunk was Chief of a village or rancheria of the
Foothills People at a place in the lower hills of Mariposa County nearly
midway between Indian Gulch and Hornitos.

PERSONAGES

*His'-sik* the Skunk, a greedy chief of the Foothills People

*Yu'-wel* the Gray Fox, a hunter who married *His'-sik's* daughter

*So'-koi* the Elk

*Too'-wik* the Badger, who outwitted *His'-sik*

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

### THE GREED OF HIS'-SIK THE SKUNK

HIS'-SIK the Skunk had a wife, and by and by a daughter, who, when she
grew up, married *Yu'-wel* the Gray Fox. *Yu'-wel* was a good hunter and
he and *His'-sik* often hunted together.

Not far from *His'-sik's* place were two high hills standing side by
side. In the narrow gap between them ran the trail of *So'-koi* the Elk.
One day *His'-sik* told *Yu'-wel* to hide in this narrow place while he
went down to the plain to drive up the elk. So *Yu'-wel* hid there and
*His'-sik* went down near the elk and fired his terrible scent. The elk
could not stand the smell and ran up the trail. *Yu'-wel* waited until
the leader and all the others had passed up between the hills, and when
the last one had gone by he stepped behind him and fired his arrow with
such force that it shot through the whole band, killing them all.

When *His'-sik* came he was so glad that he danced. He called all the
people to come and help carry the meat home; and then said to *Yu'-wel*:
"You must pack one elk and pack me too, for I am too tired to walk."

*Yu'-wel* was afraid of *His'-sik* and so did as he was told. He lifted
a big elk on his shoulders,

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

and *His'-sik* climbed up on top, and while they were on the way danced
all the time on the body of the elk, and *Yu'-wel* carried them both to
the village.

Then *His'-sik* told the people to skin the elk, and promised them some
of the meat. They skinned the elk and cut the meat in strips and hung it
up to dry. When they had done this they asked him for their share. He
refused to give them any but told them that they might eat acorn mush
and pinole. He then turned as if he were going to shoot his scent, and
everyone was afraid.

*His'-sik* was so greedy that he would not give any of the meat to
anyone--not even to his own wife and daughter, nor to his son-in-law who
killed it--but put it all away to dry for himself.

The next day he told *Yu'-wel* to hunt again, and they did the same as
before; and when the elk were in the narrow pass between the hills
*Yu'-wel* shot his arrow and killed the whole bunch, as before.

Then *His'-sik* called the people to come and carry the elk home, and
made *Yu'-wel* carry one, and he danced on top on the way, as before.

Again he told the people to skin the elk and he would give them meat for
supper; but when they had skinned the elk and cut up the meat he told
them to eat acorns and pinole, at the same time turning to frighten
them, and took all the meat to dry for himself, just as he had done
before.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

The people were very angry, but were afraid to do anything for fear
*His'-sik* would shoot his scent and kill them. They talked the matter
over for a long time and finally a wise man said: "What are we going to
do? Must we hunt for him and pack his meat and skin it for him always,
and not get any? We had better kill him, but how can we do it so he will
not shoot his scent and kill us?"

Then *Too'-wik* the Badger spoke. He said, "We can kill him." And while
*His'-sik* was watching his meat so no one could take any of it,
*Too'-wik* dug a big hole, ten or fifteen feet deep, and built a fire in
it.

Someone asked him why he made the fire. *Too'-wik* replied, "Do you not
know that *His'-sik* is a great dancer and loves to dance? We will have
fire in the hole, and cover the top over with sticks and leaves and
earth so he can't see anything, and send for him to come and dance, and
when he dances he will break through and fall in and we shall kill him."

The people answered, "All right."

When it was dark they sent a messenger to *His'-sik*. He said, "You are
a great dancer; we want a dance tonight and will pay you well if you
will come.")

*His'-sik* was pleased and answered, "All right, where shall I dance?"

They took him to the place and pointing to it said, "Right here."

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

*His'-sik* began to dance and sing, and everyone said, "Good, you are
doing well; keep on, you are doing finely; go ahead, you surely are a
great dancer." And they flattered him and he kept on and danced harder
and harder, for he was proud and wanted to show what he could do.

After a while, when he was dancing hardest, the sticks broke and he fell
into the hole. The people were ready. They had a big rock, a very big
rock, which it had taken many people to bring. They were waiting, and
the moment he fell in they pushed the rock quickly over the hole and
held it down; they all climbed up on it and held it down tight so he
could not get out.

The hot coals burnt his feet and made him dance. He was very angry and
shot his scent so hard against the side of the hole that he pushed
mountains up on that side; then he turned the other way and shot again
and pushed mountains up on that side too. After this his scent was gone
and the coals burnt him and killed him. Then all the people were happy.

The next day the people had a great feast and ate all the dried meat
they wanted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: *Nek'-na-ka'-tah* The Rock Maiden](dow24.md)
