[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](dow26)  [Next](dow28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HOW SAH'-TE SET THE WORLD ON FIRE

A TALE OF THE TU'-LE-YO-ME TRIBE

Among the low hills about four miles south of Clear Lake is the site of
an ancient Indian settlement named *Tu'-le-yo'-me poo-koot*. It was the
ancestral home of the *Tu'-le-yo'-me* or O'-lā-yo-me tribe, the last
vanishing remnant of which is now located on Putah Creek a few miles
east of Middletown.

PERSONAGES

*Ol'-le* the Coyote-man

*Wek'-wek* the Falcon, grandson of *Ol'-le*

*Hoo-yu'-mah* the Meadowlark

*Lah'-kah* the Canada Goose

*Sah'-te* the Weasel-man, who set the world on fire

*Hoo-poos'-min* brothers, two, small Grebes or Hell-divers (*Podilymbus
podiceps*)

*We'-ke-wil'-lah* brothers, two, little Shrews (*Sorex*) who stole the
fire

*Kah'-kah-te* the Crow, whose fire was stolen by the *We'-ke-wil'-lah*
brothers

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

### HOW SAH'-TE SET THE WORLD ON FIRE

A LONG time ago, before there were any than people, *Ol'-le* the
Coyote-man and his grandson, *Wek'-wek* the Falcon, lived together at
*Tu'-le-yo'-me*. In those days *Wek'-wek* hunted *Hoo-yu'-mah* the
Meadowlark and ate no other game, and *Ol'-le* the Coyote-man ate
nothing at all.

One day *Wek'-wek* said: "Grandfather, I want to see what is on the
other side of *Mel'-le-a-loo'-mah*. <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)
I want to see the country on the other side."

"All right," answered *Ol'-le*.

So the next morning *Wek'-wek* set out and crossed over the
*Mel'-le-a-loo'-mah* hills to Coyote Valley, and a little farther on
came to a small lake called *Wen'-nok* *pol'-pol*, at the south end of
which was a pretty pointed mountain called *Loo-peek'-pow-we*. On the
lake were great numbers of ducks and geese. Up to this time he had never
killed any of these-he had killed only *Hoo-yu'-mah* the Meadowlark.

He went back to *Tu'-le-yo'-me*, and told his grandfather what he had
seen, and asked how he

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

could get the ducks and geese. His grandfather answered: "A long time
ago my father taught me how to make *low'-ke* the sling, and how to put
*loo'-poo* the small stone in it, and how to aim and fire by swinging it
around and letting fly." Then *Ol'-le* took *kol* the tule and made a
*low'-ke* of it for *Wek'-wek*. The next morning *Wek'-wek* took the
*low'-ke* and *loo'-poo* and went back to *Wen'-nok-pol'-pol*, the
little lake, and stood on top of *Loo-peek'-pow-we* the sharp-pointed
mountain at the south end of the lake, from which he could see over all
the valley. The flat ground at the base of the mountain was covered with
geese of the black-neck kind called *Lah'-kah*. At the foot of the peak
was a small flat-topped blue oak tree, the kind called *moo-le*. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) When the geese, which were walking on the
ground, came up to this tree, *Wek'-wek* took careful aim with his
*low'-ke* and let fly and the stone flew down among them and killed more
than two hundred, and then came back to his hand. He at once fired again
and killed several hundred more. He then gathered them all and packed
them on his head back to *Tu'-le-yo'-me* and gave them to his
grandfather, *Ol'-le* the Coyote-man.

Next morning when *Wek'-wek* was sitting on top of the roundhouse he saw
someone coming. It was *Sah'-te* the Weasel-man, who lives under the

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

 

<span id="img_14100"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![&lt;i&gt;Ol'-le&lt;/i&gt; the Coyote-man and
&lt;i&gt;Wek'-wek&lt;/i&gt; the Falcon-man at their
Roundhouse](tn/14100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14100.jpg.md)  
*Ol'-le* the Coyote-man and *Wek'-wek* the Falcon-man at their
Roundhouse  
</span>

 

ground; he passed on to the south without stopping. *Wek'-wek* said,
"This looks like a man. Who is this man? Tomorrow morning I'll go and
see." So next morning he went out again and sat on top of the
roundhouse. Soon he saw *Sah'-te* coming; he came from the north and
went off to the south. Then *Wek'-wek* also went south; he went to the
sharp peak, *Loo-peek'-pow'-we*, and saw *Sah'-te* pass and go still
farther south.

*Wek'-wek* returned to *Tu'-le-yo'-me* and presently saw *Sah'-te* come
and go north again toward Clear Lake. *Wek'-wek* wanted to find out
where *Sah'-te* lived, so he went up to Clear Lake and at the head of
Sulphurbank Bay he found *Sah'-te's* *lah'-mah* (roundhouse). He said to
himself, "Now I've got you," and went into *Sah'-te's* house. But
*Sah'-te* was not at home. *Wek'-wek* looked around and saw a great
quantity of *hoo'-yah*, the shell beads or money. It was in skin sacks.
He took these sacks--ten or twelve of them--and emptied the shell money
out on a bear skin robe and packed it on his head back to
*Tu'-le-yo'-me*. But he did not take it in to show his grandfather; he
hid it in a small creek near by and did not say anything about it.

When *Sah'-te* came home he found that his beads were gone. "Who stole
my beads?" he asked.

He then took his *yah'-tse* \[the stick the people used to wear
crossways in a twist of their back hair\] and stood it up in the fire,
and *oo'-loop* the flame climbed it and stood on the top. He then

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

took the *yah'-tse* with the flame at one end and said he would find out
who stole his shell money. First he pointed it to the north, but nothing
happened; then to the west, and nothing happened; then east; then up;
then down, and still nothing happened. Then he pointed it south toward
*Tu'-le-yo'-me* and the flame leaped from the stick and spread swiftly
down the east side of Lower Lake, burning the grass and brush and making
a great smoke.

In the evening *Wek'-wek* came out of the roundhouse at *Tu'-le-yo'-me*
and saw the country to the north on fire. He went in and told his
grandfather that something was burning on Clear Lake.

*Ol'-le* the Coyote-man answered, "That's nothing; the people up there
are burning tules."

*Ol'-le* knew what *Wek'-wek* had done, and knew that *Sah'-te* had sent
the fire, for *Ol'-le* was a magician and knew everything, but he did
not tell *Wek'-wek* that he knew.

After a while *Wek'-wek* came out again and looked at the fire and saw
that it was much nearer and was coming on swiftly. He was afraid, and
went back and told his grandfather that the fire was too near and too
hot and would soon reach them. After a little he went out again and came
back and said, "Grandfather, the fire is coming fast; it is on this side
of the lake and is awfully hot."

*Ol'-le* answered, "That's nothing; the people at Lower Lake are burning
tules."

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

But now the roar and heat of the fire were terrible, even inside the
roundhouse, and *Wek'-wek* thought they would soon burn. He was so badly
frightened that he told his grandfather what he had done. He said,
"Grandfather, I stole *Sah'-te's* *hoo'-yah* and put it in the creek,
and now I'm afraid we shall burn."

Then *Ol'-le* took a sack and came out of the roundhouse and struck the
sack against an oak tree, and fog came out. He struck the tree several
times and each time more fog came out and spread around.

Then he went back in the house and got another sack and beat the tree,
and more fog came, and then rain. He said to *Wek'-wek*, "It is going to
rain for ten days and ten nights." And it did rain, and the rain covered
the whole country till all the land and all the hills and all the
mountains were under water--everything except the top of *Oo-de'-pow-we*
(Mount Konokti, on the west side of Clear Lake) which was so high that
its top stuck out a little.

There was no place for *Wek'-wek* to go and he flew about in the rain
till he was all tired out. Finally he found the top of *Oo-de'-pow-we*
and sat down on it and stayed there.

On the tenth day the rain stopped, and after that the water began to go
down and each day the mountain stood up higher. *Wek'-wek* stayed on the
mountain about a week, by which time the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

water had gone down and the land was bare again. In Clear Lake near
*Oo-de'-pow-we* is an island which was the home of two small grebes,
diving birds, called *Hoo-poos'-min*. They were brothers and had a
roundhouse, and in the roundhouse a fire. *Wek'-wek* went there and
stayed two or three days, and then said he was going back to
*Tu'-le-yo'-me*.

"All right," answered the *Hoo-poos'-min* brothers, "but don't tell
*Ol'-le* that we have fire."

"All right," answered *Wek'-wek*, and he went off to *Tu'-le-yo'-me* to
see *Ol'-le*, his grandfather.

When *Wek'-wek* arrived *Ol'-le* asked: "Who are you? I'm *Ol'-le*, and
I live at *Tu'-le-yo'-me*."

*Wek'-wek* answered, "I'm *Wek'-wek* and I also live at
*Tu'-le-yo'-me*."

"Oh yes," said *Ol'-le*, "you are *Hoi'-poo* (Captain) *Wek'-wek*."

"Yes," answered *Wek'-wek*.

At that time there were no real people in the world and *Wek'-wek* said,
"There are no people; I'm lonesome; what are we going to do?"

Then *Ol'-le* told *Wek'-wek* to bring the feathers of the geese he had
killed at *Wen'-nok* Lake. *Wek'-wek* did so, and they set out and
traveled over the country. Wherever they found a good place for people
*Ol'-le* took two feathers and laid them down side by side on the
ground--two together side by side in one place, two together side by
side in another place, and so on in each place

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

 

<span id="img_14700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Wek'-wek on the
hilltop killing Geese with his Sling](tn/14700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14700.jpg.md)  
Wek'-wek on the hilltop killing Geese with his Sling  
</span>

 

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

where he wanted a rancheria; and at the same time he gave each place its
name.

Next morning they again went out and found that all the feathers had
turned into people; that each pair of feathers had become two people, a
man and a woman, so that at each place there were a man and a woman.
This is the way all the rancherias were started.

By and by all the people had children and after a while the people
became very numerous.

*Wek'-wek* was pleased and said, "This is good." A little later he
asked, "Grandfather, now that we have people, what are we going to do?
There is no fire; what can we do to get fire?"

*Ol'-le* replied, "I don't know; we shall see pretty soon."

*Ol'-le* had a small box in his roundhouse and in it kept two little
Shrew-mice of the kind called *We'-ke-wil'-lah*. They were brothers.
*Ol'-le* said to them: "*Kah'-kah-te* the Crow has fire in his
roundhouse, far away in the east; you go and steal it."

*We'-ke-wil'-lah* the little Shrew-mice said they would try, and set out
on their long journey and went far away to the east and finally came to
*Kah'-kah-te's* roundhouse. They heard *Kah'-kah-te* say, "*kah'-ahk*,"
and saw a spark of fire come out of the hole on top of the house. Then
they went to a dead tree and got some *too-koom'* (the kind of buckskin
that comes on dead wood) and cut off a

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

piece and took it and climbed up on top of *Kah'-kah-te*'s house and sat
by the smoke hole and waited. After a while *Kah'-kah-te* again said
"*kah'-ahk*," and another spark came out, but they could not reach it.
But the next time *Kah'-kah-te* said "*kah'-ahk*" and another spark came
out the little brothers caught it in their *too-koom'*, the wood
buckskin.

When they had done this they caught a little bug and pushed him in
backward till he touched the spark. Then they said, "Let's go," and set
out at once and traveled as fast as they could toward *Tu'-le-yo'-me*.

just then *Kah'-kah-te* the Crow came out of his house and in the
darkness saw a little speck of light moving back and forth among the
trees. It was the fire bug going home with the little Shrew brothers.
*Kah'-kah-te* when he saw it cried, "Somebody has stolen my fire," and
set out in pursuit.

The little brothers and the firefly were badly frightened and ran around
a little hill so *Kah'-kah-te* could not see them, and hid under the
bank of a dry creek. *Kah'-kah-te* hunted for them for some time but
could not find them and went back to his house. His mate, who was
inside, said, "Nobody stole our fire."

*Kah'-kah-te* answered, "Yes, someone stole it, I saw it go around."
Then he went back into his house.

Then the *We'-ke-wil'-lah* brothers ran as fast

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

as they could all the way back to *Tu'-le-yo'-me* and arrived there the
same night. They said to *Ol'-le*, "Grandfather, look," and tossed him
the *too-koom'*--the tree buckskin with the fire inside. He unrolled it
and found the fire and took it out and made a fire on the ground.

*Wek'-wek* exclaimed, "That is good; I'm glad; now everybody can have
fire."

Then *Ol'-le* put the fire in the *oo'-noo* (buckeye) tree, and told the
people how to rub the *oo'-noo* stick to make it come out. From that
time to this everybody has known how to get fire from the *oo'-noo*
tree.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[139:15](dow27.htm#fr_14.md) *Mel'-le-a-loo'-mah*
is the name of the hill-country south of Lower Lake--between Lower Lake
and Coyote Valley.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[140:16](dow27.htm#fr_15.md) My informant pointed
out this little old tree to me and said that when he was a little boy
his father told him that it had always been there, just as it was in the
days of *Wek'-wek*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How *Cha'-ka* the Tule-wren Shot out the Sun](dow28.md)
