[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dow24)  [Next](dow26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

# THE JEALOUSY OF WEK'-WEK AND THE DEATH OF LO'-WUT

A TALE OF THE WI'-PA TRIBE

The Wi'-pā lived on No'-yoop Island between the Sacramento and San
Joaquin Rivers, east of Suisun Bay. They are now extinct. The last
survivor, an old woman named *E'-non-na-too-yā*, to whom the author is
indebted for the following remarkable story, died during the winter of
1908-1909.

PERSONAGES

*O-lā'-nah* the Coyote-man

*Wek'-wek* the Falcon, Chief of the Bird People

*Ho'-pah* the White-headed Eagle

*Lo'-wut* the Gray Goose, wife of *Wek'-wek*

*To-to'-kol* the Sandhill Crane, mother of *Lo'-wut*

*Soo'-choo-koo* the Spoon-bill Duck

*Yu-koo'-le* the Meadowlark

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

### THE JEALOUSY OF WEK'-WEK AND THE DEATH OF LO'-WUT

WEK'-WEK the Falcon-man was Chief and Captain of all the bird-people. He
used to hunt birds for food and also used to catch birds alive to bring
back to his *han-nā'-boo* (roundhouse) where he kept them locked up
until he could turn them into people. *O-lā'-nah* the Coyote-man stood
guard at the door of the *han-nā'-boo*.

*Wek'-wek* the Falcon-man and *Ho'-pah* the White-headed Eagle-man had
the power to make people out of birds. For this reason they were jealous
of one another. Besides, *Ho'-pah* was in love with *Wek'-wek's* wife,
*Lo'-wut*, the Gray Goose-woman. So *Wek'-wek* had cause to be jealous.

Once when he went out to go hunting he hid and watched and saw *Ho'-pah*
and *Lo'-wut* together. This made him very angry. When he came back he
asked *Lo'-wut*, his wife, "Have you anything ready to eat? I'm hungry."

"Yes," she replied.

"Bring me some water first," he said, "I'm thirsty; bring good water;
don't get it from the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

edge of the river; go out where it is deep and get it there."

*Lo'-wut* did as she was told and came back with good clear water, but
when she reached the house with it, it had turned into snakes and frogs
and other water animals. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) Five times
she went out into the river for water, each time with the same result.
The last time she waded out till the water was above her waist.

While she was gone, *Wek'-wek* went to her bed and fixed in it four long
spear points of flint with the points up. When she came the fifth time
with snakes and frogs instead of water, *Wek'-wek* seized her and threw
her down on the bed and the four spear points pierced her body and
killed her.

*To-to'-kol* the Sandhill Crane-woman was *Lo'wut's* mother; she was
very angry because *Wek'wek* had killed her daughter, and wanted to
punish him.

*O-lā'-nah* the Coyote-man and *Soo'-choo-koo* the Spoon-bill Duck came
to carry *Lo'wut's* dead body to the *han-nā'-boo*, but when they lifted
it they saw on the breast the black marks which *Ho'-pah* her lover had
painted there. *Wek'-wek* had seen these before and knew. So *O-lā'-nah*
and *Soo'-choo-koo* took the dead body and buried it.

When *Lo'-wut* died she left two children, a baby and a little boy.
Their grandmother, *To-to'-kol*,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

 

<span id="img_12900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Funeral of
&lt;i&gt;Lo'-wuk&lt;/i&gt;, wife of
&lt;i&gt;Wek'-wek&lt;/i&gt;](tn/12900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12900.jpg)  
Funeral of *Lo'-wuk*, wife of *Wek'-wek*  
</span>

 

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

took care of them and every day sent the little boy with the baby to the
roundhouse to be fed--and for four days *Lo'-wut* the dead mother came
each day to the *han-nā'-boo* to give milk to her young child.

On the fourth day *Wek'-wek* asked his little boy where he went every
day with the little one. The boy, afraid to tell the truth, said he took
the child to give it milk of the milkweed plant.

*Wek'-wek* hid in the top of an oak tree and watched. He saw his dead
wife *Lo'-wut* come to the roundhouse to give breast to the child; and
saw her rise from the ground and shake the earth of the grave out of her
hair.

Then *Wek'-wek* found that he loved her still, although she had been
unfaithful to him. So he went into the roundhouse and caught her in his
arms and hugged her.

"Let me go," she said, "You can't get me back; I'm not well as I used to
be."

"That doesn't make any difference," he said, "I'll cure you." And he
took her away to his own roundhouse, where the other bird-people were.
It was dark when they arrived.

*Yu-koo'-le* the Meadowlark was there. He had never liked *Wek'-wek's*
wife and had quarrelled with her. Now he made a great fuss and noise.

"*Hoo*," he said, "light a light; I smell something like a dead body."

At that very moment *Wek'-wek* was sitting in the

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

middle of the roundhouse holding the body of his wife, whom he was
bringing back to life. But when *Yu-koo'-le* spoke and said what he did,
the dead woman disappeared.

*Wek'-wek* was very angry. He spoke and said to the rest of the birds
(all of whom were going to be people): "This now is the way it will be
with us all. When we die we shall die forever. Had it not been for
*Yu-koo'-le* we would live again after the fourth day and be alive
forever, the same as before."

When *Wek'-wek* had said this he seized *Yu-koo'-le* and tore his mouth
open and killed him, and to this day you can see under the meadowlark's
throat the black mark where his mouth was torn down, and the marks on
his head where the skull was crushed.

Then *Wek'-wek* sent all the bird-people away, but before they went he
spoke to them and said: "Now you will never be people but will be real
birds; if *Yu-koo'-le* had not said what he did my wife would have lived
and all of you would have turned into people."

All the bird-people in the roundhouse were angry at what *Yu-koo'-le*
had done. They said, "Were it not for *Yu-koo'-le* we would turn into
people; now we must turn into animals." Then they came out of the
roundhouse, one at a time, and as each came out it sang the song of the
kind of bird it was to be, and became that kind, and went away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[128:14](dow25.htm#fr_13) *Wek'-wek* made this
happen, for he was a magician or witch doctor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Defeat of *O-la'-nah* the Coyote-Man](dow26)
