[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](dow30)  [Next](dow32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

# HOI-AH'-KO TALES OF THE SOUTHERN MEWUK

As told in the foothills of the Merced River region

THE TALES

*Yel'-lo-kin* and *Oo-wel'-lin* the man-eating Giants

*Oo-wel'-lin* the Rock Giant

*Tim-me-lā'-le* the Thunder

*Wek'-wek's* search for his Father

*Wek'-wek's* search for his Sister

*Wek'-wek's* visit to the Underworld

PRINCIPAL PERSONAGES

*Hoi-ah'-ko* the First People

*We'-pi-ahk* the Golden Eagle, Chief of the First People

*Tu'-pe* the Kangaroo-rat, *We'-pi-ahk*'s wife

*Yel'-lo-kin* the Giant Bird who lived on top of the sky

*Oo-wel'-lin* the Rock Giant

*Ol-lusmuk-ki'-e* the Toad-woman, *We'-pi-ahk*'s Aunt

*Ah-hā'-le* the Coyote-man

*Oo'-choom* the Fly

*Tim-me-lā'-le* the Thunder

*Wek'-wek* the Falcon

*Yi'-Yil*, *Wek'-wek's* father

*Yow'-hah* the Mallard Duck, *Wek'-wek's* wife

*Hoo-loo'-e* the Dove, *Wek'-wek's* partner

*O-wah'-to* the big-headed Fire Lizard

*Ho'-ho* the Turkey Buzzard, a wicked Chief of the South People

*Koo'-choo*, another wicked Chief of the South People

*Lol'-luk* the Woodrat, one of the firemen

*No-put'-kul-lol* the Screech-owl, the other fireman

*Pel-pel'-nah* the Nuthatch, one of the witch doctors

*Choo-ta-tok'-kwe-lah* the Red-headed Sapsucker, the other witch doctor

*Ah'-ut* the Crow, *Wek'-wek's* nephew

*O-hum'-mah-te* the Grizzly Bear

*He-le'-jah* the Mountain Lion

*To-to'-kon* the Sandhill Crane, chief of the Underworld People

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

### HOI-AH'-KO TALES OF THE SOUTHERN MEWUK

### YEL'-LO-KIN AND OO-WEL'-LIN, THE MAN-EATING GIANTS

WE'-PI-AHK the Eagle was chief of the First People. He took for his wife
*Tu'-pe* the Kangaroo-rat. She did not stay at home nights because night
was the time she went out to hunt for food. *We'-pi-ahk* did not
understand this and when she came back one morning he beat her and
killed her. After that he stayed at home a month and cried and never
went out. When the month was up he stopped crying and went out in the
sun.

Next day *Yel'-lo-kin* came. *Yel'-lo-kin* was a giant bird--the biggest
bird in the world. He was in the habit of carrying off children--boys
and girls up to fourteen or fifteen years of age. He took them by the
top of the head and carried them up through the hole in the middle of
the sky to his home on top of the sky, where he killed and ate them.

*Yel'-lo-kin* had a wife. She was *Ol'-lus muk-ki'-e* the Toad-woman,
the aunt of *We'-pi-ahk* the Eagle. *Yel'-lo-kin* had stolen her from
the earth and had taken her up to his house above the sky.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He did not kill
her but kept her as his wife, and brought people to her to eat; but she
would not eat people.

When *We'-pi-ahk* the Eagle had gone out in the sun *Yel'-lo-kin* came
and caught him by the top of his head and carried him up through the
hole in the sky.

A boy playing outside saw this and shouted to the people, and they all
got poles and bows and arrows and tried to reach *Yel'-lo-kin* but could
not, and *Yel'-lo-kin* went on up with *We'-pi-ahk* and took him to his
house on top of the sky and left him there. When *We'-pi-ahk* looked
around he saw his aunt, *Ol'-lus* *muk-ki'-e* the Toad-woman. She told
him to look out, that in a little while *Yel'-lo-kin* would come back
and kill him. "He will take you to a big tank of blood and ask if you
want to drink," she said. "When he does this you must answer 'yes' and
pretend to reach down, and tell him the water is too low, you can't
reach it; you are afraid of falling in. Ask him to show you how to get
it."

"All right," answered *We'-pi-ahk*--he would do as she said.

Then she gave him a big stone knife with which to cut off
*Yel'-lo-kin*'s head.

Soon *Yel'-lo-kin* returned and did exactly as his wife said he would
do. When he asked *We'-pi-ahk* to drink, *We'-pi-ahk* told him he could
not reach the water; he was afraid of falling in, and

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

asked *Yel'-lo-kin* to show him how. Then *Yel'-lo-kin* leaned over and
reached down deep in the tank, and *We'-pi-ahk* struck him with the big
knife and cut off his head, whereupon *Yel'-lo-kin* banged around inside
the tank and flapped his big wings and made a great noise, and finally
flopped out and died outside. He stretched out his wings and they were
as big as pine trees. Then *We'-pi-ahk* was free.

*Ah-hā'-le* the Coyote-man was down below. *We'-pi-ahk* the Eagle was
his uncle. *Ah-hā'-le* asked the people, "Where is my uncle,
*We'-pi-ahk*?"

The boys told him he had gone up*--*that *Yel'-lo-kin* had carried him
up through the sky. *Ah-hā'-le* looked but could not see the hole they
had gone through. Then he went south and looked for the south hole in
the sky, but could not find it. Returning, he went north to the hole at
Thunder Mountain, but could not get in that way for it was too cold.
Then he came back to the village and sprang up high in the air and
passed through the middle hole in the sky-the same hole that
*Yel'-lo-kin* had gone through with *We'-pi-ahk*.

just as he arrived, at that very moment *We'-pi-ahk* struck
*Yel'-lo-kin* with the knife and killed him, and *Ah-hā'-le* saw him
die.

"It is a good thing that you killed him," *Ah-hā'-le* said.

*We'-pi-ahk* replied, "He has been stealing our boys and girls; whenever
he was hungry he went

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

down and got a boy or a girl. We lost lots of people."

Then *We'-pi-ahk* showed *Ah-hā'-le* the tank of blood where
*Yel'-lo-kin* had done his killing.

After a while *Ah-hā'-le* asked, "What are you going to do with
*Yel'-lo-kin*?"

*We'-pi-ahk* said he was going to burn him, so he would not come to life
again.

But *Ah-hā'-le* replied, "No uncle, you had better not burn him."

Then *We'-pi-ahk* asked, "What are you going to do with him?"

*Ah-ha'-le* answered, "I think I'll cut off his wings and take them down
home."

"What are you going to do with them?" asked *We'-pi-ahk*.

*Ah-hā'-le* replied, "I'm going to plant the big feathers and make
trees. If I plant plenty of trees and everything green, there will be
many people, for when I'm done planting trees I'm going to make people."

When he had finished speaking he went down to the earth through a hole
of his own, for he was a witch doctor.

After he had gone down, *Yel'-lo-kin*'s wife, *Ol'-lus* *muk-ki'-e* the
Toad-woman, asked *We'-pi-ahk* how he was going to get down.

"I don't know," answered *We'-pi-ahk*.

"I'll take you down," said *Ol'-lus* *muk-ki'-e*.

"How," asked *We'-pi-ahk*.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

"You will see how," she replied. And she gathered the strong green
sword-grass called *kis'-soo*, that grows by the river, and made a long
rope of it and with it let *We'-pi-ahk* down to the earth.

*Ah-hā'-le* the Coyote-man planted the feathers, and when they had come
up watched them grow. They grew into grasses, wild oats, flowers,
manzanitas, and other bushes, and into yellow pines, sugar pines, black
oaks, blue oaks, and other kinds of trees. He told them all to bear seed
every year so the people who were coming would have plenty to eat. He
also made rivers and rocks--*Yel'-lo-kin's* heart he turned into a black
rock.

When he had done this he made people. These also he made by planting
feathers. The people multiplied and in a short time their villages were
everywhere in the land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: *O-wel'-lin* the Rock Giant](dow32.md)
