[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](dow38)  [Next](dow40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

# HOW O'-YE THE COYOTE-MAN DISCOVERED HIS WIFE

A TALE OF THE HOO'-KOO-E'-KO OF NICASIO AND SAN RAFAEL

PERSONAGES

*O'-ye* the Coyote-man

*Wek'-wek* the Falcon, *O'-ye's* grandson

*Ko-to'-lah* the Frog-woman

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

### HOW O'-YE THE COYOTE-MAN DISCOVERED HIS WIFE

THE world was made by *O'-ye* the Coyote-man. The earth was covered with
water. The only thing that showed above the water was the very top of
*Oon'-nah-pi's* \[Sonoma Peak, about forty miles north of San
Francisco\].

In the beginning *O'-ye* came on a raft from the west, from across the
ocean. His raft was a mat of tules and split sticks; it was long and
narrow. *O'-ye* landed on the top of *Oon'-nah-pi's* and threw his
raft-mat out over the water--the long way north and south, the narrow
way east and west; the middle rested on the rock on top of the peak.
This was the beginning of the world and the world is still long and
narrow like the mat--the long way north and south, the narrow way east
and west.

When *O'-ye* was sitting alone on top of *Oon'-nah-pi's*, and all the
rest of the world was covered with water, he saw a feather floating
toward him, blown by the wind from the west--the direction from which he
himself had come. He asked the feather, "Who are you?"

The feather made no reply.

He then told the feather about his family and all his relatives. When he
came to mention *Wek'-wek*,

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

his grandson, the feather leaped up out of the water and said, "I am
*Wek'-wek*, your grandson."

*O'-ye* the Coyote-man was glad, and they talked together.

Every day *O'-ye* noticed *Ko-to'-lah* the Frog-woman sitting near him.
Every time he saw her he reached out his hand and tried to catch her,
but she always jumped into the water and escaped.

After four days the water began to go down, leaving more land on top of
the mountain, so that *Ko-to'-lah* had to make several leaps to reach
the water. This gave *O'-ye* the advantage and he ran after her and
caught her. When he had caught her he was surprised to find that she was
his own wife from over the ocean. Then he was glad.

When the water went down and the land was dry *O'-ye* planted the
buckeye and elderberry and oak trees, and all the other kinds of trees,
and also bushes and grasses, all at the same time. But there were no
people and he and *Wek'-wek* wanted people. Then *O'-ye* took a quantity
of feathers of different kinds, and packed them up to the top of
*Oon'-nah-pi's* and threw them up into the air and the wind carried them
off and scattered them over all the country and they turned into people,
and the next day there were people all over the land.

NOTE. The above story was told me at Tomales Bay by an aged *Hookooeko*
woman, now dead, who in her early life lived at Nicasio. Another old

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

woman, who originally came from San Rafael, gave me a slightly different
version. She said that *O'-ye* the Coyote-man made the feathers up into
four bundles, which he set in the ground in four different places--one
in the west, at San Rafael; one in the east, at Sonoma; one in the
north, near Santa Rosa, and one in the south, on the south side of San
Francisco Bay. Next morning all had turned into people, each bundle
becoming a distinct tribe, speaking a language wholly different from the
languages of the others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part 2: Present Day Myths](dow40.md)
