[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](dow58)  [Next](dow60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GHOSTS HUNT FOR A BIG ANIMAL IN THE OCEAN

*The Mokalumne say*:

After a person dies and is buried the heart-spirit comes out and shakes
itself to shake off the earth, and then sails away in the air and
disappears--going northwest to the ocean. This may happen on the fourth
night, or at any time between the first and fourth.

The Ghost goes to the ocean and enters the water and finds a large
animal \[probably a whale\] whose breast it immediately lays hold of and
sucks. If it does not take the breast of this animal it can not live in
the ocean with the other Ghosts, but in from two to four days returns
and reënters the body from

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

which it came, and comes back to life again. It then tells the old
people of the beautiful things it saw in the ocean--flowers and fishes
and animals.

For a long time the people did not know where the *Ul'-le* or Ghosts
went. After a while the Napa Indians told our people that they sometimes
heard strange noises in the air overhead, usually in the evening or very
early morning, sometimes at night, and more rarely in the daytime. The
sounds were sometimes like singing, sometimes like crying, sometimes
like calling or scolding--always high up. For a long time they did not
know what these noises were, but finally some wise Indians found out
that they were the Ghosts of people from the interior passing over on
their way to the ocean.

One of our people was a 'Half Doctor'; he knew much medicine and was a
good dancer. Once, when some one died, the 'Half Doctor' made up his
mind that he would find out about the Ghost. So after dark he went to
the place and hid close to the grave and watched. In the night he saw
something like a person get up out of the ground and shake his head to
shake the earth off, and then fly away quickly, disappearing at once.
Nothing more was seen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: *Wah-tib'-sah* the Sign of Death](dow60.md)
