[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dow69)  [Next](dow71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPTXIK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dawn of the World*, by C. Hart Merriam, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HO-HA'-PE THE RIVER MERMAID

*The Southern Mewuk of Merced River foothills say*:

Some of the rivers are inhabited by *Ho-hā'-pe*, the River Mermaids or
Water Women. The *Ho-ha'-pe* have long hair and are beautiful to look
at. They usually live in deep pools, and are known at several places in
*Wah-kal'-mut-tah* (Merced

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> River). In that
part of the river which runs through *Ah-wah'-ne* (Yosemite Valley) they
have been seen a number of times.

One lives now lower down in the river, at the upper end of Pleasant
Valley in the large round pool called *Ow'-wal*. In the early days two
partners used to fish for salmon at *Ow'-wal*, one on each side of the
pool; several times they saw *Ho-hā'-pe*.

Another lives in the deep water at *Wel'-le-to* (on the Barrett ranch, a
little below Pleasant Valley). At this place a few years ago some
Indians from Bear Valley and Coulterville came to catch salmon. They put
their net in a deep place in the river, and when it was full of fish
tried to pull it out, but could not, for it was stuck on the bottom.
*Ho-hā'-pe* the Water Woman had fastened it to a rock, but the men did
not know this. One of them went down to find where the net had caught,
and to lift it up. While he was doing this *Ho-hā'-pe* put a turn of the
net-rope around his big toe and he was drowned. Then several of the men
had to go down to get him. After they brought up his body all of them
saw *Ho-hā'-pe* in the pool below, and saw her long hair float out in
the current.

NOTE--The story of *Ho-hā'-pe* the River Mermaid, varying more or less
in details, reaches north at least to American River, where the Nissenan

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (who call her
*Ho-sā'-pah*) have the following version:

Two maidens were walking along American River below the foothills when
they heard a baby cry. They followed the sound and soon saw the baby
lying on a sand bar in the edge of the river. One of them reached down
to pick it up when it suddenly changed to *Ho-sā'-pah* the River
Mermaid, who, seizing the young woman, dragged her into the river. She
cried out and her companion took hold of her arm and pulled and pulled
as hard as she could to save her, but *Ho-sā'-pah* was the stronger and
dragged her under the water and she was never seen again.

The other maiden ran home to the village and told her people what had
happened. She was so terribly frightened that her mind became affected
and in a short time she died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: *Che-ha-lum'-che* The Rock Giant Of Calaveras County](dow71)
