[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc37000)  [Next](cc37002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 37: Acts, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
14:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001)<span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass at Iconium, that
they went together \[or at the same time\] into the synagogue of the
Jews, and spake so, that a great multitude both of Jews and Gentiles
believed. **2.** And the Jews which believed not stirred and with envy
infected the minds of the Gentiles against the brethren. **3.**
Therefore, they were long time conversant there, behaving themselves
boldly in the Lord, who bare witness of the word of his grace, granting
that signs and wonders might be done by their hands. **4.** And the
multitude of the city was divided: and some stood with the Jews, and
some with the apostles.

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span><span id="ii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span> **1.** In the chapter last going before, Luke
declared how Paul and Barnabas took in hand their embassage unto the
Gentiles. Furthermore, it might seem to be an unprosperous and unlucky
beginning, in that they were not only expelled out of Antioch, but also
enforced by the obstinate wickedness of certain to shake off the dust
from their feet. But though they had but short entertainment  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) in one place, yet do they not yield; because
they consider that the Lord had called them upon that condition, that
they should do their duty though the whole world and Satan did say nay.
Therefore, we see that they came not only ready to teach, but also armed
to enter conflicts, that they might courageously proceed in publishing
the gospel, even through the midst of combats.

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span>And assuredly, that which was once spoken to
Jeremiah is common to all the prophets and ministers of God,

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span>“They shall fight against thee, but they shall
not prevail,”  
(<span id="ii.i-p8.2"></span>[Jer
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#019)<span id="ii.i-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span>Now, whithersoever they fly, they carry with
them the same courage  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) still; whereby
it appeareth that they were not only furnished for one combat, but even
for continual warfare; which Luke doth now prosecute.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) He saith first, that they came to Iconium,
and therewithal he showeth that they sought not there some haven where
they might rest quietly; but they entered the synagogue as if they had
suffered no hurt at all.

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span>I refer the word <span
id="ii.i-p12.1"></span>Κατα το αυτο*,* forasmuch as it signifieth among
the Grecians, *together, or at the same time,* rather unto the Jews than
unto Paul and Barnabas. Therefore, I interpret it thus, not that they
went in both together, but that they followed the multitude at the
solemn and appointed time of the meeting, whence we gather that they
spake not secretly with a few men, but in a great assembly of people;
whereby they declare their boldness and ready desire; they are so far
from fearing envy, or avoiding danger.  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>*That a great multitude believed.* As Luke
did before show the power of the Spirit in Paul and Barnabas, so now he
commandeth another grace of God in that prosperous success which they
had. For one only sermon which they made was not without fruit, but it
brought forth many children of God, as well of the Jews as of the
Gentiles. If one, or two, or a few, had believed, they might have
thought that they sped well; but the Lord confirmeth them far better,
when as they gather such plentiful fruit of their doctrine even in a
short time. For they knew that so many hearts of men were converted to
believe, not so much by their voice, as by the power of the Spirit;
whereby they might also assure themselves that they themselves were
defended by the outstretched hand of God, which did not a little
encourage them.

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span><span id="ii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span>**2.** *And those Jews which believed not*
Lo, they are persecuted now afresh, and that by the Jews, for they were
like firebrands to inflame the minds of the Gentiles; for it is to be
thought that the Gentiles could abide to hear the gospel preached,
unless they had been incensed to resist by these fans.  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) I interpret <span
id="ii.i-p17.2"></span>κακωσαι in this place for to resist  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) with a malicious affection, or to enforce to
do hurt. Under the name brethren, Luke comprehendeth, in my judgment,
all the godly; to wit, that they were vexed and troubled whosoever
embraced the gospel, as if some pernicious sect had risen to spread
discord, to trouble the peace of the city, to shake the public state;
yet if any had rather restrain it unto Paul and Barnabas I am not
greatly against him.

<span id="ii.i-p19"></span><span id="ii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p20"></span>**3.** *A long time.* Luke declareth here,
that Paul and Barnabas did not depart the city so soon as they saw some
set against them, for when he saith that they behaved themselves boldly,
he giveth us an inkling  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) that there
was cause of fear offered them. Whence we gather that they stood
stoutly, and that through rare constancy and courage they counted all
dangers as nothing, until they were compelled by violence to depart to
another place. This clause, <span id="ii.i-p21.2"></span>επι κυριω, may
be expounded diversely, either that they behaved themselves stoutly in
the Lord’s cause, or that they trusted to his grace, and were thereby
encouraged. I have followed that which was more common, that they
behaved themselves freely and boldly in the Lord, that is, being holpen
not by their own strength, but by his grace. He showeth immediately
after, after what sort they were encouraged in the Lord; to wit, because
\[that\] he approveth the doctrine by signs and miracles. For seeing
that they knew thereby that the Lord was present with them, and that his
hand was nigh to help them, they were worthily pricked forward to behave
themselves stoutly. But in noting one kind, he doth not exclude other
kinds, for the Lord did lift them up unto boldness, and establish them
in constancy by other means. But it seemeth that Luke did speak of
miracles expressly, because the Lord showed in them his power openly
before all the people. Therefore, Paul and Barnabas were not a little
emboldened when the Lord did so deliver their doctrine from contempt.

<span id="ii.i-p22"></span>Furthermore, we must note this phrase, that
the Lord gave witness to the gospel in miracles, for it showeth the true
use of miracles. This is, indeed, the first end, that they may show to
us the power and grace of God; but because we be wrong and perverse
interpreters of them, lest they be drawn unto abuse and corruption, God
doth never suffer them to be separated from his word. For if miracles
were wrought at any time without his word; first, that was very seldom;
secondly, there came but small fruit thereof; and God hath wrought
miracles, for the most part, whereby the world might know him not
simply, or in his bare majesty, but in his word. So Luke saith, in this
place, that the gospel was established by miracles, not that some
confused religion might possess the minds of men, but that Paul’s
doctrine going before they might be brought unto the pure worship of
God.

<span id="ii.i-p23"></span>Whence we may easily gather how foolishly the
Papists deal, when as they endeavor to lead away the world from the
reverence of God and the gospel by bare miracles. For we must hold that
principle, that those miracles which came from God at any time did never
tend to any other end but that the gospel might have his perfect and
full authority.

<span id="ii.i-p24"></span>Now must we see whether the gospel command us
to call upon the dead, to burn incense to idols, to translate unto
reigned saints the grace of Christ to take in hand vowed pilgrimages, to
invent profane worshippings, whereof there is no mention made in the
Word of God; but there is nothing more contrary to the gospel than that
these superstitions should take place. Whereupon it followeth that the
Papists do wickedly make engines of the shoars  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) of the gospel to oppugn it. To the same end
tendeth that which Luke saith, that the Lord granted that by the hands
of his servants miracles might be done; in which words he teacheth that
those were only ministers who obeyed God, and that he was the author,
who used their hand and industry. Wherefore, in speaking properly, we
cannot say that they were Paul and Barnabas’s miracles, but the miracles
of God alone, who doth so work by men, that he will not have his glory
darkened by their ministry.

<span id="ii.i-p26"></span>Furthermore, we must note the title of the
gospel, which Luke putteth in here, that it may be made to us more
amiable; for in calling it the word of grace, it hath a most pleasant
taste, because salvation is offered to the world in it through Christ.
And we must understand the contrariety with the law, wherein only the
curse is set before us. Therefore, let us remember that God speaketh to
us in the gospel to this end, that he may reconcile himself to us, and
may testify that he is merciful to us.: Neither doth this hinder that it
is *the savor of death unto death* to the reprobate, (<span
id="ii.i-p26.1"></span>[2Co 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span
id="ii.i-p26.1"></span>) because they change not the nature thereof by
their fault. Read those things which we have spoken in the second
chapter touching signs and wonders.

<span id="ii.i-p27"></span><span id="ii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p28"></span>**4.** *The multitude was divided.* The most
troublesome part of the tragedy  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8)
followeth now, for the city is divided into two parts; and at length
Paul and Barnabas (being enforced by the uproar of the people) depart
unto another place. If it be demanded what was the original of the
discord, assuredly it flowed from the gospel, to which, notwithstanding,
there is nothing more contrary than to cause discord; but the
forwardness of men causeth that the gospel, which ought to be the bond
of unity, is (so soon as it cometh abroad) the occasion of tumults.
Wherefore, so soon as any schism ariseth, before we condemn those who
seem to be the authors, it behoveth us wisely to consider who ought to
bear the blame. We hear here that one city was divided,  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) whereby some were brought unto Christ. The
Spirit of God pronounceth this to the praise, and not the shame, of Paul
and Barnabas. The same rule must we observe at this day, lest the gospel
be burdened with false envy, if it bring not men together  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) unto God, but the wicked rage against it.
It is assuredly a miserable matter to see division among men. But as the
unity is accursed which doth separate us all from God, so it were better
that a few should depart an hundred times from all the whole world, and,
in the mean season, come in favor again with God, than that disagreeing
with him continually, they should have peace with the world.  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
14:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#005)<span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** And when there was an assault made of
the Gentiles and Jews, together with their rulers, to do them violence,
and to stone them, **6.** When they knew the matter, they fled into
cities of Lycaonia, to Lystra and Derbe, and to the country lying nigh
there about on every side: **7.** And there they preached the gospel.
**8.** And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, who
had been lame from his mother’s womb, neither had he ever walked. **9.**
This man heard Paul speak: who, beholding him, and seeing that he had
faith to be healed, **10.** Said with a loud voice, Arise upright upon
thy feet. And he leapt up and walked.

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span><span id="ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>**5.** Mark how far forth the holy champions
of Christ did suffer. They give not back when their enemies do only set
themselves against them; but when the sedition waxeth hot, and they be
in danger of stoning, though they have many favorers of their doctrine,
they go no further, but remembering the saying of Christ, wherein he
warneth the faithful in patience to possess their souls, they avoid the
fury of the enemy. And though they fly, lest they  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) throw themselves headlong into death, yet
their constancy in preaching the gospel doth sufficiently declare that
they feared not danger. For Luke saith that they preached the gospel in
other places also. This is the right kind of fear, when the servants of
Christ do not run willfully into the hands of their enemies, of them to
be murdered, and yet they do not foreslow \[abandon\] their duty;
neither doth fear hinder them from obeying God when he calleth; and so,
consequently, they can afford, if need be, to go even through death
itself to do their duty.

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span><span id="ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span>**8.** *A certain man at Lystra.* Luke
reciteth one miracle which we may think  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) was one of many; but there was mention
made of it alone by reason of the famous event. For we shall see by and
by what happened. Luke reckoneth up the circumstances, which do more
plainly set forth the power of God, when he saith that the man did never
walk, and that he was a cripple even from his mother’s womb, and that he
was suddenly healed by the voice of Paul alone before the eyes of all
men, and that his legs, which were dead, were made nimble, so that he
leapt up without making any stop.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span><span id="ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span>**9.** *He heard Paul speak.* Hearing is set
down first, that we may know that the faith which Luke will commend by
and by was conceived of Paul’s doctrine. Therefore, when he heard Paul,
he hoped to be healed. But the question is, whether this was promised to
him specially; for God doth not command us to hope for everything by and
by,  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) when he offereth unto us
eternal salvation in the gospel. I answer, that this was a singular and
extraordinary motion of the Spirit of God in the cripple, as it was on
the other side in Paul, when he knew his faith by beholding him only. It
may be that many may receive the gospel, and yet they shall not be cured
of those diseases wherewith they are vexed. But forasmuch as God was
determined to show a token of his grace in the cripple, he prepared his
mind before, and made him capable of this that should come upon him.
 <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) Wherefore we must not make this a
common rule, because the cripple believed that he should be healed, but
it was a peculiar preparation to receive the gift of healing. And this
kind of faith is likewise particular which giveth place to  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) miracles, which many of God’s children do
want, who are, notwithstanding, indued with the Spirit of adoption.

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span>*Whom when Paul beheld steadfastly.* We know
how doubtful and how deceitful a thing the countenance of man is,
therefore there could no sure judgment be given thereby of faith, which
hath God alone to be witness thereof; but, as I have already said, the
cripple’s faith was revealed to Paul by the secret inspiration of the
Spirit, as he was to the apostles their only guide and master to work
miracles.

<span id="ii.ii-p17"></span><span id="ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p18"></span>**10.** *He said with a loud voice.* Many
old books,  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) and those of great
credit, add, “I say to thee in the name of Jesus Christ,” and surely we
see how careful the apostles were to magnify the name of Christ in all
miracles; therefore I think that that was expressed by Luke, and yet we
cannot find it commonly now in the printed books, \[copies.\] Whereas
Luke saith afterward, that the lame man leapt up, it serveth not only
for the commendation of God’s power, but also such readiness and
willingness to obey did testify that he was rightly prepared by the
Lord; so that he did already walk in mind when as his feet were as yet
dead. Although his speed in rising made the power of God more manifest,
to which end also Paul exalted his voice, that the sudden change might
the more move the multitude.

<span id="ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
14:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011)<span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p2"></span>**11.** Furthermore, when the multitude had
seen what Paul had done, they lifted up their voice, saying, in the
speech of Lycaonia, Gods being made like to men are come down to us.
**12.** And they called Barnabas, Jupiter, and Paul, Mercurius, because
he was the captain of the speech.  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)
**13.** And Jupiter’s priest, which was before their city, bringing
bulls and crowns \[chaplets\] unto the gates, would have done sacrifice
with the multitude.

<span id="ii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p6"></span>**11.** *Furthermore, the multitude.* This
history doth abundantly testify how ready and bent men are unto vanity.
Paul uttered not that word abruptly, *Arise;* but he added it as it were
a conclusion to the sermon made concerning Christ. Yet the people
ascribe the praise of the miracle unto their idols, as if they had heard
no word of Christ. Indeed, it is no such wonder, that the barbarous men
fell unto superstition which they had learned  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) from their childhood, so soon as they saw
the miracle. But this vice is too common every where, and it is so bred
in us, to be perverse and wrong interpreters of the works of God. Hence
come such gross dotings of superstitions in Popery, because catching
rashly at miracles, they take no heed to doctrine. For which cause we
must take the better heed, and be the more sober, lest we happen with
the sense of the flesh to corrupt (whereunto we are so bent) the power
of God, which shineth and appeareth to us for our salvation. And no
marvel if the Lord would have only a few miracles wrought, and that for
a short time, lest through the lust of men they should be drawn unto a
far contrary end; because it is unmeet that he should set his name to be
mocked of the world, which must needs be, when that which is proper to
him is translated unto idols, or the unbelievers corrupt his works, to
invent corrupt worshipping, while that setting the word aside, they
catch at every divine power which they feign.  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21)

<span id="ii.iii-p9"></span>*Gods like to men.* This was an opinion
drawn from old fables, which, notwithstanding, took the beginning of
truth.  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) The books of the poets are
full of these toys, that the gods were often seen upon earth in the
likeness of men; and yet we may well think that this carne not of
nothing,  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) but rather that profane
men did turn that into fables, which the holy fathers taught in times
past concerning angels. And it may be that Satan, when he had men
besotted, did with diverse jugglings delude them. This is of a truth,
whatsoever was God’s, whensoever it went with the infidels,  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) it was corrupt by their wicked
inventions. The same must we likewise think of sacrifices, wherein God
did exercise his  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) even from the
beginning, that they might have the external signs of godliness and of
the worship of God. And after that the unbelievers invented to
themselves strange gods, they abused the sacrifices unto their
sacrilegious worship. When the men of Lycaonia see unwonted power in the
cripple that was healed, they persuade themselves that it is a work of
God; this is all well.  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) But it was
evil done, in that they forge to themselves false gods in Paul and
Barnabas, according to the old \[wonted\] error, for what is the cause
that they prefer Barnabas before Paul, save only because they follow the
childish surmise \[fiction\] concerning Mercury, the interpreter of the
gods, in which they had been nourished? By which example we are taught
what a mischief it is to be accustomed and acquainted with errors in
youth, which can so hardly be rooted out of the mind, that even through
the works of God, whereby they ought to have been redressed, they wax
more hard.

<span id="ii.iii-p15"></span><span id="ii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p16"></span>**13.** *Also Jupiter’s priest.* Though
Luke doth not express with what affection he \[this priest\] was moved
to be so diligent, yet it is to be thought, that, forasmuch as there was
great hope of most plentiful gain offered, he was moved with
covetousness. For he had great hope of gain in time to come, if it
should be noised abroad that Jupiter appeared there. For this opinion
would by and by have followed, that Jupiter was more delighted in the
temple of Lystra than in any other. And so soon as such superstition
hath once filled the minds of men, they spare no cost to offer
sacrifice.  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) The world is indeed of
itself inclined to this, but then came the sacrificing priests, who are
like fans and bellows. And it is not to be doubted, but that the whole
multitude was moved with ambition, to be so desirous to offer sacrifice
to Paul under the name of Jupiter, that their city might be the more
famous and noble. Hence hath Satan so great liberty \[license\] to
deceive, whilst that the sacrificing priests set nets to get gain, and
the people are delighted to have errors confirmed.

<span id="ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
14:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014)<span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p2"></span>**14.** Furthermore, when the apostles,
Barnabas and Saul, had heard, rending their garments, they ran in into
the, press, crying, **15.** And saying, Men, why do ye these things? We
be also men subject to like miseries as you are, preaching to you that
you turn from those vain things unto the living God, who hath made
heaven and earth, and the sea, and whatsoever are in them: **16.** Who
in times, past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, **17.**
Though he left not himself without witness, doing good, giving to us
from heaven rain and fruitful times, replenishing with food and gladness
our hearts. **18.** And when they had thus said, they scarce appeased
the multitude, that they should do \[from doing\] sacrifice to them.

<span id="ii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv-p4"></span><span id="ii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p5"></span>**14.** *When the apostles had heard.* In
that Paul and Barnabas rent their garments, and leapt into the midst of
the multitude, it appeareth thereby how zealous they were for the glory
of God; \[no;\] being content only to speak to the people,  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) they troubled the preparation of the
sacrifice so much as they are able. It cometh to pass sometimes that
even hypocrites refuse excessive honor; but they rather provoke the
simple to give it them with their reigned modesty. There was no such
thing in Paul and Barnabas; for they declared, both by words and also by
all gesture of body, that they were so far from taking pleasure in that
worship which the men of Lystra gave unto them, that they did utterly
detest it. This is holy anger, wherewith the servants of God must be
inflamed so often as they see his glory profaned and overthrown by the
sacrileges of men. And, assuredly, no man shall be able otherwise to
serve God sincerely and faithfully, unless he put on that affection of
jealousy, whereof Paul speaketh in the Second Epistle to the
Corinthians, (<span id="ii.iv-p6.2"></span>[2Co
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027)<span id="ii.iv-p6.2"></span>)
that those men to whom the Lord hath committed the charge of his Church
be no less courageous and stout to defend the glory of their Lord, than
a husband is vigilant to defend his wife’s chastity.

<span id="ii.iv-p7"></span>Therefore, we must take good heed that we
suffer not that honor to be given us which may darken the glory of God;
but rather so soon as there appeareth any profaning of God’s glory, let
this heat break out, whereof we have an example in Paul and Barnabas.
And though the teachers of the Church ought especially to be imbued with
zeal, yet there is no one of the godly which ought not to be sore
displeased, when he seeth the worship of God polluted or given to some
other; because it is written of all,

<span id="ii.iv-p8"></span>“The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up,
and the rebukes of them that rebuked thee fell on me”*  
*(<span id="ii.iv-p8.2"></span>[Psalms
69:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv-p9"></span>And if so be it holy men being yet compassed
about with the flesh did so greatly detest idolatry, how shall we think
them to be affected now, when they are stripped out of all the
affections of the flesh? When as the world abuseth their names and
persons unto superstition, it thinketh it doth them a great pleasure;
but it is greatly deceived. For they will stand up first against their
worshippers, and will indeed declare that they never make more account
of anything, than that the worship of God might remain whole and sound
to him. Moreover, there can be no greater injury done to them, than when
the honor which is taken from God is given to them; which must needs be
when any divine thing is ascribed and given them.

<span id="ii.iv-p10"></span>Whereas Luke saith that Paul and Barnabas
did rent their garments, it appeareth by other places of Scripture that
this rite and custom was used among the men of the east country, so
often as they would by external gesture express either great sorrow or
detesting of any thing. When Luke calleth Barnabas an apostle together
with Paul, he extendeth the signification of the word farther than unto
the chief \[primary\] order which Christ appointed in his Church; like
as Paul maketh Andronicus and Junias excellent among the apostles. But
if we should speak properly, they were evangelists and not apostles;
unless peradventure because Barnabas was made Paul’s fellow in office,
we place them both in like degree of office, so may he be truly called
an apostle.

<span id="ii.iv-p11"></span><span id="ii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p12"></span>**15.** *Men, why do ye those things?* They
begin with a reprehension, as the matter did require; that done, they
show to what end they were sent. Afterward they preach concerning the
only God, and show that he was unknown to the world. Lastly, that they
may more strongly pluck out of their hearts the deceits and sleights of
the devil, they teach that this ignorance was without excuse. Therefore
the first part of the sermon is a reprehension, wherein the men of
Lystra are condemned for worshipping mortal men preposterously instead
of God. Though the reason which they allege seemeth to be cold. For it
were an easy matter to gather thence, that it is not unlawful to worship
those who are delivered from human miseries by death. By this means all
the superstitions of the Gentiles should stand untouched, which were
wont to count none gods but those who were dead. With the same color
also have the Papists colored their idolatry, who worship rather the
dead men’s bones, stones and wood, than living men in whose nostrils is
breath.  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) I answer, that Paul and
Barnabas drew this argument from the matter which was now in hand, We be
miserable men; therefore you do falsely and filthily imagine us to be
gods, and worship us as gods. If idolatry be handled generally, this
shall be a perpetual reason to condemn it, and shall alone be sufficient
enough, that the perfect and whole worship of godliness is due to God
alone, and that therefore it is profaned, so soon as it is in any point
given to creatures, whether they be angels, or men, or stars. But
occasion shall oftentimes be offered, that many things may be spoken
against one kind of idolatry, which do not appertain unto another,
(neither are agreeable to the same;) and yet shall they be of no small
force for the matter which is in hand, as Paul and Barnabas, by
confessing that they be mortal men, subject to diverse calamities, had a
fit reason to reprove the fury and madness of the people.

<span id="ii.iv-p14"></span>*We preach to you.* An argument drawn from
contraries. For here they show that the end of their coming was quite
contrary; to wit, that they might remove superstitions, which had
hitherto reigned. For it is all one as if they had said, Doth the
miracle move you? Then give credence to our words. And the sum of our
embassage is, that all reigned godheads wherewith the world hath
hitherto been deceived may be done away and perish. And this is a
general doctrine, whereby they do not only appease the present madness,
but also reprehend all manner \[of\] superstitions, and whatsoever was
contrary to, or disagreeing with, the rule of godliness. For without
doubt they call all that vain which men have invented to themselves of
their own brain. And we must mark this definition, that all religion is
vain which departeth and degenerateth from the pure and simple Word of
God. There is no express mention made indeed of the Word, because they
spake to the Gentiles. But because God is no otherwise rightly
worshipped than according to his appointment, it followeth out of Paul’s
words, that so soon as men depart from that worship which God hath
commanded and doth allow, \[approve,\] they are wearied foolishly and
vainly with a vain and unprofitable labor. For that religion wherein God
hath not the preeminence is nothing worth, neither hath it any truth or
soundness.

<span id="ii.iv-p15"></span>And this was the cause that sincere and
perfect godliness was never found, neither did it ever flourish in the
more part of the world. For they stood only about the removing of the
old idolatry; and the other thing was in the mean season foreslowed,
\[neglected,\] to bring men unto the true God alone, after that they had
forsaken idols. They turned, indeed, the name of an idol sometimes into
the name of God, but under that color they did nevertheless cherish the
old errors, which they should have endeavored to redress. So the priests
of France begat the single life of great Cybele.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) Nuns came in place of the vestal virgins.
The church of All Saints succeeded Pantheon, (or the church of All Gods;
 <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) ) against ceremonies were set
ceremonies not much unlike. At length came in the multitude of gods, who
they thought would be lawful and tolerable if they had once decked
\[masked\] them with the titles of saints. Corruptions are not by this
means purged, neither are the stables, both profane and full of filth,
turned into the temple of God; but the name of God is mixed with profane
pollutions, and God himself is brought into a filthy stall. Wherefore,
let us remember that the apostles did not only employ themselves to
overthrow idolatry which had long time reigned in former ages, but did
also take great heed that pure religion might reign afterward, having
put all corruptions to flight.

<span id="ii.iv-p18"></span>*Who hath made heaven and earth* We know
that the order of teaching doth require that we begin with things which
are better known. Seeing that Paul and Barnabas spake to the Gentiles,
they should have in vain essayed to bring them  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) unto Christ. Therefore, it was expedient
for them to begin with some other point, which was not so far separate
from common sense, \[perception,\] that after that was confessed they
might afterward pass over unto Christ. The minds of the men of Lystra
were possessed with that error, that there be more gods than one. Paul
and Barnabas show, on the contrary, that there is but one Creator of the
world. After that that reigned number and multitude of the gods was
taken away, there was passage now made unto the second member, that they
might teach what that God was who was the Creator of heaven and earth.
The case standeth otherwise at this day between us and the Papists; they
confess that there is but one God, and they admit the Scripture.
Therefore, it remaineth that we prove to them out of the Scripture what
God is, and after what sort he will be worshipped of men.

<span id="ii.iv-p20"></span><span id="ii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p21"></span>**16.** *In times past.* Because the men of
Lystra might object that that God was unknown hitherto, Paul and
Barnabas prevent them and say, that all men wandered indeed in darkness,
and that all mankind was stricken with blindness, but that they deny
that any prejudice must be made  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)
according to the perverse ignorance of the world. These were two no
small lets for the unbelievers, long antiquity of time, and the consent
almost of all nations. Paul and Barnabas remove both in this place, If,
say they, men have erred many years, \[ages,\] and if the world have
wandered without reason and judgment, let not, therefore, the truth of
God, when it appeareth, be less precious to you. For seeing that it is
eternal, and is not changed, it is an unmeet thing that the long
prescription of years should be set against it. They prove that there is
no more aid or patronage to be found in the number of men. There is no
cause (say they) why the conspiracy of all the whole world should keep
you from coming to the right way. Blindness hath got the upper hand
among all people; but God doth now (appear and) give light to you.
Therefore, your eyes must be open, and you must not slumber and sleep in
darkness, though all people have been drowned therein hitherto.

<span id="ii.iv-p23"></span>*Their ways.* If he had only said that men
were deceived until that time through God’s sufferance, we might easily
gather thereby that all men can do nothing else but err, so long as they
be not governed of God. Yet he speaketh far more plainly when he calleth
errors the *ways* of men. For we are plainly taught by this what the
wisdom and understanding of man’s mind can do in beholding and keeping
the way of salvation. All people \[nations\] (saith he) have walked in
their own ways; that is, they have wandered in darkness and death. It is
all one as if he should say, that there is no sparkle of true reason in
all the whole world.

<span id="ii.iv-p24"></span>Therefore, there is but one rule of true
godliness, that is, that the faithful, casting from them all confidence
in their own wit, do submit themselves to God. For the ways of men are
now as they were in times past; and the examples of all times teach how
miserably blind those men be who have not the word of God to give them
light, though they think they can pass other men in quickness of sight.
Immediately after the beginning of the world, the more part fell away
unto diverse superstitions and wicked worshippings. Whence came that,
save only because it pleased them to follow their own imaginations? When
it might have seemed that the world was purged with the flood, it fell
again \[relapsed\] straightway to the same vices. Therefore, there is
nothing more deadly than to lean to our own wisdom.

<span id="ii.iv-p25"></span>But Paul and Barnabas show no cause here why
the Lord suffered the world to err so long; and assuredly we must count
the will of God alone the chiefest law of equity. God hath always a good
reason for his worlds; but because it is oftentimes hid from us, it is
our duty reverently to wonder at his secret counsel. We must, indeed,
confess that the world was worthy of \[deserved\] such destruction; but
there can no other reason be brought why the Lord had mercy rather on
one age than on another, save only because it seemed good to him that it
should be so. Therefore, Paul calleth that time which was appointed of
God for preaching the gospel, the time of fullness, (<span
id="ii.iv-p25.1"></span>[Ga 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span
id="ii.iv-p25.1"></span>,) lest any other opportunity be sought. And we
must remember that which we had in the first chapter, that it is not for
us to know the times and seasons which the Father hath placed in his own
power. So that the cavil of the Papists is refuted, who say that it
cannot be that God suffered his Church to err so long. For whence, I
pray you, came the Gentiles but from the ark of Noah, when there was a
certain singular purity of the Church? (<span
id="ii.iv-p25.2"></span>[Ge 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009)<span
id="ii.iv-p25.2"></span>.) Also, the posterity of holy Shem, together
with others, did degenerate. Yea, Israel, the peculiar people of the
Lord, was also left for a long time. Wherefore, it is no marvel if God
did punish the contempt of his word with the same blindness under the
reign of his Son as he did in times past.

<span id="ii.iv-p26"></span><span id="ii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p27"></span>**17.** *Notwithstanding, he did not suffer
himself to be without witness.* Paul and Barnabas take from the Gentiles
in this place the cloak \[pretext\] of ignorance. For how greatly soever
men please themselves in their own inventions, being at length convicted
of error, they fly unto this fortress, \[asylums\] that they ought to
bear no blame;  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) but that God was
rather cruel, who did not vouchsafe so much as. with one hiss to call
those back whom he saw perish, \[perishing.\] Paul and Barnabas cut off
 <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) this frivolous objection, when
they show that God lay hid in such sort, that he \[still\] bare witness
of himself and his divinity. Notwithstanding, we must see how these two
things can hang together; for if God bare witness of himself, he did not
suffer (so much as in him lay) the world to err. I answer, that this
kind of testimony, whereof mention is made, was such as that it made men
without excuse, and yet was it not sufficient to salvation. For that of
the apostle is true, that by faith it is understood that the worlds were
ordained by the word of God, (<span id="ii.iv-p29.2"></span>[Heb
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv-p29.2"></span>.)
But faith is not conceived by the bare beholding of the heaven and
earth, but by the hearing of the word. Whereupon it followeth, that men
are brought by the direction of the word alone unto that knowledge of
Almighty God which bringeth salvation. And yet this letteth not but that
they may be made without excuse, even without the word, who, though they
be naturally deprived of light, are blind notwithstanding, through their
own malice, as Paul teacheth in the first chapter to the Romans.

<span id="ii.iv-p30"></span>*Giving rain and fruitful seasons.* God
hath, indeed, revealed himself to all mankind by his word since \[from\]
the beginning. But Paul and Barnabas show that there was no age on which
God did not bestow benefits, which might testify that the world is
governed by his government (and commandment;) and because the light of
doctrine had been buried long thee, therefore they say only, that God
was showed by natural arguments, \[evidences.\] And it is to be thought
that they did, in such sort, set forth the magnificence and greatness of
the works of God as became them; but it was sufficient for Luke to touch
the (sums and) chief points of matters. Neither do I so understand it,
that they intreated subtlety, and after the manner of the philosophers,
of the secrets of nature, for they spake unto an unlearned multitude;
therefore it behooved them to set that before them plainly which the
most ignorant did know. Notwithstanding they take this principle, that
in the order of nature there is a certain and evident manifestation of
God, in that the earth is watered with rain; in that the heat of the sun
doth comfort it;  <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) in that there
cometh such abundance of fruit out of the same yearly, it is thereby
gathered for a surety, that there is some God who governeth all things.
For even the heaven and earth are not moved or governed by their own
motion, and much less by fortune. Therefore it remaineth, that this
wonderful workmanship of nature doth manifestly show the providence of
God; and those who said that the world was eternal spake not as they
thought, but they went about by malicious and barbarous unthankfulness
\[ingratitude\] to suppress the glory of God, wherein they betrayed
their impudence.

<span id="ii.iv-p32"></span>*Filling with meat and gladness.* The
ungodliness of men is more convict in that, if they knew not God,
because he cloth not only set before their eyes testimonies of his glory
in his works, but doth also appoint all things for their use. For why
doth the sun and stars shine in the heavens, save only that they may
serve men? Why doth the rain fall from heaven? Why doth the earth bring
forth her increase, save only that they may minister food to men?
Therefore, God hath not set man upon earth that he may be an idle
beholder of his work, as being set upon a theater, but to exercise
himself in praising the liberality of God, whilst that he enjoyeth the
riches of heaven and earth. And now, is it not more than filthy
forwardness \[depravity\] not to be moved with so great goodness of God
in the manifold abundance of things? To fill the hearts with meat, doth
signify nothing else but to give food which may satisfy the desires of
men. By this word *gladness,* Paul and Barnabas do mean that God doth
give more to men, according to his infinite goodness, than their
necessity doth require; as if it had been said, that men have meat given
them not only to refresh their strength, but also to make their hearts
merry.

<span id="ii.iv-p33"></span>If any man do object that it falleth out so
oftentimes that men do rather mourn, being hungry, then rejoice, being
full; I answer, that that cometh to pass contrary to the order of
nature; namely, when the Lord shutteth his hand because of the sins of
men. For the liberality of God should flow unto us abundantly of his
\[its\] own accord, as it is here described by Paul and Barnabas, unless
it were kept back by the lets of our vices. And yet there was never so
great barrenness wherein the blessing of God in feeding men did quite
wither away. It was, indeed, well said of the prophet, Open thy mouth,
and I will fill it, (<span id="ii.iv-p33.1"></span>[Ps
81:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv-p33.1"></span>,)
that we may know that we be hungry through our own fault, whilst that we
do not admit the goodness of God. But how unworthy soever we be and
straight,  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) yet the fatherly love of
God breaketh through even unto the unworthy. Especially the generality
of mankind doth testify that the benefits of God do never cease, wherein
he appeareth to be our Father.

<span id="ii.iv-p35"></span><span id="ii.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p36"></span>**18.** *When they had said thus.* Luke said
before that they did not only use words, but they ran also with violence
into the multitude.  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) Now he addeth,
that the fury of the people was scarce appeased  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) with that vehemency, whereby appeareth
how mad and untamed the heat of the world is toward idolatry. For if
they believe the \[them\] gods, why do they not believe their word,
whereby they put from them false honor? But all idolaters are sick of
this disease, that they are oftentimes ready to shake off the yoke,
unless religion be subject to their will and pleasure. Wherefore, no
marvel if the prophets say oftentimes that men are carried into the
blind affection of superstitions, even as brute beasts are carried into
their lust.

<span id="ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span><span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
14:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019)<span id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span>**19.** And there came from Antioch and
Iconium Jews, by whom the multitudes were persuaded, and when they had
stoned Paul, they cast him out without the city, thinking that he was
dead. **20.** And as the disciples stood about him, he arose and entered
into the city: and on the morrow he went forth with Barnabas to Derbe.
**21.** And when they had preached the gospel to this city, and had
framed malay disciples, they returned to Lystra, and to Iconium, and
Antioch, **22.** Strengthening the souls of the disciples, and exhorting
them to continue in the faith, and that through many afflictions we must
enter into the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span><span id="ii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span>**19.** *There came.* Paul and Barnabas can
hardly stay the people from doing sacrifice; but a company of knaves do,
with small ado, persuade them to stone Paul, whom of late they made a
god. Whereby appeareth how much more men be bent unto superstition than
unto the true worship of God, and how arrogant superstition is, which
will always bear the chief sway in appointing the worship of God. The
servants of God seek no other thing but to bring men under obedience of
him, which is salvation and felicity alone. They challenge to themselves
no lordship, they hunt after no gain; and yet the world cannot abide
them. For almost all men murmur; and now and then there rise tumults.
Those who are thus stubborn against God, they be too ready to believe
seducers, and willingly submit themselves to their tyranny. So the Pope
had liberty to deceive at his pleasure, and not only to oppress
miserable souls with slavery, but also cruelly to torment them.
Whatsoever he commanded it was obediently received, and even at this
day, though he make impossible laws, yet dare no man once mutter against
them. Nevertheless, the yoke of Christ is sweet, (<span
id="ii.v-p5.1"></span>[Mt 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span
id="ii.v-p5.1"></span>,) and yet few there be who will suffer it.

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span>Therefore, in this history is most lively
painted out unto us the forwardness of the world. Paul might have
reigned under the title of Mercury, with the commendation of all men; he
will not be a god. Because he serveth Christ faithfully, he is stoned.
His constancy is commended, to the end we may follow it. He was indeed
wonderfully delivered by the Lord; but as touching himself he suffered a
most cruel kind of death. Therefore, we must make like account of this
testimony, which he doth also recite in the Second Epistle to the
Corinthians, (<span id="ii.v-p6.1"></span>[2Co
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025)<span id="ii.v-p6.1"></span>,) as
if he had been slain. Furthermore, we need not doubt but that the common
sort made insurrection against him outrageously.  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) So that, what violence soever the wicked
do to the servants of Christ, it is never called in question; the laws
are whist, \[silent;\] judgments cease; the magistrate is asleep; there
is no patron to be found.

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span><span id="ii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span>**20.** *As the disciples.* Though no man
defended Paul, yet Luke showeth that the godly were desirous of his
life;  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) yet they did so moderate
themselves, lest they should attempt anything with great danger to no
end, seeing they could not help him unless it were done privily. And
surely we must always mark what the Lord hath brought to our hand. If I,
standing upon the bank, shall see a man in the midst of the water, and
cannot reach him my hand when he is like to be drowned,  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) what is remaining for me to do but to
commend him to the Lord? And \[but\] if there be any hope to help him,
then must I endanger myself.  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)
Therefore, we will not say that Saint Paul was left alone by the
disciples through sloth, seeing they could not help him; and they
declare their love and care when they stand about him after he is cast
out.

<span id="ii.v-p13"></span>*They went to Derbe* It appeareth plainly by
this that Paul was miraculously saved, seeing that, on the morrow, after
he was cast out for dead, he taketh his journey, being fresh and sound;
whence it is also gathered what an invincible heart he bare against all
evils and afflictions. For he creepeth not into a corner, where, like an
overworn soldier, he may live idly; but he goeth to the same places
where he was uncourteously and cruelly handled but a little before.
Notwithstanding Luke showeth that the church was first planted among the
men of Derbe, he addeth afterward, that Paul and Barnabas returned unto
the churches which they had ordained, that they might confirm the
disciples; whereby by he giveth us to understand that the use of the
Word consisteth not in instruction only, whereby the hearer is only
taught, but that it is also available for confirmation of faith, in
admonishing, exhorting, and reproving. And Christ doth not only command
his ministers to teach, but also to exhort; and Paul saith that the
Scripture is profitable not only to teach, but also to exhort, (<span
id="ii.v-p13.1"></span>[2Ti 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span
id="ii.v-p13.1"></span>.) Wherefore, let not pastors think that they
have done their duty as they ought, when they have well trained up their
people in true knowledge, unless they employ themselves to this part
also. Again, let not the faithful neglect the Word of God, as if the
reading and preaching thereof were unnecessary; because there is no man
who hath not need of continual confirmation.

<span id="ii.v-p14"></span><span id="ii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p15"></span>**22.** *And exhorting them.* This was the
principal way to confirm, in that they provoke the disciples who had
before embraced the Gospel and did profess it, to go forward by
exhorting them; for we are far from being so ready and stout  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) as we ought. Therefore our laziness
needeth pricks, and our coldness must be warmed. But because God will
have his exercised with diverse combats, Paul and Barnabas admonish the
disciples to be ready to suffer tribulation. A very necessary
admonition, that we must go on warfare in this world, that we may live
well and godly. If the flesh should not molest us, if Satan should
attempt nothing, if the wicked should not trouble us with some
stumbling-blocks, it were no such troublesome thing to persevere;
because that were a sweet walk through a soft and pleasant way; but
because there arise on every side, and every minute of an hour,
\[moment,\] infinite assaults, which provoke us to fall away, there
ariseth the hardness,  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) and
therefore is it that the virtue of constancy is so rare. Therefore, to
the end we may persist even unto the end, we must be prepared for war.

<span id="ii.v-p18"></span>But Luke speaketh not in this place only of
the persecutions which the adversaries raise against us with drawn
swords and flaming fires; but he comprehendeth under the word
*tribulations,* all sorrows and miseries whereunto the life of the godly
is subject; not because the faithful alone are miserable; because this
is the common state both of the good and bad. Whence also cometh that
famous proverb, It is the best not to be born; and the next to die very
quickly.  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) But when as God doth
oftentimes spare the wicked, and doth fat them with prosperity, he is
more sharp and hard,  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) toward his
children. For besides common molestations, they are oppressed peculiarly
with many discommodities, and the Lord doth humble them with such
exercises, keeping their flesh under correction lest it wax wanton; he
awaketh them, lest they lie sleeping upon earth. Unto these are added
the reproaches and slanders of the wicked; for they must be, as it were,
the offscourings of the world. Their simpleness is laughed at; but they
use  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) wicked mocks and scoffs,
principally against God. Last of all, the lust of the wicked breaketh
out into open violence; so that they have need to strive  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) with many tribulations, and it cannot be
but that all their life shall be envied and unquiet amidst so many
enemies. But this is the best comfort, and which is sufficient enough to
confirm their minds, that this way (though it be hard and sharp) leadeth
unto the kingdom of heaven. For we gather by this that the miseries of
the godly are more happy than be all the doting dainties and delights of
the world.

<span id="ii.v-p23"></span>Therefore, let us remember, first, that this
condition is set down for us, that we suffer many tribulations; yet let
us also remember to add this, to mitigate the bitterness thereof, that
by them we be brought unto the kingdom of God. Furthermore, their
babbling is frivolous,  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) who gather
hereby that patience is a work which deserveth eternal salvation, seeing
that the cause of salvation is not in this place handled, but after what
sort God useth to handle his in this world; and the comfort is added,
not to extol the dignity and merit of works, but only to encourage the
godly, that they faint not under the burden of the cross. All mankind,
as we have said before, as well one as other, is subject to many
miseries; but the afflictions of the reprobate are no thing else to them
but the very entry of hell; but these turn to the saints to an happy and
joyful end, and for them they fall out well; and so, consequently, they
be helps for salvation, because they take part with Christ.  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) We must note that Paul and Barnabas being
not content with the plural number, do plainly set down many
tribulations, lest any man, after he hath suffered one or two, or  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) a few, do at length sink down.  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) Therefore, let the faithful think that
they must pass through continual miseries; that done, let them prepare
themselves not for one kind of persecution only, but for diverse kinds.
For though God handle some men more courteously and gently, yet doth he
pamper none of his so daintily that he is free from all tribulations.

<span id="ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
14:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)<span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span>**23.** And when by voices \[suffrages\] they
had ordained them elders through all churches, having prayed with
fasting, they commended them to the Lord, in whom they had believed.
**24.** And passing over through Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.
**25.** And when they had spoken the word at Perga, they went down to
Attalia: **26.** And thence they sailed to Antioch, from whence they
were commended to the grace of God unto the work which they had
fulfilled. **27.** And when they were come, when the Church was gathered
together, they showed what great things God had done by them, and that
he had opened to the Gentiles the door of faith. **28.** And they were
there no small time with the disciples.

<span id="ii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi-p4"></span><span id="ii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p5"></span>**23.** *When they had ordained elders.* By
this it appeareth sufficiently, that it is not enough if men have been
once taught the doctrine of godliness, and to have \[hold\] the sum of
faith, unless they go forward continually; therefore, Christ did not
only send his apostles to preach the gospel, but he commanded also that
there should be pastors appointed, that the preaching of the gospel
might be perpetual and in daily use. Paul and Barnabas do mark that this
order was set down by Christ, when they assigned pastors to every
church, lest, after their departure, doctrine should cease and be
whisht, (silent.) Furthermore, this place teacheth, that the Church
cannot want an ordinary ministry, neither can any be counted Christians
before God but those who, during their whole life, are willing to learn.
I take it that those are called elders, in this place, who had the
office of teaching enjoined them; for it appeareth by Paul that some
were only censors of manners, and such as had authority to punish
enormities, (<span id="ii.vi-p5.1"></span>[1Ti
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)<span id="ii.vi-p5.1"></span>.)
Now, forasmuch as Luke saith, that they were set over every church, the
difference between their office and the office of the apostles is
gathered hence. For the apostles had no certain place of abode, but they
went to and fro to found new churches; but pastors were set and
appointed, every man to his own church, and were, as it were, placed to
watch  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) over their congregations.

<span id="ii.vi-p7"></span>*Had ordained by election.* The Greek word
<span id="ii.vi-p7.1"></span>χειροτονειν doth signify to decree, or
ordain a thing, by lifting up the hands, as they used to do in the
assemblies of the people. Notwithstanding, the ecclesiastical writers do
often use the word <span id="ii.vi-p7.2"></span>χειροτονεια*,* in
another sense; to wit, for their \[the\] solemn rite of ordaining, which
is called in Scripture *laying on of hands.* Furthermore, by this manner
of speech is very excellently expressed the right way to ordain pastors.
Paul and Barnabas are said to choose  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) elders. Do they this alone by their
private office?  <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) Nay, rather they
suffer the matter to be decided by the consent of them all.  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) Therefore, in ordaining pastors the
people had their free election, but lest there should any tumult arise,
Paul and Barnabas sit as chief moderators. Thus must the decree of the
council of Laodicea be understood, which forbiddeth that the people have
liberty granted them to elect.  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)

<span id="ii.vi-p12"></span>*They having prayed with fasting.* They had
a double end and reason of their prayer; the first, that God would
direct them with the spirit of wisdom and discretion to choose the best
and most meet men, for they knew that they were not furnished with so
great wisdom but they might be deceived; neither did they so much trust
to their diligence, but that they knew that the principal point did
consist in the blessing of God, as we see men’s judgments err daily
where the heavenly government is not, and that all their labor is
nothing worth where the hand of God is not. These be the true signs and
tokens  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) of the godly to call upon
the Spirit of God, that he may govern their counsels. And if so be it
this rule be to be observed in all businesses so often as the government
of the Church is in hand, which dependeth wholly upon his will and
pleasure, we must  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) beware that we
attempt nothing unless we have him for our guide and governor. And the
second end of their prayer was, that God would furnish with necessary
gifts those pastors which were chosen. For it is a harder matter to
fulfill such a function faithfully as a man ought, than that man’s
strength is sufficient for it. Therefore, they crave God’s help even in
this part also, having Paul and Barnabas for their authors.

<span id="ii.vi-p15"></span>They fast likewise, that even that may be a
help  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) to stir up the ferventness of
their prayers; for we know how great our coldness is otherwise. Not
because it is always necessary that we should pray fasting, seeing that
God doth invite even those who are full to give thanks; but when we are
urged by any necessity to pray more fervently than we used commonly to
do, this is a very profitable provokement. And now we have already
declared what a weighty matter the choosing of pastors is, wherein the
soundness of the Church is handled. Wherefore, no marvel if Luke write
that they used extraordinary prayers. And it is profitable for us to
mark this use, and other \[uses\] of fasting, lest we imagine with the
Papists that it is a meritorious work, or lest we place the worship of
God in it, seeing it is of itself nothing, neither is it of any
importance with God, save only inasmuch as it is referred unto another
end.  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)

<span id="ii.vi-p18"></span>*They committed themselves to the Lord.* We
gather hereby, first, what great care Paul and Barnabas had for the
salvation of those who, by their industry,  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) were turned unto the Lord; for they
testify, that in this infirmity of the flesh men be subject to more
dangers, than that their faith can continue steadfast through his
\[its\] own strength. Therefore, this is the only refuge and aid, if the
Lord keep them continually whom he hath once received. And when Luke
saith, that they were commended to God in whom they believed, there
cometh no small confidence hence unto us; because he assigneth this
office to God as proper to him, to save and defend all those who by true
faith have embraced his word.

<span id="ii.vi-p20"></span><span id="ii.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p21"></span>**24.** *Passing through Pisidia.* We have
already said that Paul and Barnabas came to Antioch of Pisidia. Being
now about to return to Antioch of Syria, whence they were sent away,
they go through Pamphylia, which is the middle region toward the mount
Taurus. And Perga and Attalia are cities lying near together. And
whereas Luke saith, that they preach the Word in the one only, we may
thereby guess that they had not opportunity offered them everywhere to
teach, which they were wont to neglect or let pass nowhere.

<span id="ii.vi-p22"></span><span id="ii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p23"></span>**26.** *When they had been commended.* Luke
might have said that they were ordained there to be the apostles of the
Gentiles; but by a circuit of words  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) he doth more plainly express that they
were neither sent away of men, neither did they attempt any thing
trusting to their own strength, but that their whole journey, together
with the success, was committed to God, the author thereof. Therefore,
their preaching was no man’s work, but a work of the grace of God. And
the word *grace* is referred as well unto the power and efficacy of the
Spirit, as also unto all the rest of the signs of favor; because all
those gifts be free which God bestoweth upon his servants. And the
sentence may be thus resolved, that they prayed God that he would show
forth his grace to further the labors of his servants.

<span id="ii.vi-p25"></span><span id="ii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p26"></span>**27.** *After they had called the Church
together.* As those who return from an embassage used to give an account
of their acts, so Paul and Barnabas declared to the Church all the sum
of their voyage, that it may thereby appear what good success they had,
and how faithfully they behaved themselves in their office; and also
that they may exhort the faithful to give thanks to God, as the thing
itself gave them large matter;  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)
therefore Luke saith, Not that they did extol the things which they
themselves had done, but whatsoever things the Lord had done by them. It
is word for word *with them;* but according to the phrase of the Hebrew
tongue, it is all one as if it had been said, *in them,* or *by them,*
or *towards them,* or simply *to them,* in the dative case. Therefore
Luke doth not say <span id="ii.vi-p27.2"></span>συν αυτοις*,* but <span
id="ii.vi-p27.3"></span>μετα αυτων; which I say for this cause, lest any
unskillful man ascribe some part of the praise to Paul and Barnabas, as
if they had been partners with God in the work; whereas he doth rather
make him the only author of all those famous facts which they had done.

<span id="ii.vi-p28"></span>Luke addeth immediately after, that the Lord
had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles; for though they were sent
unto the Gentiles, yet the strangeness \[novelty\] of the matter causeth
them to wonder not a little; and not only the sudden change did make the
Jews astonished, but also because it was to them as it were a monster,
that unclean men, and such as were strangers  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) from the kingdom of God, should be mixed
with the holy seed of Abraham, that they might both together make one
and ‘the same Church of God. They are now taught by the event itself,
that it was not for nothing that there were apostles sent to them.
Moreover, it is said that the door of faith was set open to the
Gentiles, not only because the gospel was preached to them with the
external voice, but because, being illuminated by the Spirit of God,
they were called effectually unto the faith. The kingdom of heaven is
indeed set open to us by the external preaching of the gospel; but no
man entereth in save he to whom God reacheth out his hand; no man
draweth near unless he be drawn inwardly by the Spirit. Therefore, Paul
and Barnabas show and prove by the effect that their calling was
approved and ratified by God, because the faith of the Gentiles was, as
it were, a seal engraven by the hand of God to establish the same, as
Paul saith, (<span id="ii.vi-p29.2"></span>[Ro
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)<span id="ii.vi-p29.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.vi-p29.3"></span>[2Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span id="ii.vi-p29.3"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc37001.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p6.1"></span>Verum quamvis
duciter accepti,” but however harshly they were received.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc37001.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p10.1"></span>Animi
praesentiam,” presence of mind.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc37001.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p11.1"></span>Quod Lucas
nunc prosequitur,” as Luke now relates in detail.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc37001.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p13.1"></span>Ut invidiam
fugitent, aut periculem formident,” from shunning envy, or dreading
danger.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc37001.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p17.1"></span>Nisi liabellis
illis accensae fuissent ad resistendum,” had not these like fans kindled
their resistance.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc37001.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.i-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p18.1"></span>Inficere,” to
infect.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc37001.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p21.1"></span>Innnib,” he
intimates.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc37001.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p25.1"></span>Fulturis,” the
props or stays.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc37001.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p29.1"></span>Catastrophe,”
the catastrophe.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc37001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p30.1"></span>Schismate,” by
a schism.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc37001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p31.1"></span>Omnes
pariter,” all alike.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc37001.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p32.1"></span>Mundi pac.”

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc37001.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p6.1"></span>Temere,”
rashly, omitted.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc37001.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p9.1"></span>Probabile
est,” it is probable.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc37001.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p10.1"></span>Sine
difficultate,” without difficulty.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc37001.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p13.1"></span>Protinus,”
forthwith.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc37001.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p14.1"></span>Hujus
accessionis,” of this accession.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc37001.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p15.1"></span>Locum,” room
for.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc37001.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p19.1"></span>Codices,”
manuscripts or copies.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc37001.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p3.1"></span>Dux esset
sormonis,” took the lead in speaking.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc37001.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p7.1"></span>Imbiberant,”
had imbibed.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc37001.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p8.1"></span>Numen
quodlibet. a se confictum,” any kind of deity reigned by themselves.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc37001.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p10.1"></span>Originem a
veritate duxerant,” had derived their origin from truth.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc37001.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p11.1"></span>Non fuisse
de nihilo confictum,” was not reigned without some foundation.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc37001.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p12.1"></span>Ubi ad
infideles transiit,” when it was transmitted to unbelievers, the
heathen.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc37001.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p13.1"></span>Fideles
suos,” his believing people.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc37001.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p14.1"></span>Recte
hactenus,” so far right.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc37001.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p17.1"></span>Donaria,”
gifts.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc37001.htm#fr_28) <span
id="ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p6.1"></span>Verbis non
contenti,” not contented with words.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc37001.htm#fr_29) <span
id="ii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p13.1"></span>Quam vivos
et spitantes homines,” than living, breathing men.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc37001.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p16.1"></span>Sic Galli
sacrifici magnae Cybeles caelibatum genuerunt,” so the priests of Gaul
gave rise to the celibacy of great Cybele.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc37001.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p17.1"></span>Pantheo
successit Pantagion,” Pantagion (All Saints) succeed Pantheon, (All
Gods.)

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc37001.htm#fr_32) <span
id="ii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p19.1"></span>Statim,”
forthwith, omitted.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc37001.htm#fr_33) <span
id="ii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p22.1"></span>Debere
praejudicium fieri,” that any thing should be prejudged, (any judgment
should be founded on.)

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc37001.htm#fr_34) <span
id="ii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p28.1"></span>Nullum sibi
debere culpam imputari,” that no blame ought to be imputed to them

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc37001.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ii.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p29.1"></span>Anticipant,”
anticipate.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc37001.htm#fr_36) <span
id="ii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p31.1"></span>Vegetat,”
causes it to vegetate.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc37001.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ii.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p34"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p34.1"></span>Sed quam
libet simus restricti,” but however we may be restrained (in ourselves.)

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc37001.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p37.1"></span>Sed etiam
cure impetu irruisse in turbam,” but also rushed impetuously among the
multitude.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc37001.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.iv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p38"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p38.1"></span>Repressum,”
repressed.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc37001.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p7.1"></span>Quin tumultuose
in eum insurrexeret vulgus,” that the mob rose tumultuously against him.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc37001.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p10.1"></span>De ejus vita
sollicitos,” were anxious for his life.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc37001.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ii.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p11.1"></span>Naufrago,”
when shipwrecked.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc37001.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ii.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p12.1"></span>Periculum
subire,” run the risk.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc37001.htm#fr_44) <span
id="ii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p16.1"></span>Prompti et
strenui,” prompt and strenuous.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc37001.htm#fr_45) <span
id="ii.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p17.1"></span>Difficultas,”
difficulty.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc37001.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p19.1"></span>Optimum est
non nasci; proximum vero, quam citissime mori,” the best thing is not to
be born; the next best to die as soon as possible.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc37001.htm#fr_47) <span
id="ii.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p20.1"></span>Austerior est
ac durior,” he is more harsh and austere.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc37001.htm#fr_48) <span
id="ii.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p21.1"></span>Maxime
uruntur,” they are most of all stung by. The translator appears to have
read “utuntur.”

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc37001.htm#fr_49) <span
id="ii.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p22.1"></span>Valde
infesta,” exceedingly troubled.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc37001.htm#fr_50) <span
id="ii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p24.1"></span>Futilis et
stulta,” futile and foolish.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc37001.htm#fr_51) <span
id="ii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p25.1"></span>Communicant
cum Christo,” make them to be partakers with Christ.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc37001.htm#fr_52) <span
id="ii.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p26.1"></span>Aut saltem
paucis,” or at least a few.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc37001.htm#fr_53) <span
id="ii.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.v-p27.1"></span>Tandem
succumbunt,” at length succumb.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc37001.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p6.1"></span>Ad
praesidium,” as a guard.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc37001.htm#fr_55) <span
id="ii.vi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p8.1"></span>Eligere,” to
elect.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc37001.htm#fr_56) <span
id="ii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p9.1"></span>An soli hoc
privato officio faciunt,” do they alone do this by their peculiar
office?

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc37001.htm#fr_57) <span
id="ii.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p10.1"></span>Omnium
suffragiis,” by the suffrages of all.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc37001.htm#fr_58) <span
id="ii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p11.1"></span>Plebi
electionem permitti,” election to be given (left) to the people.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc37001.htm#fr_59) <span
id="ii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p13.1"></span>Auspicia,”
auspices.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc37001.htm#fr_60) <span
id="ii.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p14.1"></span>Sollicite,”
anxiously.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc37001.htm#fr_61) <span
id="ii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p16.1"></span>Adduntur
jejunia, tamquam adminicula,” fastings are added as helps.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc37001.htm#fr_62) <span
id="ii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p17.1"></span>Nisi
quatenus alio refertur,” except in so far as it has reference to
something else.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc37001.htm#fr_63) <span
id="ii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p19.1"></span>Cura et
labore,” by their care and labour.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc37001.htm#fr_64) <span
id="ii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p24.1"></span>Verborum
circuitu,” by a circumlocution.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc37001.htm#fr_65) <span
id="ii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p27.1"></span>Amplum
materiam,” ample materials.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc37001.htm#fr_66) <span
id="ii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p29.1"></span>Impuros et
alienos,” impure men, aliens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](cc37002)
