[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc37014)  [Next](cc37016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 37: Acts, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>Chapter 28

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
28:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And when they were escaped, they knew
that the isle was called Melita. **2.** And the barbarians showed us no
little kindness; for they kindled a fire and received us all, because of
the present shower, and because of the cold. **3.** And when Paul had
gathered a bundle of sticks, and had laid them on the fire, a viper came
out of the heat, and leaped on his hand. **4.** Now, when the barbarians
saw the beast hang upon his hand, they said among themselves, This man
surely is a murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the sea, vengeance
doth not suffer to live. **5.** But he shook off the viper into the
fire, and suffered no harm. **6.** But they thought that it would come
to pass, that he would swell and fall down dead suddenly. And as they
waited long, and saw no harm come to him, changing their mind, they said
he was a god.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span><span id="xvi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**1.** That doleful spectacle is described in
the beginning of the chapter, when so many men being wet, and also all
berayed with the foam and filth of the sea, and stiff with cold, did
with much ado crawl to the shore; for that was all one as if they had
been cast up by the sea to die some other death. After that, Luke
declareth that they were courteously entertained of the barbarians, that
they kindled a fire that they might dry their clothes, and refresh their
joints, which were stiff with cold, and at length that they were saved
 <span id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653) from the shower. Therefore, in
that Paul commendeth these duties, he showeth his thankfulness; and so
great liberality toward strangers is for good causes advanced, whereof
there be rare examples in the world. And though common nature doth wring
out of the barbarous Gentiles some affection of mercy in so great
necessity; yet undoubtedly it was God which caused the men of Melita to
handle these men so courteously, that his promise might be sure and
certain, which might seem imperfect if the shipwreck had caused the loss
of any man’s life.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>*A viper coming out of the heat.* The very
event did prove that Paul was a true and undoubted prophet of God. Now,
that God may make him famous as well by land as by sea, he sealeth the
former miracles  <span id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654) with a new
miracle; and so he ratifieth his apostleship among the men of Melita.
And though there were not many which did profit thereby, yet the majesty
of the gospel did shine even among the unbelievers; also this did
greatly confirm the oracles to the mariners, which they had not
sufficiently reverenced. Neither did the viper come out of the sticks by
chance; but the Lord did direct her by his secret counsel to bite Paul,
because he saw it would turn to the glory of his gospel.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span><span id="xvi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>**4.** *So soon as the barbarians saw.* This
judgment was common in all ages, that those who were grievously punished
had grievously offended. Neither was this persuasion conceived of
nothing; but it came rather from a true feeling of godliness. For God,
to the end he might make the world without excuse, would have this
deeply rooted in the minds of all men, that calamity and adversity, and
chiefly notable destruction, were testimonies and signs of his wrath and
just vengeance against sins. Therefore, so often as we call to mind any
notable calamity, we do also remember that God is sore offended, seeing
he punisheth so sharply. Neither did ungodliness ever get the upper hand
so far, but that all men did still retain this principle, that God, to
the end he may show himself to be the Judge of the world, doth notably
punish the wicked. But here crept in an error almost always, because
they condemned all those of wickedness  <span
id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655) whom they saw roughly handled. Though
God doth always punish men’s sins with adversity, yet doth he not punish
every man according to his deserts in this life; and sometimes the
punishments of the godly are not so much punishments as trials of their
faith and exercises of godliness.

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>Therefore, those men are deceived, who make
this a general rule to judge every man according to his prosperity or
adversity. This was the state of the controversy between Job and his
friends, (<span id="xvi.i-p12.1"></span>[Job
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)<span id="xvi.i-p12.1"></span>)
they did affirm that that man was a reprobate, and hated of God, whom
God did punish; and he did allege, on the other side, that the godly are
sometimes humbled with the cross. Wherefore, lest we be deceived in this
point, we must beware of two things. The former is, that we give not
rash and blind judgment of things unknown,  <span
id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656) according to the event alone, for
because God doth punish the good as well as the bad; yea, it falleth out
oftentimes that he spareth the reprobate, and doth sharply punish those
who are his; if we will judge aright, we must begin at another thing
than at punishments, to wit, that we inquire after the life and deeds.
If any adulterer, if any blasphemous person, if any perjured man or
murderer, if any filthy person, if any cozener, if any bloody beast be
punished, God doth point out his judgment as it were with his finger. If
we see no wickedness, nothing is better than to suspend our judgment
concerning punishment.

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span>The other caution is, that we wait for the
end. For so soon as God beginneth to strike, we do not by and by see his
drift and purpose; but the unlike end doth at length declare, that those
differ far before God who seem in men’s eyes both alike in the
likelihood of punishment. If any man object that it is not in vain so
often repeated in the law, that all private and public miseries are the
scourges of God, I grant indeed that that is true; but yet I deny that
it doth keep God from sparing whom he will for a time, though they be of
all men the worst, and from punishing those more sharply whose fault is
mean.  <span id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657) Nevertheless, it is not
our duty to make that perpetual which falleth out oftentimes. We see now
wherein the men of Melita were deceived, to wit, because having not
scanned Paul’s life, they judge him to be a wicked man, only because the
viper doth bite him; secondly, because they stay not the end, but give
judgment rashly. Nevertheless, we must note that these are detestable
monsters, who go about to pluck out of their hearts all feelings of
God’s judgment, which is ingrafted in us all naturally, and which is
also found in the barbarians and savage men. Whereas they think that
Paul is rather guilty of murder than of any other offense, they follow
this reason, because murder hath always been most detestable.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span>*Vengeance doth not suffer.* They gather
that he is a wicked man, because vengeance doth persecute him though he
have escaped the sea. And they feigned that the revenging goddess did
sit by the seat of Jupiter, which they commonly called <span
id="xvi.i-p16.1"></span>Δικη; grossly, I grant, as men ignorant of pure
religion, and yet not without some tolerable signification, as if they
had painted out God to be Judge of the world. But by these words the
wrath of God is distinguished from fortune, and so the judgment of God
is avouched against all blind chances. For the men of Melita take it to
be a sign of the heavenly vengeance, in that though Paul be saved, yet
can he not be safe.

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span><span id="xvi.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span>**5.** *Shaking off the viper.* The shaking
off of the viper is a token of a quiet mind. For we see how greatly fear
doth trouble and weaken men; and yet you must not think that Paul was
altogether void of fear. For faith doth not make us blockish, as
brain-sick men do imagine, when they be out of danger.  <span
id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658) But though faith doth not quite take
away the feeling of evils, yet it doth temperate the same, lest the
godly be more afraid than is meet; that they may always be bold and have
a good hope. So though Paul understand that the viper was a noisome
beast, yet did he trust to the promise which was made to him, and did
not so fear her plaguy  <span id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659) biting,
that it did trouble him; because he was even ready to die if need had
been.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span><span id="xvi.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span>**6.** *Changing their minds, they said.*
This so wonderful and sudden a change ought to have inwardly touched the
men of Melita, and to have moved them to give the glory to the mercy of
God, as they did before to vengeance. But as man’s reason is always
carried amiss unto extremities, they make Paul at a sudden a god, whom
they took before to be a wicked murderer. But if he could not choose but
be the one, it had been better for him to be counted a murderer than a
god. And surely Paul would rather have wished to be condemned, not only
of one crime, but also to have sustained all shame,  <span
id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660) and to have been thrust down into the
deep pit of hell,  <span id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661) than to take
to himself the glory of God, which thing those knew full well who had
heard him preach amidst the storms. Notwithstanding, it may be, that,
being taught afterward, they did confess that God was the author of the
miracle.

<span id="xvi.i-p25"></span>Furthermore, let us learn by this history,
with patient and quiet minds, to wait for the prosperous event of
things,  <span id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662) which seem at the first
to tend toward the robbing of God of his honor. Which of us would not
have been terrified with this spectacle which did arm the wicked to
slander with all manner of slanderous speeches the glory of the gospel?
Yet we see how God did in good time prevent this inconvenience;
therefore, let us not doubt but that after he hath suffered his to be
darkened with clouds of slanders, he will send remedy in his good time,
and will turn their darkness into light. In the mean season, let us
remember that we must beware of the judgment of the flesh. And because
men do always forget themselves, let us beg of God the Spirit of
moderation, that he may keep us always in the right mean. Furthermore,
let us learn by this how ready the world is to fall to superstition.
Yea, this wickedness is in a manner born with us, to be desirous to
adorn creatures with that which we take from God.

<span id="xvi.i-p27"></span>Wherefore, no marvel if new errors have come
abroad  <span id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663) in all ages, seeing
every one of us is, even from his mother’s womb, expert in inventing
idols. But lest men excuse themselves therewithal, this history doth
witness that this is the fountain of superstitions, because men are
unthankful to God, and do give his glory to some other.

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
28:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#007)<span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**7.** And in those places were the
possessions of the chief man of the isle, whose name was Publius; who
received us, and lodged us courteously. **8.** And so it was, that the
father of Publius lay sick of the fever and bloody flux; to whom Paul
entered in, and when he had prayed, and had laid his hands upon him, he
healed him. **9.** Therefore, when he had done thus, the rest also,
which had infirmities in the isle, came, and were healed: **10.** Who
did also give us great honor; and when we departed, they laded us with
things necessary. **11.** And after three months we sailed in a ship of
Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose badge was Castor and
Pollux. **12.** And when we came to Syracuse, we stayed there three
days. **13.** And from thence we fetched a compass, and came to Rhegium:
and after one day when the south wind blew, we came the next day to
Puteoli: **14.** Where we found brethren, and were desired to stay with
them seven days: and so we came to Rome.

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span>**7.** *And in those places.* Because this
name, Publius, is a Roman name, I suspect that this man, of whom mention
is made, was rather a citizen of Rome than born in the isle. For the
Grecians and other strangers were not wont to borrow their names of the
Latins unless they were men of small reputation. And it may be that some
of the noble men of Rome came then to see his possessions, and is called
the chief man of the isle, not because he dwelt there, but because no
man could compare with him in wealth and possessions. And it is scarce
probable that all the whole multitude of Grecians was lodged there three
days. I do rather think, that, when he entertained the centurion, he did
also honor Paul and his companions, because, being admonished by the
miracle, he did believe that he was a man beloved of God.
Notwithstanding, howsoever it be, his hospitality was not unrewarded.
For shortly after the Lord restored his father to health by the hand of
Paul, who was indeed sick of a dangerous disease. And by this means he
meant to testify how greatly that courtesy, which is showed to men in
misery and to strangers, doth please him. Although those who are holpen
be unmindful and unthankful for that benefit which they have received,
or they be not able to recompense those who have done good to them, yet
God himself will abundantly restore to men whatsoever they have bestowed
at his commandment; and he hath sometimes appointed, to those which be
merciful and given to hospitality, some of his servants, which bring
with them a blessing. This was now great honor, in that Publius did
lodge Christ in the person of Paul. Notwithstanding, this was added as
an overplus, in that Paul came furnished with the gift of healing, that
he might not only recompense his courtesy, but also give more than he
had received.

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span>Also, we know not whether he learned the
first principles of faith, as miracles do for the most part win the rude
and unbelievers unto faith,  <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664)
Luke mentioneth the kind of disease that he may the better set forth the
grace of God. For seeing it is an hard matter to cure a bloody flux,
 <span id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665) especially when the ague is
joined therewith, the old man was cured thus suddenly only by the laying
on of hands and prayer, not without the manifest power of God.

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p10"></span>**8.** *And had laid his hands upon him*
Paul declareth by prayer that he himself is not the author of the
miracle, but only the minister, lest God be defrauded of his glory. He
confirmeth this self-same thing by the external sign. For, as we saw
before, in other places, the laying on of hands was nothing else but a
solemn rite of offering and presenting. Wherefore, in that Paul doth
offer the man to God with his own hands, he professed that he did humbly
crave his life of him. By which example, not only those who have
excellent gifts of the Spirit given them are admonished to beware, lest
by extolling themselves they darken the glory of God, but also we are
all taught in general that we must so thank the ministers of the grace
of God that the glory remain to him alone. It is said, indeed, that Paul
healed the man which had the bloody flux; but it is plainly expressed by
the circumstances which are added, that it was God which bestowed this
benefit, making him the minister thereof. Whereas Luke saith afterwards,
that others which were sick in the isle were cured, he doth not extend
it unto all; but his meaning is, that the power of God, which appeared
evidently enough, was proved by many testimonies, that the apostleship
of Paul might be thereby ratified. Neither need we doubt but that Paul
sought as well to cure their souls as their bodies. Yet Luke doth not
declare what good he did, save only that the barbarians gave him and his
fellows victual and necessary things when they loosed from the haven. In
the mean season, we must note, that though Paul might have withdrawn
himself, and have escaped many ways, yet was the will of God to him
instead of voluntary fetters, because he was often cited by the heavenly
oracle to appear before the judgment-seat of Nero to bear witness of
Christ. Again, he knew that if he should run away, he could no longer
have preached the gospel, but should have lurked in some corner during
his whole life.

<span id="xvi.ii-p11"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p12"></span>**11.** *In a ship of Alexandria.* By these
words, Luke giveth us to understand, that the former ship was either
drowned, or else so rent and beaten, that it served for no use
afterward; whereby the greatness of the shipwreck doth the better
appear. And he setteth down expressly that the badge of the ship of
Alexandria, wherein they were carried to Rome, was Castor and Pollux,
that we may know that Paul had not liberty granted to sail with such as
were like to himself; but was enforced to enter into a ship which was
dedicated to two idols. The old poets did feign that Castor and Pollux
came of Jupiter and Leda; for which cause they are called in Greek <span
id="xvi.ii-p12.1"></span>διοσκουροι; which word Luke useth in this
place, as if you should say, Jupiter’s sons. Again, they said  <span
id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666) that they are the sign in the zodiac
called Gemini. There was also another superstition among the mariners,
that those fine exhalations which appear in tempests are the very same.
Therefore, in times past, they were thought to be gods of the seas, and
were therefore called upon as at this day, Nicholas and Clement, and
such like. Yea, as in Popery, they retain the old errors, changing the
names only; so at this day they worship these exhalations under the name
of Saint Hermes, or Saint Ermus. And because if one exhalation appear
alone, it is a doleful token; but if two together, (as Pliny writeth)
then they foreshow a prosperous course. To the end the mariners of
Alexandria might have both Castor and Pollux to favor them, they had
both for the badge of their ship. Therefore, as touching them, the ship
was polluted with wicked sacrilege; but because Paul did not make choice
thereof, of his own accord, he is not polluted thereby.

<span id="xvi.ii-p14"></span>And surely seeing an idol is nothing, it
cannot infect the creatures of God, but that the faithful may use them
purely and lawfully. And we must needs think thus, that all those blots
wherewith Satan doth go about to stain the creatures of God through his
juggling, are washed away by no other means but by a good and pure
conscience, whereas the wicked and ungodly do defile those things which
are of themselves pure, though they do but touch them. Finally, Paul was
no more defiled by entering into this ship, than when he did behold the
altars at Athens; because, being void of all superstition, he knew that
all the rites of the Gentiles were mere illusions. Again, the men could
not think that he did agree to that profane error; for if he had been to
do any worship to Castor and Pollux, though it had been only for
fashion’s sake, he would rather have died a thousand deaths than once
have yielded.

<span id="xvi.ii-p15"></span>Therefore, because he needed not to fear
any offense, he entereth the ship without any more ado; and undoubtedly
he did this heavily, and with inward sorrow; because he saw the honor
which is due to God alone given to vain inventions. Therefore, this
ought to be numbered among his exercises, in that he had those to be his
guides, who thought that they were governed of idols, and had committed
their ship to their tuition.

<span id="xvi.ii-p16"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p17"></span>**12.** *When we were come to Syracuse.*
Luke prosecuteth the residue of the course of their sailing, that they
arrived first in Sicilia. And after that they set a compass  <span
id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667) by reason of the tempest and raging of
the sea, and sailed over into Italy. And as that haven whereof Luke
speaketh in this place is the most famous haven of all Sicilia, so is it
farther from the coast of Italy than is that of Messina, over against
which is Rhegium, whereof he maketh mention. And it is in the country of
the Brutians, as is Puteoli, a city of Campania. But forasmuch as the
brethren kept Paul at Puteoli seven days, by this we gather how
favorably and gently the centurion handled Paul. Neither do I doubt but
that the holy man would have made him a faithful promise that he would
always return in due time. But he was persuaded of his uprightness, so
that he was not afraid that he would deceive him. And now we gather out
of this place, that the seed of the gospel was then sown abroad, seeing
there was some body of the Church even at Puteoli.

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
28:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#015)<span
id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span>**15.** And when the brethren had heard of
us from thence, they came out to meet us at Appii Forum, and at The
three Taverns; whom when Paul saw, he gave thanks to God, and waxed
bold. **16.** And when we were come to Rome, the centurion delivered the
prisoners to the chief captain of the host; but Paul was suffered to
dwell alone with a soldier which kept him. **17.** And after three days
Paul called together the chief of the Jews; and when they were come, he
said to them, Men and brethren, though I have done nothing against the
people, or ordinances of the elders, yet was I delivered a prisoner from
Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans. **18.** Which, when they had
examined me, they would have let me go, because there was no cause of
death in me. **19.** But when the Jews spake contrary, I was enforced to
appeal to Caesar: not as if I have anything to accuse my nation of.
**20.** For this cause, therefore, have I sent for you, that I might see
you, and speak to you; for the hope of Israel am I bound with this
chain.

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span>**15.** *When the brethren heard.* God did
comfort Paul by the coming of the brethren who came forth to meet him,
that he might the more joyfully make haste to defend the gospel. And the
zeal and godly care of the brethren appeareth therein, in that they
inquire for Paul’s coming, and go out to meet him. For it was at that
time not only an odious thing to profess the Christian faith, but it
might also bring them in hazard of their life. Neither did a few men
only put themselves in private danger, because the envy redounded to the
whole Church. But nothing is more dear to them than their duty wherein
they could not be negligent, unless they would be counted sluggish and
unthankful. It had been a cruel fact to neglect so great an apostle of
Jesus Christ, especially seeing he labored for the common salvation.

<span id="xvi.iii-p6"></span>And now forasmuch as he had written to them
before, and had of his own accord offered his service to them, it had
been an unseemly thing not to repay to him brotherly goodwill and
courtesy. Therefore, the brethren did, by this their dutifulness,
testify their godliness toward Christ; and Paul’s desire was more
inflamed, because he saw fruit prepared for his constancy. For though he
were endued with invincible strength,  <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668) so that he did not depend upon man’s
help; yet God, who useth to strengthen his by means of men, did minister
to him new strength by this means. Though he were afterward forsaken
when he was in prison, as he complaineth in a certain place, (<span
id="xvi.iii-p7.2"></span>[2Ti
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)<span id="xvi.iii-p7.2"></span>)
yet he did not despair; but did fight no less valiantly and manfully
under Christ’s banner, than if he had been guarded with a great army.
But the remembrance of this meeting did serve even then to encourage
him, seeing he did consider with himself that there were many godly
brethren at Rome, but they were weak, and that he was sent to strengthen
them. And there is no cause why we should marvel that Paul was
emboldened at this present when he saw the brethren, because he did hope
that the confession his faith would yield no small fruit. For so often
as God showeth to his servants any fruit of their labor, he doth, as it
were, prick them forward with a goad, that they may proceed more
courageously in their work.

<span id="xvi.iii-p8"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p9"></span>**16.** *The centurion delivered the
prisoners.* Luke doth signify that Paul had more liberty granted him
than the rest; for his condition and estate was peculiar. For he was
suffered to dwell in an house by himself, having one keeper with him,
whereas the rest were shut up in the common prison. For the general
captain  <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669) knew by Festus’ report
that Paul was guiltless; and the centurion, as it is likely, did
faithfully rehearse such things as might serve to bring him into favor.
Notwithstanding, let us know that God did govern  <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670) from heaven the bonds of his servant;
not only that he might ease him of his trouble, but that the faithful
might have freer access unto him. For he would not have the treasure of
his faith shut up in prison, but he would have it laid open, that it
might enrich many far and wide. And yet Paul was not so at liberty, but
that he did always carry a chain. Luke calleth the general captain <span
id="xvi.iii-p11.2"></span>στρατοπεδαρχης, who was appointed over the
army which kept the city, as histories make mention.  <span
id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671)

<span id="xvi.iii-p13"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p14"></span>**17.** *And after three days.* Paul’s
humanity  <span id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672) was wonderful, in
that, though he had suffered such cruel injuries of his nation, he
studied, notwithstanding, to appease the Jews which are at Rome, and he
excuseth himself to them, lest they hate his cause, because they hear
that the priests do hate him. He might well have excused himself before
men, if he passed over these Jews and turned himself to the Gentiles.
For though he had continually, in divers places, essayed to bring them
to Christ, yet they were more and more nettled and moved;  <span
id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673) and yet he had omitted nothing,
neither in Asia, nor in Greece, neither at Jerusalem, which might
mitigate their fury. Therefore, all men would have justly pardoned him,
if he had let those alone whom he had so often tried \[experienced\] to
be of desperate pride.  <span id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674) But
because he knew that his Master was given of his Father to be the
minister of the Jews, to fulfill the promises whereby God had adopted to
himself the seed of Abraham to be his people; he looketh unto the
calling of God, and is never weary. He saw that he must remain at Rome,
seeing he had liberty granted to teach, he would not that they should be
deprived of the fruit of his labor. Secondly, he would not have them
moved through hatred of his cause to trouble the Church; because a small
occasion might have caused great destruction. Therefore, Paul meant to
beware, lest, according to their wonted madness, they should set all on
fire.  <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675)

<span id="xvi.iii-p19"></span>*I have done nothing against the people.*
These two things might have made the Jews hate him; either because he
should have done hurt to the commonwealth of his nation, as some
runagates did increase their bondage, which was too cruel, through their
treachery; or because he should have done somewhat against the worship
of God; for though the Jews were grown out of kind,  <span
id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676) and religion was depraved and
corrupted among them with many errors, yet the very name of the law and
the worship of the temple were greatly reverenced. Furthermore, Paul
denieth not but that he did freely omit those ceremonies whereto the
Jews were superstitiously tied; yet he cleareth himself of the crime of
revolting whereof he might be suspected. Therefore, understand those
ordinances of the fathers, whereby the children of Abraham, and the
disciples of Moses ought, according to their faith, to have been
distinguished from the rest of the Gentiles. And surely in that he did
cleave so holily to Christ, who is the soul and perfection of the law,
he is so far from impairing the ordinances of the fathers, that none did
better observe the same.

<span id="xvi.iii-p21"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p22"></span>**19.** *I was enforced to appeal.* This
appeal was full of hatred and envy for this cause, because the authority
and liberty of the Jewish nation did seem to be sore opprest, who could
have been content to have lived with their own laws. Secondly, because
his defense was joined with infamy and loss of all the people. Therefore
he answereth this objection also, because he was enforced with the
stubbornness of his enemies to fly to this fortress \[asylum\]. For he
is excused by necessity, because he had no other way to escape death.
And after that he had excused that which was done already, he promiseth
that he will so handle his matter hereafter,  <span
id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677) that he will not labor against the
Jews.

<span id="xvi.iii-p24"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p25"></span>**20.** *For the hope of Israel.* We must
understand much more under these words than Luke expresseth; as we
gather out of the answer, where the Jews speak of the sect; to wit,
repeating his speech, which Luke omitteth. Therefore Paul intreated of
Christ, that it might plainly appear that neither the law nor the temple
did profit the Jews anything without him; because the covenant of
adoption is grounded in him, and the promise of salvation is in him
confirmed. Neither did they doubt but that the restoring of the kingdom
did depend upon the coming of the Messias; and even at that time their
misery and decay did increase the hope and desire of him. Wherefore Paul
saith, for good causes, that he is bound for the hope of Israel. Whereby
we be also taught, that no man doth hope aright, but he which looketh
unto Christ and his spiritual kingdom; for when he placeth the hope of
the godly in Christ, he excludeth all other hopes.

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
28:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#021)<span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span>**21.** But they said unto him, We neither
received letters from Judea touching thee, neither did any of the
brethren come and show us or speak any evil of thee. **22.** But we will
hear of thee what thou thinkest; for as concerning that sect, we know
that it is spoken against everywhere. **23.** And when they had
appointed him a day, many came to him to his lodging; to whom he
expounded and testified the kingdom of God, and persuaded them of Jesus
out of the law of Moses, and out of the prophets, from morning till
night. **24.** And certain believed those things which were spoken, but
certain believed not.

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span>**21.** *Neither by letters.* The priests
and scribes did not hold their peace, because they were become more
gentle towards Paul, or to the end they might spare him; that proceeded
rather of contempt, or else of despair, because they neither knew how to
oppress him when he was so far from them, and his carrying into Italy
was  <span id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678) to them instead of a grave.
For they did lord it no less carelessly than proudly, so that nobody did
trouble them at home. Furthermore, though the Jews come not altogether
rightly prepared to hear, yet they show some desire to learn, when as
they do not refuse to hear the defense of his doctrine, which is spoken
against everywhere. For many do stop the way before themselves with this
prejudice, because they cannot abide to hear that which is refused by
common judgment, but subscribe to the opinion of other men to the
condemning of doctrine which they know not. Nevertheless, this is not
without fault (as I said) that they object gainsaying to cause hatred,
or to procure evil suspicion; as if it had not been said before by
Isaiah, that God should be a stone of offense to all the people. It is
uncertain, whether upon the day appointed Paul disputed all the day, or
they reasoned one with another; save only, because we may guess, by the
circumstance of time, that Paul did not continue speaking still.  <span
id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679) For he could scarce have framed a
speech which could have continued from morning to night. Wherefore I do
not doubt, but that after the apostle had briefly expounded the sum of
the gospel, he granted liberty to the hearers to propound questions,
 <span id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680) and did make answer to the
questions which were objected to him.

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span>But we must note the state of the
disputation, which Luke saith is double. For Paul taught first, after
what sort the kingdom of God was amongst them, and principally what
manner \[of\] chief felicity and glory that was which was promised to
them, which the prophets do so highly extol. For seeing that many of
them did dream of a frail estate of the kingdom of God in the world, and
did place the same falsely in idleness, pleasure, and in plenty of
present good things, it was necessary that it should be rightly defined,
that they might know that the kingdom of God is spiritual, whose
beginning is newness of life, and the end thereof blessed immortality
and the heavenly glory. Secondly, Paul exhorted them to receive Christ,
the author of the promised felicity.

<span id="xvi.iv-p10"></span>And, again, this second point had two
members, for it could not be handled profitably and soundly unless he
did expound the office of the promised Redeemer; secondly, unless he did
show that he is already given, and that the Son of Mary is he in whom
the fathers hoped. It was indeed a common maxim among the Jews, that the
Messias should come and restore all things into perfect order.

<span id="xvi.iv-p11"></span>But Paul labored another point, which was
not so well known; that the Messias was promised, who should, with the
sacrifice of his death, make satisfaction for the sins of the world; who
should reconcile God to men; who should purchase eternal righteousness;
who should fashion men after the image of God, being regenerate with his
Spirit; who should, finally, make his faithful servants heirs with him
of eternal life; and that all those things were fulfilled in the person
of Jesus Christ crucified. He could not intreat of those things; but he
must needs call back the Jews from gross and earthly inventions into
heaven, and also take away the stumbling-block of the cross, seeing he
taught that there was no other way or means whereby we are reconciled
with God.

<span id="xvi.iv-p12"></span>And let us note, that (as Luke doth
testify) Paul took all that which he spake of Christ out of the law and
prophets. For true religion differeth from all feigned religions,
because the word of God alone is the rule thereof. Also the Church of
God differeth from all profane sects in this, because it heareth him
speak alone, and is governed by his commandment. And now by this we see
the agreement that is between the Old and the New Testaments to
establish the faith of Christ; secondly, that double profit of the
Scripture which the same Paul commendeth in another place, to wit, that
it is sufficient as well to instruct those which are willing to learn,
as to refute the stubbornness of those which set themselves against the
truth (<span id="xvi.iv-p12.1"></span>[2Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span id="xvi.iv-p12.1"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iv-p12.2"></span>Titus 1:9). Therefore, let those who
desire to be wise with sobriety, and to teach others well, appoint
themselves these bounds, that they utter nothing but out of the pure
fountain of the word. The philosophers deal otherwise, who contend only
with reasons, because they have no sound authority, whom the Papists
imitate too much, who set apart the oracles of God, and lean only to the
inventions of man’s brain, that is, to mere folly.

<span id="xvi.iv-p13"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p14"></span>**24.** *Some believed.* Luke declareth
that this was at length the success of the disputation, that they did
not all profit  <span id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681) in the same
doctrine. We know that the apostle was endued with such grace of the
Spirit, that he ought to have moved stones; and yet he could not, after
long disputing and testifying, win all men unto Christ. Wherefore, let
us not marvel, if the unbelief of many do at this day resist the plain
doctrine of the gospel, and if many remain obstinate, to whom the truth
of Christ is no less made manifest than the sun at noon-day. Moreover,
those return from Paul blind and blockish, who came unto him willingly,
as if they had been desirous to learn. If there were such stubbornness
in voluntary hearers, what marvel is it if those refuse Christ with a
malicious  <span id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682) mind, who swell with
pride and malice, \[bitterness\] and do openly fly and hate the light?

<span id="xvi.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p1"></span><span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
28:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025)<span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p2"></span>**25.** And when they could not agree, they
departed, after that Paul had spoken one word, Well spake the Holy Ghost
by Esaias to our fathers, **26.** Saying, Go to this people, and say, Ye
shall hear with your ears, and not understand; and seeing ye shall see,
and not perceive; **27.** For the heart of this people is waxed gross,
and their ears are dull with hearing, and with their eyes they have
winked, lest at any time they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their heart, and they be converted, and I heal
them. **28.** Be it known therefore unto you, that this salvation of God
is sent to the Gentiles, and they shall hear it. **29.** And when he had
said these things, the Jews went out from him, and had great reasoning
among themselves. **30.** And Paul remained two years full in a thing he
had hired for himself,  <span id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683) and he
received all those which came in unto him, **31.** Preaching the kingdom
of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus, with all
boldness, and no man did let \[hinder\] him.

<span id="xvi.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.v-p5"></span><span id="xvi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p6"></span>**25.** *And when they could not* The malice
and frowardness of the unfaithful is the cause of this, that Christ, who
is our peace, and the only bond of holy unity, is an occasion of
dissension, and doth cause those to go together by the ears who were
friends before. For, behold, when the Jews come together to hear Paul,
they think all one thing; and speak all one thing; they do all profess
that they embrace the law of Moses. So soon as they hear the doctrine of
reconciliation, there ariseth dissension among them, so that they are
divided.  <span id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684) And yet for all this
we must not think that the preaching of the gospel is the cause of
discord; but that privy displeasure, which lurked before in their
malicious minds, doth then break out; and as the brightness of the sun
doth not color things otherwise than they were, but doth plainly show
the difference, which was none so long as it was dark. Therefore, seeing
God doth illuminate his elect peculiarly, and faith is not common to all
men, let us remember that it cannot be but that, so soon as Christ
cometh abroad, there will be a division among men. But then let us call
to mind that which Simon foretold of him, that he shall be a sign which
shall be spoken against, that the thoughts of many hearts may be
disclosed (<span id="xvi.v-p7.2"></span>[Luke
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035)<span id="xvi.v-p7.2"></span>) and
that unbelief which striveth against God is the mother of dissension.

<span id="xvi.v-p8"></span>*After that Paul.* At the first he went about
to allure them meekly and gently; now, so soon as he espieth their
obstinacy, he inveigheth sharply, and doth severely denounce the
judgment of God. For the rebellious must be handled thus, whose pride
cannot be tamed with plain doctrine. The same order must we keep; we
must gently govern those who are apt to be taught and gentle, but we
must cite the stubborn unto God’s judgment-seat. Whereas he bringeth in
rather the Holy Ghost speaking than the prophet, it maketh to the credit
of the oracle. For seeing God requireth that he alone be heard, doctrine
cannot otherwise be of authority, than if we know that it did proceed
from him, and that it did not issue out of man’s brain. Again, he
declareth therewithal that the stubbornness of one age only is not there
noted, but that the oracle of the Spirit is extended unto the time to
come.

<span id="xvi.v-p9"></span><span id="xvi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p10"></span>**26.** *Go to this people.* This is a
notable place, because it is cited six times in the New Testament,
(<span id="xvi.v-p10.1"></span>[Mt
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014)<span id="xvi.v-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="xvi.v-p10.2"></span>[Joh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040)<span id="xvi.v-p10.2"></span>;
<span id="xvi.v-p10.3"></span>[Ro
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#008)<span id="xvi.v-p10.3"></span>;
<span id="xvi.v-p10.4"></span>[Mr
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012)<span id="xvi.v-p10.4"></span>;
<span id="xvi.v-p10.5"></span>[Lu
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#010)<span id="xvi.v-p10.5"></span>)
but because it is brought in elsewhere to another end, we must mark for
what purpose Paul applieth it unto the present cause; namely, he meant
with this, as with a mallet, to beat in pieces the hardness and
frowardness of the wicked, and to encourage the faithful, who were as
yet weak and tender, lest the unbelief of others should trouble them.

<span id="xvi.v-p11"></span>Therefore, the sum is, that that was
fulfilled which was foretold by the prophet, and that, therefore, there
is no cause why the reprobate should flatter themselves, or that the
faithful should be terrified, as it were, with some new unwonted thing.
And though it be certain that this blindness whereof the prophet spake
began in his time, yet John showeth that it did properly appertain unto
the kingdom of Christ. Therefore, Paul doth fitly apply it unto that
contempt of the gospel which he saw; as if he should have said, This is
the very same thing which the Holy Ghost foretold in times past by the
mouth of Isaiah. And though this place be diversely applied not only by
the Evangelists, but also by Paul himself, the show of contrariety is
easily put away and answered. Matthew, Mark, and Luke, say that this
prophecy was fulfilled when Christ spake by parables unto the people,
and did not reveal to them the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. For
then the unfaithful heard the voice of God with their outward ears, but
they did not profit thereby. John saith in a sense not much unlike to
this, that the, Jews were not brought to believe, no, not with many
miracles, (<span id="xvi.v-p11.1"></span>[Joh
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037)<span id="xvi.v-p11.1"></span>)
so that this same prophecy of the prophet was fulfilled.

<span id="xvi.v-p12"></span>Therefore, these four agree in this, that it
came to pass by the just judgment of God, that the reprobate in hearing
should not hear, and in seeing should not see. Now, Paul calleth to mind
that which the prophet did testify concerning the Jews, lest any man
wonder at their blindness. Furthermore, in the Epistle to the Romans,
(<span id="xvi.v-p12.1"></span>[Rom.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007)<span id="xvi.v-p12.1"></span>) he
mounteth higher, showing that this is the cause of blindness, because
God doth give the light of faith only to the remnant whom he hath chosen
freely. And surely it is certain that because the reprobate reject the
doctrine of salvation, this cometh to pass through their own malice, and
that therefore they themselves are to be blamed. But this next cause
doth not let but that the secret election of God may distinguish between
men; that those may believe who are ordained to life, and that the other
may remain blockish. I will not stand long about the words of the
prophet, because I have expounded the same elsewhere. Neither did Paul
curiously recite the words which are in the prophet; but did rather
apply his words unto his purpose. Therefore, he imputeth that making
blind, which the prophet attributeth to the secret judgment of God, to
their malice. For the prophet is commanded to stop the eyes of his
hearers; and Paul in this place accuseth the unbelieving of his time,
because they shut their own eyes. Though he setteth down both things
distinctly, that God is the author of their blindness, and that yet,
notwithstanding, they shut their own eyes, and become blind of their own
accord; as these two things do very well agree together, as we said
elsewhere.

<span id="xvi.v-p13"></span>In the last remember where it is said, Lest
they see with their eyes, or hear with their ears, or understand with
their heart; God showeth how clear his doctrine is, to wit, that it is
sufficient to lighten all the senses, unless men do maliciously darken
themselves; as Paul also teacheth in another place, that his gospel is
plain, so that none can be blind in the light thereof, save those who
are ordained to destruction, whose eyes Satan hath blinded, (<span
id="xvi.v-p13.1"></span>[2Co 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003)<span
id="xvi.v-p13.1"></span>).

<span id="xvi.v-p14"></span>*Lest they be converted, and I heal them.*
By this we gather that the Word of God is not set before all men that
they may return to soundness of mind; but that the external voice
soundeth in the ears of many, without the effectual working of the
Spirit, only that they may be made inexcusable. And here the pride of
flesh doth rashly murmur against God; as we see many object, that men
are called in vain, yea, absurdly, unless it be in their power to obey;
though we see no reason why God appeareth to the blind, and speaketh to
the deaf; yet his will alone, which is the rule of all righteousness,
ought to be to us instead of a thousand reasons.

<span id="xvi.v-p15"></span>In the conclusion, we must note the
wholesome effect of the Word of God; namely, the conversion of men,
which is not only the beginning of health, but also a certain
resurrection from death to life.

<span id="xvi.v-p16"></span><span id="xvi.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p17"></span>**28.** *Therefore be it.* Lest the Jews may
afterward accuse him of revolting, because he forsaketh the holy stock
of Abraham, and goeth to the profane Gentiles; he denounceth that which
the prophets did so often testify, that the salvation whereof they were
the proper, at least the principal  <span
id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685) heirs, should be translated unto
strangers. Notwithstanding, whereas he saith that salvation was sent to
the Gentiles, he meaneth, in the second place, to wit, after that the
Jews had rejected it, as we have said before more at large (<span
id="xvi.v-p18.2"></span>[Ac 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)<span
id="xvi.v-p18.2"></span>) Therefore, the sense is, that there is no
cause why the Jews should complain if the Gentiles be admitted into the
void possession after that they have forsaken it. Neither doth he make
faith common to all the Gentiles in general, when he saith that they
shall hear. For he had full well tried, that even many of the Gentiles
did wickedly resist God, but he setteth so many of the Gentiles as
believed against the unbelieving Jews, that he may provoke them unto
jealousy; as it is in the Song of Moses (<span
id="xvi.v-p18.3"></span>[De 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)<span
id="xvi.v-p18.3"></span>). In the mean season, he signifieth that the
doctrine which they refuse shall profit others.

<span id="xvi.v-p19"></span><span id="xvi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p20"></span>**29.** *Having much reasoning.* No doubt,
the wicked were more nettled because he cited the prophecy against them;
for they are so far from waxing meek when they are reproved, that they
are more inflamed with fury. This is the reason why they reasoned  <span
id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686) when they were gone out from Paul,
because the more part would not be quiet. But seeing there was such
disputing, it appeareth that some did so embrace those things which Paul
had spoken, that they doubted not to defend and stoutly to avouch that
which they believed. But it is in vain for any man to object thereupon,
that the gospel of Christ is the seed of contention, which cometh
undoubtedly from man’s pride and waywardness; and assuredly, if we will
have peace with God, we must strive against  <span
id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687) those which contemn him.

<span id="xvi.v-p23"></span><span id="xvi.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p24"></span>**30.** *He received all.* The apostle
showed an excellent example of constancy, in that he offered himself so
willingly to all those which were desirous to hear him. Surely he was
not ignorant what great hatred he did purchase; and that this was his
best way, if by holding his peace he might appease the hatred of his
adversaries. For a man being desirous to provide for himself alone would
not have done thus; but because he remembered that he was no less the
servant of Christ, and a preacher of the gospel, when he was in prison,
than if he had been at liberty, he thought it was not lawful for him to
withdraw himself from any which was ready to learn, lest he should
foreslow \[neglect\] the occasion which was offered him by God, and
therefore he did more regard the holy calling of God than his own life.
And that we may know that he did incur danger willingly, Luke doth
shortly after expressly commend his boldness, as if he should say, that
setting all fear aside, he did faithfully obey the commandment of God,
neither was he terrified with any danger,  <span
id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688) but did proceed to take pains with
whomsoever he met.

<span id="xvi.v-p26"></span>*Preaching the kingdom of God.* He doth not
separate the kingdom of God, and those things which belong to Christ, as
diverse things, but doth rather add the second thing by way of
exposition, that we may know that the kingdom of God is grounded and
contained in the knowledge of the redemption purchased by Christ.
Therefore, Paul taught that men are strangers  <span
id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689) and foreigners from the kingdom of
God, until having their sins done away they be reconciled to God, and be
renewed into holiness of life by the Spirit; and that the kingdom of God
is then erected, and doth then flourish among them, when Christ the
Mediator doth join them to the Father, having both their sins freely
forgiven them, and being also regenerate unto righteousness, that
beginning the heavenly life upon earth, they may always have a longing
desire to come to heaven, where they shall fully and perfectly enjoy
glory. Also, Luke setteth forth a singular benefit of God, in that Paul
had so great liberty granted him. For that came not to pass through the
winking and dissimulation of those who could hinder it, seeing they did
detest religion, but because the Lord did shut their eyes. Wherefore, it
is not without cause that Paul himself doth boast that the Word of God
was not bound with his bonds (<span id="xvi.v-p28.1"></span>[2Ti
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009)<span id="xvi.v-p28.1"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_653"></span>[654](cc37015.htm#fr_653) <span
id="xvi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p6.1"></span>Protectos,”
protected.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[655](cc37015.htm#fr_654) <span
id="xvi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p8.1"></span>Oracula,”
predictions.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[656](cc37015.htm#fr_655) <span
id="xvi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p11.1"></span>Sine
exceptione,” without exception, omitted,

<span id="fn_656"></span>[657](cc37015.htm#fr_656) <span
id="xvi.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p13.1"></span>De hominibus
ignotis,” of persons unknown.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[658](cc37015.htm#fr_657) <span
id="xvi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p15.1"></span>Mediocris,”
trivial.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[659](cc37015.htm#fr_658) <span
id="xvi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p19.1"></span>In umbra et
extra teli jacturam,” in the shade, and out of bowshot.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[660](cc37015.htm#fr_659) <span
id="xvi.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p20.1"></span>Pestiferum,”
pestiferous, deadly.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[661](cc37015.htm#fr_660) <span
id="xvi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p23.1"></span>Omni
infamiae genere,” every kind of infamy.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[662](cc37015.htm#fr_661) <span
id="xvi.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p24"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p24.1"></span>Ad inferos,”
to the dead.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[663](cc37015.htm#fr_662) <span
id="xvi.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p26"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p26.1"></span>Tristium
rerum,” of gloomy affairs.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[664](cc37015.htm#fr_663) <span
id="xvi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p28"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p28.1"></span>Subinde,”
ever and anon.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[665](cc37015.htm#fr_664) <span
id="xvi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p7.1"></span>Ad
docilitatem,” to docility.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[666](cc37015.htm#fr_665) <span
id="xvi.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p8.1"></span>Nam quam
difficilis et lenta sit dysenteriae curatio,” for since the cure of
dysentery is slow and difficult.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[667](cc37015.htm#fr_666) <span
id="xvi.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p13.1"></span>Fabulati,”
they fabled.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[668](cc37015.htm#fr_667) <span
id="xvi.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p18.1"></span>Oblique...
trajecerint,” they made an indirect passage.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[669](cc37015.htm#fr_668) <span
id="xvi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p7"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iii-p7.1"></span>Fortitudine,” fortitude.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[670](cc37015.htm#fr_669) <span
id="xvi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p10"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iii-p10.1"></span>Praefectus,” the praefect.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[671](cc37015.htm#fr_670) <span
id="xvi.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p11"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iii-p11.1"></span>Moderatum,” temper.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[672](cc37015.htm#fr_671) <span
id="xvi.iii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p12"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iii-p12.1"></span>Praefectum praetorio cujus illud officium
fuisse ex historiis satis notum est,” praefect of the praetorium, to
whom it is well known from history that office belonged.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[673](cc37015.htm#fr_672) <span
id="xvi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p15"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iii-p15.1"></span>Mausuetudo,” meekness.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[674](cc37015.htm#fr_673) <span
id="xvi.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p16"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iii-p16.1"></span>Exacerbati,” exasperated.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[675](cc37015.htm#fr_674) <span
id="xvi.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iii-p17.1"></span>Pervicaciae,” obstinacy and petulance.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[676](cc37015.htm#fr_675) <span
id="xvi.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p18.1"></span>Pessimi
incendii faces essent,” they should be torches to kindle a very bad
fire.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[677](cc37015.htm#fr_676) <span
id="xvi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p20"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iii-p20.1"></span>Degeneres,” degenerate.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[678](cc37015.htm#fr_677) <span
id="xvi.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p23.1"></span>Ita
causam suam acturum,” will so plead his cause.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[679](cc37015.htm#fr_678) <span
id="xvi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p6.1"></span>Videri
poterat,” might seem.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[680](cc37015.htm#fr_679) <span
id="xvi.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p7.1"></span>Uno tenore,”
without stopping.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[681](cc37015.htm#fr_680) <span
id="xvi.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p8.1"></span>Vicissim,”
in their turn.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[682](cc37015.htm#fr_681) <span
id="xvi.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p15.1"></span>Pariter,”
equally.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[683](cc37015.htm#fr_682) <span
id="xvi.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p16"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iv-p16.1"></span>Amarulento,” bitter.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[684](cc37015.htm#fr_683) <span
id="xvi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p3.1"></span>In suo
conducto,” in his hired room.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[685](cc37015.htm#fr_684) <span
id="xvi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p7.1"></span>In diversas
partes,” into different parties.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[686](cc37015.htm#fr_685) <span
id="xvi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p18"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p18.1"></span>Primarii,”
primary.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[687](cc37015.htm#fr_686) <span
id="xvi.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p21"></span> “<span
id="xvi.v-p21.1"></span>Disceptaverunt,” disputed.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[688](cc37015.htm#fr_687) <span
id="xvi.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p22"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p22.1"></span>Bellare
necesse est,” we must of necessity war with.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[689](cc37015.htm#fr_688) <span
id="xvi.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p25"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p25.1"></span>Ullis
difficultatibus,” by any difficulties.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[690](cc37015.htm#fr_689) <span
id="xvi.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p27"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p27.1"></span>Exules,”
exiles.

<span id="xvi.v-p28"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc37016)
