[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc37012)  [Next](cc37014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 37: Acts, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>Chapter 26

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
26:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art
permitted to answer for thyself. Then Paul stretched forth his hand, and
answered for himself: **2.** I think myself happy, O king Agrippa,
because I shall answer this day before thee of all the things whereof I
am accused of the Jews; **3.** Seeing thou art most expert in all those
customs and questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee
hear me patiently. **4.** My life which I have led from my youth, which
was at the first in mine own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews;
**5.** Who knew me before since the beginning, if they would testify,
that after the most strait sect of our religion 1 lived a Pharisee.
**6.** And now I stand subject to judgment for the hope of the promise
which God made to our fathers: **7.** Whereunto our twelve tribes,
serving God instantly day and night, hope to come. For which hope, king
Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews. **8.** Why doth it seem to you a
thing incredible, if God raise the dead?

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span><span id="xiv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**2.** We have declared to what end Paul was
brought before that assembly, to wit, that Festus might write unto
Caesar as he should be counseled by Agrippa and the rest. Therefore, he
doth not use any plain or usual form of defense, but doth rather apply
his speech unto doctrine. Luke useth indeed a word of excusing; yet such
a one as is nothing inconvenient whensoever there is any account given
of doctrine. Furthermore, because Paul knew well that Festus did set
light by all that which should be taken out of the law and prophets, he
turneth himself unto the king, who he hoped would be more attentive,
seeing he was no stranger to the Jewish religion. And because he had
hitherto spoken to deaf men, he rejoiceth now that he hath gotten a man
who, for his skill and experience, can judge aright. But as he
commendeth the skill and knowledge which is in Agrippa, because he is a
lawful judge in those matters whereof he is to speak, so he desireth him
on the other side to hear him patiently; for otherwise contempt and
loathsomeness should have been less excusable in him. He calleth those
points of doctrine, which were handled among the scribes, questions, who
were wont to discuss religion more subtilely. By the word *customs,* he
meaneth those rites which were common to the whole nation. Therefore,
the sum is this, that king Agrippa was not ignorant either in doctrine,
either in the ceremonies of the law. That which he bringeth in or
concludeth,  <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) wherefore I pray
thee hear me patiently, (as I said even now) doth signify that the more
expert a man is in the Scripture, the more attentive must he be when the
question is about religion. For that which we understand doth not
trouble us so much. And it is meet that we be so careful for the worship
of God, that it do not grieve us to hear those things which belong to
the defining thereof, and chiefly when we have learned the principle,
 <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) so that we may readily judge,
if we list to take heed.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span><span id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span>**4.** *My life which I have led.* He doth
not as yet enter into the state of the cause; but because he was
wrongfully accused and burdened with many crimes, lest king Agrippa
should envy the cause  <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) through
hatred of the person, he doth first avouch his innocency. For we know
that when a sinister suspicion hath once possessed the minds of men, all
their senses are so shut up that they can admit nothing. Therefore, Paul
doth first drive away the clouds of an evil opinion which were gathered
of false reports, that he may be heard of pure and well purged ears. By
this we see that Paul was enforced by the necessity of the cause to
commend his life which he had led before. But he standeth not long upon
that point, but passeth over straightway unto the resurrection of the
dead, when he saith that he is a Pharisee. And I think that that is
called the most strait sect, not in respect of holiness of life, but
because there was in it more natural sincerity of doctrine, and greater
learning. For they did boast that they knew the secret meaning of the
Scripture. And surely forasmuch as the Sadducees did vaunt that they did
stick to the letter, they fell into filthy and gross ignorance after
they had darkened the light of the Scripture. The Essenes, contenting
themselves with an austere and strait kind of life, did not greatly care
for doctrine. Neither doth that any whit hinder, because Christ
inveigheth principally against the Pharisees, as being the worst
corrupters of the Scripture (<span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>[Mt
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013)<span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>).
For seeing they did challenge to themselves authority to interpret the
Scripture according to the hidden and secret meaning, hence came that
boldness to change and innovate, wherewith the Lord is displeased. But
Paul doth not touch those inventions which they had rashly invented, and
which they urged with tyrannous rigor. For it was his purpose to speak
only of the resurrection of the dead. For though they had corrupted the
law in many points, yet it was meet that the authority of that sect
should be of more estimation in defending the sound and true faith, than
of the other, which were departed farther from natural purity. Moreover,
Paul speaketh only of the common judgment, which did respect the color
of more subtile knowledge.

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span><span id="xiv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**6.** *For the hope of the promise.* He
doth now descend into the cause, to wit, that he laboreth for the
principal point of faith. And though he seem to have spoken generally of
the resurrection, yet we may gather out of the text, that he beginneth
with a farther point, and that he did comprehend those circumstances
which did properly appertain unto the faith of the gospel. He
complaineth that the Jews did accuse him, because he maintained the hope
of the promise made to the fathers. Therefore, this was the beginning
and also the issue of the matter, that the covenant which God had made
with the fathers is referred unto eternal salvation. Wherefore this was
the sum of the disputation, that the Jewish religion was nothing worth
unless they took heed to the heavens, and did also lift up their eyes
unto Christ, the author of the new life. They did boast that they were
chosen from among all people of the word. But their adoption did profit
them nothing, unless they did trust to the promised Mediator, and look
unto the inheritance of the kingdom of God. Therefore, we must conceive
much more than Luke doth plainly express. And surely his narration
tendeth to no other end, save only that we may know of what things Paul
intreated. But what this was, and in what words he uttered it, we cannot
tell. Nevertheless, it behoveth us to gather out of a brief sum those
things which appertain unto this disputation, which was freely handled
before Agrippa, when Paul had free liberty granted to him to plead his
own cause.

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span><span id="xiv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>**7.** *Whereunto our twelve tribes.* Paul
complaineth before Agrippa, that the state of the Church is come to that
pass, that the priests set themselves against the common hope of all the
faithful; as if he should say, To what end do those of our nation, who
worship God carefully, and spend both days and nights in the duties of
godliness, sigh in their prayers, save only that they may at length come
unto eternal life? But the same is the mark whereat I aim in all my
doctrine; because, when the grace of redemption is set before men, the
gate of the kingdom of heaven is set open therewithal. And when I preach
the author of salvation raised up from the dead, I offer the
first-fruits of immortality in his person; so that the former
confirmation of his doctrine was taken out of the Word of God, when he
cited the promise made to the fathers. Now, in the second place, he
addeth the consent of the Church. And this is the best way to maintain
and avouch the opinions of faith, that the authority of God go foremost;
and that then the consent of the Church come next. Though we ought
therewithal wisely to make choice of the true Church, as Paul doth teach
us in this place by his own example; for though he knew that the priests
did pretend the visor \[mask\] of the Church against him, yet he doth
boldly affirm, that the sincere worshippers of God are on his side, and
he is content with their defense. For when he meaneth \[nameth\] the
twelve tribes, he doth not speak generally of all those which came of
Jacob according to the flesh; but he meaneth those only which did retain
the true study of godliness. For it had been an unmeet thing to commend
the nation generally for the fear of God, which was only in a few.

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span>The Papists deal very disorderly in both;
who, by the voices and consents of men, oppress the Word of God, and
give also the name and title of the Catholic Church to a filthy
rabblement of unlearned and impure men, without any color or shame. But
if we will prove that we think as the true Church thinketh, we must
begin with the prophets and apostles; then those must be gathered unto
them whose godliness is known and manifest. If the Pope and his clergy
be not on our side, we need not greatly to care. And the true affection
of true religion is proved by continuance and vehemency, which was of
singular force at that time, principally when the Jews were in greatest
misery.

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span><span id="xiv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>**8.** *Why should* I do not doubt but that
he proved that both by reason, and also by testimonies of Scripture,
which he taught concerning the resurrection and the heavenly life. But
for good causes doth he call back those unto whom he speaketh unto the
power of God, lest they judge thereof according to their own weak
capacity. For nothing can more hardly sink into men’s brains, than that
men’s bodies shall be restored when as they be once consumed.  <span
id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) Therefore, seeing it is a mystery far
surpassing man’s wit, let the faithful remember how far the infinite
power of God doth reach, and not what they themselves comprehend; as the
same Paul teacheth in the third chapter to the Philippians (<span
id="xiv.i-p18.2"></span>[Php 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span
id="xiv.i-p18.2"></span>). For when he hath said that our vile bodies
shall be made like to the glorious body of Christ, he addeth
immediately, “according to the mighty working whereby he is able to
subdue all things to himself.” But men are for the most part injurious
 <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) to God, who will not have his
arm to reach any farther than their understanding and reason can reach;
so that so much as in them lieth they would desire to restrain the
greatness of his works (which surpasseth heaven and earth) unto their
straits.  <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) But, on the other
side, Paul commandeth us to consider what God is able to do, that being
lifted up above the world, we may learn to conceive the faith of the
resurrection, not according to the weak capacity of our mind, but
according to his omnipotency.

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
26:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#009)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**9.** And I verily thought that I ought to
do many things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth. **10.** Which
thing I also did at Jerusalem; and I shut up many of the saints in
prison, having received power from the high priests; and when they were
put to death, I gave sentence. **11.** And punishing them oftentimes
throughout all synagogues, I enforced them to blaspheme; and being yet
more mad upon them, I did persecute them even into strange cities.
**12.** And as I went to Damascus for this intent, with authority and
commission from the high priests, **13.** At midday, king, I saw in the
way a light from heaven, passing the brightness of the sun, shine round
about me and those which journeyed with me. **14.** And when we were all
fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the
Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee
to kick against the pricks. **15.** And I said, Who art thou, Lord? But
he said unto me, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. **16.** But rise, and
stand up upon thy feet: for to this end did I appear unto thee, that I
may make thee a minister and witness both of those things which thou
hast seen, and also of those things wherein I will appear unto thee;
**17.** Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto
whom now I send thee, **18.** That thou mayest open their eyes, that
they may be converted from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance among those who are sanctified by the faith which is in me.

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span>**9.** *And I truly.* If Paul had not spoken
more things than those which Luke hath hitherto recited, his speech had
not hanged well together.  <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613)
Whence we prove that which was said before, that after that he had
spoken of the covenant of God, he intreated of the grace and office of
Christ, as the matter required. And he repeateth the history of his
conversion for this cause, not only that he may remove from himself all
suspicion of lightness, but that he may testify that God had called him,
and that he was even enforced by a commandment coming from heaven. For,
seeing that he was, contrary to his expectation, suddenly made a sheep
of a wolf, such a violent change is of no small importance to purchase
credit to his doctrine.

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>Therefore, he amplifieth that his heat and
vehement desire which he had to punish  <span
id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) the members of Christ, and also that
stubbornness whereunto he was wholly given over. If he had been nousled
\[brought\] up in the faith of Christ from his youth, or if he had been
taught by some man, he should have embraced it willingly and without
resistance, he himself should have been sure of his calling, but it
should not have been so well known to others. But now, seeing that being
inflamed with obstinate and immoderate fury, being moved with no
occasion, neither persuaded by mortal man, he changeth his mind, it
appeareth that he was tamed and brought under by the hand of God.

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span>Therefore, this contrariety is of great
weight,  <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) in that he saith that
he was so puffed up with pride, that he thought he should get the
victory of Christ, whereby he teacheth that he was nothing less than
made  <span id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) a disciple of Christ
through his own industry. The name of Jesus of Nazareth is taken in this
place for the whole profession of the gospel, which Paul sought to
extinguish, by making war ignorantly against God, as we may see.  <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617)

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span>**10.** *Which thing I did.* He proveth by
his very facts with what force of zeal he was carried away to strive
against Christ, until greater force did pull him back, and made him go
the quite contrary way. Furthermore, his adversaries were witnesses of
this his vehemency, so that it was most certain that he was suddenly
changed; and undoubtedly the priests would never have put him in any
such office, unless he had behaved himself courageously in exercising
cruelty; and it was meet that he should be very courageous who should
satisfy their fury. This is also to be noted, that Paul was not ashamed
to confess how sore he had offended against God, so that that might turn
to the glory of Christ. It was to him undoubtedly reproachful, to have
been carried away with blind zeal, so that he enforced those to
blaspheme which did desire to serve God; to have troubled the good and
simple diversely; to have given sentence of the shedding of innocent
blood; finally, to have lifted up his horns even unto heaven, until he
was thrown down. But he doth not spare his own estimation, but doth
willingly utter his own shame, that the mercy of God may the more
plainly appear thereby.

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span>Wherefore, there could no sinister
suspicion rest in his speech, seeing that (without having any respect of
himself) he saith, that he did utterly offend  <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) in those things whereby he got the
praise of all the people. Therefore, he condemneth his very zeal of
madness, which others did honor.

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span>Whereby it appeareth how filthy the
ambition of those men is, who are ashamed simply to confess, if they
have offended through ignorance or error. For although they do not
altogether excuse the same, yet they go about to lessen or paint these
things, for which they ought humbly with sorrow and tears to crave
pardon. But though Paul might have retained the fame of a courageous
man, yet he confesseth he was a madman. For the participle which Luke
useth importeth thus much, that he compelled many to blaspheme. By this
we know that there was great corruption even in the very first fruits of
believers, seeing that having first professed themselves to be disciples
of Christ, and being afterwards discouraged with fear or stripes, they
did not only deny him, but also spake evil of his blessed name. Though
the very denial itself containeth an horrible blasphemy.

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p19"></span>**13.** *At midday, O king.* The narration
tendeth to this end, that king Agrippa may understand that it was no
vain visure or ghost, neither was it any such trance as brought him into
some madness, so that he was destitute of judgment.  <span
id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) For though he fell to the earth for
fear, yet he heareth a plain voice; he asketh who it was that spake; he
understandeth the answer which was made, which are signs that he was not
beside himself. Hereupon it followeth that he did not rashly change his
mind, but did godlily and holily obey the heavenly oracle, lest he
should of set purpose proceed to strive against God.

<span id="xiv.ii-p21"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p22"></span>**16.** *But rise.* Christ did throw down
Paul that he might humble him; now he lifteth him up, and biddeth him be
of good courage. And even we are daily thrown down by his voice to this
end, that we may be taught to be modest; but look whom he throweth down,
he doth raise the same again gently. And this is no small consolation,
when Christ saith that he appeared to him not as a revenger to plague
him  <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) for his madness, for those
stripes which he had unjustly and cruelly given, for his bloody
sentences, or for that trouble wherewith he had troubled the saints, for
his wicked resisting of the gospel, but as a merciful Lord, intending to
use his industry, and to call him to an honorable ministry. For he made
him a witness of those things which he saw, and which he should
afterward see. This vision was worthy to be recorded, by which he
learned that Christ reigneth in heaven, that he might no longer proudly
contemn him, but acknowledge that he is the Son of God, and the promised
Redeemer; he had other revelations afterward, as he saith in the Second
Epistle to the Corinthians, and 12th chapter (<span
id="xiv.ii-p23.2"></span>[2Co
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)<span id="xiv.ii-p23.2"></span>).

<span id="xiv.ii-p24"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p25"></span>**17.** *Delivering thee.* He is armed in
this place against all fear, which was prepared for him; and also he is
prepared to bear the cross; notwithstanding, seeing he addeth
immediately that Paul should come to lighten the blind, to reconcile
those to God which were estranged from him, and to restore salvation to
those which were lost; it is a marvel why he doth not also promise that
they shall on the other side receive him joyfully, who shall by means of
him receive such and so great benefits. But the unthankfulness of the
world is noted out unto us in this place, because the ministers of
eternal salvation are far otherwise rewarded, as frantic men do rail
upon their physicians. And Paul is admonished, that whithersoever he
shall come, a great part of those to whom he shall study to do good
shall hate him, and seek his overthrow. And he saith plainly, that he is
appointed to be a witness both to Jews and Gentiles, lest that turn to
his reproach, because he made the gospel common to both alike. For the
Jews had conceived such deadly hatred against him for this cause,
because it grieved them that the Gentiles should be made their fellows.
And though they made a show that this did proceed of zeal, because they
would not have the covenant which God made with the posterity of Abraham
profaned, by being translated unto strangers, yet mere ambition did
prick them forward, because they alone would be excellent, all other
being underlings. But in the person of one man, all godly teachers are
encouraged to do their duty, that they be not hindered or kept back with
the malice of men from offering the grace of God unto miserable men,
though they be unworthy.

<span id="xiv.ii-p26"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p27"></span>**18.** *That thou mayest open their eyes.*
Paul, in taking to himself that which is proper to God, doth seem to
exalt himself too high. For we know that it is the Holy Ghost alone
which doth lighten the eyes. We know that Christ is the only Redeemer
which doth deliver us from the tyranny of Satan. We know that it is God
alone who, having put away our sins, doth adopt us unto the inheritance
of the saints. But this is a common thing, that God doth translate unto
his ministers that honor which is due to himself alone, not that he may
take any thing from himself, but that he may commend that mighty working
of his Spirit which he doth show forth in them. For he doth not send
them to work, that they may be dead instruments, or, as it were,
stage-players; but that he may work mightily by their hand. But it
dependeth upon the secret power of his Spirit that their preaching is
effectual, who worketh all things in all men, and which only giveth the
increase.

<span id="xiv.ii-p28"></span>Therefore, teachers are sent, not to utter
their words in vain in the air, or to beat the ears only with a vain
sound, but to bring lively light to the blind, to fashion again men’s
hearts unto the righteousness of God, and to ratify the grace of
salvation which is gotten by the death of Christ. But they do none of
all these, save only inasmuch as God worketh by them, that their labor
may not be in vain, that all the praise may be his, as the effect cometh
from him.

<span id="xiv.ii-p29"></span>And, therefore, we must note, that so often
as the Scripture doth extol the external ministry so honorably, we must
not separate it from the Spirit, which quickeneth the same even as the
soul doth the body. For it teacheth in other places how little man’s
industry can do of itself. For they must plant and water, but it is God
alone which giveth the increase (<span id="xiv.ii-p29.1"></span>[1Co
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006)<span id="xiv.ii-p29.1"></span>).
But because many are hindered by their own ignorance and malice, that
they cannot reap such fruit of the gospel as they ought, we must note
this description, which setteth before our eyes briefly and plentifully
that incomparable treasure. Therefore, this is the drift of the gospel,
that being delivered from blindness of mind, we may be made partakers of
the heavenly light; that being delivered from the thraldom of Satan, we
may be turned to God; that having free forgiveness of sins, we may be
made partakers of the inheritance among the saints. Those which will
rightly profit in the gospel must direct all their senses to this end;
for what good shall the continual preaching thereof do us, if we know
not the true use thereof? Also, the way and means to attain to salvation
is described to us, all men boast that they be desirous of salvation,
but few consider how God will save them.

<span id="xiv.ii-p30"></span>Therefore, this place, wherein the means is
prettily comprehended, is, as it were, a key to open the gate of heaven.
Furthermore, we must know that all mankind is naturally deprived of
those good things which Christ saith we have by believing the gospel; so
that it followeth that all are blind, because they be lightened by
faith; that all are the bond-slaves of Satan, because they are set free
by faith from his tyranny; that all men are the enemies of God, and
subject to eternal death, because they receive remission of sins by
faith. So that nothing is more miserable than we, if we be without
Christ, and without his faith, whereby it appeareth how little, yea,
that nothing is left for the free will of men’s merits. As touching
every part, this lightening is referred unto the knowledge of God,
because all our quickness of sight is mere vanity and thick darkness,
until he appear unto us by his truth. That reacheth farther which
followeth afterward: To be turned from darkness to light; for that is
when we are renewed in the spirit of our mind.

<span id="xiv.ii-p31"></span>Therefore, in my judgment, this member, and
that which followeth, express both one thing, to be turned from the
power of Satan unto God. For that renewing which Paul declareth more
largely in the second chapter to the Ephesians, (<span
id="xiv.ii-p31.1"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="xiv.ii-p31.1"></span>,
and <span id="xiv.ii-p31.2"></span>[Eph
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)<span id="xiv.ii-p31.2"></span>)
is expressed in divers forms of speech. Remission of sins followeth
next, whereby God doth freely reconcile us to himself, so that we need
not doubt but that God will be favorable and merciful to us. At length,
the furnishing and filling of all things is put in the last place; to
wit, the inheritance of eternal life. Some do read it falsely in one
text, among those who are sanctified by faith, because this word is
extended unto the whole period. Therefore, the meaning thereof is, that
by faith we come unto the possession of all those good things which are
offered by the gospel. And faith is properly directed unto Christ
because all the parts of our salvation are included in him. Neither doth
the gospel command us to seek the same anywhere else save only in him.

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
26:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#019)<span
id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**19.** Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was
not disobedient to the heavenly vision: **20.** But I preached first to
those which are at Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and through every region
of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and be
turned unto God, doing works which become those which repent. **21.**
For this cause the Jews, having caught me in the temple, went about to
kill me. **22.** Therefore, seeing I have obtained help of God, I stand
until this present day, testifying both to small and great, saying none
other things than those which the prophets and Moses said should come to
pass: **23.** Whether Christ should suffer, whether he should be the
first that should rise from the dead, to show light to the people, and
to the Gentiles.

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span>**19.** He declareth now briefly to what
end he rehearsed the history of his conversion; to wit, that Agrippa and
the rest might understand that he had God for his author of all those
things which the Jews condemned of sacrilege and apostacy. He speaketh
to Agrippa by name, because he knew that Festus and the Romans knew not
what an heavenly vision meant. Now, it appeareth that there is nothing
in the very sum of his doctrine which dissenteth from the law and the
prophets; whereby the oracle doth win greater credit, whereby Paul was
commanded to teach nothing but that which was agreeable to the
Scripture. Conversion, or turning unto God, is joined with repentance,
not as some peculiar thing, but that we may know what it is to repent.
Like as, also, on the contrary, the corruption of men and their
frowardness  <span id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621) is nothing else but
an estranging from God. And because repentance is an inward thing, and
placed in the affection of the heart, Paul requireth, in the second
place, such works as may make the same known, according to that
exhortation of John the Baptist: “Bring forth fruits meet for
repentance,” (<span id="xiv.iii-p6.2"></span>[Mt
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008)<span id="xiv.iii-p6.2"></span>).
Now, forasmuch as the gospel calleth all those which are Christ’s unto
repentance, it followeth that all men are naturally corrupt, and that
they have need to be changed. In like sort, this place teacheth that
these men do unskillfully pervert the gospel which separate the grace of
Christ from repentance.

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span>**21.** *They went about to kill me.* He
complaineth in this place of the iniquity of his adversaries, that it
may thereby appear that their cause and conscience were both evil.
 <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) For if Paul had offended they
might have gone to law with him; and even there should they have stand
\[stood\] in better state, seeing they did far pass him both in favor
and authority. Therefore, their madness doth testify that they are
destitute of reason. Whereas Paul saith that he was saved by the help of
God, it maketh for the confirmation of his doctrine. For how is it that
he reacheth out his hand to help him, save only because he acknowledged
his minister, and because he will defend the cause which he alloweth
\[approveth?\]. Moreover, this ought to have encouraged him to go
forward so much the more boldly in his office, in that he was thus
holpen by God. For it had been a point of an unthankful man to withdraw
himself from him which had holpen him. By which example we be taught,
that so often as we be delivered from danger, the Lord doth not
therefore prolong our days that we may afterward live idly, but that we
may do our duty cheerfully, and be ready to die every hour to his glory,
who hath reserved us to himself. And yet Paul did not forget how much he
was indebted to the chief captain; but in this place he commendeth the
help of God, that he may show that it became him to spend all the rest
of his course in his service by whom he was delivered, though that came
to pass, and were done through the industry and by the hand of man.

<span id="xiv.iii-p10"></span>*Testifying both to small and great.* We
have said elsewhere that it is more to testify than to teach, as if
there were some solemn contestation made between God and men, that the
gospel may have his \[its\] majesty. And he saith that he is a witness
both to great and small, that king Agrippa may perceive that this doth
appertain even to him; and that when the gospel is offered even to every
simple man, that doth no whit hinder but that it may ascend even unto
the throne of princes. For Christ doth gather all men into his bosom
with one and the same embracing, that those who lay before in the
dunghill, and are now extolled unto so great honor, may rejoice in his
free goodness; and that those who are placed in high degree of honor may
willingly humble themselves, and not grudge to have some of the base and
contemptible multitude for their brethren, that they may be made the
children of God. So in the first chapter to the Romans, he saith that he
is indebted both to the fools and to the wise, lest the Romans should be
kept back with the confidence which they might repose in their wisdom
from submitting themselves to his doctrine. By this let us learn that it
is not in the teacher’s will to make choice of his hearers, and that
they do no less injury to God than defraud men of their right, whosoever
they be which restrain their labor unto great men, whom God doth join
with those which are small. It were too cold to restrain this unto ages.
 <span id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) Wherefore, I do not doubt but
that Paul taketh away the exception which used to be between the noble
and ignoble, because he was neither afraid of the dignity of the one,
neither did he loathe the baseness of the other, but did show himself a
faithful teacher to both alike.

<span id="xiv.iii-p12"></span>*Saying no other thing.* First, this is
worth the noting, that Paul, to the end he may bring in fit and
substantial witnesses of his doctrine, doth not take the same from among
men, but he citeth Moses and the prophets, to whom the Lord had granted
undoubted authority. And surely this is one principle to be observed,
when we will teach soundly, to utter nothing but that which did proceed
out of the mouth of God. Secondly, this is worth the noting, that these
were the principal points of the disputation which Luke doth now touch;
that this was the proper office of Christ, by his death to make
satisfaction for the sins of the world, by his resurrection to purchase
righteousness and life for men; and that the fruit of his death and
resurrection is common both to Jews and Gentiles. But forasmuch as there
is no manifest and (as they say) literal testimony extant in the law
concerning the death and resurrection of Christ, undoubtedly they had
some doctrine delivered by hand from the fathers, out of which they did
learn to refer all figures unto Christ. And as the prophets, which did
prophesy more plainly of Christ, had their doctrine from that fountain,
so they made the men of their time believe that they delivered unto them
no new thing, or which did dissent from Moses. And now Paul did either
not finish his apology, or else he gathered more evident testimonies of
all those things wherein he professed Moses and the prophets to be his
authors.

<span id="xiv.iii-p13"></span>*The first of those which.* There were
some other whose resurrection went before Christ’s in time; namely, if
we admit that the saints of whom the Evangelists speak (<span
id="xiv.iii-p13.1"></span>[Mt
27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)<span id="xiv.iii-p13.1"></span>)
did come out of their graves before Christ, which may likewise be said
of the taking up of Enoch and Elias (<span id="xiv.iii-p13.2"></span>[Ge
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024)<span id="xiv.iii-p13.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iii-p13.3"></span>[2Ki
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)<span id="xiv.iii-p13.3"></span>).
But he calleth him in this place the *first;* as in another place the
first fruits of those which rise again (<span
id="xiv.iii-p13.4"></span>[1Co
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023)<span
id="xiv.iii-p13.4"></span>). Therefore, this word doth rather note out
the cause than the order of time, because, when Christ did rise again,
he became the conqueror of death and Lord of life, that he might reign
forever, and make those who are his partakers of \[his own\] blessed
immortality. Under this word light, he comprehendeth whatsoever doth
pertain unto perfect felicity, as by darkness is meant death and all
manner of misery. And I do not doubt but that Paul alluded unto the
sayings of the prophets,

<span id="xiv.iii-p14"></span>“The people which walked in darkness saw
great light,”  
(<span id="xiv.iii-p14.2"></span>[Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002)<span id="xiv.iii-p14.2"></span>).

<span id="xiv.iii-p15"></span>And again,

<span id="xiv.iii-p16"></span>“Behold, darkness shall cover the earth,
and a mist the people: but the Lord shall be seen upon thee,” (<span
id="xiv.iii-p16.1"></span>[Isa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002)<span id="xiv.iii-p16.1"></span>).

<span id="xiv.iii-p17"></span>Again,

<span id="xiv.iii-p18"></span>“Behold, those which are in darkness shall
see light,”  
(<span id="xiv.iii-p18.2"></span>[Isa
42:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#016)<span
id="xiv.iii-p18.2"></span>).

<span id="xiv.iii-p19"></span>Again,

<span id="xiv.iii-p20"></span>“I have made thee a light of the
Gentiles,” (<span id="xiv.iii-p20.1"></span>[Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)<span id="xiv.iii-p20.1"></span>).

<span id="xiv.iii-p21"></span>And it appeareth by many oracles that the
light of life should come out of Judea, and should be spread abroad
among the Gentiles.

<span id="xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
26:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#024)<span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p2"></span>**24.** And as Paul answered for himself,
Festus saith with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thyself; much
learning doth make thee mad. **25.** And Paul said, I am not mad, most
noble Festus; but speak forth the words of truth and sobriety. **26.**
For the king knoweth of these things, before whom I also speak freely:
for I think that none of these things are hidden from him; for this was
not done in a corner. **27.** King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets?
I know that thou believest. **28.** And Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou
briefly persuadest me to become a Christian. **29.** And Paul saith,
Would to God that not only thou, but also all which hear me this day,
were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds.
**30.** And when he had thus spoken, the king arose, and the governor,
and Bernice, and those which sat with them. **31.** And when they were
gone apart, they talked together between themselves, saying, This man
doth nothing worthy of death or bonds. **32.** Then Agrippa said to
Festus, This man might have been loosed, if he had not appealed unto
Caesar.

<span id="xiv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iv-p4"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p5"></span>**24.** *Festus said with a loud voice.*
This outcry which Festus doth make doth show how much the truth of God
prevaileth with the reprobate; to wit, though it be never so plain and
evident, yet is it trodden under foot by their pride. For though those
things which Paul had alleged out of the law and prophets had nothing in
them which was anything like to madness, but were grounded in good
reason, yet he doth attribute the same to madness, not because he seeth
any absurdity, but because he refuseth those things which he doth not
understand. Nothing was more foolish or more unsavory than the
superstitions of the Gentiles, so that their high priests were for good
causes ashamed to utter their mysteries, whose folly was more than
ridiculous.

<span id="xiv.iv-p6"></span>Festus doth grant that there was learning
packed  <span id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) in Paul’s speech;
nevertheless, because the gospel is hidden from the unbelievers, whose
minds Satan hath blinded, (<span id="xiv.iv-p7.2"></span>[2Co
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003)<span id="xiv.iv-p7.2"></span>) he
thinketh that he is a brain-sick fellow which handleth matters
intricately. So that though he cannot mock and openly contemn him, yet
he is so far from being moved or inwardly touched, that he counteth him
a man which is frenzy \[frenzied\] and of mad curiosity. And this is the
cause that he cannot away to mark what he saith, lest he make him mad
also; as many at this day fly from the word of God, lest they drown
themselves in a labyrinth. And they think that we be mad because we move
questions concerning hidden matters, and so become troublesome both to
ourselves and also to others. Wherefore, being admonished by this
example, let us beg of God that he will show us the light of his
doctrine, and that he will therewithal give us a taste thereof, lest
through obscurity and hardness it become unsavory, and at length proud
loathsomeness break out into blasphemy.

<span id="xiv.iv-p8"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p9"></span>**25.** *I am not mad.* Paul is not angry,
neither doth he sharply reprehend Festus for his blasphemous speech;
yea, he speaketh unto him with great submission.  <span
id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) For it was no place for reprehension,
and it became him to pardon the ignorance of the man, seeing he did not
set himself face to face against God. Also, he had respect unto his
person \[office\]. For though he were unworthy of honor, yet was he in
authority. And yet for all that he doth not therefore give place to his
blasphemy, but he defendeth the glory of the word of God. Whereby we do
also see, that not caring for himself, he did only take thought for his
doctrine. For he doth not vaunt of his wit;  <span
id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) he doth not labor in defense of his
wisdom; but he is content with this defense alone, that he teacheth
nothing but that which is true and sober.

<span id="xiv.iv-p12"></span>Furthermore, \[the\] truth is set against
 <span id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) all manner \[of\] fallacies and
fraud: sobriety against all manner \[of\] frivolous speculations and
thorny subtilties, which are only seeds of contention. Paul doth,
indeed, refute Festus’ error; yet we may gather by this, which is the
best manner of teaching, to wit, that which is not only clean from all
fallacies and deceit, but also doth not make the minds of men drunk with
vain questions, and doth not nourish foolish curiosity, nor an
intemperate desire to know more than is meet, but is moderate and good
for sound edification.

<span id="xiv.iv-p14"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p15"></span>**26.** *For the king hnoweth of these
things.* He turneth himself unto Agrippa, in whom there was more hope.
And, first, he saith that he knew the history of the things; but he
calleth him straightway back to the law and the prophets. For it was to
small end for him to know the thing which was done, unless he did know
that those things which had been spoken before of Christ were fulfilled
in the person of Jesus which was crucified. And whereas Paul doth not
doubt of Agrippa’s faith, he doth it not so much to praise him, as that
he may put the Scripture out of all question, lest he be enforced to
stand upon the very principles. Therefore, his meaning is, that the
Scripture is of sufficient credit of itself, so that it is not lawful
for a man that is a Jew to diminish any jot of the authority thereof.
And yet Paul doth not flatter him; for though he did not reverence the
Scripture as became a godly man, yet he had this rudiment from his
childhood, that he was persuaded that nothing is contained therein
besides the oracles of God. As the common sort of men, though they do
not greatly care for the word of God, yet they acknowledge and confess
generally and confusedly that it is the word of God, so that they are
letted with some reverence either to reject or to despise the same.

<span id="xiv.iv-p16"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p17"></span>**28.** *And Agrippa said unto Paul.* The
apostle prevailed thus far at least, that he wrung out of king Agrippa a
confession, though it were not voluntary, as those use to yield who can
no longer resist the truth, or, at least, to show some token of assent.
Agrippa’s meaning is, that he will not willingly become a Christian;
yea, that he will not be one at all; and yet that he is not able to
gainsay, but that he is drawn after a sort against his will. Whereby it
appeareth how great the pride of man’s nature is until it be brought
under to obey by the Spirit of God.

<span id="xiv.iv-p18"></span>Interpreters expound this, <span
id="xiv.iv-p18.1"></span>εν ολιγω diversely. Valla thought that it ought
to be translated thus, Thou dost almost make me a Christian. Erasmus
doth translate it *a little.* The old interpreter dealeth more plainly
 <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) *in a little;* because,
translating it word for word, he left it to the readers to judge at
their pleasure. And surely it may be fitly referred unto the time, as if
Agrippa had said, Thou wilt make me a Christian straightway, or in one
moment. If any man object that Paul’s answer doth not agree thereto, we
may quickly answer; for seeing the speech was doubtful, Paul doth fitly
apply that unto the thing which was spoken of the time. Therefore,
seeing Agrippa did mean that he was almost made a Christian in a small
time, Paul addeth that he doth desire that as well he as his companions
might rise from small beginnings, and profit more and more; and yet I do
not mislike that that <span id="xiv.iv-p19.2"></span>εν ολιγω doth
signify as much as almost. This answer doth testify with what zeal, to
spread abroad the glory of Christ, this holy man’s breast was inflamed,
when as he doth patiently suffer those bonds wherewith the governor had
bound him, and doth desire that he might escape the deadly snares of
Satan, and to have both him and also his partners to be partakers with
him of the same grace, being in the mean season content with his
troublesome and reproachful condition. We must note that he doth not
wish it simply, but from God, as it is he which draweth us unto his Son;
because, unless he teach us inwardly by his Spirit, the outward doctrine
shall always wax cold.

<span id="xiv.iv-p20"></span>*Except these bonds.* It is certain that
Paul’s bonds were not so hard, ne \[nor\] yet did they cause him such
sorrow, wherein he did oftentimes rejoice, and which he doth mention for
honor’s sake, as being the badge of his embassage, (<span
id="xiv.iv-p20.1"></span>[Ga 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)<span
id="xiv.iv-p20.1"></span>), but he hath respect to those to whom he
wisheth faith without trouble or cross. For those who did not as yet
believe in Christ were far from that affection to be ready to strive for
the gospel. And surely it behoveth all the godly to have this gentleness
and meekness, that they patiently bear their own cross, and that they
wish well to others, and study so much as in them lieth to ease them of
all trouble, and that they do in no case envy their quietness and mirth.
This courtesy  <span id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) is far contrary
to the bitterness of those who take comfort in wishing that other men
were in their misery.

<span id="xiv.iv-p22"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p23"></span>**31.** *They spake together.* In that Paul
is acquitted by the judgment of them all, it turned to the great renown
of the gospel. And when Festus agreeth to the rest he condemneth
himself, seeing he had brought Paul into such straits through his unjust
dealing, by bringing him in danger of his life under color of changing
the place. And though it seemeth that the appeal did hinder  <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) the holy man, yet because this was the
only way to escape death, he is content, and doth not seek to get out of
that snare; not only because the matter was not even now safe and sound,
 <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) but because he was admonished
in the vision that he was also called by God to Rome (<span
id="xiv.iv-p25.2"></span>[Ac
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)<span id="xiv.iv-p25.2"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_607"></span>[608](cc37013.htm#fr_607) <span
id="xiv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p6.1"></span>Illatio ista,”
the inference.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[609](cc37013.htm#fr_608) <span
id="xiv.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>Ne praasertim
ubi jam principiis imbuti sumus,” and especially when we have already
been imbued with the principles.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[610](cc37013.htm#fr_609) <span
id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>Causae sit
infensus,” be prejudiced against the cause.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[611](cc37013.htm#fr_610) <span
id="xiv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p18.1"></span>Ubi in
nihilum redacta fuerint,” after being reduced to nothing.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[612](cc37013.htm#fr_611) <span
id="xiv.i-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p19.1"></span>Maligni...
et injurii,” malignant and injurious,

<span id="fn_612"></span>[613](cc37013.htm#fr_612) <span
id="xiv.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p20.1"></span>Ad suas
angustias,” to their narrow capacity.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[614](cc37013.htm#fr_613) <span
id="xiv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p6.1"></span>Abrupta
esset,” would have been abrupt.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[615](cc37013.htm#fr_614) <span
id="xiv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p8.1"></span>Nocendi,” to
persecute

<span id="fn_615"></span>[616](cc37013.htm#fr_615) <span
id="xiv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p10.1"></span>Magnum
ergo pondus habet ista antithesis,” there is a great force, therefore,
in the antithesis.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[617](cc37013.htm#fr_616) <span
id="xiv.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>Nihil
minus... quam factum,” that he was by no means made.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[618](cc37013.htm#fr_617) <span
id="xiv.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p12.1"></span>Hoc modo,”
in this way.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[619](cc37013.htm#fr_618) <span
id="xiv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p16.1"></span>Ultro sibi
in crimen imputat,” voluntarily charges upon himself as criminal.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[620](cc37013.htm#fr_619) <span
id="xiv.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>Quae
mentis sanitatem vel judicium illi eriperet,” as deprived him of his
sober senses, or the power of judging.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[621](cc37013.htm#fr_620) <span
id="xiv.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p23"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p23.1"></span>Qui poenam
exigat,” to punish him.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[622](cc37013.htm#fr_621) <span
id="xiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p6.1"></span>Pravitas,”
depravity.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[623](cc37013.htm#fr_622) <span
id="xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p9.1"></span>Malam
causam ipsos agere mala conscientia,” that they pleaded a bad cause with
a bad conscience.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[624](cc37013.htm#fr_623) <span
id="xiv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>Ad
aetates hoc restringere,” to confine this to periods of time.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[625](cc37013.htm#fr_624) <span
id="xiv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p7.1"></span>Reconditam
eruditionem,” recondite erudition.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[626](cc37013.htm#fr_625) <span
id="xiv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p10.1"></span>Honorifice
eum corrpellat,” addresses him in terms of honour.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[627](cc37013.htm#fr_626) <span
id="xiv.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p11.1"></span>Acumen,”
acuteness.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[628](cc37013.htm#fr_627) <span
id="xiv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p13"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iv-p13.1"></span>Opponitur,” is opposed to.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[629](cc37013.htm#fr_628) <span
id="xiv.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p19"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iv-p19.1"></span>Simplicius,” more simply.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[630](cc37013.htm#fr_629) <span
id="xiv.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p21.1"></span>Humanitas
et moderatio,” humanity and moderation.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[631](cc37013.htm#fr_630) <span
id="xiv.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p24.1"></span>Damnosa
esse,” was injurious to.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[632](cc37013.htm#fr_631) <span
id="xiv.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p25.1"></span>Res jam
non erat integra,” matters were no longer entire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](cc37014)
