[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](moc00)  [Next](moc02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5ITU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe*, by Donald A. Mackenzie,
\[1917\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# PREFACE

This volume deals with the myths and legends connected with the ancient
civilization of Crete, and also with the rise and growth of the
civilization itself, while consideration is given to various fascinating
and important problems that arise in the course of investigating
pre-Hellenic habits of thought and habits of life, which are found to
have exercised a marked influence in the early history of Europe. In the
first two chapters the story of European civilization is carried back to
remote Palæolithic times, the view having been urged, notably by Mosso,
that a connection existed between the civilization of the artistic
cave-dwellers in France and Spain, and that of the Island of Minos. It
is shown that these civilizations were not, however, contemporary, but
separated by thousands of years, and that in accounting for close
resemblances the modern dogma of independent evolution is put to a
severe test. The data summarized in the Introduction emphasize the need
for caution in attempting to solve a complex problem by the application
of a hypothesis which may account for some resemblances but fails to
explain away the marked differences that existed even between
contemporary civilizations of the Neolithic, Copper, and Bronze Ages.

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

To enable the reader to become familiar with the geological,
ethnological, and archæological evidence regarding the earliest traces
and progressive activities of man in Europe, who laid the foundations of
subsequent civilizations, a popular narrative is given in the first
chapter, the scientific data being cast in the form of a legend
following the manner of Hesiod's account of the Mythical Ages of the
World in the *Work and Days*, and of that of the Indian sage
Markandeya's story of the "Yugas" in the Máhabhárata, and of Tuan
MacCarell's narrative of his experiences in the various Irish Ages.
Footnotes provide the necessary references.

Consideration is also given, in dealing with Cretan origins, to
Schliemann's hypothesis regarding the "Lost Atlantis", and the
connection he believed existed between the Mexican, early European, and
Nilotic civilizations. It is brought out that the historical elements in
Plato's legend are susceptible of a different explanation.

Cretan civilization has not yet been rendered articulate, for its script
remains a mystery, but of late years a flood of light has been thrown
upon it by the archæologists, among whom Sir Arthur Evans is
pre-eminent. We can examine the remains of the palace of Minos; tread
the footworn stones of the streets of little towns; examine pottery and
frame a history of it; gaze on frescoes depicting scenes of everyday
life in ancient Crete, on seal engravings which show us what manner of
ships were built and navigated by mariners who ruled the Mediterranean
Sea long before the Phœnician period, what deities were worshipped and
what ceremonies were performed; we can study a painted sarcophagus which
throws light on funerary customs and conceptions of the Otherworld,

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

and stone vases which afford glimpses of boxers, bull-baiters, soldiers,
and processions; and we can also examine the jewellery, weapons, and
implements of the ancient folk. With the aid of these and other data we
are enabled to reconstruct in outline the island civilization and study
its growth over a period embraced by many centuries. It has even been
found possible to arrange a system of Cretan chronology) approximate
dates being fixed with the aid of artifacts, evidently imported from
Egypt, and of Cretan artifacts found in the Nilotic area and elsewhere.
The idea of the "Hellenic miracle" no longer obtains. It is undoubted
that Crete was the forerunner of Greece, and that the Hellenes owed a
debt to Cretan civilization the importance of which was not realized
even by the native historians of ancient Greece.

Various problems arise in dealing with the growth of civilization in
Crete and the influence exercised by it in Central and Western Europe.
These include the race question, the migrations of peoples from the area
in which the agricultural mode of life was first adopted, the question
of cultural contact, of trade routes on sea and land. of homogeneity of
beliefs of common origin, and of the influence of locality in the
development of beliefs and material civilization. In the pages that
follow, these problems are presented in their various aspects, and such
representative evidence as is available has been utilized with purpose
to throw light upon them.

Readers cannot fail to be impressed by the note of modernity which
prevails in the story of Cretan life. It is emphasized to a remarkable
degree in Minoan art. In this connection the coloured illustrations in
the present volume. by Mr. John Duncan, A.R.S.A., are of peculiar

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

interest. In preparing these designs Mr. Duncan has deliberately sought
to follow the style of the Minoan artists themselves, as displayed in
the relics of frescoes, and in pottery, seal engravings and impressions,
&c., recently unearthed. The colours are confined to those used by the
native craftsmen, while the decorative borders are essentially Cretan in
character. In the Plate facing [p. 248](moc15.htm#page_248.md) a suggestive
parallel is drawn between Celtic and Minoan patterns and symbols. It
will be noted that the Celtic treatment of complicated patterns of
common origin is more thorough and logical than the Minoan, as, for
instance, when we compare No. 3, which has incomplete curves, with the
finished and exact No. 4. The examples dealt with include a symbol of
the Egypto-Libyan goddess Neith.

The note of modernity in Cretan art inclines us perhaps to be somewhat
generous and enthusiastic in our praises of it. An eminent archæologist
has declared that "it yields to none that was contemporary and hardly to
any that came after it". This is a strong claim, especially when we give
consideration to the extraordinarily full and varied art of Egypt. In
Crete, for instance, we do not meet with the skilled technique and
psychological insight of some of Egypt's notable portraiture in stone,
nor with faces of such high intellectual and moral qualities; nor do we
meet with the masculine energy, the disciplined ferocity and brilliant
directness of appeal that characterize the finest products of Assyrian
art; nor can we help noting the absence of the idealistic tendencies of
Greek art, with its aim to visualize mental and spiritual impressions,
its moral ascendancy, and its preoccupation with the idea of beauty of
form and character. No doubt it

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

is because Cretan art is infused with a lyrical carelessness and
freedom, not only in subject, but also in execution, that it makes a
very special appeal to modern eyes. There are certainly notable
instances of excellency in delicate modelling, a love of colour--who can
refrain, for instance, from admiring the golden afternoon effects of
Vasiliki pottery?--a delight in natural objects, a marked absence of
formalism in the best work, and an extreme and arresting grace,
especially in the ivory work. Yet it is possible to overestimate the
artistic value of such works as the "Harvester Vase" ([p.
212](moc14.htm#page_212).md), with its liveliness of movement and
expression, and to commend even its defects, and forget that there are
finer examples of low relief in Egypt, where the artists have left us in
no doubt as to what they meant; it is possible also to infuse our art
criticisms with archæological enthusiasm, as when, for instance, we gaze
on the fresco of the Cup Bearer ([p. 118](moc11.htm#page_118).md), which is
an impression of a very ordinary, good-looking, young man, with formal
eyes, and hand and arm out of drawing. Yet while, as a whole, Cretan art
is very unequal, there are a few masterpieces which set it on a high
level. The ivory figurine of "The Leaper" is one of these ([p.
48](moc07.htm#page_48).md). Its Parisian elegance and Greek-like accuracy
and beauty of modelling take the eye at once. It is much worn, but the
unbroken parts exhibit fine craftsmanship. The bones and muscles of the
arm and hand especially are expressed with the modesty and animation of
nature; there is none of the gross exaggeration so often found in
Assyrian art. Another outstanding masterpiece is the bull's head in
steatite ([p. 108](moc10.htm#page_108).md). We are struck by its fine
dignity, the noble poise of the head, the alert eye, the mobility of the
pricked ears, and the

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

combination of naturalism with simplicity, grace, and loftiness of
treatment. A contrast is presented by the other bull's head in plaster
relief ([p. 124](moc11.htm#page_124).md), with the magnificent blaze of the
great eye and the exhausted gasp of mouth and nostrils; the noble animal
has evidently fallen a victim in the ring; it is powerful and grand even
when death takes it. Special mention may also be made of the goat
suckling its kid, an admirable piece of realism characterized by grace
and insight ([p. 152](moc12.htm#page_152).md).

The spirit of naturalism pulsating in Cretan art is also found in
Palæolithic art, of which two notable examples are given ([p.
20](moc06.htm#page_20).md) from the cave paintings. These remarkable relics
of the Pleistocene Age are typical products of Palæolithic art, the
advanced condition of which suggests a long history, and even the
existence, in such remote times, not only of devoted personal study, but
also of an organized system of training. The civilization reflected by
such an art must have been of no mean order. Evidently it met with
disaster during the Fourth Glacial Period, but subsequent discoveries
may yet demonstrate that its influence was not wholly lost to mankind.

D. A. MACKENZIE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](moc02.md)
