[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](moc07)  [Next](moc09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5ITU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe*, by Donald A. Mackenzie,
\[1917\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

# CHAPTER III

### Ancient Peoples of the Goddess Cult

Crete and Palæolithic Man--Traces in Malta, Egypt, Palestine, and
Phoenicia--Links between Palæolithic and Neolithic Ages--Azilian Culture
in France, Denmark, and Britain--Evidence of Geology and
Folk--tales--Palæolithic Types in Modern England--Coming of Neolithic
Man of Mediterranean Race--The Cretan Snake--goddess, Dove--goddess, and
"Lady of Wild Creatures"--The "Mother" of Crete--Identified with
Rhea--Primitive Goddesses as Destroyers--Black Annis of England and
Black Kali of India--The Black, Green, and Yellow Demeter (Ceres)--The
Green Neith of Libya--Babylonian Labartu and Black Scoto-Irish Hag--The
"Terrible" Sekhet of Egypt--Tree and Mountain Worship--Oak and Maypole
and "Swain Motes"--Earth Oaths in Greece and Scotland--The Greek
Gæia--Cailleach and Artemis--Wind Hags--Goddess Cult and Status of
Women--Process of Myth-making.

No Palæolithic skulls have been yet discovered in Crete, although traces
have been forthcoming of an early stage of culture not unlike the
Azilian. As the island was at one time connected with the mainland, it
may be that the bones of the early races and the animals associated with
them lie buried in the Ægean Sea, which, during the Inter-glacial
periods, was a broad plain watered by noble rivers and covered by dense
forests. The extensive land depression along the North African coast has
similarly hidden from us the secrets of prehistoric Libya.

In Malta, where ancient sites favoured by man Were liable to less
disturbance by builders than in Crete, skulls of the middle Palæolithic
periods have been discovered. There are eleven specimens from Hal
Saflieni in the Valetta museum. Some are of mixed types, but two

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

have distinct Mousterian characteristics and especially the protruding
brow ridges which distinguished the men of the Third Glacial Period.

One skull from Hagiar Kim has negroid traits and appears to link with
those found in the Grimaldi cave near Mentone. As has been stated,
steatopygous figures have been taken from Neolithic Maltese graves and
sanctuaries, a sure indication that the Aurignacian proto-Bushmen were
known to the early settlers of the Mediterranean race. Some of these
figures are nude and others wear the flounced gown usually called
"Cretan", and it is of interest to note here that they are associated
among burial relics with perforated axe amulets of polished stone. No
Cro-Magnon skulls have been discovered in Malta, but some race quite as
tall must have mingled there with the early Neolithic folk. A male
skeleton found at Santa Verna measures 5 feet 9 inches in length. "The
man was of a noble type," writes an excavator; "he must have stood 6
feet high, his skull is massive and shapely, the jaws and teeth are even
and regular, and the limbs powerful." <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) The Mediterranean Neolithic man was of
slight build and medium stature.

The earliest Cretans were of the Mediterranean racial type, but among
them were alien broad-heads. Ere the Neolithic folks settled on the
island they came into contact, apparently, with mountaineers from the
north, or descendants of Palæolithic races. Steatopygous figurines have
been found in Cretan Neolithic strata.

In Egypt there was no hiatus between the Palæolithic and Neolithic Ages.
Not only have steatopygous figurines been found in pre-Dynastic Egyptian
and Nubian graves, but also flints which show that the artifacts of the
later period were developed from those of the earlier. A

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

reference to the "Smiting of the Troglodytes" on the Palermo stone of
the First Dynasty may refer to descendants of the Palæolithic
cave-dwellers.

Palestine, the high road from Egypt into eastern Europe, has yielded
numerous relics of the early stages of culture. Chellean and Acheulian
flints "have been picked up on the maritime plain, in yet greater
numbers on the plateau south of Jerusalem, and in considerable
quantities in the region to the south of Amman, east of Jordan. Some
have also been discovered far to the south, in the region of Petra."
Professor Macalister, from whom we quote, notes that "Palæolithic man in
Palestine missed, however, the higher developments attained by his
brother in France". Mousterian cave-settlements in Phoenicia have
yielded characteristic flints and bone instruments, including needles.
Dr. Max Blanckenhorn has assigned the date 10,000 B.C. to the earliest
Neolithic settlement in this region. Sherds of pottery have been
discovered in the Phœnician cave of Harajel "side by side with the bones
of extinct fauna, especially the woolly rhinoceros". In the natural
Gezer caves of a later age finds have been made of "rude pottery,
ornamented with coarse moulding or roughly painted red lines; flint
flakes, knives and scrapers; millstones; rounded stone pebbles, that
could be used for a variety of purposes-hearth stones; heating stones;
missiles; polishers, &c.", and "an amulet or two of bone or slate,
perforated for suspension". <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78.md)

In France the most remarkable link between the Palæolithic and later
ages is formed by the Cro-Magnon racial type which first appeared in the
Dordogne valley in the Aurignacian Period, before the Fourth Glacial
Epoch. The "most curious and significant trait" of these people

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

is that they have long heads and broad faces: that is, they have skulls
with Mediterranean characteristics and faces which resemble those of the
broad-headed Armenoids of the mountains. Summarizing the evidence of Dr.
Collignon regarding the present-day inhabitants of the Dordogne valley,
Professor Ripley says: "The people we have described above agree in
physical characteristics with but one other type of men known to
anthropologists. This is the celebrated Cro-Magnon race, long ago
identified by archæologists as having inhabited the south-west of Europe
in prehistoric times." Varieties of the type have occurred owing to the
proximity of other races, but it is still common and easily detected.
Individuals with the Cro-Magnon skull and "disharmonic face" are also
found among present-day Berbers. <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md)
Skeletons of Cro-Magnon man of the Palæolithic Period have been found as
far north as Belgium. Dr. Schliz finds traces at the present time of
Cro-Magnon man throughout western Europe, and believes that even the
Neanderthal-Spy (Mousterian) type has also left a slight but
recognizable impress. <span id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80.md) The high
average stature and weight of the Scottish people, which has long
puzzled ethnologists, may be due to a strong Palæolithic intermixture in
early Neolithic times. The evidence obtained from the Glasgow graveyard,
referred to in the Introduction, is suggestive in this connection.

Interesting evidence has been forthcoming at Mas d'Azil, in France, of
the transition period between the late Palæolithic and early Neolithic
culture. This stage of culture is called Azilian. It was of long
continuance. Artifacts called "Azilian" found in Scotland may have been
separated by a considerable period of time from those

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

discovered at Mas d'Azil. Cro-Magnon and Magdalenian men lived through
and survived the Fourth Glacial Epoch. Then during the subsequent period
of minor oscillations of climate the reindeer and other animals of the
chase migrated northwards. These were followed, it would appear, by the
huntsmen, a proportion of whom, however, remained behind and adopted new
habits of life. As the Cro-Magnon folks of the Dordogne valley had
domesticated animals, they no doubt found the struggle for existence in
the homeland less arduous than their contemporaries, the small men of
Magdalenian culture, who were hunters and fishermen and naught else.

Subsequent to the Fourth Glacial Period there was a re-elevation of
land, and the Magdalenian wanderers were able to walk over the bed of
the English Channel. The reindeer entered the British Isles also and
survived in Scotland until the Middle Ages. A deer-horn implement,
carved with a scene of the chase, which was picked up on the slopes of
Ben Wyvis, was shown to the writer shortly after it was discovered. It
lay for several years in the vestibule of a Dingwall hotel, but
unfortunately has gone amissing. It appears to have been a relic of
Palæolithic culture of the late period which must be assigned to it in
northern Highlands. The carving had Magdalenian characteristics.

Professor James Geikie shows that after the Fourth Glacial Epoch genial
conditions prevailed in Scotland. This is the period of the great
forests, relics of which are embedded in peat mosses. He terms it "Lower
Forestian". A cold period followed and glaciers once again descended
from the mountains, and some of these were not melted before they
touched the sea. The forests decayed and the peat formed above the great
trees which perished as each succeeding winter grew colder and each

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

succeeding summer shorter and wetter. Meanwhile the land sunk and the
sea washed round the 45 to 50 feet beaches. Another Inter-glacial Period
followed, during which the forests again flourished. It constitutes
Geikie's "Upper Forestian" Epoch. The last, or sixth, Glacial Period
followed, with its small and local glaciers, during which the land sunk
again, and the later peat beds covered great fallen trees. Thereafter
the present Age was inaugurated by the raising of the land to more or
less its present level with a gradual improvement of the climate.

Traces of man in the Azillan stage of culture have been found in
Scotland. <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) The MacArthur cave, which
overlooks Oban, was inhabited when the sea was 30 feet above its present
level, and the Highland troglodytes--the earliest visitors--who were
hunters and fishermen, left behind bone and horn implements, including
the Azilian harpoon invented during the Magdalenian stage of culture of
the Fourth Glacial Epoch in southern France. At Stirling harpoons of the
same type were utilized at a period when whales spouted not far from the
castle rock. Of late an interesting cave-dwelling, excavated at
Rosemarkie in the Black Isle, has yielded a variety of bone and other
implements, and human remains. A large fire-place, with upright
smoke-blackened stones and surrounded by a cobbled floor, was laid bare.
The cave is situated about 15 feet above the present sea-level.

Associated with these caves and other early settlements, chiefly on the
ridges of the old coast-lines, are heaps of shells. These have been
found as far north as Caithness. <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82.md)

Those early settlers, of the "river-bed" race, are

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

believed to be of the same mixed stock, surviving from Palæolithic
times, as the famous "beach-combers" of the Danish "kitchen middens".
When the earliest Mediterranean racial pioneers of the Neolithic Age
entered these islands, they met and mingled with the troglodytes who are
referred to in Gaelic folk-tales. <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md)

"It may quite well be", says Professor James Geikie, that Neolithic man
appeared in southern Europe before Palæolithic man had vanished from the
Pyrenean region, and the two races may possibly have here come into
contact." Most archæologists have abandoned the old hiatus theory. Dr.
Robert Munro argues, after reviewing the latest evidence, that in Europe
there was "no break in the continuity of human occupation from late
Palæolithic to Neolithic times", and accepts Dr. Keith's view that
"Palæolithic blood is as rife in the British people of today as in those
of the European continent". <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84.md) Dr.
Keith finds everywhere in England numerous representatives of the
"river-bed" Palæolithic folks.

The Neolithic folks, who came into contact with the remnants of the
Palæolithic races in various parts of Europe, were representatives of
the widespread Mediterranean or Brown Race. They were men of medium
stature, with long heads and high but narrow foreheads, refined faces,
dark eyes and hair, and slim bodies. Their brunette complexions suggest
that their area of characterization was on the North African coast. Some
ethnologists incline to the view that the homeland of this stock was
Somaliland, the Punt of the Egyptian records, which, like Arabia,
favoured the production of a larger population than it

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

was capable of sustaining permanently. In Egypt they adopted the
agricultural mode of life long before the dawn of history. Periodic
folk-waves, drifting westward and east, entered Europe across the
Straits of Gibraltar and through Palestine and Asia Minor by the
coast-line route. In the process of time they overspread southern,
central, and western Europe, and entered the British Isles. Probably
they crossed over to Ireland from Scotland. Their burial customs
indicate that their religious beliefs were well developed prior to the
period of "folk-wandering". The Neolithic graves in Europe and Africa
are constructed on similar lines, and the great majority of the
skeletons they contain are remarkable for their uniformity of type. "So
striking", writes Professor Elliot Smith, "is the family likeness
between the early Neolithic peoples of the British Isles and the
Mediterranean and the bulk of the population, both ancient and modern,
of Egypt and East Africa, that the description of the bones of an Early
Briton of that remote epoch might apply in all essential details to an
inhabitant of Somaliland." <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md)

It is not necessary to assume that they waged a war of extermination
against the Palæolithic huntsmen and fishermen of Europe, so as to
account for their ultimate superiority of numbers. Their pastoral and
agricultural mode of life made it possible for them to live in larger
communities and prosper in smaller areas than the Palæolithic huntsman,
whose activities had necessarily to extend over wide stretches of
country. At any rate, they never overcame the Dordogne valley men of
Cro-Magnon type. It is possible that in districts in western Europe, as
well as in the British Isles, the Neolithic and late Palæolithic peoples
formed mixed communities. Dr. Robert Munro

 

<span id="img_05800"></span> ![](img/05800.jpg)

THE SNAKE GODDESS OF CRETE

From the painting by John Duncan, A.R.S.A.

 

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

suggests that the latter became the servants and "clodhoppers" of the
agriculturists.

The Neolithic, like the late Palæolithic peoples, were
goddess-worshippers. They believed that the "Great Mother" had given
origin to the world, the gods, the demons, and the races of mankind. In
the various countries in which early Neolithic civilization was
developed traces still survive of this early belief, and it will be
found that the conception of the "Great Mother" is as varied as were the
degrees of culture attained by the separated communities of common
stock. Primitive ideas appear to have persisted longer in isolated
districts where ethnic disturbances were least frequent and habits of
life less liable to undergo change.

In Crete there were three outstanding forms of the mother-goddess-the
snake-goddess, the dove-goddess, and the "lady of wild creatures". These
may have been different forms of an original deity, or representative of
a group composed of mother and daughters. As in Egypt and Babylonia, it
is found that the one goddess tends to absorb the attributes of the
other. It is possible that the Mother was supposed to manifest herself
in different forms, at different seasons, and in different districts,
and that one of the results of local ritualistic development was to
emphasize a particular form of the original deity. But there can be no
doubt that the conception of the Mother was an essential part of the
Cretan faith.

The great goddess was depicted wearing a flounced gown suspended from
her slim waist, round which a girdle is clasped (Chapter VI). The upper
part of the body is bare, and she has enormous breasts. Sometimes she
stands on a mountain top, guarded by two great lions, and sometimes she
is seated beside trees or plants. In addition

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

to the lions, her wild animals include the wild goat, the horned sheep,
the bull, the red deer, the snake, and the dove; and among the symbols
associated with her are the horns of the bull, the double axe, the
sacred pillar, the moon crescent, and a staff or wand. She was
apparently a goddess of death, battle, fertility, and the chase.
Offerings were made to her in a mountain-cave she was supposed to
inhabit.

It must be recognized at the outset that this ancient deity, like others
of her kind, was not necessarily an attractive personality. Our
conception of her must not be based solely on Greek sculpture, for
instance. She is believed to be identical with Rhea, the mother of
Vesta, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus, and that deity was
depicted by Phidias as a benign mother of great dignity and tenderness
and beauty. The original mother was worshipped and propitiated because
she was feared. She was the Fate who measured the lives of men, who sent
disasters as well as blessings, and was associated with lions and snakes
as well as doves and deer. Withal, she was a voluptuous wanton. Like the
Babylonian Ishtar, who was the lover of Gilgamish in one hour and his
unrelenting enemy in the next, she was fickle and changeable as the wind
and the seasons. She gloried with callous heart in her power to destroy,
and was untouched by tender emotions for mankind, when--

Looking over wasted lands,  
Blight and famine, plague and earthquake, roaring deeps and fiery
sands,  
Clanging fights, and flaming towns, and sinking ships and praying hands.

Greek mythology, in which the beliefs of various ethnic elements were
fused, and savage traditions were ultimately transformed by philosophic
speculations, survives to us

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

mainly as the product of a cultured Age. But the poets and artists did
not divest it wholly of its primitive traits. it is now generally
recognized that the savagery of Cronus is not mere symbolism, or the
wrath of Artemis, who required the sacrifice of a beautiful maiden,
simply a myth based on natural phenomena and not a reflection of "old
unhappy far-off things"--a reminiscence of primitive rites performed to
propitiate a bloodthirsty deity.

In those parts of ancient Europe in which ancient rites were perpetuated
till a comparatively late period the worship of pagan deities was a
gloomy memory. The Irish Cromm Cruaich put prostrated hosts under
"deadly disgrace" before his golden image--

          To him without glory  
They would kill their piteous, wretched offspring,  
With much wailing and peril,  
To pour their blood around Cromm Cruaich.

          Milk and corn  
They would ask from him speedily  
In return for one-third of their healthy issue:  
Great was the horror and the scare of him. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md)

The mother-goddess of ancient Europe was similarly remembered as a
devourer of children. She survives in English folk-lore as a fierce
demon. In Leicestershire she is Black Annis, who is associated with the
Easter "hare hunt", and has a "cat Anna" form. The earliest reference to
her appears in the following extract from an eighteenth-century
title-deed: "All that close or parcel of land commonly called or known
by the name 'Black Anny's Bower Close'."

It must not be assumed, however, that Black Annis was a comparatively
recent importation. She appears to

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

be of as great antiquity as the customs associated with her name. It is
impossible to limit the age of these and other customs and beliefs which
survive to the present day, not only in rural districts, but even in
cities and among the cultured classes, after so many centuries of
Christian teaching. If they have persisted so long, in spite of the
combined influences of Church, printing-press, and school, like rank
weeds among flowers, for how long a period, it may be asked, did they
flourish before they were condemned and shown to be unworthy of
civilized communities? There can be little doubt that some have been
inherited from the earliest settlers in these islands, who brought from
the Continent in one of the Inter-glacial Epochs, and again in the Late
Stone Age, the prototypes of the charms like the lucky pigs which now
dangle from watch-chains and the mascots that figure on motor-cars and
aeroplanes as they once figured on coracles, and boats hollowed from
trunks of trees.

It is not to be marvelled at that the ancient goddess should be
remembered in Leicester district. The city's name is fragrant with
ancient memories. It was called after Llyr, the British sea-god, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87.md) who became the King Lear of the legend on
which one of Shakespeare's great dramas was based. "He (King Lear) it
was", wrote Geoffrey of Monmouth in the twelfth century, "that builded
the city on the River Soar, that in the British is called Kaerleir, but
in the Saxon Leicester (Leirchester)." <span
id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88.md)

Black Annis Bower was a cave upon the Dane Hills, <span
id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_89.md) which, during the past century, became
filled up with

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

earth. Over the cave grew an oak-tree, in the branches of which the bag
was wont to conceal herself so that she might pounce out unawares and
seize human victims, especially children. A local poet has immortalized
the hag and her cave:

An oak, the pride of all the mossy dell,  
Spreads its broad arms above the stony cell;  
And many a bush, with hostile thorns arrayed,  
Forbids the secret cavern to invade.

Here Black Annis "held her solitary reign, the dread and wonder of the
neighbouring plain". Shepherds attributed to her the loss of lambs, and
mothers their loss of children. According to a local writer, the
children of a past generation "who went to run on Dane Hills were
assured that Black Anna lay in wait there to snatch them away to her
'bower'."

"Oft the gaunt maid the frantic mother cursed",

sang the poet, who has left the following interesting description of the
hag:--

'T is said the soul of mortal man recoiled  
To view Black Annis' eye, so fierce and wild.  
Vast talons, foul with human flesh, there grew  
In place of hands, and features livid blue  
Glar'd in her visage; whilst the obscene waist  
Warm skins of human victims close embraced. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md)

She appears to be identical with the "Yellow Muilearteach" of Gaelic
legend:

Her face was blue black of the lustre of coal,  
And her bone-tufted tooth was like red rust.  
In her head was one deep pool-like eye  
Swifter than a star in a winter sky. <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91.md)

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

Another description of her runs:

The name of the dauntless spectre  
Was the bald-red, white-maned Muilearteach.  
Her face was dark-grey of the hue of coals,  
The teeth of her jaw were slanting red;  
There was one flabby eye in her head  
That quicker moved than lure pursuing mackerel.  
Her head bristled dark and grey,  
Like scrubwood before hoar-frost.

But the Scoto-Irish hag did not wear "warm skins of human victims".

                        Oscar caught  
The embroidered skirt that was round her body;  
They took the apple from the wretch.

She had also a "girdle" like Aphrodite. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md) In India there is a ferocious goddess, who
resembles Annis of Leicester. This is Black Kali. She is usually
depicted dancing the "dance of fertility", like the Aurignacian and
Bushman deities. Modern artists have given her normal eyes, but have
retained also the primitive forehead eye. She wears a necklace of human
or giant heads, and from her girdle dangle the hands and skins of
victims. It would appear that Kali, whose body was smeared with the
sacrificial blood, was a form of the earth-goddess; her harvest form was
Jagadgauri, the yellow woman; while as the love and fertility deity she
was the beautiful Lakshmi or Sri, she was Durga as the goddess of
war. <span id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93.md) The Greek goddess Demeter was
black at Phigalia (Chapter VIII), but the ancient black statue of her
was only a memory in the days of Pausanias. No doubt the rites
associated with her worship were abandoned when "old times had gone and
manners changed". Still the memory of Black Demeter

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

survived as the mother of Persephone, the young corn-goddess. The "Green
Demeter" was the green corn, and the "yellow Demeter" the ripened
harvest grain. As the Roman Ceres her name is perpetuated in
cereals--the gifts of the goddess. <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94.md)

The Libyan goddess Neith was depicted with a green face. Her symbols
included the "shuttle" or thunderbolt, the bow and arrows of deities of
fertility, lightning, rain, and war. In Babylonia, where the demoniac
forms of gods and goddesses were perpetuated in metrical charms and
incantations, the "Labartu" (Sumerian "Dimme") was a female demon. She
resembled the English Annis and the Scoto-Irish Muilearteach. This
primitive goddess haunted mountain and marsh, and devoured stray
children who were not protected against her by wearing magical charms
attached to neck-cords. The Egyptian Sekhet-Hathor was similarly a
destroyer. In her primitive lion-headed Sekhet form, crowned with the
solar disk and uræus serpent, she was sometimes depicted with a naked
dagger grasped tightly in her right hand, and sometimes with a magic
wand. Isis-Hathor, who personified all the goddesses of Egypt in late
times, is referred to significantly in a Philae text as follows:--

Kindly is she as Bast (the cat-goddess)  
Terrible is she as Sekhet. <span id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95.md)

The association of the Cretan mother-goddess with trees and mountains
will be dealt with more intimately in a later chapter. Here, however, it
is of interest to note that the demoniac English deity, Black Annis, was
a tree as well as a cave deity. Offerings of children were

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

probably made to her in the archæological Hunting Period, as they were
to the Irish Cromm Cruaich in the Agricultural Period in return for milk
and corn. The oak in Leicestershire was reverenced as the habitation of
the goddess. In Charnwood Forest the "copt oak" was a "trysting-place in
olden time". It was long "a place of assembly. . . . Swain motes (courts
for the common people) were held for regulation of rights and claims on
the forest." In the Highlands Gaelic-speaking people who attend a court
at the present day refer to it as a "mote". Trials were conducted at
these assemblies, and it is not surprising to find that near the
Leicestershire "swain's hill" is situated "Hangman's Stone". "Royal Oak
Day" (May 29th) is the "May Day" for Leicestershire children.

In early times the maypole, usually made of oak, was the symbol of
authority and justice, as well as of fertility. "The column of May",
suggests one writer on the subject, "was the great standard of justice
in the Ey Commons, or Fields of May. Here it was that the people, if
they saw cause, deposed or punished their governors, their barons, or
their kings." When the maypole was brought from the forest the youths
and maidens joined in singing songs, of which the chorus was: "We have
brought the Summer home". <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96.md) Scrimmages
took place between youths who were attired to represent winter and
spring. A seventeenth-century writer says that "a company of yonkers, on
May-day morning, before day, went into the country to fetch home a
maypole with drumme and trumpet, whereat the neighbouring inhabitants
were affrighted, supposing some enemies had landed to sack them. The
pole being thus brought home and set up, they began to drink healths
about it till they could not

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

stand so steady as the pole did." <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97.md)
The maypole customs and the "motes" held under oak-trees are evidently
relics of tree-worship. Probably the human representative of the Cretan
goddess, seated below her tree, dispensed justice and ushered in the
season of fertility and growth, like the May Queen.

In Scotland., where there are "motes" also, it is found that certain
"church lands" were anciently associated with magical and religious
ceremonies. <span id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98.md) Twisting paths leading
to wells and hillocks remain as "rights of way". It is of interest to
find, too, that the habit of swearing by the earth was also prevalent.
In a Gaelic story it is related that when the heroes formed a compact to
avenge insults and injuries suffered by one of their number they "lifted
a little piece of earth and shouted 'Vengeance'". They thus effected a
ceremonial connection with the Earth Mother. In Greece "the most current
formula of the public oath, when a treaty was to be ratified or an
alliance cemented, was", writes Dr. Farnell, "the invocation of Zeus,
Helios, and Ge (the Earth Mother). "And doubtless", he adds, "one of the
earliest forms of oath taken was some kind of primitive communion,
whereby both parties place themselves in sacred contact with some divine
force." <span id="fr_99"></span>[3](#fn_99.md)

Ge or Gaia was a vague and ancient deity who was sometimes identified
with the "earth snake". She was the mother of Titans, Cyclopes, and
Hecatoncheires. Similarly the Scoto-Irish hag known as "Cailleach" (old
wife), "Grey Eyebrows", "Muilearteach", &c., was

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

mother of the giants (Fomorians) who had monstrous forms, and against
whom gods and mortals waged war. A black lamb was offered to Gaia. The
Cailleach was apparently offered the "black boar", or the "green boar",
slain by the heroes of folk-tales.

As the Earth Mother was sworn by, she must have been conceived of as an
active force, capable of assuming concrete form. Rhea, Demeter, Artemis,
and other deities were probably forms or manifestations of her at
various seasons.

The Cailleach, with blue-black face and roaring mouth, appears to have
been recognized in her Muilearteach form as the spirit of tempest on sea
and land. As the mountain-spirit of the Hunting Period she moved
restlessly among the hills, followed by herds of wild animals, including
deer, goats, and swine. In her right hand she grasped a "hammer", or
"magic wand", like the gigantic Cretan goddess on her lion-supported
mountain-peak. When standing-stones were struck with the "magic wand",
they were immediately transformed into giant warriors, fully armed and
ready for battle. After throwing away this, her symbol of fertility and
authority, the Cailleach herself was transformed into a standing-stone
"looking over the sea". She was also associated with rivers and lakes
and overflowing wells.

This hag, who, according to one folk-tale, "existed from the long
eternity of the world", was not only the mother of giants but also the
ancestress of the various tribes of mankind. In Ireland she appears to
have been the earlier Danu, the mother of the Danann gods and people,
and Anu, the mountain-hag associated with "the Paps of Anu". As the "Old
Woman of Beare" she had "seven periods of youth one after another",
writes Professor Kuno Meyer, "so that every

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

man who had lived with her came to die of old age, and her grandsons and
great-grandsons were tribes and races". <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) In several stories she appears before a
hero as a repulsive hag and suddenly transforms herself into a beautiful
girl.

As the patroness of wild animals the Cailleach resembles Artemis, whom
Browning, like certain of the Greek poets, idealized and consequently
robbed of her primitive savage character.

I shed in Hell o'er my pale people peace,  
On Earth, I, caring for the creatures, guard  
Each pregnant yellow wolf and foxbitch sleek  
And every feathered mother's callow brood,  
And all that love green haunts and loneliness.

Artemis occasionally appeared in the form of a hare, a hind, or a bear.
As a goddess of the chase she might be depicted seated on the back of a
stag or standing with bow in hand beside a hill surmounted by a boar's
head. Human sacrifices appear to have been offered to her, and myths
were formed in the process of time to justify the substitution of wild
animals for girls and lads. Spartan boys were flogged and sprinkled with
blood at rites connected with Artemis worship. As a wind-goddess she
demanded the sacrifice of Agamemnon's daughter when the fleet assembled
at Aulis in Bœotia ready to sail against Troy. The Scoto-Irish Cailleach
had similarly control over the winds, as had also the hags who "brewed
breezes" on Jochgrimm mountain in Tyrol. Artemis haunted the mountains
Erymanthus and Taygetus and the banks of the River Eurotas in Laconia.
It was in Crete that she was fabled to have slain the giant Orion
because he loved her.

It will be seen that the idea of the mother-goddess

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

prevailed in ancient times from India to Ireland and throughout Egypt.
Although she was closely associated with the Mediterranean or Brown
Race, which included the Neolithic Europeans, the proto-Egyptians, the
Sumerians, Southern Persians, and Aryo-Indians, she was also a
conspicuous figure in the Late Palæolithic Period. Long before the ideal
types of her had evolved in Greece, she was a terror-inspiring
conception among the common people. In isolated areas, which were
untouched by Greek idealism, her memory was perpetuated as a repulsive
and blood-thirsty hag who terrorized the people and demanded annual dues
of human and animal victims. She was associated with the worship of
stones, trees, wild animals, wells and rivers, mountains and mounds. As
an earth-goddess she was a deity of death, destruction, fertility, and
growth; hunters preyed on her flocks and had accordingly to propitiate
her; pastoralists made offerings to her to secure the supply of grass,
and the agricultural peoples recognized her as the mother of the
corn-spirits, male and female. She reflected the culture of various
stages of human development, and she assumed the character of the
various communities who developed the ritual of her worship; she also
mirrored the natural phenomena of the different countries in which she
received recognition. Yet she was never wholly divested of her primitive
traits. As in Aurignacian times, she remained as the Mother who was the
ancestress of all and the source of good and evil, or luck and
misfortune. In Crete she was well developed before the earliest island
settlers began to carve her images on gems and seals or depict them in
frescoes. She symbolized the island and its social life and
organization. The Cretans, according to Plutarch, spoke of Crete as
their motherland and not their fatherland.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

As the mother-goddess in her various forms reflected the habits of life
and the degree of civilization attained by her worshippers, it is
possible also that the prominence given to the female principle in
religious life caused women to be held in higher esteem than among the
peoples of the god cult. Mr. J. R. Hall, in his *Ancient History in the
Far East*, referring to the social status of the women in Crete, says
that "it is certain they must have lived on a footing of greater
equality with men than in any other ancient civilization. . . . We see
in the frescoes of Knossos conclusive indications of an open and free
association of men and women, corresponding to our idea of 'Society', at
the Minoan Court, unparalleled till our own day." Cæsar remarked on the
matriarchal conditions which prevailed in certain parts of ancient
Britain. Among the Scottish Picts descent was reckoned by the female
line, as in the royal families of Egypt and southern European states. It
is possible that in Aurignacian times the women of the tribes similarly
exercised considerable influence. They appear to have been prominent in
the performance of magical and religious rites. Indeed, it is the
opinion of some anthropologists, like Bachofen, that women exercised a
greater influence than men in developing primitive religious ideas.
"Wherever", he comments "gynæocracy meets us, the mystery of religion is
bound up with it, and lends to motherhood an incorporation of some
divinity." <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md) The evidence gleaned
from certain folktales suggests that women trained young huntsmen and
warriors to perform feats of strength and skill. When the Irish
Cuchullin visited Alban, to complete his military education, he was
tested by an Amazon. Brynhild, of Iceland fame, like Brunhild of the
*Nibelungenlied*, overcame many warriors ere she was won.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

The comparative evidence dealt with in this chapter emphasizes the fact
that in dealing with the Cretan and pre-Hellenic deities account must be
taken of the primitive modes of thought which are traceable n the
accumulated myths and legends attached to them. In the process of
myth-making many influences were at work. Historical happenings had to
be dealt with as well as the experiences of everyday life in a new
environment. The growth of civilization changed the character of
religious beliefs also. When old savage practices were abandoned, myths
were framed to justify innovations, as when, for instance, the innocent
girl Iphigenia was to be sacrificed to Artemis but was substituted by a
stag. It was related that the goddess carried her off in a cloud and
decided that she should become a priestess. The practice of offering up
strangers in sacrifice obtained probably when a community began to abhor
the idea of offering up one of its own members.

In the next chapter it will be shown how the study of ancient myths has
led to the discovery of those traces of ancient civilization in Crete
and the Ægean which has made it possible to reconstruct two thousand
years of pre-Hellenic civilization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[52:1](moc08.htm#fr_77.md) *Malta and the
Mediterranean Race*, R. N. Bradley, pp. 72 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[53:1](moc08.htm#fr_78.md) *History of Civilization
in Palestine*, pp. 9 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[54:1](moc08.htm#fr_79.md) *The Races of Europe*,
pp. 172 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[54:2](moc08.htm#fr_80.md) *Archiv für
Anthropologie*, Band 351 St. 239 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[56:1](moc08.htm#fr_81.md) For earlier traces of
Palæolithic man see *The Stone Ages in North Britain and Ireland*, by
Rev. Frederick Smith (London & Glasgow, 1909). Dr. A. H. Keane calls the
author the "Boucher de Perthes of Scotland".

<span id="fn_82"></span>[56:2](moc08.htm#fr_82.md) Huxley & Laing's
*Prehistoric Remains in Caithness* (London, 1886).

<span id="fn_83"></span>[57:1](moc08.htm#fr_83.md) A cave-dweller in a
Fingalian story is called Ciofach Mac a' Ghoill ("Ciofach, son of the
stranger"). Another version refers to him as Ciuthach (pronounce
"Kew'-ach"). Dealing with the legend of the Ciuthach, Professor W. J.
Watson considers that he was a hero "of a different race from the Gael"
(Celtic Review, January, 1914).

<span id="fn_84"></span>[57:2](moc08.htm#fr_84.md) *Prehistoric Britain*,
p. 234. (London, 1914 ).

<span id="fn_85"></span>[58:1](moc08.htm#fr_85.md) *The Ancient Egyptians*,
p. 58.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[61:1](moc08.htm#fr_86.md) *Celtic Myth and
Legend*, p. 39.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[62:1](moc08.htm#fr_87.md) *Celtic Myth and
Legend*, pp. 252 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[62:2](moc08.htm#fr_88.md) "Kaer" and "Chester"
signify cities. London was "Kaer-lud", called after the god Lud, whose
name lingers also in "Ludgate".

<span id="fn_89"></span>[62:3](moc08.htm#fr_89.md) It is suggested that
"Dane" is a corruption of the Celtic "Danann".

<span id="fn_90"></span>[63:1](moc08.htm#fr_90.md) *County Folk-lore*
(Leicestershire and Rutland), by C. J. Billson, Vol. I., London, 1895
(Folk-lore Society's Publications).

<span id="fn_91"></span>[63:2](moc08.htm#fr_91.md) Campbell's *West
Highland Tales*, Vol. III, p. 138.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[64:1](moc08.htm#fr_92.md) *Waifs and Strays of
Celtic Tradition*, Vol. IV, pp. 142 et seq. (London, 1891).

<span id="fn_93"></span>[64:2](moc08.htm#fr_93.md) *Indian Myth and
Legend*, pp. xl. and 149-50.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[65:1](moc08.htm#fr_94.md) *Golden Bough* ("Spirits
of the Corn and the Wild"), Vol. I, pp. 35 *et seq*. (third edition).

<span id="fn_95"></span>[65:2](moc08.htm#fr_95.md) *Religion of the Ancient
Egyptians*, A. Wiedemann, p. 138 (London, 1897).

<span id="fn_96"></span>[66:1](moc08.htm#fr_96.md) Quoted in *County
Folk-lore*, Vol. I, pp. 29 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[67:1](moc08.htm#fr_97.md) Brand's Antiquities,
Vol. I, pp. 238 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[67:2](moc08.htm#fr_98.md) According to Caesar, the
Druids of Gaul held sessions at consecrated places of meeting which,
from other sources, we learn were called *nemeta*. In old Irish the term
appears as *nemed*, and in modern Scottish Gaelic it is *neimhidh*,
which signifies "church land". The English rendering is *Navity* or
*Nevity*.--Professor W. J. Watson in *Celtic Review* (1915), Vol. X, pp.
263 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[67:3](moc08.htm#fr_99.md) *Cults of the Greek
States*, Vol. III, p. 5.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[69:1](moc08.htm#fr_100.md) *Ancient Irish
Poetry*, p. 88.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[71:1](moc08.htm#fr_101.md) *Das Mutterrecht*, p.
xv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. History in Myth and Legend--Schliemann's
Discoveries](moc09.md)
