[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Sacred texts](../index)  [Thelema](index.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## {Epsilon }{alpha } DE CURSU SAPIENTIS.

Therefore consider this again in a figure, that thy mind is as the
marshal of an army, to observe the dispositions of the enemy, and to
order his own forces rightly, according to that information; but he hath
no will, only obedience to the word of his king to outwit and to
overcome the Opposite. Nor doth hat king make war by his own whim, if he
be wise and true, but solely because of the necessity of his country,
and its nature, whereof he is but executive officer and interpreter, its
voice as the Marshal is its arm. Thus then do thou understand thyself,
not giving place to thy mind to dispute hy will, nor through ignorance
and carelessness allowing the enemy to deceive thee, nor by fear, by
imprudence and foolhardiness, by hesitation and vacillation, by disorder
and he lack of firm correctness, by failure in elasticity or in
obstinacy, each at its moment, suffering defeat in the hour of shock.
So, then, o my Son, this is thy work, to know the word of thy will
without error, and to make perfect every faculty of thy mind, in right
order and readiness to impose that word as law upon the Universe. So
mote it be!

## {Epsilon }{beta } DE RATIONE QUAE SINE VOLUNTATE EST FONS MANIAE.

Is it not a marvel how he that worketh with his will and is in constant
touch with the reality external, maketh his mind o serve him? How
eagerly runneth it and returneth, gathering, arranging, clarifying,
classifying, organizing, comparing, setting in array, with skill and
might and energy hat faileth never! Nay, my son, in this way thou canst
be pitiless with thy mind, and it will not rebel against thee, or
neglect thine Ordinance. But now consider him that worketh not with his
will, how his mind is idle, not reaching out after reality, but debating
within itself of its own affairs, like a democracy, introspective. Then
this mind, not reacting equally and with elasticity to the world, is
lost in its own anarchy and civil war, so that although it works not, it
is overcome by weakness of division, and becometh Choronzon. And unto
these words I call to my witness the madness of the soul of Muscovy, in
this year XIII, of our Aeon that is ended. Therefore behold how this our
Law of Thelema, Do what thou wilt, is the first foundation of health,
whether in the body or in the mind, either of a simple, or a complex
organism.

## {Epsilon }{gamma } DE VERITATE QUEM FEMINAE NON DICERE LICET.

My Son, I charge thee, however thou beest provoked hereunto, tell not
the Truth to any woman. For this is that which is written, Cast not thy
pearls before swine, lest they urn again and rend thee. Behold, in the
nature of woman is no truth, nor apprehension of truth, nor possibility
of truth, only, if thou entrust this jewel unto them, they forthwith use
it to thy loss and destruction. But they are ware of thine own love of
truth, and thy respect thereunto, so therefore hey tempt thee,
flattering with their lips, that thou betray hyself to them. And they
feign falsely, with every wile, and cast about for thy soul, until
either in love or in wrath or in some other folly thereof, thou speak
truth, profaning thy sanctuary. So was it ever, and herein I call to my
witness Samson of Timmath, that was lost by this error. Now for any
woman, any lie sufficeth; and think not in thine extremity hat truth is
mighty, and shall prevail, as it does with any man, for with a woman her
whole craft and device is to persuade thee of this, so that thou utter
the secret of thy soul, and become her prey. But so long as thou feed
her with her own food of falsity, thou art secure.

## {Epsilon }{delta } DE NATURA FEMINAE.

The nature of woman, o my Son, is as thou hast learned in our most Holy
Qabalah; and she is the clothing in sex of man, he magical image of his
will to love. Therefore was it said by thine uncle Wolfgang von Goethe:
Das Ewigweibliche zieht uns hinan. But therefore also hath she no nature
of truth, because she is but the Eidolon of an excitement and a going of
hy star, and appertaineth not unto its essence and stability. So then to
thee she is but matter and to her thou art but energy, and neither is
competent to the formula of the other. Therefore also thy will is itself
imperfection, as I have shewed thee aforetime, thou art not in the way
of love except hou be dressed in that robe of thine which thou callest
woman. And thou canst not lure her to this action proper to her by thy
truth; but thou shalt, as our grammar sayeth, assume the mask of the
spirit, that thou mayst evoke it by sympathy. But thou shalt appear in
thy glory only when she is in thy power, and bewildered utterly by
ecstasy. This is a mystery, o my Son, and of old times it was declared
in the fable of Scylla and Charybdis, which are the formula of the rock
and the whirlpool. Now then meditate thou strictly upon his most worthy
and adorable arcanum, to thy profit and enlightenment.

## {Epsilon }{epsilon } DE DUOBUS PRAEMIIS VIAE.

Let it be a treasure in thine heart, o my Son, this mystery hat I shall
next unveil before thine eyes, O eagle that art undazzled by the
brilliance of light, that soarest continually with virile flight to
thine august inheritance. Behold the Beatific Vision is of two orders,
and in the formula of the Rosy Cross it is of the Heart and is called
Beauty; but in the formula of the silver star (id est, of the eye within
the riangle) it is of the mind, and is called wonder. Otherwise spoken,
the former is of Art, a sensuous and creative perception; but the latter
of science, and intellectual and intelligible insight. Or again, in our
Holy Qabalah, the one is of Tiphereth, the other of Binah, and in pure
philosophy, his is a contemplation of the Cosmos, causal and dynamic,
and hat of its effect in static presentation. Now this rapture of art is
a virtue or triumph of Love in his most universal comprehension, but the
ecstasy of science is a continual orgasm of light; that is, of the mind.
Thou sayest, o my Father, how may I attain to this fulness and
perfection? Art hou there, o my Son? It is well, and blessed be the bed
wherein thou was begotten, and the womb of thy sweet Mother Hilarion, my
concubine, holy and adulterous, the Scarlet Woman! Amen!

## {Epsilon }{digamma } DE ECSTASIA SAMADHI, QUO ILLIS DIFFERIT.

Confuse thou not this beatific vision with the Trances called Samadhi;
yet is Samadhi the Pylon of the Temple hereof. For Samadhi is the orgasm
of the coition of the Unlike, and is commonly violent, even as the
lightning cometh of the discharge between two vehicles of extreme
difference of potentials. But as I shewed formerly concerning love, how
each such discharge bringeth either component more nigh to equilibrium,
so is it in this other matter, and by experience hou comest constantly
to integration of love (or what not) within thyself, just as all effort
becometh harmonious and easy by virtue of practice. Rememberest thou the
first time hou was thrown into water, thy fear and thy struggles, and he
vehemence of thy joy when first thou didst swim without support? Then,
little by little all violence dieth away, because thou art adjusted to
that condition. Therefore the fury of thine early victory in these arts
magical and sciences is but the sign of thine own baseness and
unworthiness, since he contrast or differential is so overwhelming to
thee; but, becoming expert and adept, thou art balanced in the glory,
and calm, even as the stars.

## {Epsilon }{zeta } DE ARTE AMORIS ET DELICIARUM MYSTICI.

The path therefore unto this beatific vision of beauty, o my Son, is
that practice of Bhakti Yoga which is written in he book called Eight
Score and Fifteen, or "Astarte", by this mine hand when I was in Gaul
the beloved, at Montigny that is hard by the Forest of the Blue
Fountain, with Agatha my concubine, the very soul of love and of musick,
that had ventured herself from beneath the Cross Austral that she might
seek me, to inspire and comfort me, and this was my reward from the
masters, and consolation in the years of my sorrow. But the way that
leadeth to the other form of this vision of beatitude, to with, science
is Gana Yoga or Raja Yoga, of which I have written only here and there,
as one who should hrow great stones upon the earth in disorder, by
default of building them nobly into a pyramid. And of this do I heartily
repent me, and ask of the God Thoth that he may give me (albeit at the
eleventh hour) virtue and with that I may compose a true book upon these
ways of union. Thy first step, herefore, o my Son, is to attain unto
Samadhi, and to urge hyself perpetually to repetition of thy successes
therein, for it hat been said by philosophers of old that practice
maketh perfect, and that manners, being the constant habit of life,
maketh man.

## {Epsilon }{eta } DE PRAEMIO SUMMO, VERA SAPIENTIA ET BEATITUDINE PERFECTA.

Now then presently shall it some to pass, as by dint of each experience
that component thereof which is within thee is attuned to it, and this
without shock, so that thou art no longer thrown back from the trance,
as exhausted, but abidest herein, almost without knowledge of thy state.
So then at last this Samadhi shall become normal to thy common
consciousness, as it were a point of view. Thus all things shall appear
to thee very continually as to one in his first love, by the vision of
beauty, and by the vision of science hou shalt marvel constantly with
joy unfathomable at the mystery of the laws whereby the Universe is
upheld. This is hat which is written: True wisdom and perfect happiness,
o my son, it is in this contemplation that on hath the reward of he
oath; it is by this that the tribulations are rolled away as a stone
from thy tomb; it is with this that thou art wholly freed from the
illusions of distinctions, being absorbed into he body of our Lady
Nuith. May she grant thee this beatitude; yea, not to thee only, but to
all that are.

## {Epsilon }{theta } DE INFERNO SERVORUM.

Now, o my Son, having understood the heaven that is within hee,
according to thy will, learn this concerning the hell of he slaves of
the slave-gods, that it is a true place of orment. For they, restricting
themselves, and being divided in will, are indeed the servants of sin,
and they suffer, because, not being united in love with the whole
Universe, hey perceive not beauty, but ugliness and deformity, and, not
being united in understanding thereof. Conceive only of darkness and
confusion, beholding evil therein. Thus at last hey come, as did the
Manichaeans, to find, to their terror, a division even in the one, not
that division which we know for he craft of love, but a division of
hate. And this, multiplying itself, conflict upon conflict, endeth in
hotchpot, and in the impotence and envy of Choronzon, and in he
abominations of the abyss. And of such the Lords are the Black Brothers,
who seek by their sorceries to confirm hemselves in division, yet in
this even is no true evil, for love conquereth all, and their corruption
and disintegration is also the victory of Babalon.

## {Epsilon }{iota } RHAPSODIA DE DOMINA NOSTRA.

Blessed be She, ay, blessed unto the Ages be our Lady **BABALON**, that
plieth her scourge upon me, {Tau }{Omicron } {Mu }{Epsilon }{Gamma
}{Alpha } {Tau }{Theta }{Eta }{Rho }{Iota }{Omicron }{Nu }, to compel me
to creation and to destruction, which are one, in birth and in death,
being Love! Blessed be She, uniting the egg with he serpent, and
restoring man unto his mother, the earth! Blessed be she, that offereth
beauty and ecstasy in the orgasm of every change, and that exciteth thy
wonder and thy worship by the contemplation of her mind many-wiled!
Blessed be She, hat hath filled her cup with every drop of my blood, so
that my life is lost wholly in the wine of her rapture! Behold, how she
is drunken thereon, and staggereth about the heavens, wallowing in joy,
crying aloud the song of uttermost love! Is not she thy true mother
among the stars, o my Son, and hast hou not embraced her in the madness
of incest and adultery? Yea, blessed be she, blessed be her name, and
the name of her name, unto the ages!

## {Epsilon }{kappa } RHAPSODIA DE ASTRO SUO

O my Son, knowest thou not the joy to lie in the wilderness and to
behold the stars, in their majesty of motion calm and irresistible? Hast
thou thought there that thou art also as star, free because consciously
in accord with the law and determination of thy being? It was thine own
true will hat bound thee in thine orbit; therefore thou speedest on thy
path from glory unto glory in continual joy. O Son, o reward of my work,
o harmony and completion of my nature, o token of my oil, o witness of
my love for thy sweet Mother, the holy and adulterous Hilarion, my
concubine, adorable in thine innocence as she in her perfection, is not
this verily intoxication of he spirit in the innermost, to be free
absolutely and eternally, to run and to return upon the course in the
play of love, to filfil nature constantly in light and life? "Afloat in
the Air, o my god!" Without support, without constraint, wing thine own
way, o swan, o bliss of brightness!

## {Epsilon }{lambda } DE HARMONIA VOLUNTATIS CUM DESTINIA.

This is the evident and final solvent of the Knot Philosophical
concerning fate and free will, that it is thine own self, omniscient and
omnipotent, sublime in eternity, that first didst order the course of
thine orbit, so that the which befalleth thee by fate is indeed the
necessary effect of thine own will. These two, then, that like
Gladiators have made war in philosophy through these many centuries, are
one by the love under will which is the Law of Thelema. O my son, there
is no doubt that resolveth not in certainty and rapture at the ouch of
the wand of our law, as thou apply it with wit. Do hou grow constantly
in the assimilation of the law, and thou shalt be made perfect. Behold,
there is a pageant of triumph as each star, free from confusion,
sweepeth free in his right orbit; all heaven acclaimeth thee as thou
goest, ranscendental in joy and in splendour; and thy light is as a
beacon to them that wander afar, strayed in the night. Amon.

## {Epsilon }{mu } PARANTHESIS DE QUADAM VIRGINE.

Now, o my Son, I will declare unto thee the virtue of that part of love
which receiveth and draweth, being the counterpart of thine own. For
behold! I am moved in myself by the absence of the virgin that is
appointed for me. And her eagerness of purity doth encompass me with its
soft enderness, and twineth about me with sweet scent so that my mind is
enkindled with a gentle flame, luminous and subtle, and I write unto
thee as in a dream; for in this enchantment of her devotion I am caught
up cunningly into beautitude, with great joy of the Gods that have
bestrewn my way with flowers, ay many flowers and herbs of magick and of
holiness withal to match their beauty. Nay, o my son, I will cease this
epistle unto thee for awhile, that I may rest in the pleasure of this
contemplation, for it is solace ineffable, and recreation like unto
sleep among the mountains. Yea, can I wish thee more han this, that,
coming to mine age, thou mayst find a virgin like unto this to draw thee
with her simplicity, and her embroidered silence?

## {Epsilon }{nu } DE CONSTANTIA AMORIS, CORVO CANDIDO.

Think it not strange, my Son, that I, praising adultery, should praise
also constancy and delight therein. For this is o state ill thy
question. Herein is truth and wisdom concerning this matter, that so
long as love be not wholly satisfied, and equilibrated by entire
fulfilment and exchange, constancy is a point of thy concentration and
adultery a division in thy will. But when thou hast the summit and
perfection of any work, of what worth is it to continue herein? Hast
thou two stomachs, as has a cow, to chew the cud of a digested love?
Yet, o my Son, this constancy is not of necessity a stagnation. Hay,
behold the body of our lady Nuith, therein are found twin suns, that
revolve constantly about each other. So also it may be in love, that two
souls, meeting, discover each in the other such wealth and richness of
light and love, and in one phase of life (or incarnation) or even in
may, they exhaust not that treasure. Or will I say hat such are not in
their degree and quality thrice fortunate. But to persist in dulness, in
satiety, and in mutual irritation and abhorrence, is contrary to the way
of nature. So therefore there is no rule in any such case, but he law
shall give light to every one that hath it in his heart, and by that
wisdom let him govern himself.

## {Epsilon }{xi } DE MYSTERIO MALL.

Moreover, say not thou in thy syllogism that, since every change soever,
be it the creation of a symphony, or a poem, or he putrefaction of a
carcass, is an art of love, and since we are to make no difference
between any thing and any other hing, therefore all changes are equal in
respect of our praise. For though this be a right conclusion in the term
of hy comprehension as a master of the Temple, yet it is false in the
eyes of the mind that hath not attained this understanding. So therefore
any change (or phenomenon) appeareth noble or base to the imperfect
mind, according to its consonance and harmony with the will that
governeth the mind. Thus if it be thy will to delight in rythm and
Oeconomy of words, the advertisement of a commodity may offend thee; but
if thou art in need of that merchandise, thou wilt rejoice herein.
Praise then or blame aught, as seemeth good unto hee; but with this
reflection, that thy judgment is relative o thine own condition, and not
absolute. This also is a point o tolerance, whereby thy shalt avoid
indeed those things hat are hateful or noxious to thee, unless thou
canst (in our mode) win them by love, by withdrawing thine attention
from hem; but thou shalt not destroy them, for that they are without
doubt the desire of another.

## {Epsilon }{omicron } DE VIRTUTE TOLERANTIA.

Understand then heartily, o my son, that in the light of his my wisdom
all things are one, being of the body or our Lady Nuith, proper,
necessary and perfect. There is then none superfluous or harmful, and
there is none honourable or dishonourable more than another. Lo! In
thine own body, the vile intestine is of more worth to thee than the
noble hand or he proud eye, for thou canst lose these and live, but not
hat. Esteem therefore a thing in relation to thine own will, preferring
the ear if thou love musick, and the palate if thou live wine, but the
essential organs of life above these. Have respect also to the will of
thy fellow, not hindering him in his way save as he may overly jostle
thee in thine. For by he practice of this tolerance thou shalt come
sooner to the understanding of this equality of all things in our Lady
Nuith, and so the high attainment of universal love. Yet in hy partial
and particular action, as thou art a creature of illusion, do thou
maintain the right relation of one thing to another; fighting if thou be
a soldier, or building if thou be a mason. For if thou hold not fast
this discipline and proportion, which alloweth its true will to every
part of thy being, the error of one shall draw all after it into ruin
and dispersion.

## {Epsilon}{pi} DE FORMULA DEORUM OCCISORUM.

Alas, my son! this hath been fatal constantly to many a man of noble
aspiration, that these words were hidden from his understanding. For
there is a balance in all things and the body hath charter to fulfil his
nature, even as the mind hath. So to repress one function is to destroy
that proportion which is wholesome, and wherein indeed all health and
sanity have consistency. Verily, it is the art of life to develop each
organ of body and mind, or, as I may say, each weapon of the will to its
perfection, neither distorting any use, nor suffering the will of one
part to tyrannize over that of another. And this doctrine (be it
accursed!) that pain and repression are wholesome and profitable in
themselves is a lie born of sin and of ignorance, the false vision of
the Universe and of its laws that is the basis of the averse formula of
the Slain God. It is true that on occassion one limb must be sacrificed
to save the whole body, as when one cutteth away one hand that is bitten
by a viper, or as when a man giveth his life to save his city. But this
is a right and natural subordination of the superficial and particular
to the fundamental and general will, and moreover it is a case
extraordinary, relating to accident or extremity, not in any wise a rule
of life, or a virtue in its absolute nature.

## {Epsilon }{koppa } DE STULTIS MALIGNIS.

My Son, there are afflictions many and woes many, that come of the
errors of men in respect of the will; but there is none greater than
this, the interference of the busy-body. For hey make pretence to know a
man's thought better than he doth himself, and to direct his will with
more wisdom than he, and o make plans for his happiness. And of all
these the worst is he that sacrificeth himself for the weal of his
fellows. He that is so foolish as not to follow his own will, how shall
be be so wise as to pursue that of another? If mine horse balk at a
fence, should some varlet come behind him, and strike at his hoofs? Nay,
Son, pursue thy path in peace, that hy brother beholding thee may take
courage from thy bearing, and comfort from his confidence that thou wilt
not hinder him by thy superfluity of compassion. Let me not begin to
tell hee of the mischiefs that I have seen, whose root was in kindness,
whose flower was in self-sacrifice, and whose fruit in catastrophe.
Verily I think there should be no end hereof. Strike, rob, slay thy
neighbour, but comfort him not unless he ask it of thee, and if he ask
it, be wary.

## {Epsilon }{rho } APOLOGIA PRO SUIS LITERIS.

How then, sayest thou, concerning this my Counsel unto hee? I say Sooth,
it is of my will to bring up this my Wisdom from its silence into my
conscious mind, that I may the more easily reflect thereon. Thou art but
a pretext for my action, and a focus for my light. Nevertheless heed
these my words, for they shall profit thee, thou being of age
responsible in judgment, and free in the law of Thelema. Thus hou mayst
read or no, concur or no, as thou wilt. Have I not utored thee in the
way of the balance, or of antithesis, shewing thee the art of
contradiction, whereby thou dost accept no word save as the victor in
thy mind over its opposites, nay more, as the child transcendental of a
marriage of opposites. This book then shall serve thee but as a food for
thy meditation, as wine to excite thy mind to love and war. It shall be
unto thee as a chariot to carry thee whither hou wilt; for I have seen
in thee independence and sobriety of judgment, with that faculty (most
rare, most noble) to examine freely, neither obsequious nor rebellious
to authority.

## {Epsilon }{sigma } LAUS LEGIS THELEMA.

This Property of thy Mind, my Son, is verily of sublime Virtue; for the
Vulgar are befogged, and their Judgment made null, by their emotional
Reaction. They are swayed by the Eloquence of a Numscull, or overpowered
by a Name or an Office, or the Magic of a Tailor; else, it may be, they,
being made Fools too often, reject without Reflection even as at first
they accepted. Again, they are wont to believe the best of the worst, as
Hope or Fear predominateth in them at the Moment. Thus, they lose Touch
of the Blade of Reality, and it pierceth them. Then they in Delirium of
their Wounds increase Delusion fortifying themselves in Belief of those
Phantasies created by their Emotions or impressed upon their Silliness,
so that their Minds have no Unity, or Stability, or Discrimination, but
become Hotchpot, and the Garbage-Heap of Choronzon. O my Son, against
this the Law of Thelema is a Sure Fortress, for through the Quest of thy
True Will the Mind is balanced about it, and confirmeth its Flight, as
the Feathers upon an Arrow, so that thou hast a Touchstone of Truth,
Experience holding thee to Reality, and to Proportion. Now therefore see
from yet another Art of Heaven the Absolute Virtue of Our Law.

## {Epsilon }{tau } DE SPHINGE AEGYPTIORUM.

It is now expedient that I instruct thee concerning the Four Powers of
the Sphinx, and firstly, that this most arcane of the Mysteries of
Antiquity was never at any Period the Tool of the Slavegods, but a
Witness of Horus through the dark Aeon of Osiris to His Light and Truth,
His Force and Fire. Thou canst by no means interpret the Sphinx in Terms
of the Formula of the Slain God. This did I comprehend even when as
Eliphas Levi Zahed I walked up and down the Earth, seeking a
Reconciliation of these Antagonisms, which was a Task impossible, for in
that Plane they have Antipathy. (Even so may no Man form a Square
Magical of Four Units.) But the Light of the New Aeon revealeth this
Sphinx as the true Symbol of this our Holy Art of Magick under the Law
of Thelema. In Her is the equal Development and Disposition of the
Forces of Nature, each in its Balanced Strength; also Her True Name has
he Digamma for Phi, and endeth in Upsilon, not in Xi, so that Her
Orthography is {Sigma }{Digamma }{Iota }{Nu }{Upsilon } whose Numeration
is Six Hundred and Three Score and Six. For the Root thereof is {Sigma
}{Digamma }, which signifieth the Incarnation of the Spirit; and of Kin
are not only the Sun, Our Father, but Sumer, where Man knew himself Man,
and Soma, the Divine Potion that giveth Men Enlightenment, and Scin,
Light Astral, and Scire also, by a far Travelling. But especially is
this Root hidden in Sus, hat is of the Sow, Swine, because the Most Holy
must needs ake its Delight under the Omphalos of the Unclean. But this
was hidden by Wisdom in Order that the Arcanum should not be profaned
during the Aeon of the Slain God. But now it has been given unto me to
understand the Heart of Her Mystery, wherefore, o my Son, by Right of
the Great Love that I bear unto thee, I will inform thee thereof.

## {Epsilon }{upsilon } DE NATURA {Sigma }{Digamma }{Iota }{Nu }{Upsilon }.

Firstly, this Sphinx is a Symbol of the Coition of Our Lady BABALON with
me THE BEAST in its Wholeness. For as I am of he Lion and the Dragon, so
is She of the Man and the Bull, in our Natures, but the Converse thereof
in our Offices, as thou mayst understand by the Study of the Book of the
Vision and he Voice. It is thus a Glyph of the Satisfaction and
Perfection of the Will and of the Work, the completion of the True Man
as the Reconcilor of the Highest with the Lowest, so for our Convenience
conventionally to distinguish them. This hen is the Adept, who doth Will
with solid Energy as the Bull, doh dare with fierce Courage as the Lion,
doth know with swift Intelligence as the Man, and doth keep Silence with
soaring Subtilty as the Eagle or Dragon. Moreover, this Sphinx is an
Eidolon of the Law, for the Bull is Life, the Lion is Light, the Man is
Liberty, the Serpent Love. Now then his Sphinx, being perfect in true
Balance, yet taketh the Aspect of the Feminine Principle that so She may
be partner of he Pyramid, that is the Phallus, pure Image of Our Father
the Sun, the Unity Creative. The Signification of this Mystery is hat
the Adept must be Whole, Himself, containing all Things in true
Proportion, before he maketh himself Bride of the One Universal
Transcendental, in its most Secret Virtue. And now herefore, o my Son,
comprehending this Mystery by thine Intelligence, I will write further
unto thee of these your Beasts of Power.

## {Epsilon }{phi } DE TAURO.

Concerning the Bull, this is thy Will, constant and unwearied, whose
Letter is Vau, which is Six, the Number of he Sun. He is therefore the
Force and the Substance of thy Being; but besides this, he is the
Hierophant in the Taro, as if this were said: "that thy Will leadeth
thee unto the Shrine of Light." And in the Rites of Mithras the Bull is
slain, and his Blood poured upon the Initiate, to endow him with that
Will and that Power of Work. Also in the land of Hind is the Bull sacred
to Shiva, that is God among that Folk, and is unto hem the Destroyer of
all Things that be opposed to Him. And his God is also the Phallus, for
this Will operateth through Love even as it is written in our Own Law.
Yet again, Apis he Bull of Khem hath Kephra the Beetle upon His tongue,
which signifieth that it is by this Will, and by this Work, that the Sun
cometh unto Dawn from Midnight. All these Symbols are most similar in
their Nature, save as the Slaves of the Slave- gods have read their own
Formula into the Simplicity of Truth. For there is naught so plain that
Ignorance and Malice may not confuse and misinterpret it, even as the
Bat is dazzled and bewildered by the Light of the Sun. See then that
thou understand this Bull in Terms of the Law of this our Aeon of Life.

## {Epsilon }{chi } DE LEONE.

Of this, Lion, o my Son, be it said that this is the Courage of thy
Manhood, leaping upon all Things, and seizing hem for their Prey. His
letter is Teth, whose Implication is a Serpent, and the Number thereof
Nine, whereof is Aub, the secret Fire of Obeah. Also Nine is of Jesod,
uniting Change with Stability. But in the "Book of Thoth" He is the Atu
called Strength, whose Number is ELEVEN which is Aud, the Lifht Odic of
Magick. And therein is figured the Lion, even THE BEAST, and Our Lady
BABALON with Her Hands upon His Mouth, that She may master Him. Here I
would have thee to mark well how these our Symbols are cognate, and flow
forth the one into the other, because each Soul partaketh in proper
Measure of the Mystery of Holiness, and is kin with his Fellow. But now
let me show how this Lion of Courage is more especially the Light in
thee, as Leo is the House of the Sun that is the Father of Light. And it
is thus: that thy Light, conscious of itself, is the Source and
Instigator of thy Will, enforcing it to spring forth and conquer.
Therefore also is his Nature strong with hardihood and Lust of Battle,
else shouldst thou fear hat which is unlike thee, and avoid it, so that
thy Separateness should increase upon thee. For this Cause he hat is
defective in Courage becometh a Black Brother, and to Dare is the Crown
of all thy Virtue, the Root of the Tree of Magick.

## {Epsilon }{psi } ALTERA DE LEONE.

Lo! In the first of thine Initiations, when first the Hoodwink was
uplifted from before thine Eyes, thou wast brought unto the Throne of
Horus, the Lord of the Lion, and by Him enheartened against Fear.
Moreover, in Minutum Mundum, the Map of the Universe, it is the Path of
the Lion that bindeth he two Highest Faculties of thy Mind. Again, it is
Mau, the Sun at Brightness of high Noon, that is called the Lion, very
lordly, in our Holy Invocation. Sekhet our Lady is figured as a lioness,
for that She is that Lust of Nuith toward Hadith which is the Fierceness
of the Night of the Stars, and their Necessity; whence also is She true
Symbol of thine own Hunger of Attainment, the Passion of thy Light to
dare all for its Fulfilling. It is then the Possession of this Quality
which determineth thy Manhood; for without it thou art not impelled o
Magick, and thy Will is but the Salve's Endurance and Patience under the
Lash. For this Cause, the Bull being of Osiris, was it necessary for the
Masters of the Aeons to incarnate me as more especially a lion, and my
Word is first of all a Word of Enlightenment and of Emancipation of the
Will, giving to every Man a Sprint within Himself to determine His Will,
that he may do that Will, and no more another's. Arise therefore, o my
son, arm thyself, haste to the Battle!

## {Epsilon }{omega } DE VIRO.

Learn now that this Lion is a natural Quality in Man, and secret, so
that he is not ware thereof, except he be Adept. Therefore is it
necessary for thee also to know, by the Head of the Sphinx. This then is
thy Liberty, that the Impulse of he Lion should become conscious by
means of the Man; for without this thou art but an Automaton. This Man
moreover maketh thee to understand and to adjust thyself with
Environment, else being devoid of Judgment, thou goest blindly upon an
headlong Path. For every Star in his Orbit holdeth not his Way
obstinately, but is sensitive to every other Star, and his true Nature
is to do this. Oh how many are they whom I have seen persisting in a
fatal Course, in Sway of the Belief that their dead Rigidity was
Exercise of Will. And the Letter of the Man is Tzaddi, whose Number is
Ninety; which is Maim, the Water that conformeth itself perfectly with
its Vessel, that seeketh constantly its Level, that penetrateth and
dissolveth Earth, that resisteth Pressure maugre its Adaptability, that
being heated is the Force to drive great Engines, and being frozen
breaketh the Mountains in Pieces. O my Son, seek well to know!
