[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Sacred texts](../index)  [Thelema](index.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright (c) Ordo Templi Orientis

**0.**

0\. Behold the Yoke upon the neck of the Oxen! Is it not thereby that
the Field shall be ploughed? The Yoke is heavy, but joineth together
them that are separate --- Glory to Nuit and to Hadit, and to Him that
hath given us the Symbol of the Rosy Cross!

Glory unto the Lord of the Word Abrahadabra, and Glory unto Him that
hath given us the Symbol of the Ankh, and of the Cross within the
Circle!

1\. Three are the Beasts wherewith thou must plough the Field; the
Unicorn, the Horse, and the Ox. And these shalt thou yoke in a triple
yoke that is governed by One Whip.

2\. Now these Beasts run wildly upon the earths and are not easily
obedient to the Man.

3\. Nothing shall be said here of Cerberus, the great Beast of Hell that
is every one of these and all of these, even as Athanasius hath
foreshadowed. For this matter [**1**](#1.md) is not of Tiphereth without,
but Tiphereth within.

**I.**

0\. The Unicorn is speech. Man, rule thy Speech! How else shalt thou
master the Son, and answer the Magician at the right hand gateway of the
Crown?

1\. Here are practices. Each may last for a week or more.

2\. (a) Avoid using some common word, such as "and" or "the" or "but";
use a paraphrase.

\(b\) Avoid using some letter of the alphabet, such as "t", or "s". or
"m"; use a paraphrase.

\(c\) Avoid using the pronouns and adjectives of the first person; use a
paraphrase.

Of thine own ingenium devise others.

2\. On each occasion that thou art betrayed into saying that thou art
sworn to avoid, cut thyself sharply upon the writs or forearm with a
razor; even as thou shouldst beat a disobedient dog. Feareth not the
Unicorn the claws and teeth of the Lion?

3\. Thine arm then serveth thee both for a warning and for a record.
Thou shalt write down thy daily progress in these practices, until thou
art perfectly vigilant at all times over the least word that slippeth
from thy tongue.

Thus bind thyself, and thou shalt be for ever free.

**II.**

0\. The Horse is Action. Man, rule thine Action. How else shalt thou
master the Father, and answer the Fool at the Left Hand Gateway of the
Crown?

1\. Here are practices. Each may last for a week, or more.  
(a) Avoiding lifting the left arm above the waist.  
(b) Avoid crossing the legs.  
Of thine own ingenium devise others.  
  
2. On each occasion that thou art betrayed into doing that thou art
sworn to avoid, cut thyself sharply upon the wrist or forearm with a
razor; even as thou shouldst beat a disobedient dog. Feareth not the
Horse the teeth of the Camel?

3\. Thine arm then serveth thee both for a warning and for a record.
Thou shalt write down thy daily progress in these practices, until thou
art perfectly vigilant at all times over the least action that slippeth
from the least of thy fingers.

Thus bind thyself, and thou shalt be for ever free.

**III.**

0\. The Ox is Thought. Man, rule thy Thought! How else shalt thou master
the Holy Spirit, and answer the High Priestess in the Middle Gateway of
the Crown?

1\. Here are practices. Each may last for a week or more. (a) Avoid
thinking of a definite subject and all things connected with it, and let
that subject be one which commonly occupies much of thy thought, being
frequently stimulated by sense-perceptions or the conversation of
others.

\(b\) By some device, such as the changing of thy ring from one finger
to another, create in thyself two personalities, the thoughts of one
being within entirely different limits from that of the other, the
common ground being the necessities of life.[**2**](#2.md)

Of thine own Ingenium devise others.

2\. On each occasion that thou art betrayed into thinking that thou art
sworn to avoid, cut thyself sharply upon the wrist or forearm with a
razor; even as thou shouldst beat a disobedient dog. Feareth not the Ox
the Goad of the Ploughman?

3\. Thine arm then serveth thee both for a warning and for a record.
Thou shalt write down thy daily progress in these practices, until thou
art perfectly vigilant at all times over the least thought that ariseth
in thy brain.

Thus bind thyself, and thou shalt be for ever free.

1.  <span id="1"></span>(i.e. the matter of Cereberus).
2.  <span id="2"></span>For instance, let A be a man of strong passions,
    skilled in the Holy Qabalah, a vegetarian, and a keen "reactionary"
    politician. Let B be a bloodless and ascetic thinker, occupied with
    business and family cares, an eater of meat, and a keen progressive
    politician. Let no thought proper to "A" arise when the ring is on
    the "B" finger, and vice versa.
