[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Sacred texts](../index)  [Thelema](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Extracted from the Magical Record of the Beast 666 for the year 1920 e.v. By Aloster Kerval (Aleister Crowley)

  

7 June 1:55 a.m.

I feel inspired to jot down a few notes upon the Elixir of Life.

The Elixir of Life by the Master Therion

The conditions of life are that the organism should be able to adjust
itself continually to its environment. Any individual, to do this for
long, needs either very great intelligence or very great luck. His chief
physical asset is elasticity, the power of compensation and
recuperation. Our bodies are some 75% pure water; we are a mere sponge,
our strength arises from the great mechanical ingenuity of our
structure. But we are not \`solid bodies' like most inanimate beings.
This water, by kidneys, lungs, and skin, constantly cleanses us, and
carries off most of our waste and noxious matter. Block one of these
conduits; death follows very rapidly. However, this drainage system is
not quite perfect; our pipes \`fur' like a kettle. Disease and accident
apart, we die of arterio-sclerosis caused by the gradual deposits of
insoluble salts which harden the arteries and destroy the elasticity
which enables them to adjust themselves to new conditions. In fact, we
\`perish' like india rubber. Old age is simply a solidification of the
tissues, all of which become hard, dry and brittle.

As in philosophy, change is life, stagnation death; we should not fear a
brisk metabolism. Why should the process which we call growth only a few
years ago become degeneration? For the same reason that a well-kept
well-oiled machine works more easily with age while a rusty one wrecks
itself. Exercise helps us to sluice our sewers, but we must flush them
well with water to dissolve mineral waste. We must avoid the ingestion
of foods likely to leave insoluble deposits.

But there is another cause of decay, cause also in part of this
poisoning. Our organs would repair themselves perfectly, if they were
given sufficient rest. In their haste they absorb the first material to
hand, be it good or bad. Also, we call on them to work before they are
fully rested and so wear them gradually out. Exercise is necessary to
keep us clean; but our rest must be perfect restoration also. We can
give the muscles this benefit by Asana, and also reduce to a minimum the
work of heart and lungs. We can give our diges- tions rest by eating
only at noon and sunset, thus allowing them a clear twelve hours of the
twenty-four. Pranayama is the ideal exercise as it promotes metabolism
to the utmost with the minimum of fatigue, and can be combined with
Asana.

The Hindus, to whom we owe these practices, realize also (as I, above)
that the solidity of the food is an objection. They try to live on the
Prana (subtle energy) contained in it. For instance, they teach people
to reject their food before it has passed out of the stomach. In the
West, we have sought rather to discover concentrations of good, and
pre-digested prepara- tions with a minimum of substance liable to form
waste insoluble or poisonous products. We thus endeavor to diminish the
work necessary to assimilation, as well as to avoid dirt and disorder in
our Temple. We even eliminate on occasion the whole alimentary canal,
and feed our patients by direct injection into the blood, or by
absorbtion of nutriment in some convenient mucous membrane.

But mankind--in temperate climes--does not ask merely to exist; it
demands joy; and joy, physiologically speaking, consists in the
expenditure of surplus energy. Men living in the tropics need very
little food since all we require beyond the repair of tissues and supply
of mechanical force, is the heat required to keep our bodies at 37o
Centigrade, as above the temperature of the air. If that be already 27o
or so, we need but half of that necessary if it be 17o, or one third if
it be 7o. Yet men in the tropics are not more energetic than our Scots
and Norsemen. Those like dolce far niente, repose, as these take
pleasure in activity. Even their phantasies attest to it, the one
inventing Nirvana as the other Valhalla.

We admire the frolics of the young horse turned out to grass; we
cultivate rough games, wild sports, and athletics. The Struldbruggs of
Swift are perhaps, to us, of all his creations the most horrible. The
immortality we ask is neither idleness nor stagnation. We want infinite
Youth to squander, just as we wish a bottomless purse not to hoard but
to spend. We cannot rest, just as the tropical peoples cannot work
properly and efficiently. By our theory they should live longer than we
do; but the same high temperature that favours them befriends their
enemies, bacteria; and they lack our science of health.

Now all the means that we take to prolong life, such as I have outlined
above, have so far failed to supply this superfluity of energy which we
really desire. People with diets and breathing exercises and the like
are usually walking sepulchres--some of them whited! The animal who
thinks about his health is already sick. Absence of noise and friction
is the witness of free mechanical function. Fear actually creates
disease, for the mind begins to explore and so interferes with, the
unconscious rhythm of the body, as the Edinburgh Review killed John
Keats.

The man with the best chance of prolonged youth is he who eats and
drinks heartily, not much caring what; who does things vigorously in the
open air, with the minimum of common-sense precautions; and who keeps
his mind at the same time thoroughly active, free from worry, and his
heart high. He has come, with William Blake, to the Palace of Wisdom by
the Road of Excess. He is on friendly terms with Nature, and though he
does not fear her he heeds her, and does not provoke her. It is better
says he, to wear out than to rust out. True, but is there need to wear
out? He tires himself improperly, and he digs his grave with his teeth.

It is this surplus of good food, this codocil to our Will to Live, that
makes us, like the Englishman on the fine day, want to go out and kill
something. And so Death pays in some much Uric-Acid at his human
Savings-Bank.

There are only two solutions possible, the invention of either a solvent
more perfect than water, or a super-Food. The first alternative is
theoretically none too probable. As to the second, if food were merely a
chemical and mechanical agent in us, the problem would be one of diet.
But there is some reason to believe that food contains a substance yet
unanalyzed and unweighed which is of the nature of pure Energy. Live
foods, like oysters, stimulate inexplicable; foods long stored lose
their nutrive value, though the chemist and physicist can detect no
change. We need no psychical research but only common sense and common
experience to tell us that there is a difference between a live thing
and a dead one beyond the detective powers of the laboratories of
Mid-Victorian arrogance and dogmatism.

A copper wire changes not in colour, weight, or chemical composition
when a current of electricity passes through it; must we deny the
existence of that force whose nature is still perfectly mysterious
despite our knowledge of its properties, our measurements and our
control of it? Why then deny a Life- bearing force? Ostensibly because
\`there is no evidence of it'; but mainly because the hypothesis
happened to be packed in with the theological parcel of rubbish. But we
have nothing to span the gap between the two well-ascertained groups of
facts familiar to all; namely the facts of \`matter' and the facts of
\`mind'.

To our copper wire again! Electricity is matter of a subtle and tenuous
sort, in a peculiar state of motion; so is my hypothetical Life-bearing
force. The charged copper wire does not wear out; why should the human
body do so, if only we could feed it with pure Life?

Nature everywhere is prolific of live things, animal and vegetable.
(Pray note that these things, and only these avail to feed us.) What
wealth of \`spriritual' force in and acorn! What history, its beginning
veiled beyond all search! What potentiality of future life, of growth,
of multiplication, beyond all conjecture! Like us, it has the power of
Life; it can take live things and dead things into its own substance,
bidding them, for its own purposes, to live again, transfigured! There's
far more energy in the acorn than in radium, at which fools gape so wide
in wonder. Far more, and far higher; radium only degenerates and
dissipates; the acorn lives!

But all that energy is latent and potential; the acorn must be fed, like
the fire that it is. (For every growth is a chemical change, a kind of
combustion, element married to element with violence, with change of
state, with heat, light pleasure, pain, as its by-products. Growth
crowns itself with bloom or scent, with flame or colour, with wisdom
conscious or unconscious.) The acorn cannot hoard its wealth or
experience, use its credit of possibility, except by taking earth, air,
and water into partnership, and invoking on the Venture, the Benediction
of the Sun. If we destroy the fragile walls of its huge Library of
Wisdom, we do not otherwise than the Saracen at Alexandria. The ages
draw black hoods over their mighty foreheads; they cover their
inscrutable eyes; they breathe no more upon us; their voice is Silence,
Mystery, Oblivion; and we are left orphan, exposed like Oedipus,
cheating croupier, Malice, has loaded with a curse. Where is the
treasured wisdom of that dead world? Where is the Sphinx that hid in our
crushed acorn? It was; it is not. Love itself no more intangible, more
fugitive, more tragic, or more heedless. Its Fate? The oracles sneer;
the hieroglyphs are indecipherable; the black lamb is found without a
heart, and we must make our pilgrimage perforce to the altar of the
Unknown God. All we can say is: It is not. Nay, but It was; and so, in
some strange form, must be; else were all science and all mathematics
falsehood and mockery.

But, as long since we learned, first to distinguish rubbed from unrubbed
amber, next to measure, last control, though never yet to understand,
the nature of, the force that made that distinction; so we can tell the
living from the dead, can even measure life roughly, by taking heed of
its external shews and proofs; so we shall come to control it,
perhaps--nay, surely!--to create it.

We cannot yet direct the forces of the acorn, save within narrowest
limits; we can stop, thwart or foster, even distort its growth; but we
cannot lure it so far from its path as to grow Elms from it. But that is
due to the definite bent and scope of the particular structure of the
physical basis of the Life-force which must be one even as Electricity
is one.

We shall be able to gather, if not to create, this Life; to transmute it
into other forms of force, as now we transmute heat to light. We shall
be able to store it, to harness it, to guide it; to absorb its energy
ourselves directly, without resorting to our present gross, inefficient,
cumbrous and dangerous means of abstracting it from ores (if I may say
so) mechanically, blindly, empirically, and with such toil and strife.
Our journey--by such means of transit--is necessary and hateful; our
travelling companions are our diseases, and the host to ease us at the
end of the short, the weary day, is Death.

As we cannot drink at the source of Life, keep Youth perpetual as we can
keep Light--strange realization of the Rosicrucian's dream, or, it may
be, discovery of his secret!

But we have found the Super-food. We know a vehicle of which a few
grains can house enough pure light to fill a man not only with
nourishment, but with Energy almost superhuman, and parallel,
Intelligence incredibly sun-bright for four-and twenty hours. That
substance is theoretically easy, but practically hard to obtain. In
England and America it would be impossible to procure any quantity even
of the raw material, at least in strength and purity; much less to
prepare it. We know how to charge this substance with the Life-force.
The process is at present laborious and expensive; great skill is
required, and much precaution for errors in preparation are hard to
detect, and may result in hideous mischance.

It is now six years since we gained our knowledge. They have been
crowded with experiment; we are arrived at the practical stage. We
cannot understand the true Nature of this force; we cannot measure it;
we cannot create it, or obtain it synthetically. But we can purify and
intensify it; we can, within wide limits, determine at will the quality
and scope of its action; we can postpone death, increase energy, or
prolong youth; and we are justified in saying that we possess the Elixir
of Life

666

Note: The Elixir is only administered to selected individuals for good
reason shown. The normal course of treatment consists of two or three
months' preparation in the place prepared for the purpose in Sicily,
followed by the necessary period, usually one month, of the actual
experiment which is made in the greatest secrecy.

Here at 5:50 a.m. (legal time) on the  
Day of Diana, being the 7th of June,  
An XVI Sol in Gemini.
