[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc17016)  [Next](cc17018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 17: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part I*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1**. At that time, saith the Lord, they
shall bring out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his
princes, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets,
and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves:

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1**. In die illo, dicit Jehova, extrahent
ossa regum Jehudah et ossa principum ejus, et ossa sacerdotum, et ossa
prophetarum, et ossa civium Jerosolymae (habitantium,) e sepulchris
suis;

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span>**2**. And they shall spread them before
the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven, whom they have loved,
and whom they have served, and after whom they have walked, and whom
they have sought, and whom they have worshipped: they shall not be
gathered, nor be buried; they shall be for dung upon the face of the
earth.

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et expendent coram sole et luna et
toto exercitu coelorum, quae dilexerunt (*nam relativum neutrum
comprehendit et solem et lunam et exercitum; vel, si magis placeat
vertere,* quos exercitus dilexerunt,) et quibus servierunt, et post quos
ambularunt, et quos quaesierunt, et coram quibus prostrati sunt (*hoc
est,* se inclinarunt;) neque colligentur, et non sepelientur, in stercus
in terrae superficie erunt.

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span><span id="xviii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span>I Have said that Jeremiah repeats in the
first verse what he had before said, — that the Jews would be deprived
of their graves, in order that there might be on the dead a mark of
God’s vengeance; as though he had said, that after having been destroyed
by the hand of enemies, they would have their punishment extended
farther by having their dead bodies exposed to the wild beasts and
birds. The faithful, as I have said, suffer no loss, when burial is
denied them; but yet they do not disregard burial, inasmuch as it is a
badge of the resurrection. Though God suffers them to be involved in
this disgrace with the reprobate, yet this does not hinder but that God
should execute his vengeance on the wicked by such a temporal punishment
as turns to a blessing to the faithful. It is therefore no unmeaning
denunciation, when the Prophet says that the time was at hand, when
their bones would be taken out of their graves.

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span>He mentions *the bones of kings, and of
priests, and of prophets, and of the whole people* The kings thought
that as soon as they were hid in their graves, their dead bodies would
be deemed sacred: the same notion prevailed as to rulers, priests, and
prophets: but he says that no grave would be untouched or free from the
outrage of enemies; and thus he shews, that the city would be rooted up
from its foundations. Were the city to remain safe, the graves would be
spared. Hence this punishment could not have been inflicted, without the
very foundations of the city being dug up by the enemies. In short, he
points out here a dreadful and final overthrow; and at the same time he
shews the reason why God would manifest such severity towards the Jews.

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span><span id="xviii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>It was, because they *served the sun, and
the moon, and the stars* It was God’s just vengeance, that their bones
should be taken from their graves, in order that the sun and moon and
all the stars might be witnesses of his judgment. By these words
Jeremiah indirectly reprobates the senselessness of the people for
thinking that they performed an acceptable service to the sun and moon.
He therefore says, that all the stars and the planets would become as it
were spectators of the vengeance which God would execute; as though he
had said, that the whole celestial host would approve of that
punishment; for nothing is more detestable to creatures, than when the
glory of their Maker is ascribed to them. It is indeed true that the
sun, moon, and stars are without sense or reason; but the Prophet here
attributes reason to them, in order that he might shake off from the
Jews that stupidity in which they hardened themselves, while they
thought that they were rendering to the sun an acceptable service. At
the same time he alludes, as it appears also from other places, to the
punishment inflicted on adulterers: for when a harlot is drawn out and
led forth in contempt and disgrace in the presence of her adulterers, it
is deemed a most just punishment. And thus as the Jews had as it were
committed adultery with the sun and the moon and the stars, so the
Prophet says here, that their disgrace and baseness would be made
manifest in the sight of the sun, and the moon, and the stars.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>He says, *which they have loved* He no
doubt alludes to the blind ardor by which idolaters were possessed, when
they zealously pursued their illicit devotions; for it was a species of
an unbridled and mad passion, as it appears from other places; for no
fornicator burns with a more impetuous lust after a woman, than
idolaters do, when Satan dazzles their eyes and fascinates their hearts.
Of this impure love then does the Prophet now speak; and at the same
time, he indirectly condemns the Jews for having alienated themselves
without a cause from God, who was their legitimate husband. There is
indeed nothing less tolerable than for men thus perfidiously to forsake
God, when he has invited them to himself, and contracted as it were with
them a holy and an inviolable marriage.

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *whom they have
served* This was still more base; they devoted themselves to the work of
serving the sun, the moon, and the stars. He mentions in the third
place, that they *walked after them.* God had shewn them the right way,
and had commanded them to follow him: but they forsook God, says the
Prophet, and followed the stars of heaven. He states in the fourth
place, that they *sought* them. By this he refers to their perverseness.
Some render the word “consulted,” of which I do not approve, for it is
strained and far-fetched.  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) The
Prophet, I doubt not, denotes here the persevering attention of the Jews
to the objects of their worship; for they followed their idols not by a
sudden and momentary impulse, but they resolutely devoted themselves to
them and became as it were fixed in their wicked purpose. And he says in
the last place, that they *prostrated themselves* before them. This was
the way in which they served them. It is an evidence of reverence when
men prostrate themselves before their idols; and thus they serve them,
for it is an act of worship. The Prophet might indeed have sufficiently
expressed in one sentence the impiety of the people; but he joins
together several sentences for the sake of amplification, in order that
he might render more evident the ingratitude of the people in seeking
for themselves unknown gods, and in setting up false and fictitious
modes of worship, rather than to render obedience to the only true God
and to acquiesce in his law, which is a certain rule, and never leads
any astray.  <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215)

<span id="xviii.i-p18"></span>He afterwards adds, *They shall not be
gathered, nor be buried; for dung shall they be on the face* or surface
*of the land* He confirms what he had said of the punishment before
mentioned, — that they had acted disdainfully towards God, and had
prostrated themselves before their idols, so after death they would be
made base and detestable, so that the mind would revolt at such a
hateful sight. This is the meaning. It follows —

<span id="xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#003)<span id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span>**3**. And death shall be chosen rather
than life by all the residue of them that remain of this evil family,
which remain in all the places whither I have driven them, saith the
Lord of hosts.

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span>**3**. Et eligetur (*ad verbum esset,*
electa est) mors (*sed debet resolvi in futurum tempus*) prae vita ab
omnibus reliquiis, quae residuae erunt ab hac prava natione (a natione
hac mala) in omnibus locis ubi residui fuerint, ad quae expulero eos (ad
quae illuc; *sed* <span id="xviii.ii-p3.1"></span>שם*, est
supervacuum,)* dicit Jehova exercituum.

<span id="xviii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p6"></span>He intimates in this verse, that all
survivors would be doubly miserable, as it would be better for them to
die at once than to pine away in unceasing evils: for they who give
another meaning to the words, seem not to understand the design of the
Prophet. The import then of the passage is, — that however dreadful
God’s judgment would be, when slaughters everywhere prevailed, and dead
bodies were drawn out which had been previously buried, yet all this
would be a slight punishment in comparison with what God would inflict
on the rest, such as remained alive: and he also intimates that their
life would be more miserable than death itself, yea, than ten deaths.

<span id="xviii.ii-p7"></span>That those then who would escape death
might not think that they gained any advantage, the Prophet says,
*Chosen shall be death before life by all the residue* We hence learn
how grievous was to be God’s vengeance; for nothing would be better or
more desirable than to undergo death at once, as life would be nothing
else but a continued languor and torment. Expected then *will be death*
in *all places* in which there shall be survivors, *where I shall drive
them* He mentions a reason for this twofold misery, — they would not be
allowed to live in their own country, but would become aliens, — and
they would find in their exile God’s hand against them, and as it were
following them everywhere.  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216)

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xviii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
terrifiest us daily with thy judgments, and as it is needful for our
sloth to be stimulated, and for our corruption to be thus corrected, — O
grant, that we may be moved by thy threatenings, and at the same time
suffer ourselves to be kindly invited by thee, and make such progress in
thy word, that, being terrified by threatenings, we may also readily and
willingly obey whenever thou in a paternal manner callest us to thyself,
and labor in every way to devote ourselves wholly to thee, by subduing
the corrupt affections of our flesh, so that nothing may hinder us to be
submissive to thy will, until we shall at length enjoy the rest of that
eternal inheritance, which thou hast promised to us in Christ Jesus our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xviii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Second

<span id="xviii.v"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p1"></span><span id="xviii.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004)<span id="xviii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p2"></span>**4**. Moreover thou shalt say unto them,
Thus saith the LORD; Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turn away,
and not return?

<span id="xviii.v-p3"></span>**4**. Et dices ad eos, Sic dicit Jehova,
An qui ceciderunt non resurgent? si quis aversus fuerit non revertetur?

<span id="xviii.v-p4"></span>**5**. Why *then* is this people of
Jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast
deceit, they refuse to return.

<span id="xviii.v-p5"></span>**5**. Quare rebellis est populus hic
Jerosolymae rebellione perpetua? (forti, *ad verbum;*) adhaeserunt
fraudi (*vel,* apprehenderunt fraudem,) noluerunt reverti.

<span id="xviii.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="xviii.v-p7"></span><span id="xviii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p8"></span>Though God had reminded his Prophet of the
event, yet he still invites the Jews to repentance; not that there was
any hope of restoring them to a right mind, (for he had said that they
were wholly irreclaimable,) but that their perverseness might be less
excusable; and it was also his object to afford some relief to the small
number of the godly who still remained; for they had not all fallen away
into impiety, though the great body of the people had become corrupt.
God then, partly to aggravate the sin of the ungodly, and partly to
provide for his faithful people, exhorts those to repentance, who were
yet wholly intractable. And here we ought to consider that God’s
goodness, when abused, brings a much heavier judgment. God does here in
a manner contend with the wickedness of his people, by setting before
them the hope of pardon, if they repented.

<span id="xviii.v-p9"></span>*Thou shalt* then *say to them;* that is,
“Though I have already testified to thee that thy labor would be in
vain, yet thou shalt not give over thy work.” *Shall they who have
fallen rise again?* This sentence is variously explained; the greater
part of interpreters confine it to the Jews only, “Shall the Jews who
have fallen rise again?” As to the second clause, some give this
explanation, “If Israel returns, will not God also return?” that is,
from his wrath, or, “Will he not be propitious?” Or, “If Israel turns
away, will not God also turn away?” Others understand both parts of the
sentence of the people, “If the people have once turned away, will they
not yet return to God?” For the verb <span id="xviii.v-p9.1"></span>שוב,
*shub,* has contrary meanings; it means, to fall away, to rebel, to go
back; and it means also to return. But after having maturely considered
the words and the design of the Prophet, I think it to be a general
statement, as though he had said, “When any one falls, he immediately
thinks of recovering his fall; when any one deviates from the right
course, being warned of his going astray, he immediately looks for the
road. This is what is usually done, what then means this so great a
stupidity, that the people of Jerusalem do not repent, when yet they
ought to have long ago acknowledged their fall and their wanderings?”

<span id="xviii.v-p10"></span><span id="xviii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p11"></span>Whoever will impartially consider the
discourse of the Prophet must see that this is the real meaning; for, in
the second of these verses, he says, *Why is this people of Jerusalem,
etc*.; he now first speaks, as it clearly appears, of the people. It
then follows that the former verse ought not to be applied to the
people; but it contains only a general statement. In short, Jeremiah
condemns here the madness of the people, because they followed not the
example of those who have either fallen or deviated from the way by
mistake. For it is what is naturally implanted in all, that they do not
willingly perish in their misfortunes. He then who falls immediately
strives to rise again; and he who leaves the right way, tries if
possible to return to it again. This then is what the most foolish will
do; why then, says Jeremiah, do not this people imitate such an example?
He therefore shews by this comparison, that their conduct was monstrous;
for they obstinately adhered to their vices, and never thought that
there was a hope of reconciliation if they from the heart returned unto
God. And he emphatically mentions *Jerusalem;* for had such obstinacy
prevailed among the Chaldeans or the Egyptians, it would indeed have
been inexcusable; but not so strange as among a people to whom the law
had been given, and to whom God had plainly revealed the way of
salvation. When, therefore, this people so hardened themselves as to
reject all warnings, was it not monstrous?  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217)

<span id="xviii.v-p13"></span>Then he says, that they were *rebellious
with a pertinacious rebellion;* that is, that they forsook God not only
through levity or want of thought, or some sudden impulse, but so
pertinaciously, that the prophets spent their labor in vain in teaching
and exhorting them. Hence he calls it a *strong rebellion,* though the
word may be taken here as in other places in the sense of *perpetual*
And he assigns the cause, because they *laid hold on deception,* that
is, they adhered fast to deception. But the Prophet means by deception,
not that by which a neighbor is deceived or circumvented, but hypocrisy,
by which men so blind themselves, that they are unwilling either to
attend to God’s word, or to open their eyes to see the light. When,
therefore, men through willful obstinacy bury themselves in darkness,
they may be said to *lay fast hold on deception*  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218)

<span id="xviii.v-p20"></span>David says, in <span
id="xviii.v-p20.1"></span>[Ps
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span id="xviii.v-p20.1"></span>,
that the man is blessed in whose spirit there is no guile: he entertains
no guile, as we commonly do. Now, to entertain guile is to possess a
deceitful heart. He had before said that they are blessed whose sins are
forgiven and to whom iniquity is not imputed: he adds by way of
explanation, provided there be no guile in the spirit; and why? Because
wicked men seem to themselves to be blessed, for they perceive not their
own misery, because they are enveloped in their own coverings: and this
is the guile of which David speaks. According to the same meaning, our
Prophet says, that those *laid fast hold on deception,* who were so
involved in darkness or so blinded by their lusts, as to seek to deceive
God; but they deceive themselves. This then is the cause why those whom
God corrects and chastises feel no penitence; for they are willfully
blind, they close their eyes and deafen their ears, and seek to be
deceived by the devil; they attend not to the holy warnings given them
for their salvation. If then, we wish to be healed of our vices, let us
ever begin in this way, — let us carefully examine our thoughts and our
motives, and not please ourselves nor deceive ourselves by empty
flatteries, but strive to shake off whatever is reprehensible and
vicious. The very beginning of true repentance is to renounce all
deceptions and fallacies and to seek the light, which can alone discover
to us our evils. It afterwards follows —

<span id="xviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006)<span id="xviii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p2"></span>**6**. I hearkened and heard, *but* they
spake not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What
have I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into
the battle.

<span id="xviii.vi-p3"></span>**6**. Attendi et audivi, non loquentur
recte; nemo est quem poeniteat (*ad verbum,* non vir poenitens super
malo suo; *sed sensus clarior est,* nemo est quem poeniteat) malitiae
suae, dicendo, Quid feci? omnis vertitur (*ad verbum* pro omnes
vertuntur) ad cursos suos, sicut equus ruit (*ad verbum,* inundat; *sed
metaphorica est locutio;* Sicut *ergo* equus praeceps ruit) in praelium.

<span id="xviii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.vi-p5"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p6"></span>These words may be considered as spoken by
God himself, — that he from heaven examined the state of the people; but
it is more suitable to regard them as spoken by the Prophet; for he was
placed, as it were, in a watch — tower in order to observe how the
people acted towards God. He now testifies, that having seen their
pursuits and their doings, he saw nothing that was right. The people
ought to have been more touched by these words. We indeed know how ready
we are naturally to lay hold on any pretences, when we wish to continue
quiet in our dregs. So the greater part are wont to object and say, “O,
indeed, thou reprovest me, but inconsiderately; for thou knowest not
what is in my heart.” Hence the Prophet says, that he had carefully
examined what sort of people they were, and that he spoke of what was
well known to him, and fully seen by him, —

<span id="xviii.vi-p7"></span>*I have heard,* he says, *and attended;
but they speak not rightly* He means, that so far were the Jews from
repenting truly and sincerely, that they did not even with their mouths
profess to do so. It is less to confess sins than really to amend; but
the Prophet says, that they did not even say what was right. It hence
follows, that they were very far from having any serious thoughts of
repentance, since they were so wanton with their tongues, or at least
afforded no evidence of sorrow.

<span id="xviii.vi-p8"></span>He then adds, that there was *no one who
repented, saying,* etc. This clause is explanatory, for Jeremiah proves
here more clearly that they did not *speak rightly,* for they did not
say, *What have I done?* But he says first, that there was no one who
*repented of his wickedness* He afterwards shews, that what is first
necessary for repentance is, that the sinner should call himself to an
account; for as long as we rest secure in our sins, it is impossible for
us to repent, It is hence necessary that every one should examine
himself, so as to call himself to an account, and in a manner to summon
himself before God’s tribunal. We then see that men can never be brought
to repentance, except they set their own evils before their eyes, so as
to feel ashamed, and to ask themselves, as it were in great fear, What
have we done? for this question is an evidence of terror. Many, we know,
formally own their sins; but this is useless, for afterwards such an
acknowledgement vanishes without producing any benefit. Then real
repentance necessarily requires that the sinner should not only be
displeased with himself, should not only be ashamed, but that he should
also be filled with terror at his own sins; for this is what is meant by
the inquiry, *What have I done?* for it implies astonishment.

<span id="xviii.vi-p9"></span>We now perceive the meaning of the
Prophet’s words: he says, that he did not inconsiderately reprove the
people, but that he found such perversity in them that no one *spoke
rightly,* that no one repented, because they did not consider what they
were, nor examined their own lives, but slept securely in their sins.

<span id="xviii.vi-p10"></span>He pursues the same subject when he says,
that *all turned to their own courses,* that is, to their own lusts. But
by the word “courses” the Prophet means impetuous movements; as though
he had said, that the Jews were so precipitant in following their lusts,
that they in a manner ran headlong after them; and he compares them to
horses rushing into battle. We know with what impetuosity horses advance
when they hasten to battle; for they seem to fly, to cut the air, and to
dig the ground with their hoofs. Thus the comparison is exceedingly
suitable, when the Prophet says that the Jews were so impetuous in
pursuing their lusts, that they rushed on, not less precipitantly than
war — horses when advancing to battle. It now follows —

<span id="xviii.vii"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007)<span id="xviii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p2"></span>**7**. Yea, the stork in the heaven
knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle and the crane and the
swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the
judgment of the LORD.

<span id="xviii.vii-p3"></span>**7**. Etiam ciconia in coelis cognoscit
tempora sua, et turtur et hirundo (*alii vertunt,* picam; *sed nomen
hirundinis est aptius, quemadmodem statim patebit*,) et grues observant
tempus itineris; populus autem meus non cognoscit judicium Jehovae.

<span id="xviii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.vii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p6"></span>Here again Jeremiah condemns the shameful
insensibility of the people, — that they had less wisdom than birds, not
endued with reason and understanding. He then says, that the Jews were
more foolish than cranes, swallows, and storks. He no doubt deeply
wounded the feelings of the people by so severe a reproof; but it was
necessary thus sharply to reprehend the despisers of God; for it appears
evident by these words, that they were become exceedingly hardened in
their vices. No wonder, then, that the Prophet declares that they were
more silly than cranes and swallows. Isaiah also exposes the same sort
of madness, when he says that the ox knew his own master, and the ass
his master’s crib, but that God was not known by his people. (<span
id="xviii.vii-p6.1"></span>[Isa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span id="xviii.vii-p6.1"></span>.)
Now Isaiah made the Jews worse than oxen and asses, because these brute
animals possess something like memory, so that they keep to their own
manger and crib. So now Jeremiah, speaking of storks, etc., says, —

<span id="xviii.vii-p7"></span>Behold, the *stork* knows the time in
which it ought to migrate from one country to another; and the same is
observed by *swallows* and *cranes*  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) For at stated times they seek a warmer
climate; that is, they leave a cold country, that they may escape the
severity of winter; and they afterwards know the time in which they are
to return. As, then, the birds of the air observe their seasons, how is
it that my *people do not* consider *the judgment* of God? By mentioning
the *heavens,* he no doubt alludes to the constant flying of birds, the
birds having hardly any rest, for they continually rove through the air.
Since, then, there is so much wisdom in birds, which yet the air wafts
here and there, how comes it, that a people, who dwell quietly at home,
who can leisurely meditate on God’s law — how comes it that this people
understand nothing? We hence see that there is an import in the word
*heavens* which has not been noticed. Readers may yet have their doubts;
for it is nothing strange that birds in the heavens should have a
clearer view, as they come nearer the sun and the element of fire: but
different seems to have been the Prophet’s object; which was to shew,
that though birds labor as it were continually, they yet contrive to
know the suitable time for going and returning. Hence, then, is
exaggerated more fully the insensibility of that people, who, while
sitting leisurely at home, did not consider what God did set before
them.

<span id="xviii.vii-p9"></span>The particle <span
id="xviii.vii-p9.1"></span>גם, *gam,* even, is emphatical; *Even the
stork,* he says. What means this, that birds, though not possessed of
understanding, do yet know their time? *But my people, etc*. By saying
“my people, “the Prophet no doubt intended more clearly to set forth
their wickedness. For, as I have before said, such blindness in heathens
would not have been so strange; but as they were the holy and peculiar
people of God, it was far more shameful and monstrous that they knew not
his judgment.

<span id="xviii.vii-p10"></span>Christ uses other words in condemning
the Pharisees for not attending to the time of their visitation; for he
says, “Ye are wont to conclude what will be the state of the heavens in
the morning; for if the sky be red in the evening, ye say, It will be
fine to — morrow; and ye know the signs of future and approaching rain:
ye possess, he says, judgment sufficiently acute in external things,
which conduce to the benefit of the present life; yet ye know not the
time of your visitation, and still ye seek signs: but were ye attentive,
God would shew to you in a way clear enough, and as it were by the
finger, that the time of deliverance which ye pretend to expect is now
nigh at hand.” But the Prophet reproves the Jews in a severer strain,
when he says that there was more fatuity and madness in them than in
birds. They *know not,* he says, *the judgment of Jehovah,* though it
had been shewn to them many times, and for a long season.

<span id="xviii.vii-p11"></span>But some one might have objected and
said, “No wonder if we perceive not God’s judgment, for his judgments
are a great deep; and since these exceed what we can comprehend, there
is no reason to find fault with us.” But the Prophet speaks not here of
hidden judgments, which elude the comprehension of men, but of
punishments, of which they had been so often warned. Since, then, they
were so blind as not to see what was clear and evident, the Prophet
justly says that they were more foolish than cranes, and the other birds
which he mentions. It follows —

<span id="xviii.viii"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008)<span id="xviii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p2"></span>**8**. How do ye say, We *are* wise, and
the law of the Lord *is* with us? Lo, certainly in vain made he *it*;
the pen of the scribes *is* in vain.

<span id="xviii.viii-p3"></span>**8**. Quomodo dicetis (*pro* dicitis;
*significat continuum actum*) sapientes nos (*hoc est,* nos sumus
sapientes,) et lex Jehovae nobiscum est (*vel,* penes nos, *melius:)*
certe ecce frustra aptavit stylum (*vel,* calamum) scriptor; frustra
sunt seribae.

<span id="xviii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.viii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p6"></span>Interpreters think that the Prophet here
directs his words to the priests, and the false prophets, and the other
chiefs of the people, because they proudly arrogated to themselves the
knowledge of the law: but what is said may be no less extended to the
whole people; for, as we shall presently see, all of them, from the
least to the greatest, no doubt boasted that they were sufficiently
wise. I hence think that the Prophet here inveighs against the whole
body of the people; for all, almost without exception, rejected his
teaching, as we see also to be done at the present day; for who is there
that can bear to be admonished and reproved? All say that they are wise
enough: “Oh! do you think that I am a child?” or, as it is commonly
said, “Do you think that I am a goose? I know how I am to live, and I am
not without reason.” Thus the rudest and the most ignorant set up their
own wisdom and sharpness of wit against God and his prophets. Such
audacity and ferociousness prevailed no doubt in the time of Jeremiah.
For when he sharply reproved them, they were ready with their answer, —
“Oh! thou treatest us as though we were barbarians, as though God’s law
was unknown to us, as though we had not been taught from our childhood
how we are to live: does not God dwell in the midst of us?” Since, then,
the Jews did set up as it were this shield against the doctrine of the
Prophet, he attacks them here with great vehemence, —

<span id="xviii.viii-p7"></span>*How say ye, We are wise?* He afterwards
describes the kind of wisdom which they claimed, *The law of God is with
us*: and doubtless, to attend to God’s law is the way of becoming really
wise. Had they justly boasted that they had the law, the Prophet would
not have brought against them the charge, that they were doubly foolish.
But as they falsely made this pretense, he says to them, How? and here
he asks a question as to what was very strange, “How are you so foolish,
“he says, “that ye think yourselves wise, as though the law of God were
with you? Surely, if so, in vain has the law been written; for ye shew
by your whole life that you have never known anything of what God by the
law commands and sets before us, and what the design of it is.”

<span id="xviii.viii-p8"></span>Thus Jeremiah shows by their life that
there was no ground for their foolish boasting; for they gave no
evidence of their wisdom. It is indeed necessary for those who seek to
be God’s disciples to bring forth some fruit: but as there was among
them so much impiety, so much contempt of God, and as, in short, their
whole life proclaimed them to be wholly insane, he says, *In vain has he
prepared his pen,* even the writer of the law; *and in vain have been
the scribes,* that is, the teachers; for by scribes, in the second
place, he understands teachers.  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220)

<span id="xviii.viii-p18"></span>I explain this passage somewhat
different from other interpreters; for there seems to be implied a kind
of irony, as we commonly say, *Il faut bruler tous les livres.* Hence
Jeremiah derides their folly, in saying that they knew how they were to
live, because the teaching of the law prevailed among them. “If it be
so, “he says, “what is God’s law? Doubtless, nothing, as the whole of
its teaching must in this way be deemed as nothing.” We now then see
that the Jews are here reproved as false, for they claimed the law, as
though it were a shadow without a body, and possessed not a particle of
right knowledge. He afterwards adds —

<span id="xviii.ix"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xviii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#009)<span id="xviii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p2"></span>**9**. The wise *men* are ashamed, they
are dismayed and taken: lo, they have rejected the word of the Lord; and
what wisdom *is* in them?

<span id="xviii.ix-p3"></span>**9**. Pudefacti sunt sapientes, territi
sunt et capti sunt (תחת *significat proprie* frangere, *vel,* conterere,
*sed transferter ad animum, et tunc significat* terrere; *dicit igitur
esse territos, deinde illaqueatos; postea adjungit causam, nempe,)* quia
respuerunt in verbo (*sed* ב *est supervacuum,* verbum *ergo*) Jehova
(reprobarunt, *vel* repudiarunt,) et sapientia quid illis (prodest,
*subaudiunt quidam interpretes; alii vertunt,* et quid est in ipsis
sapientiae? *Ego autem aliter accipio, ut statim dicam.*)

<span id="xviii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ix-p5"></span><span id="xviii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p6"></span>He says now that the *wise were ashamed,
and astonished, and ensnared* By which words he means, that the Jews
gained nothing by their craftiness, while they arrogated to themselves
wisdom, and under this pretense rejected all admonitions, and sought to
be spared.

<span id="xviii.ix-p7"></span>“This wisdom, “he says, “avails you
nothing, for God, as it is said in another place, will take you
unawares.” (<span id="xviii.ix-p7.1"></span>[Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)<span id="xviii.ix-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="xviii.ix-p7.2"></span>[1Co
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019)<span id="xviii.ix-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.ix-p8"></span>*Ashamed,* then, he says, *are they;* not
that they were then ashamed; for be said before, in <span
id="xviii.ix-p8.1"></span>[Jer
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#015)<span id="xviii.ix-p8.1"></span>,
and will state the same presently, that they were so hardened that they
could not be made ashamed, nor be made to blush:  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) but he here denounces a punishment,
which was soon to overtake them; as though he had said, “Ye have now an
iron front, and think that ye can elude God and his servants with
impunity; but God will take you unawares, and will so shake off the
masks under which you hide yourselves, that your disgrace shall be made
manifest to all.” This is the meaning.

<span id="xviii.ix-p10"></span>For the same purpose he says, “Ye are now
secure, but God will shortly fill you with such terror, that he will
make you greatly *astonished* ” He intimates, then, that nothing would
benefit them while they took delight in their vices, and increasingly
hardened themselves; for God would deprive them of their craftiness, and
cast them down with terror, however secure and perverse they were now.

<span id="xviii.ix-p11"></span>By the third word he sets forth the
manner in which they would be treated: God would have his snares by
which he would take them. He alludes to the subterfuges in which those
hypocrites trust, who proudly oppose God, while they think that by their
arts they can escape in this or that way, and often devise some new
schemes by which they may deceive God. Hence the Prophet, alluding to
their perverse cunning, says, that God would be as it were a fowler, who
would ensnare them, and hold them captive.

<span id="xviii.ix-p12"></span>He afterwards assigns the reason,
*Because they had repudiated,* or despised or rejected,  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) (for the verb means all these things,)
*the word of Jehovah* And he uses a demonstrative particle, *Behold,*
that they might not, as usual, make any evasions: “The thing, “he says,
“is sufficiently known, and even children can be judges of your impiety,
that you have rejected the word of Jehovah.” He draws hence this
inference, *What does wisdom avail them?* or, What is their wisdom?
Either of these meanings may be admitted, They were wise to no purpose,
while they provoked God by their impious contempt. “I hate the wise who
is not wise for himself, “is an old proverb. As then the Jews ill
consulted their own benefit, by rejecting the word of God, in which
their safety was involved, the Prophet justly alleges, that their wisdom
availed them nothing. Others read, “What is their wisdom, “when there is
no fear of God? And doubtless it ever remains a truth, that the fear of
God is the beginning and the chief part of wisdom. (<span
id="xviii.ix-p13.3"></span>[Pr
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)<span id="xviii.ix-p13.3"></span>;
<span id="xviii.ix-p13.4"></span>[Pr
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010)<span id="xviii.ix-p13.4"></span>;
<span id="xviii.ix-p13.5"></span>[Ps
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)<span
id="xviii.ix-p13.5"></span>.) Since then they had basely despised God’s
word, rightly does the Prophet ask, “What is their wisdom?” But there is
a third meaning which is suitable, even this, *And wisdom, what to
them?* So it is literally, — What is wisdom to them? He still speaks to
them ironically, as though he said, “They are indeed wise, but in their
own esteem; they have therefore no need of being taught: What then is
wisdom to them!” The meaning is, that they were so swollen with pride
that they received no instruction. How so? They refused wisdom through
the false conceit with which they were inflated. Let, however, every one
choose for himself; my object is to shew what I mostly approve. There
will be no lecture to — morrow, as a consistory is to be held.

<span id="xviii.x"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xviii.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
ceasest not daily to rouse us, as also our sloth requires continual
warnings, — O grant, that we may not be unteachable, and that our
perverseness may not hinder us to return immediately and willingly to
thee, from whom we have, through our own fault, alienated ourselves: and
may we not only feel some desire to repent, but persevere so constantly
in the exercise of penitence, that through the whole course of our life
we may contend with our lusts, until having at length subdued them all,
we shall reach the goal which has been set before us, and enjoy in
heaven that eternal inheritance, which has been procured for us by the
blood of thine only — begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="xviii.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Third

<span id="xviii.xii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010)<span id="xviii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p2"></span>**10**. Therefore will I give their wives
unto others, *and* their fields to them that shall inherit *them*: for
every one from the least even unto the greatest is given to
covetousness, from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth
falsely.

<span id="xviii.xii-p3"></span>**10**. Propterea dabo uxores eorum
alienis, et agros eorum possessoribus; quia a parvo usque ad magnum
omnes cupiditatem concupiverunt (*vel,* cupiditate concupiverunt;) a
propheta usque ad sacerdotem omnes egerunt fallaciter.

<span id="xviii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p6"></span>GOD here threatens punishment, because he
found that he effected nothing, and that he had to do with an obstinate
people, having before tried whether they were reclaimable. Having seen
that exhortations were of no avail, he now comes to extreme severity, *I
will give,* he says, *their wives to strangers.* He sets forth, by a
particular instance, the evils which usually accompany wars: and nothing
is more distressing than when the wife is snatched away from her
husband; for if husbands had their option, they would prefer instant
death than to bear such a disgrace. Jeremiah then shews that the most
atrocious thing that happens to conquered nations was nigh the Jews, —
that their men would be deprived of their wives. He afterwards says the
same thing of their fields; God declares that he would give the *fields
to their possessors.* By this mode of speaking he intimates, that they
would be deprived of their fields, not for a short time, but
perpetually.

<span id="xviii.xii-p7"></span>There is, indeed, a contrast here
implied: for it sometimes happens, that enemies prevail and plunder
everything; but yet they take no long possession of the fields, for a
change succeeds: but when he calls enemies possessors, he means that
there would be such a calamity, that the Jews would for a long time,
even for their life, be banished from their country, and would lose
their possessions. They thought that the land was so given to them, that
it could never be taken from them: and doubtless the Lord would have
never expelled them, had they not defiled it with their pollutions; but
as they had polluted it by their sins, they deserved to be banished from
it. So the Prophet shews that their confidence was absurd, in thinking
that they would be the perpetual inheritors of that land: “Succeed you,
“he says, “shall others, who shall possess it as it were by an
hereditary right.” We now perceive the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="xviii.xii-p8"></span>He afterwards mentions the reason why God
had resolved to deal so severely with them, *For they are,* he says,
*from the least to the greatest given up to avarice*  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) He means that no equity prevailed
among the people; for under one kind of sin he includes all frauds and
plunders, and every kind of injustice. He then says, that every one was
addicted to his own gain, so that they practiced mutual wrongs without
any regard to what was right and just.

<span id="xviii.xii-p12"></span>He then enlarges on the subject and
says, *that all, from the prophet to the priest, acted deceitfully*
There is here also a part mentioned for the whole. But Jeremiah in
various ways sets forth the wrongs by which men harassed one another.
Nor does he exclude violence when he speaks of fraud; but it is the same
as though he said, that they, being forgetful of what was right,
practiced fraud of every kind. It was, indeed, a dreadful thing, that
there remained no rectitude or justice in the prophets and the priests,
who ought to have carried light for others, and to have shewn to them
the right way, as God had constituted them to be the leaders of the
people. Since, then, even these acted deceitfully, there must have been
among the common people the most disgraceful injustice. Hence the
Prophet shews by these words, that God could not be charged with too
much rigor, as though he treated the people cruelly; for there was such
a mass of wickedness, that it could no longer be borne. It follows —

<span id="xviii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#011)<span id="xviii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p2"></span>**11**. For they have healed the hurt of
the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when *there
is* no peace.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p3"></span>**11**. Et curarunt vulnus filiae populi
mei super nihilo, dicendo, Pax, pax; et nulla pax.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p6"></span>THE Prophet repeats what we have noticed
in the sixth chapter: but it was necessary to reiterate often, to the
deaf and the slothful, what had already been forgotten, or what had not
touched their hearts. As these things have been already explained, I
shall now only refer briefly to the main points.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p7"></span>He no doubt condemns here the priests
and the prophets. He spoke before generally of the whole people, “from
the least,” he said, “to the greatest.” But as for the sake of
amplifying, he had expressly mentioned the prophets and the priests as
given to fraudulent dealings, he now in an especial manner condemns
them, not only for grievously offending God, but also for deceiving
others by their flatteries, as though they were allowed to sin with
impunity. It is, indeed, an inexcusable crime in those, who ought to
lead others, to be no less wicked than the common people; for they not
only by their example, but also by their doctrine, corrupt the whole
community, and thus they increase the evil twofold. It was therefore an
intolerable impiety, when they were so presumptuous as to spread those
falsehoods, by which they led the people to despise God and his law.
Hence he says, that they *healed the wound* of the people, while God was
yet shewing tokens of his wrath. And he speaks, as it has been said
elsewhere, by way of concession, as though he had said, that they were
very foolish physicians in applying plaisters to cover the wrath of God.
 <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224)

<span id="xviii.xiii-p9"></span>*Behold,* he says, *they have healed the
wound of my people,* saying, *Peace, peace* By mentioning the word twice
the Prophet shews more clearly how supine was their security; for they
deceived the people not only once, but proceeded obstinately in the work
of deceiving the wretched people by their false promises. He adds, *When
there was no peace* This may be taken in two ways, — that God by the
event exposed their madness, — or, that when there was no prosperity,
they still fallaciously promised peace. As God elsewhere complains that
the prophets flattered the people, so he does here: such sentences we
have already often explained. He then adds —

<span id="xviii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#012)<span id="xviii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p2"></span>**12**. Were they ashamed when they had
committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could
they blush: therefore shall they fall among them that fall: in the time
of their visitation they shall be cast down, saith the Lord.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p3"></span>**12**. An pudor (*est enim interrogative
hoc legendum, sicuti capite sexto diximus, subaudienda igitur est
particula,* An; An *ergo* pudefacti sunt) quod abominationem patrarunt?
etiam in pudore non pudifacti sunt, et erubescere non noverunt;
propterea cadent inter cadentes; in tempore visitationis ipsorum
impingent (*vel,* corruent,) dicit Jehova.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet in these words shews still
more clearly that they were wholly irreclaimable; for they had divested
themselves of every shame. It is no doubt a proof of a wickedness past
all remedy, when no shame remains. This verse has been also explained in
the sixth chapter; it forms the fifteenth verse. But we must bear in
mind the design of the Prophet. It is then briefly this, — to shew that
the wickedness of the people was unhealable, and for this reason,
because they had an iron front.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p7"></span>Hence he asks, *Have they been ashamed,
because they have committed abomination?* as though he had said, “They
have been proved guilty of wickedness, can they be made to feel any
shame?” To this he answers, *Even in their shame they are not ashamed*
The particle <span id="xviii.xiv-p7.1"></span>גם, *gam,* even, is
emphatic, Then the meaning may be thus given, — that when God brought
against them their shameful conduct, and proved them guilty, so that
they could not escape by any evasion — that when they were thus
convicted, they yet had no feeling of shame. At the same time, this
passage may be explained as referring to what is commonly called actual
conviction; for they were well — nigh consumed with miseries, through
their untamable perverseness, while contending with God’s judgment.
*Even* then *in shame itself they had no feeling of shame*

<span id="xviii.xiv-p8"></span>Added is the reason, *They know not how
to blush* By this want of shame, then, Jeremiah proves that they were
men past remedy. And on this account he adds, *Fall therefore shall they
among those who fall, and in the time of their visitation they shall
perish,* or stumble. By these words he intimates that they were no
longer to be reasoned with, and that God’s vengeance would be just in
wholly destroying them, for he had in vain spoken to them, he had in
vain contended with them, he had in vain tried to bring them to the
right way. The import of the whole then is, — that the only thing that
remained for them was destruction; for they had without shame rejected
all instruction and every warning.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p9"></span>And he says, *among the fallen,* because
every one, as it is commonly the case, encouraged others in their
contempt of God, and in their perverseness. When therefore they saw
others to be like themselves, they entertained hope of impunity; and
hence they were allured to sin by this deception. On this account the
Prophet says, that ruin was nigh them all. *They shall fall,* he says,
*among the fallen,*  <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) *and
stumble in the time of their visitation*. He shews that God had fixed a
day in which they were to be destroyed. But if he deferred the time,
there was no reason for them to think that it would be to their
advantage; for they would by their obstinacy procure for themselves a
heavier judgment. In short, though God might spare them for a time, yet
the Prophet warns them, that this would avail them nothing, as God’s
time of visitation was fixed. Then follows a confirmation —

<span id="xviii.xv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p1"></span><span id="xviii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013)<span id="xviii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p2"></span>**13**. I will surely consume them, saith
the Lord: *there shall be* no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig
tree, and the leaf shall fade; and *the things that* I have given them
shall pass away from them.

<span id="xviii.xv-p3"></span>**13**. Colligendo colligam (*vel,*
perdendo perdam,) dicit Jehova: non uvae in vite (*vel,* botri,) et non
ficus in ficulnea; et folium decidet, et dabo illis, transibunt (*hoc
est,* quae dedere illis transibunt ab ipsis.)

<span id="xviii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p6"></span>He confirms, as I have said, what he had
declared in the last verse, tie had said, that there would be the ruin
of the whole people: for the same purpose he now adds, *Destroying I
will destroy them* The verb <span id="xviii.xv-p6.1"></span>אסף,
*asaph,* properly means “to collect, “but metaphorically, “to destroy;”
as we say in our language, *Trousser; Je les trousserai tous ensemble.*
And hence it more fully appears, that the Prophet explains what he had
said, that destruction was nigh them all, so that none would remain,
that is, with regard to the people as a body, as a community; for God
ever preserved a remnant. We have, indeed, said elsewhere, and we shall
have to notice the same thing often again, that the prophets, regarding
the people as a body, threatened them all with destruction; but when
they addressed the elect, and the faithful, they added a modification:
*Destroying I will* then *destroy them*

<span id="xviii.xv-p7"></span>He afterwards shews the manner: No
*grapes* shall be on *the vines,* and *no figs on the fig* — *trees* The
word for “fig” means the fruit as well as the tree, as it is well known.
And that he might more fully set forth God’s vengeance, he says, that
the very leaves would wither. The meaning is, that God would soon come
as an avenger, however securely the Jews might be resting in their sins:
and he shews the kind of vengeance that awaited them, — that God would
deprive them of all sustenance and support; by mentioning a part for the
whole, he includes everything necessary for life. He speaks not of wine,
and of corn, and of oil; but by figs and grapes, as I have said, he
comprehends every kind of sustenance; and even the leaves would wither
and fall.

<span id="xviii.xv-p8"></span>In the second place, he adds, *Even, what
I shall give them shall pass away from them* Some apply this to the
fruit in the granaries and cellars, as though he had said, “Even if they
should have provisions in their storehouses and cellars, and be
furnished with plenty, all this shall yet avail them nothing, for it
shall be all taken away; for to pass away has often this meaning; and
the <span id="xviii.xv-p8.1"></span>מ, *mem*, affixed, is the same as
though it was <span id="xviii.xv-p8.2"></span>מהם, *meem*, from them.
Others render the words, “they shall pass over them;” but this is too
strained. They refer to the precepts granted to the Jews, which they had
rendered void or neglected: but this cannot suit the passage. And as to
the first explanation, it seems to me too limited. I therefore take this
to be the meaning, — “Even if the grapes and figs come to maturity, yet
what they shall consider as already prepared shall be taken away.” The
Prophet then means, that there would be various ways by which the Jews
would be reduced to penury and want; for either the enemies would rob
them of their grapes and figs, or he himself would send sterility; or,
when they thought their provisions secured to them, they would not yet
be allowed to enjoy them. This is the import of the whole.  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) It follows —

<span id="xviii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014)<span id="xviii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p2"></span>**14**. Why do we sit still? assemble
yourselves, and let us enter into the defenced cities, and let us be
silent there: for the Lord our God hath put us to silence, and given us
water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against the Lord.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p3"></span>**14**. Ut quid nos sedemus? congregate
vos, et ingrediamur urbes munitas (urbes munitionis, *ad verbum,)* et
quiescamus illic: certe Jehova Deus noster silere nos (*vel,* quiescere
nos) fecit, et *potavit nos a quis venenatis* (*vel,* aquis fellis; nam
<span id="xviii.xvi-p3.1"></span>ראש, significat fel et venenum;) quia
impie egimus contra Jehovam.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p6"></span>This verse, and those which follow, are
explained in different ways; but I will briefly shew the meaning of the
Prophet. I have no doubt but that he speaks here in the name of the
whole people. The Prophet, then, in these words, represents what
occupied their minds, and the counsels which the Jews adopted: and
further, there is no doubt but that he shews in these words that they,
as hypocrites are wont to do, had recourse to expedients, by which they
thought they could protect themselves from God’s wrath. For they who
think that the Prophet spoke his own sentiments are greatly mistaken: on
the contrary, he relates here the purposes which the Jews formed; and at
the same time he reproves their hardness in turning here and there, and
in thinking that they could turn aside the judgment of God; for
hypocrites, unless constrained, never ascend to the first cause; that
is, they never acknowledge nor regard the hand of him who strikes them,
as it is said in another place. (<span id="xviii.xvi-p6.1"></span>[Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)<span
id="xviii.xvi-p6.1"></span>.) They indeed feel their evils, and seek to
apply remedies; but they stop at the nearest reliefs, without seeking to
pacify God and to return into favor with him; and when the smallest hope
is given them, they think themselves to be safe, if they betake
themselves to this or that hiding-place.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p7"></span>This feeling is what the Prophet
describes: *Why do we sit?* or, “Why do we rest?” But the word here
means to sit still: *Why do we* then *sit still?* as though they had
accused themselves of sloth or idleness: “What means this our
slothfulness? we sit still in the villages, which are exposed to the
violence of enemies: *gather* then yourselves, and let us *enter* into
fortified cities; we shall rest there.” They thought that they should be
safe, if they entered into fortified cities. Then, on the other hand,
Jeremiah shews how foolishly they trusted to such refuges. *Surely,* he
says*, our God hath made us silent* He had said before <span
id="xviii.xvi-p7.1"></span>ונדמה-שם*, vanudame-shem, “*and we shall
there rest.” The verb*,* means to rest, and to be silent. He repeats the
same word, “*Surely,* our God hath made us to be silent;” but in a
different sense. There is then a striking allusion in the verb <span
id="xviii.xvi-p7.2"></span>דמה, *dame*, or the sameness of sound.
“Jehovah hath made us to be silent, “or to rest; or, he hath cut us off,
for in Hiphil, it has this meaning.  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227)

<span id="xviii.xvi-p14"></span>We hence see, that on the one hand is
declared what might have given some comfort to the Jews, for there were
fortified cities which might have protected them from the assaults of
enemies; but, on the other hand, the Prophet shews that they were
greatly mistaken, for God would make them to rest in a different manner,
as he would reduce them to nothing; for the dead are said to rest, or to
be silent. In short, he means a quiet state when speaking in the name of
the people; but he refers to destruction when speaking by God’s command.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p15"></span>He afterwards confirms the same thing in
a metaphorical language, *God will give them the waters of gall,* or,
poisoned waters: and he adds, *Because they have acted impiously against
Jehovah* We may learn from this last part, that the Prophet is now
performing the duty of his office. The people indeed never willingly
allowed that they were suffering punishment justly due to their sins;
but the Prophet here reproves them for hoping to be safe by fleeing to
fortified cities, as though God could not follow them there. He then
says that God’s vengeance would closely pursue them, and that wherever
they fled, they would still be exposed to evils, for they carried with
them their impieties, which would draw upon them the wrath of God. It
follows —

<span id="xviii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#015)<span id="xviii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvii-p2"></span>**15**. We looked for peace, but no good
*came; and* for a time of health, and behold trouble!

<span id="xviii.xvii-p3"></span>**15**. Expectando  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) pacem (*vel,* ad pacem) et non bonum;
ad tempus sanationis, et ecce terror (aut, turbatio.)

<span id="xviii.xvii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xvii-p8"></span><span id="xviii.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvii-p9"></span>He explains his meaning more clearly in
this verse, — that the Jews in vain flattered themselves, while they
entertained vain hopes. He then says that there was no reason for them
to deceive themselves; for were they to promise themselves peace a
hundred times, ruin would still be nigh them, and that though they hoped
for a time of healing, terror would assail them. We hence see that in
the last verse his purpose was to shew how foolish the people were, who
thought that they would be safe by means of the remedies which seemed to
be at hand, though they despised God’s judgment. It follows —

<span id="xviii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016)<span
id="xviii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xviii-p2"></span>**16**. The snorting of his horses was
heard from Dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of
his strong ones; for they are come, and have devoured the land, and all
that is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein.

<span id="xviii.xviii-p3"></span>**16**. A Dan auditus est fremitus
equorum ejus, a voce hinnituum robustorum ejus tremefacta est (*vel,*
contremuit) tota terra; quia venient (*nam copula hic resolvi debet in
causalem particulam*) et comedent terram et plenitudinem (*vel,* copiam)
ejus, urbem et habitatores ejus.

<span id="xviii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xviii-p6"></span>He says, *Heard has been the snorting
of horses from Daniel* Dan was on the extremities, as it is well known,
of the land of Canaan. Some think that the loudness of the noise is
intended, as it was heard from such a distance in the holy city itself;
but I know not whether this can be gathered from the words of the
Prophet. The simpler and the correcter meaning then is, that though
Jerusalem rested securely, they were not yet in a quiet state on the
borders of the land, for they were disturbed by the snorting of the
enemies’ horses. *From Dan* then *has been heard a snorting* When the
inhabitants of a city indulge in pleasures, while the borders of the
land are assailed by enemies, it might be pertinently said to them, “Why
do ye here live at your ease? your neighbors and your brethren are
exposed to the assaults of enemies: war therefore ought to be waged in
your land, though it has not yet reached your gates and your walls.” So
the Prophet speaks here: “From Dan has been heard the snorting of his
horses.” The relative “his” may be applied to the Assyrians; for the
Hebrews often use relatives without antecedents. But it is more probable
that Jeremiah refers to the first mover of the war, even God; as though
he had said, — “God will send forth hostile armies, which will disturb
the borders of your land.” He then calls them the horses of God; for the
Chaldeans did not wage that war, but under the authority of God, as we
have often seen, and shall have to notice often again.

<span id="xviii.xviii-p7"></span>Then he says, *At the noise of the
neighings of his strong ones,* etc. He calls the horses “*strong,“*
<span id="xviii.xviii-p7.1"></span>אבירים, *abirim;* and as he had not
described them, he now does so. *Trembled,* he says, *has the land at
the noise of the neighings of his strong ones* As he mentions the
neighings of horses, we must understand “strong” as referring to the
horses themselves. *Come,* he says, *shall they, and shall devour the
land and its fullness, the city and its inhabitants* Here is an
irregularity as to the number; for he puts city for cities, as he
threatens not only Jerusalem, but also the neighboring cities. Whatever
then might be the abundance in the land, the enemies would devour it;
and he says also, that they would devour the cities and their
inhabitants. It follows —

<span id="xviii.xix"></span>

<span id="xviii.xix-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017)<span id="xviii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xix-p2"></span>**17**. For, behold, I will send
serpents, cockatrices, among you, which *will* not *be* charmed, and
they shall bite you, saith the Lord

<span id="xviii.xix-p3"></span>**17**. Quia ecce ego mitto in vos
serpentes, regulos (quidam tamen subaudiunt copulam, serpentes et
regulos) quibus nulla erit incantatio, et mordebunt vos, dicit Jehova.

<span id="xviii.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xix-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xix-p6"></span>He increases their terror by another
comparison, — that not only enemies would violently attack them, but
that their bitings would be venomous. He had spoken of horses, and
mentioned their violent onsets; but he now expresses another thing, —
that the Jews would have to carry on war with *vipers* and *basilisks*
The Prophet no doubt only meant to shew that they could not possibly
escape; for as from serpents men can hardly escape, especially when they
are numerous, and assail them on every side, so he intimates, that the
war would be fatal to the Jews, when attacked by serpents and vipers.

<span id="xviii.xix-p7"></span>*They shall bite you,* he says, *and for
them* there will be *no incantation;* that is, by no means can they be
driven away from you. If one asks, Can serpents be driven away by
incantations? the answer is, — that the Prophet here does not refer to
what is true, but speaks according to the common opinions of men. It has
been thought in all ages, that serpents can be driven away by
incantations, or be killed, or be deprived of the power of hurting. “The
deadly snake, “says Virgil, in Eclo. viii., “is dissolved in the meadows
by singing.” What that heathen poet has said has been believed also by
other nations; and as I have already said, it has been a commonly
received opinion that serpents may be charmed. As then it was a common
belief, the Prophet says, “If ye think that these serpents can be turned
away, and the hurt that proceeds from them, ye are greatly deceived; for
there will be for them no incantation.” There is also a mention made of
incantation in <span id="xviii.xix-p7.1"></span>[Ps
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)<span id="xviii.xix-p7.1"></span>:
but as I have already said, the prophets accommodate their words to the
comprehension of men. The Prophet does here also indirectly reprove the
Jews, by comparing their false resources to incantations, as though he
had said, — “Ye think that ye can soothe your enemies by flatteries and
bribery, so that they may not hurt you; and ye also think that ye have
ready at hand various means by which you may avert the evils which
impend over you: in vain, he says, ye deceive yourselves with such
hopes; for all your incantations as to these serpents shall be to no
purpose, and wholly useless.”

<span id="xviii.xix-p8"></span>We now then perceive the Prophet’s
intention, and see that by this figure he ironically derides the crafty
measures of the people, and all the remedies which they thought they had
in readiness when assailed by their enemies. It follows —

<span id="xviii.xx"></span>

<span id="xviii.xx-p1"></span><span id="xviii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#018)<span id="xviii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xx-p2"></span>**18** *When* I would comfort myself
against sorrow, my heart *is* faint in me.

<span id="xviii.xx-p3"></span>**18**. Roborate meum (*vel,* quum vellem
roborare me) super dolorem, super me cor meum infirmum est.

<span id="xviii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xx-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xx-p6"></span>Interpreters explain differently the word
<span id="xviii.xx-p6.1"></span>מבלגיתי, *mebelgiti.* Some take <span
id="xviii.xx-p6.2"></span>מ, *mem,* in the sense of <span
id="xviii.xx-p6.3"></span>ב, *beth;* but others, with whom I agree,
regard it as a servile, deriving the word from <span
id="xviii.xx-p6.4"></span>בלג, *belag;* and this letter is prefixed to
it to shew that it is a noun. The <span id="xviii.xx-p6.5"></span>ת,
*tau*, also at the end, is a servile.  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229)

<span id="xviii.xx-p12"></span>The Prophet then means, that he sought
*strength in his sorrow,* but that his *heart was weak* He no doubt, I
think, sets forth in this verse the perverse character of the people, —
that they sought through their obstinacy to drive away every punishment.
This could not indeed be referred to himself, or to those who were like
him, as we know how fearful are God’s servants with regard to his wrath;
for as the fear of God prevails in their hearts, so they are easily
terrified by his judgment; but hypocrites and wicked men ever harden
themselves as far as they can. They then strengthened themselves against
God, and thought in this way to be conquerors. Since they thus
perversely contended with God, the Prophet sets forth here the great
hardness of the people: *I would,* he says, *strengthen myself in my
sorrow; but my heart is within me weak;* that is, “In vain are these
remedies tried; in vain have ye hitherto endeavored to strengthen
yourselves, and have sought fortresses and strongholds against God; for
sorrow will at length prevail, as the Lord will add troubles to
troubles, so that ye must at length succumb under them.”

<span id="xviii.xx-p13"></span>He means the same when he says, his
*heart* was within him *weak*: “I have, “he says, “been oppressed with
sorrow, when I thought I had strength enough to resist.” For thus the
ungodly think manfully to act, when they madly resist God; but at length
they find by the event that they in vain seek thus to strengthen
themselves; for our heart, he says, will become within us weak, and
debility itself will at last oppress and overwhelm us.

<span id="xviii.xxi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xviii.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we have
been abundantly taught by ancient examples how insane they are who bend
not under thy threatenings, and repent not in due time while thou
invitest them to repentance, — O grant, that we may wholly give up
ourselves to be disciplined by thee, and that we may not only bear with
submissive minds to be chastised, but also learn by thy warnings to
return without delay to thee, and that we may so remain in obedience to
thee, that with unceasing perseverance we may fight under thy banner,
until having at length finished our warfare, we shall enjoy that blessed
rest which has been prepared for us by Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xviii.xxi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Fourth

<span id="xviii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#019)<span
id="xviii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p2"></span>**19**. Behold the voice of the cry of
the daughter of my people because of them that dwell in a far country:
*Is* not the LORD in Zion? *is* not her king in her? Why have they
provoked me to anger with their graven images, *and* with strange
vanities?

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p3"></span>**19**. Ecce vox clamoris filiae populi
mei a terra longinqua, An Jehova non est in Sion? an rex ejus non est in
ea? Quare provocarunt me ad iram in suis sculptilibus? in vanitati-bus
aiieni?

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p6"></span>The Prophet in this verse assumes
different characters: he first denounces ruin, which, though near, was
not yet dreaded by the people; he then represents the people, and
relates what they would say; in the third place, he adds an answer in
God’s name to check the clamors of the people.

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p7"></span>When he says that the *daughter* of his
*people* uttered a *cry,* he is to be understood as referring to a
future time; for the Jews as yet continued perversely in their sins, and
ridiculed all threatenings, and regarded as nothing what was said by the
prophets. Jeremiah then does not mean that his own nation cried, as
though they dreaded future calamities, (for they were heedlessly
secure;) but he condemns their indifference, as though he had said, “Ye
indeed do now indulge your own delusions, and think that your felicity
is to be perpetual; but in a short time your cry will be heard.” The
words, *From a distant land,* interpreters apply to the Chaldeans and
Assyrians, as though the Prophet had said, “Ye hope for a perpetual
rest, because your enemies are far from you; hence distance and delay in
marching produce this security in you; for it seems not to you credible
that your enemies shall make such a journey, except with much expense
and much trouble; but in this opinion you are deceived; for though the
Chaldeans and the Assyrians are far distant from you, yet they shall
soon come and constrain you to utter a cry: ye cannot now bear the
warnings of the prophets, my voice ye cannot endure; but God will
constrain you to utter a different voice, for ye shall cry, but without
any avail.”

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p8"></span>This meaning is not without reason on
its side: if then the Prophet’s words be thus taken, I offer no
objection; for hypocrites derive confidence from the present appearance
of things; when they see that there is quietness on every side, they
fear no danger; when God threatens them, and shews not immediately his
rods, they ridicule or despise them.: thus have we seen in other places.

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p9"></span>But another meaning is not unsuitable,
— that Jeremiah describes the lamentations of the people in exile, after
having been driven into Chaldea and Assyria: *The voice,* then, *of the
daughter of my people from a distant land;*  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) that is, after having been deprived of
their country, they will then begin to cry, and for this reason, because
they wished the prophets to give them rest, and refused to bear any
reproofs. Appropriate also is this view; but I prefer the former, — that
the people would shortly find out how foolishly they deluded themselves,
when God by his servants threatened them with ruin and destruction: and
hence he uses the demonstrative particle, “Behold:” *Behold,* he says,
*the voice of crying;* and yet great was the silence then at Jerusalem:
for though in their pleasure they uttered some voices, yet as to
weepings and lamentations the whole city was silent. The Prophet then
refers to what was hidden. But God usually acts in this way, as he
afterwards executes suddenly his judgment; for when the wicked say,
Peace, peace, destruction comes and suddenly overwhelms them. (<span
id="xviii.xxiii-p10.2"></span>[1Th
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008)<span
id="xviii.xxiii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p11"></span>He adds in the second place, *Is not
Jehovah in Sion? Is not her king in her?* The Prophet no doubt expresses
here the complaints of the people on finding themselves overwhelmed with
so many and so great evils, without receiving any aid from heaven. For
hypocrites ever expostulate with God; and as they consider that they are
unjustly chastised, they reject every instruction, and avoid it as much
as they can; in short, they seek stupidity, that they may deceive
themselves with vain delusions. As then it is usual with hypocrites to
reject every apprehension of God’s wrath, Jeremiah strikingly describes
their contumacy, “*Is not Jehovah in Sion? Is not her king in her?*” For
they accused God of falsehood, as though he had deceived them, since he
had promised to be the defender of the city, and of the whole land. As
then they thought that God was bound to them by this promise, they
daringly raged against him, “What means this? for God has chosen this
place, where Abraham’s race might worship him; it has been as it were
his earthly kingdom: but now what can this mean, that enemies are coming
here? Can God ever permit them to do so? This is not possible, except
God himself be overcome.”

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p12"></span>We hence see the import of the
Prophet’s words; for he here imitates the perverse language of the
people, and recites the words which he knew most of them used. We have
before found him addressing them,

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p13"></span>“Trust not in words of falsehood,
saying, The temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of
Jehovah,”  
(<span id="xviii.xxiii-p13.2"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span
id="xviii.xxiii-p13.2"></span>;)

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p14"></span>for they were wont perversely to
allege against God, the temple, and to regard it as a shield to ward off
every evil. In the same way the Prophet says now, “*Is not God in
Sion?*” and then, “*Is not her king in her?*” The Jews were not only
persuaded that God would be propitious to them, but they doubted not of
their own safety, while they could turn their eyes to their king. They
therefore uttered these words, as though they were beyond the chance of
danger: for we know what God had declared respecting the kingdom, that
it would continue for ever: So long as the sun and moon shall be in
heaven, shall remain the seat of David, and his posterity flourish.
(<span id="xviii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>[Ps.
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span
id="xviii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>.) Hence they connected the king with God;
as though they had said, “Here is God worshipped, and his power dwells
in the temple; the king also, whom he has set over us, is a sure pledge
of his favor; and the perpetuity of his kingdom has been promised to us:
it then follows, that either God is untrue, and that we have been
deceived with vain promises, or that our enemies will come in vain; for
when they shall make every effort, God, who is the guardian of our
safety, will easily drive them away.”

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p15"></span>At the first view this seems to be an
evidence of faith, as the people seemed persuaded that they should be
safe and secure under the protection of God, and as they turned their
eyes to that kingdom, which was a remarkable exhibition of God’s
presence: for as David was a type of Christ, and also his posterity, no
other refuge could have been sought by the faithful than that which is
here described. But we know how hypocrites swell with vain confidence,
while yet they are wholly destitute of faith, and how they become
wantonly insolent whenever God threatens them, as though they held him
bound at their will. As then the ungodly are wont thus to abuse the name
of God, it is no wonder that they imitate the language of his true
servants: but yet they are wholly different. How so? They lay hold on
the promises, but they have no faith nor repentance. “This is my rest
for ever: it then follows that we shall be ever safe, for God cannot be
overcome by any force of arms, by any onset of enemies; since he has
taken us under his protection, what have we to fear?” But, at the same
time, they despised God and all his teaching.

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p16"></span>We hence see how foolish was the
boasting of that people, since they wholly despised the holy name of
God, and did swell only with wind, inasmuch as they were altogether
destitute of faith and piety. We must also ever keep in mind what I have
already said, — that the Jews not only entertained this vain confidence,
but also presumptuously rose up against God, as though he had deceived
them, having promised that Sion would be his perpetual rest: they now
ask him, why he did not defend the city, as he dwelt in Sion? and why
was not the king their protection, since it had been said, “So long as
the sun and moon shall be in heaven, shall remain the throne of David?”
Now follows God’s answer.

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p17"></span>*Why* then *have they provoked me with
their carvings, and the vanities of the foreigner?* Here God retorts
their false complaints. We hence learn, that in the last clause the
contumacy of the people is what is set forth by Jeremiah: they raged
against God, because he did not aid them in time. God shews how absurdly
they complained against him, and accused him: *Why,* he says, *have they
provoked me?* “*They* say now that they are forsaken, because there is
no faithfulness in me: I have not betrayed them, nor forsaken them, but
they have forsaken *me* ” We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet. We
observe, indeed, that the passage is abrupt, for the Prophet assumes
different characters; but as to what is meant there is nothing doubtful.

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p18"></span>God says, that he was *provoked with
carvings:* it hence follows, that the temple was polluted. God had
indeed promised to dwell in the temple, but on a certain condition,
provided he was faithfully, and in a legitimate manner, worshipped
there; but the people with their pollutions had defiled the temple. God
then shews that there was a just cause why he had departed, according to
what is set forth more fully in the tenth chapter of Ezekiel: God shews
to his servant in that vision that he had left the temple, and for this
reason, — because his holiness could not be blended with ungodly and
filthy profanations. He first mentions *carvings* generally, and then he
adds, *the vanities of the foreigner:* and here he amplifies the sin of
the people, because they borrowed here and there from foreigners such
superstitions as were unknown to their fathers, as though they wished to
banish God from the temple, and from the whole land.  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) It follows —

<span id="xviii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#020)<span id="xviii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p2"></span>**20**. The harvest is past, the summer
is ended, and we are not saved.

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p3"></span>**20**. Transiit messis, finita est
aestas, et nos non sumus servati.

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p6"></span>The Prophet shews now in the name of the
people what was the hindrance. At the time Jeremiah spoke, the *Jews*
confidently boasted that God was their defender; and they did not think
that the Chaldeans were preparing for an expedition. But as they were
inflated with false confidence, the Prophet here recites what they would
presently say*, Passed has the harvest, ended has the summer, and we
have not been saved;* that is, “We thought that the associates, with
whom we have made alliances, would at length come to our aid; and we
have in this respect been deceived.” In saying, that the harvest had
passed, some think that they expected help from the Egyptians after they
had gathered their corn into barns; for there is then more leisure, and
then also there are provisions for the army. But the Prophet seems to
include the whole time suitable for carrying on war; as though he had
said, “What will become of us at last? for if the Egyptians intended to
bring help, they would have done so at the suitable time of the year;
but passed has the harvest, and the summer has ended: will they come
now, when the severity of winter constrains them to keep at home?.”

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p7"></span>It is the same as though they had said,
“There is no hope of aid either from the Egyptians or from other
confederates, for the seasonable time is gone by.” There was nothing
less credible to the Jews at that time; for as it; has elsewhere
appeared, they doubted not but that the Egyptians would bring them aid,
and supply them with help instead of God: but the Prophet intimates,
that whatever the Egyptians might have promised would be in vain, and
wholly useless, that the people would at length find out by experience
that their promises were mere trumperies, yea, impostures and deceits.
In short, he describes in the name of the people (that what he said
might be more emphatical) what they would soon find out, though they
would not believe it at that time. It follows —

<span id="xviii.xxv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxv-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#021)<span id="xviii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxv-p2"></span>**21**. For the hurt of the daughter of
my people am I hurt; I am black; astonishment hath taken hold on me.

<span id="xviii.xxv-p3"></span>**21**. Super contritione filiae populi
mei contritus sum, obtenebratus sum, stupor (*nam* <span
id="xviii.xxv-p3.1"></span>שמם *est stupere et attonitum esse;* stupor
*ergo)* apprehendit me.

<span id="xviii.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxv-p6"></span>As the hardness of the people was so
great, that the threatenings we have observed did not touch them, the
Prophet now ascribes to himself what he had *before* attributed to them.
*We* then see how the Prophet varies his mode of speaking; but it was
necessary, for he was at a loss to find a way to address them
sufficiently strong to penetrate into their stony and even iron hearts.
We need not wonder, then, that there are so many figurative terms used
by the Prophet; for it was needful to set *before* them God’s judgment
in various ways, that the people might be awakened out of their torpid
state.

<span id="xviii.xxv-p7"></span>He then says, that he was *bruised for
the bruising* of his people. He was no doubt ridiculed by most of them:
“*Oh!* thou grievest for thine own evils; it is well and prosperous with
us: who has asked thee for this pity? Think not, then, that thou canst
gain any favor with us, for we are contented with our lot. Weep rather
for thine own calamities, if thou hast any at home; but suffer us at the
same time to enjoy our pleasures, since God is propitious and indulgent
to *us.*” Thus then was the Prophet derided; but yet he warns the
obstinate people, that they might be less excusable: he says, that he
was *rendered black;* for sorrow brings blackness with it, and makes
dark the face of man: it is a metaphorical expression. He says at last,
that he was *astonished*  <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) The
astonishment with which he was seized he no doubt sets down as being the
opposite of the people’s torpor and insensibility, for they had no fear
for themselves. It follows —

<span id="xviii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022)<span id="xviii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p2"></span>**22** *Is there* no balm in Gilead? *is
there* no physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of
my people recovered?

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p3"></span>**22**. An resina (aut, balsamus) non
est in Gilead? an medicus non illic est? nam cur non ascendit sanitas
filiae populi mei?

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p6"></span>The Prophet intimates in these words
that the slaughter of the people would be so fatal that they would in
vain seek remedies; as though he had said, that the disease would be
incurable, and altogether deadly. The people, no doubt, ever devised for
themselves many kinds of aids, according to what is commonly done; for
ungodly men, when any danger appears, look around them on all sides; and
when they think that they can be protected by any kind of assistance, or
by any of the means they contrive, they rest secure and free from every
trouble. Hence the Prophet, that he might dispel such vain confidences,
says that there *would be no rosin* to heal their diseases. The rosin is
a liquid which flows, not from every tree, but from the pine, and trees
of that kind.

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p7"></span>*We* may conclude from this passage, as
well as from other passages, that the best and the most valuable rosin
was found in that part of Judea, called Gilead. Indeed the whole of
Judea produced rosin; but as it was more abundant in Gilead, and as that
rosin was more odoriferous and more powerful, he expressly mentions that
place. The word <span id="xviii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>צרי *tsari,* means
also balsam: and as to this let each follow his own opinion, for the
Jews themselves do not altogether agree. They who render it “*treacle*”
wholly depart from the meaning, and offer what is absurd; for we know
that treacle is made up of several ingredients: now rosin is not any
sort of gum, but a thick liquid, as I have said, which belongs to trees;
and from it comes rosin, and mastic, and other things; for the liquid
becomes thick after it has flown from the trees.

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p8"></span>He says then, as one astonished, *Is
there not rosin in Gilead? Is there not a physician there?* But the
Prophet foretells here by the Spirit, that there would be such a
destruction as could not by any means be avoided, that the disease would
be incurable. *For why,* he says, *does not health come to the daughter
of my people?* The reason is added, because healing could not be
expected by the people; not that the Jews perceived this, for, on the
contrary, they boasted, as I have said, of their perfect safety. But the
Prophet here declares that a deadly disease was at hand, which would
inevitably destroy the wicked  <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233)
Afterwards follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc17017.htm#fr_214) <span
id="xviii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span> Though it be improper to render the word
“consult;” yet the meaning is the same: they sought them, that is, their
counsel and direction. They sought them in all emergencies. “To inquire
of the Lord,“ in <span id="xviii.i-p14.1"></span>[Ge
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#022)<span id="xviii.i-p14.1"></span>,
is literally “to seek the Lord;” and “to inquire of God,” in <span
id="xviii.i-p14.2"></span>[Ex
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#015)<span id="xviii.i-p14.2"></span>,
is literally “to seek God.” Indeed, to inquire of or to ask, that is,
counsel, seems to be the most common meaning of the word. “Sought,“ is
the *Vulgate* and *Targum,* — “consulted,“ is the *Syriac*, — and
“cleaved to,“ is the *Septuagint* and *Arabic;* and this is the idea of
*Calvin.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc17017.htm#fr_215) <span
id="xviii.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span> It would be better to render <span
id="xviii.i-p15.1"></span> אמונהbefore the verbs here as an adverb,
*because, as,* or *inasmuch as.* There is a pronoun following every
verb, —

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span>**2.** And they shall expose them to the
sun, And to the moon, and to all the host of heaven: As they had loved
them, and as they had served them, And as they had walked after them,
And as they had sought them, And as they had bowed down to them, They
shall not be gathered, nor buried; For dung on the face of the land
shall they be.

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span>The order here is from the principle to
the action, and not the contrary, as is often the case: love — service —
walking according to the rules prescribed — seeking counsel-and
worshipping. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc17017.htm#fr_216) <span
id="xviii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p8"></span> The literal rendering of this verse is as
follows, —

<span id="xviii.ii-p9"></span>And chosen shall be death rather than life
by all the remnant, — Who *shall* remain of this wicked family, In all
the places of such as *shall* remain, Whither I shall have driven them,
Saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="xviii.ii-p10"></span>*Blayney* justly observes, that the
participle in the second line is in apposition with “remnant,“ as
explanatory of it, and is not to be put in the genitive case, as in our
version. A similar construction is found in <span
id="xviii.ii-p10.1"></span>[Jer
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#008)<span id="xviii.ii-p10.1"></span>.
But there is no sufficient authority or reason for omitting the same
participle after “places,“ as is done by *Blayney.* Such repetitions are
common in the prophets. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc17017.htm#fr_217) <span
id="xviii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p12"></span> Most agree in this view,-*Gataker,
Venema, Henry, Lowth, Blayney,* and *Scott.* All the versions favor this
view, giving two different meanings to <span
id="xviii.v-p12.1"></span>שוב, repeated in the last clause, except the
*Syriac,* which gives this version, “Though they ought to repent, they
yet do not repent.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc17017.htm#fr_218) <span
id="xviii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p14"></span> The idea of revolt or apostasy is given
by the ancient versions to the verb used at the beginning of the verse,
and also to the noun which follows, and not that of rebellion, as by
*Calvin.* The same meaning is given by *Gataker, Venema,* and *Blayney*;
and they consider that Jerusalem is in apposition with “this people,“ in
this manner, — Why has this people, Jerusalem, Revolted with perpetual
revolt? As it has been already observed, the verb <span
id="xviii.v-p14.1"></span>שוב, with all its derivations, means strictly
to *turn,* but is used in the sense of turning to or from, that is, of
returning or of departing. The context is our guide. It can hardly be
supposed to have these two meanings in the same passage. All agree in
giving it the idea of returning, at the end of the fourth verse, and at
the end of this verse, the fifth; and in the three other instances in
which it occurs here, they give it the idea of turning away or
departing. I am disposed to think that it has the first meaning
throughout the passage. I would render these two verses thus, —

<span id="xviii.v-p15"></span>**4.** Thou shalt also say to them, Thus
saith Jehovah, — Do men fall and not rise again? Does *any one* return
and not return? —

<span id="xviii.v-p16"></span>**5.** Why, — often have this people
returned, Jerusalem *is* returning continually! — They hold fast deceit,
they have refused to return.

<span id="xviii.v-p17"></span>The hypocrisy of the people is the
subject: they pretended to return, but did not really return; they were
deceitful. It is a sort of a dialogue. The beginning of the next verse
is an answer to the end of this, —

<span id="xviii.v-p18"></span>**6.** I hearkened and heard, “No:“ thus
they say: *Yet* no man has repented of his evil, — Saying, What have I
done? Every one returns to his own course, Like a horse rushing into
battle.

<span id="xviii.v-p19"></span>The charge of refusing to return was
negatived. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc17017.htm#fr_219) <span
id="xviii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p8"></span> It is curious the variety as to the
names of birds in this verse, as given in the ancient versions:
*Vulgate;* kite — turtle — swallow — stork; *Septuagint,* stork — turtle
— swallow — sparrows; *Syriac,* stork — turtle — crane — swallow;
*Arabic,* crane — turtle — swallow — birds; and the *Targum* is, stork —
turtle — crane — swallow. The names in our versions seem to be the most
correct, and are adopted by *Venema* and *Blayney*, stork — turtle —
crane — swallow; the same with the *Syriac* and the *Targum* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc17017.htm#fr_220) <span
id="xviii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p9"></span> The latter part of this verse has
another meaning according to the ancient versions. They are
substantially to this purport, —

<span id="xviii.viii-p10"></span>Behold, surely to deceive *is what* the
false pen of the scribes has done.

<span id="xviii.viii-p11"></span>The *Vulgate,* with which the rest
materially agree, is as follows, —

<span id="xviii.viii-p12"></span>Verily, falsehood has the false pen of
the scribes wrought.

<span id="xviii.viii-p13"></span>As a proof of this it is added in the
next verse, that those who pretended to be wise were made ashamed, etc.
That the reference is made to the false glosses of the scribes, the
expounders of the law, is confirmed by verse 11. I render the whole
verse thus, —

<span id="xviii.viii-p14"></span>**8.** How can ye say, “Wise *are* we,
And the law of Jehovah *is* with us?” Indeed! — Behold, to deceive Has
the deceptive pen of the scribes served.

<span id="xviii.viii-p15"></span>He ironically admits that they had the
law; but he refers to the false interpretation of the teachers; and in
the next verse he mentions the *effect* on the pretended wise, and *the
fact* as to God’s law, —

<span id="xviii.viii-p16"></span>**9.** Ashamed have become the wise,
They have been dismayed and ensnared: Behold, the word of Jehovah have
they despised; And wisdom, what have they!

<span id="xviii.viii-p17"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc17017.htm#fr_221) <span
id="xviii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p9"></span> It would be better to consider the
*shame* in this verse as referring to the people, and the *want* of
shame in <span id="xviii.ix-p9.1"></span>[Jer
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#012)<span id="xviii.ix-p9.1"></span>,
as applied to the teachers, the scribes, the false interpreters of the
law, who promised peace, while there was no peace. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc17017.htm#fr_222) <span
id="xviii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p13"></span> The verb is here followed by <span
id="xviii.ix-p13.1"></span>ב: see note on <span
id="xviii.ix-p13.2"></span>[Jer
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#037)<span id="xviii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc17017.htm#fr_223) <span
id="xviii.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p9"></span> It would be more suitable to render
“for” because, as it is explanatory of <span
id="xviii.xii-p9.1"></span>לכן, “for this,“ or, for this reason, at the
beginning of the verse. This illative, and others too, are often used
anticipatively, —

<span id="xviii.xii-p10"></span>For this reason, give will I Their wives
to strangers, their fields to inheritors; Because from the least even to
the greatest, Ever one covets gain; From the prophet even to the priest,
Every one practices deception.

<span id="xviii.xii-p11"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc17017.htm#fr_224) <span
id="xviii.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p8"></span> See note on <span
id="xviii.xiii-p8.2"></span>[Jeremiah
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014)<span
id="xviii.xiii-p8.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc17017.htm#fr_225) <span
id="xviii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p10"></span> This may be differently understood.
There are here throughout the passage two parties spoken of, — the
people, and the priests together with the prophets. The “wise” men, in
<span id="xviii.xiv-p10.1"></span>[Jer
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#009)<span id="xviii.xiv-p10.1"></span>,
made ashamed were the people deluded by the priests and prophets. Those
who felt no shame, mentioned in this verse, though their words proved
false, were the priests and prophets: and hence we see the import of
this expression here, that they were appointed to fall with the fallen,
that punishment would reach them as well as the people.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p11"></span>This verse is somewhat different from
the fifteenth of the sixth chapter, and may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xviii.xiv-p12"></span>**12.** Have they been ashamed, Because
they have done abomination? Even with shame they are not ashamed, And
how to blush they know not: Therefore fall shall they with the fallen;
At the time of their visitation They shall perish, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p13"></span>The “abomination” was the perversion of
the law so as to justify idolatry and all kinds of wickedness. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc17017.htm#fr_226) <span
id="xviii.xv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p9"></span> The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xviii.xv-p10"></span>**13.** I will gather their ingathering,
saith Jehovah: No grapes *shall be* on the vine, And no figs on the
fig-tree, Even the leaf *shalt* fade away; For I will give *these* to
those *who* shall pass through them.

<span id="xviii.xv-p11"></span>God threatens the Jews with the
deprivation of the fruits of the earth. He would gather their fruits by
means of their enemies, such as would pass through them; and there would
be no limits for them. As to the last line, it is a common thing in
Hebrew to leave out the relative “who” before a verb in the future
tense. So it is in *Welsh* —

<span id="xviii.xv-p12"></span><span id="xviii.xv-p12.1"></span>Canys
rhoddav y *rhain* iddynt hwy a dramwyant trwyddynt.

<span id="xviii.xv-p13"></span>The most literal and the most suitable to
the context is this rendering. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc17017.htm#fr_227) <span
id="xviii.xvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p8"></span> The verb <span
id="xviii.xvi-p8.2"></span> דמהmeans, to be silent, to be reduced to
silence; and the silence is that of inactivity, or of weakness, or of
death. The silence of inactivity seems to be the meaning in the first
instance, and the silence of weakness in the second: “Let us be silent,“
or, let us rest; “God hath made us silent,“ or, made us feeble, or,
reduced to nothing our strength: —

<span id="xviii.xvi-p9"></span>**14.** Why do we sit still? be ye
assembled, And let us go into fortified cities, And let us be silent
there; For Jehovah our God has reduced us to silence; And he has given
us to drink the water of hemlock, Because we have sinned against
Jehovah.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p10"></span>That <span id="xviii.xvi-p10.1"></span>
ראשis “hemlock,“ or some poisonous herb, is evident from <span
id="xviii.xvi-p10.2"></span>[Ho
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004)<span
id="xviii.xvi-p10.2"></span>. “The water” seems to be the juice in this
instance — “the juice of hemlock.” It is rendered “the water of gall,
<span id="xviii.xvi-p10.3"></span>ὕδωρ χολὢς,” by the *Septuagint,* and
the same by the *Vulgate; “*bitter waters,“ by the *Syriac; “*water of
bitterness,“ by the *Arabic; “*the cup of malediction,“ by the *Targum*.
“Water of hemlock” is the rendering of *Blayney.*

<span id="xviii.xvi-p11"></span>*Horsley* renders the third and the
fourth line as follows: —

<span id="xviii.xvi-p12"></span>And let us there sit in despair, Since
the Lord our God hath brought us to despair.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p13"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc17017.htm#fr_228) <span
id="xviii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvii-p4"></span> The word is <span
id="xviii.xvii-p4.1"></span>קוה, hoping, or longing, rendered by all the
ancient versions, as though it were in the first person plural. It may
be taken as a noun, —

<span id="xviii.xvii-p5"></span>The hope was for peace, but there was no
good! For a time of healing, but behold terror!

<span id="xviii.xvii-p6"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc17017.htm#fr_229) <span
id="xviii.xx-p6.6"></span>

<span id="xviii.xx-p7"></span> The ancient versions and the *Targum* all
differ as to the meaning of this word; and it is difficult to make the
original to agree with any of them. The word, as in the received text,
is a verbal noun from Hiphil, with a *iod* affixed to it, and is either
a personal noun in the feminine gender, “my consoler,“ or
“strengthener,“ meaning his own soul,-or a common noun, “my
consolation,“ or “strength,“ meaning God. But *Schultens,* regarding the
verb as signifying to smile or to laugh, and thinking that it means here
the laugh of misery or of contempt, renders it “O thou (*i.e.,* the
daughter of Sion) that grinnest at me for pain,“ and sayest, “within me
the heart is sick.” The *Targum* seems to favor this view, as it
mentions the division of the people. *Blayney,* according to several
copies, divides the word thus, <span id="xviii.xx-p7.1"></span>מבלי
גיתי, and considers the one as a negative, and the other a verbal noun
from <span id="xviii.xx-p7.2"></span>גהה, to heal, and renders the verse
thus: —

<span id="xviii.xx-p8"></span>Sorrow is upon me past my remedying,  
My heart within me is faint.

<span id="xviii.xx-p9"></span>Still the simplest way, and the most
suitable to the passage, is to take the word as a common noun,
signifying consolation, comfort or strength, and to consider the words
as addressed to God, —

<span id="xviii.xx-p10"></span>My strength! within me *is* sorrow,
Within me *is* my heart faint.

<span id="xviii.xx-p11"></span>“Faint,“ that is, through grief. It is
rendered “grieve,“ or “is sorrowful,“ by all the ancient versions and
the *Targum.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc17017.htm#fr_230) <span
id="xviii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p10"></span> Literally it is, “*The* voice of the
shout of the daughter of my people,” four words in succession, and three
in regimine by juxtaposition. The *Welsh* is exactly the same, “<span
id="xviii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>Llev gwaedd merch vy mhobl“ — Voice shout
daughter my people. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc17017.htm#fr_231) <span
id="xviii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p19"></span> The meaning of this verse is viewed
by some differently. Their exile is considered as referred to at the
beginning of the verse, “from a distant land,” — or literally, “from the
land of the remote ones.” All the versions render the preposition
“from,” and not “because of,” as in our version. The Prophet
contemplates them as in banishment, and relates what they would say, and
what answer God had for them: and they seem to have been thus
contemplated to the end of the chapter, —

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p20"></span>**19.** Behold the voice of the cry of
the daughter of my people From the land of the remote ones, — “*Was* not
Jehovah in Sion? *Was* not her king within her?” “Why! they provoked me
with their carved images, With the vanities of the foreigner.”

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p21"></span>Then follows the continuation of the
cry in exile, —

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p22"></span>**20.** “Passed has the harvest, Ended
has the summer, And we have not been saved!”

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p23"></span>The “King,” in verse 19, is “Jehovah”
in the former line. “The vanities of the foreigner” were idols: they
were vanities, because they could do nothing, neither good nor evil.
What made them gods were the imaginations of the infatuated and
superstitious. The gods of many now are nothing better. Every notion of
God is false but what is consistent with his word. The Socinian god is
not the true God; it is the fiction of a perverted mind. Nor is the god
of the thorough Papists anything better, nor the god of the Pharisee. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc17017.htm#fr_232) <span
id="xviii.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxv-p8"></span> To keep throughout the metaphorical
character of this verse, it ought to be rendered thus, —

<span id="xviii.xxv-p9"></span>For the bruising of the daughter of my
people I was bruised, I became black;  
Desolation possessed me.

<span id="xviii.xxv-p10"></span>But taking the words as applied to the
mind, divested of metaphor, we must render them thus, —

<span id="xviii.xxv-p11"></span>For the sorrow of the daughter of my
people I sorrowed, I mourned;  
Astonishment possessed me.

<span id="xviii.xxv-p12"></span>And this “astonishment” he explains in
the next verse: there were means of restoration, and yet the people were
not restored; at this he was astonished. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc17017.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xviii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p9"></span> As the whole passage, from the 19th
verse, is anticipative, and represents the ease of the Jews in
captivity, this verse is to be viewed in the same light, and rendered in
the past tense, —

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p10"></span>**22.** Was there not balm in Gilead?
Was there not a healer there?  
Why then has not succeeded The recovery of the daughter of my people?

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p11"></span>Whether balm or rosin be meant, it
makes no great difference; its healing virtues had become proverbial;
and in this sense it is to be taken here. *Kimchi* held that it was balm
or balsam, which *Josephus* reports was first brought to Judea by the
Queen of Sheba. But the tree which produced <span
id="xviii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>צרי, was not an exotic, but indigenous in
Judea, as it appears from <span id="xviii.xxvi-p11.2"></span>[Gen.
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025), [Gen.
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#010)<span
id="xviii.xxvi-p11.2"></span>; and it grew especially in Gilead, as it
appears from this passage and from <span
id="xviii.xxvi-p11.3"></span>[Jer
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011)<span
id="xviii.xxvi-p11.3"></span> *Bochart* maintained that rosin is meant
by the word, the gum drawn from the Terebinthus or the turpentine tree,
which possesses strong healing virtues. It is rendered, “<span
id="xviii.xxvi-p11.4"></span>ῥητίνη — rosin,” by the *Septuagint,* the
*Vulgate,* and the *Arabic;* and “<span
id="xviii.xxvi-p11.5"></span>cera — wax,” by the *Syriac.* “Healer,” or
physician, is rendered “<span id="xviii.xxvi-p11.6"></span>ἰατρὸς —
healer,” by the *Septuagint,* and “<span
id="xviii.xxvi-p11.7"></span>*medicus,*” by the *Vulgate, Syriac,* and
*Arabic.* It appears that Gilead was not only celebrated for its healing
gum, but also for its medical men.

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p12"></span>The balm was the word of God, and the
healer who applied it was the prophet or the teacher.

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p13"></span>Perhaps the most literal rendering of
the first two lines is the following, and the most suitable to express
astonishment, —

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p14"></span>The balm, not in Gilead!:  
Verily, a healer, not there!

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p15"></span>— *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc17018)
