[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc17018)  [Next](cc17020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 17: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part I*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="xx-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="xx-p3"></span>JEREMIAH

<span id="xx-p4"></span>CHAPTERS 1—9

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1** The words of Jeremiah, the son of
Hilkiah, *one* of the priests who were in Anathoth, in the land of
Benjamin:

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2** Even the word of Jehovah came to him in
the days of Josiah, the son of Amon, The king of Judah, in the tenth
year of his reign;

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**3** And it came in the days of Jehoiakim,
the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, to the end of the eleventh year of
Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, to the transmigration of
Jerusalem in the fifth month.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**4** And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying, —

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**5** Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew
thee; Before thou camest forth from the womb, I sanctified thee; A
prophet to the nations have I made thee.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>**6** And I said, — Ah! Lord Jehovah, Behold,
I know not how to speak, for I am a child.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**7** And Jehovah said to me, — Say not, I am
a child; For wheresoever I send thee, thou shalt go; And whatsoever I
command thee, thou shalt say:

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**8** Fear not their face, for I am with
thee, To deliver thee, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**9** And Jehovah extended his hand and
touched my mouth; and Jehovah said to me, — Behold, I have put my words
in thy mouth;

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**10** See, I have set thee today Over
nations and over kingdoms, To pull down and to destroy, To root up and
to demolish, To build and to plant. (**1:47**)

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**11** Then the word of Jehovah came to me
saying, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I said, The rod of a watcher *is
what* I see.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>**12** Then Jehovah said to me, Thou hast
rightly seen, for I watch over my word to do it.

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span>**13** And the word of Jehovah came to me
again, saying, What seest thou? And I said, A pot boiling *is what* I
see; its face is towards the north.

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span>**14** And Jehovah said to me, — From the
north shall break forth an evil On all the inhabitants of the land:

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>**15** For behold, I am calling all the
families Of the kingdoms of the north, saith Jehovah; And they shall
come, *and* set shall each his throne, At the entrance of the gates of
Jerusalem, And on all its walls around, And on all the cities of Judah:

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>**16** And I will execute my judgments on
them For all their wickedness; Because they have forsaken me, And have
burnt incense to strange gods, And bowed down to the works of their own
hands. (**1:58**)

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>**17** Thou then, gird thy loins and arise,
And speak to them whatsoever I command thee; Fear not their face, Lest I
dismay thee before them.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span>**18** And I, behold I have made thee this
day A fortified city, an iron pillar, And a brazen wall, as to the whole
land, Against the kings of Judah, Against his princes, against his
priests, Against the people of the land:

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>**19** And they shall fight with thee, But
shall not prevail over thee, For with thee am I, saith Jehovah, to
deliver thee.

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span>**1** And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying, —

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span>**2** Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,
Saying, Thus saith Jehovah, — I remember thee for *my* kindness to thine
youth And *my* love at thy espousal, When thou didst follow me in the
desert, In a land not sown. (**1:70**)

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**3** Holiness *was* Israel to Jehovah, The
first-fruits of his increase: Whosoever devour him shall be punished,
Evil shall come upon them, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span>**4** Hear the word of Jehovah, ye house of
Jacob, And all the families of the house of Israel:

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span>**5** Thus saith Jehovah, — What iniquity did
your fathers find in me? For they alienated themselves from me, And
walked after vanity, and became vain; (**1:75**)

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span>**6** And they said not, “Where is Jehovah,
Who brought us out of the land of Egypt, And led us through the
wilderness, In a land waste and rugged, In a land horrible and deadly,
In a land through which none passed, And in which no man dwelt?”
(**1:79**)

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span>**7** And I brought you into a fertile land,
To eat its fruit and its abundance; But ye entered and polluted my land,
And my heritage have ye made an abomination:

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span>**8** The priests said not, “Where is
Jehovah?” And they who handled the law, knew not me; And the pastors
dealt treacherously with me, And the prophets prophesied by Baal, And
after things which did not profit, they walked.

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span>**9** Therefore still will I contend with
you, saith Jehovah; And with your children’s children will I contend.

<span id="xx.ii-p12"></span>**10** For pass over to the isles of
Chittim, and see; And to Kedar send, and consider diligently; And see
whether such a thing as this has been done —

<span id="xx.ii-p13"></span>**11** Has a nation changed its gods, Though
they are no gods? Yet my people have changed their glory Unto that which
does not profit.

<span id="xx.ii-p14"></span>**12** Be astonished, ye heavens, at this,
and terrified, Be ye wholly desolated, saith Jehovah: (**1:92**)

<span id="xx.ii-p15"></span>**13** Surely, two evils have my people
done, — Me have they forsaken, the fountain of living waters, And dug
have they for themselves cisterns, Broken cisterns, which hold no
waters!

<span id="xx.ii-p16"></span>**14** Is Israel a servant? Is he one born
in the house? Why is he become a prey?

<span id="xx.ii-p17"></span>**15** Over him roar the lions, They have
raised their voice; They have made his land waste; His cities are burnt
up, Without an inhabitant.

<span id="xx.ii-p18"></span>**16** Even the children of Noph and
Thaphanes Do break thy crown.

<span id="xx.ii-p19"></span>**17** Hast thou not done this for thyself,
By forsaking Jehovah thy God, While he was leading thee in the way?

<span id="xx.ii-p20"></span>**18** And now what hast thou to do in the
way to Egypt, That thou mightest drink the waters of the Nile? And what
hast thou to do in the way to Assyria, That thou mightest drink of the
water of the river?

<span id="xx.ii-p21"></span>**19** Chastise thee shall thine own
wickedness, And thy apostasies, they shall punish thee; And thou shalt
understand and know, That it is an evil and a bitter thing for thee To
have forsaken Jehovah thy God, And that my fear has not been in thee,
Saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="xx.ii-p22"></span>**20** For of old have I broken thy yoke,
Have I burst thy bands; But thou hast said, “I will not serve;” For on
every high hill and under every shady tree Hast thou rambled like a
harlot. (**1:107**)

<span id="xx.ii-p23"></span>**21** I indeed planted thee a choice vine,
Altogether a good seed; How then art thou turned to me A degenerated
foreign vine!

<span id="xx.ii-p24"></span>**22** Even though thou washest thyself with
nitre, And multipliest to thee the herb of the fuller; *Yet* imprinted
is thine iniquity Before my face, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xx.ii-p25"></span>**23** How canst thou say, “I am not
polluted, After Baalim have I not gone?” See thy ways in the valley,
Know what thou hast done, — *Thou* swift dromedary, traversing her ways,
—

<span id="xx.ii-p26"></span>**24** A wild she-ass, used to the desert,
In her own lust snuffing up the wind she meets with: Who can thence
bring her back? Whosoever seeks her, needs not weary himself; In her
month will he find her. (**1:118**)

<span id="xx.ii-p27"></span>**25** Keep thy foot from being unshod, And
thy throat from thirst: Yet thou hast said, “It is all over, No, for I
have loved strangers, And after them will I go.”

<span id="xx.ii-p28"></span>**26** As there is shame to a thief when
caught, So ashamed shall be the house of Israel, Their kings and their
princes, Their priests and their prophets, —

<span id="xx.ii-p29"></span>**27** Who say to the wood, “My father art
thou;” And to the stone, “Thou hast begotten me:” For they have turned
to me the back, not the face; But in the time of their calamity they
say, “Arise and save us.”

<span id="xx.ii-p30"></span>**28** But where are thy gods, Which thou
hast made for thyself? Let them arise, if they can save thee In the time
of thy calamity; For according to the number of thy cities Have been thy
gods, O Judah!

<span id="xx.ii-p31"></span>**29** Why do ye contend with me? Ye have
all dealt perfidiously with me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.ii-p32"></span>**30** In vain have I chastised your
children; Correction they received not; Devoured has the sword your
prophets, As a destroying lion.

<span id="xx.ii-p33"></span>**31** O generation! see ye the word of
Jehovah; Have I been a desert to Israel, or a land of darkness?
Wherefore have my people said, — “We have ruled, we will come no more to
thee.” (**1:135**)

<span id="xx.ii-p34"></span>**32** Can a maid forget her ornaments, A
spouse her attire? But my people have forgotten me, Days without number.

<span id="xx.ii-p35"></span>**33** Why trimmest thou thy ways to seek
love? Thou hast even thus taught wickedness by thy ways.

<span id="xx.ii-p36"></span>**34** Even in thy skirts is found The blood
of the souls of the poor innocents; Not in digging under have they been
found, But on account of all these things: (**1:143**)

<span id="xx.ii-p37"></span>**35** Yet thou hast said, “Surely I am
clean; Only let his fury depart from me.” Behold I will contend with
thee in judgment, Because thou hast said, “I have not sinned.”

<span id="xx.ii-p38"></span>**36** Why ramblest thou so much to change
thy ways? Even of Egypt shalt thou be ashamed, As thou hast been ashamed
of Assyria.

<span id="xx.ii-p39"></span>**37** Even now for this thou shalt go
forth, And thine hands on thine head; For abhorred hath Jehovah thy
confidences, And in them thou shalt not prosper. (**1:151**)

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span>**1** It is said, when a man puts away his
wife, And she goes from him to another man, Shall he return to her
again? Would not the land be thus greatly polluted? But thou hast played
the harlot with many friends; Yet return to me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span>**2** Raise thine eyes to the high places,
And see where thou hast played the harlot: By the ways thou didst sit
for them, As the Arabian in the desert; And polluted hast thou the land
With thy whoredoms and thy wickedness.

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span>**3** Restrained therefore have been the
showers, And the late rain has not been; Yet the front of a strumpet has
been thine, Thou hast refused to be ashamed.

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span>**4** Wilt thou not hereafter cry to me, —
“My Father, the guide of my youth art thou?

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span>**5** Will he keep *wrath* for ever? Will he
reserve it perpetually?” Behold, thou hast spoken, And hast done evils
with all thy might. (**1:162**)

<span id="xx.iii-p8"></span>**6** And Jehovah said to me in the days of
Josiah the king, — Hast thou seen what the apostate Israel has done? She
went on every high mountain And under every shady tree, And played there
the harlot:

<span id="xx.iii-p9"></span>**7** And I said, after she had done all
these things, “Return to me;“ but she returned not; And see this did her
perfidious sister Judah.

<span id="xx.iii-p10"></span>**8** And I saw, that when for all these
things, Because rebellious Israel had played the harlot, I had dismissed
her and given her a bill of divorce, Yet fear did not her perfidious
sister Judah, But went and played also the harlot. (**1:166**)

<span id="xx.iii-p11"></span>**9** And it happened through the levity of
her whoredom, That she polluted the land, And played the harlot with
stone and with wood.

<span id="xx.iii-p12"></span>**10** And yet after all this, returned to
me Has not her perfidious sister Judah, With her whole heart, but
feignedly, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iii-p13"></span>**11** And Jehovah said to me, — Justified
herself has apostate Israel Rather than perfidious Judah:

<span id="xx.iii-p14"></span>**12** Go and publish these words towards
the north, And say, Return, rebellious Israel, saith Jehovah; I will not
let fall my wrath upon you, For I am merciful, saith Jehovah; I will not
keep it for ever:

<span id="xx.iii-p15"></span>**13** But know thine iniquity, That
against Jehovah thy God thou hast acted wickedly, And prostituted thy
ways to strangers Under every shady tree; (**1:176**) And to my voice
thou didst not hearken, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iii-p16"></span>**14** Return, ye rebellious children,
saith Jehovah; For I am your husband; And I will take you, one from a
city, And two from a family, and bring you to Sion;

<span id="xx.iii-p17"></span>**15** And will give you pastors according
to my heart, And they shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.

<span id="xx.iii-p18"></span>**16** And it shall be, when ye shall
multiply and increase In the land, in those days, saith Jehovah, That
they will no more say, — “The ark of the covenant of Jehovah;” And it
shall not come to mind, And they shall not remember nor visit it; Even
*this* shall not be done any more. (**1:185**)

<span id="xx.iii-p19"></span>**17** At that time they shall call
Jerusalem, The throne of Jehovah; And assemble to it shall all nations,
For the name of Jehovah, even to Jerusalem; And walk shall they no more
After the evil hardness of their own hearts. (**1:186**)

<span id="xx.iii-p20"></span>**18** In those days shall come The house
of Judah with the house of Israel; Together shall they come from the
land of the north, To the land which I have given For an inheritance to
your fathers.

<span id="xx.iii-p21"></span>**19** But I said, How shall I put thee
among the children, And give thee the desirable land, The heritage
coveted by hosts of nations? And I said, “My Father,” shalt thou call
me, And from me thou wilt not depart. (**1:189**)

<span id="xx.iii-p22"></span>**20** Surely as a woman deals perfidiously
with her partner, So hast thou dealt perfidiously with me, O house of
Israel, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iii-p23"></span>**21** A voice on high places was heard,
The weeping of the prayers of the children of Israel; Because they had
perverted their way, *And* forgotten Jehovah their God. (**1:192**)

<span id="xx.iii-p24"></span>**22** “Return, ye rebellious children, I
will heal your transgressions.” “Behold we come to thee, For thou art
Jehovah our God:

<span id="xx.iii-p25"></span>**23** Surely deceit *is* from the hills,
*From* the multitude of mountains; Surely, in Jehovah our God Is the
salvation of Israel. (**1:194**)

<span id="xx.iii-p26"></span>**24** Even shame hath devoured the labor
Of our fathers, from our youth, Even their sheep and their cattle, Their
sons and their daughters.

<span id="xx.iii-p27"></span>**25** We have lain down in our shame, And
our reproach hath covered us, Because with Jehovah our God We have dealt
wickedly, we and our fathers, From our childhood even to this day,
(**1:196**) And have not attended to the voice of Jehovah our God.”

<span id="xx.iv"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="xx.iv-p3"></span>**1** If thou wilt return, Israel, saith
Jehovah, Return to me; Even if thou wilt take away Thine abominations
from my sight, And wilt not wander: (**1:199**)

<span id="xx.iv-p4"></span>**2** And thou shalt swear, “Live does
Jehovah, In truth, in judgment, and in righteousness;” Then bless
themselves in him shall nations, And in him shall they glory.
(**1:202**)

<span id="xx.iv-p5"></span>**3** For thus saith Jehovah To the men of
Judah and to Jerusalem, — Plough again the first ploughing, And sow not
among thorns:

<span id="xx.iv-p6"></span>**4** Be ye circumcised to Jehovah, And take
away the foreskin of your heart, Ye men of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem; Lest my fury go forth like fire, And burn that none may
quench it; On account of the evil of your doings.

<span id="xx.iv-p7"></span>**5** Proclaim ye in Judah, And publish in
Jerusalem, and say, “Sound the trumpet in the land;” Call, assemble,
yea, say, — “Be assembled, and let us enter into fortified cities;”

<span id="xx.iv-p8"></span>**6** Raise the standard in Sion; Flee, stay
not, for an evil do I bring From the north, even a great ruin.
(**1:208**)

<span id="xx.iv-p9"></span>**7** Ascended has the lion from his thicket,
And the waster of nations is gone forth; He is come forth from his
place, To make thy land a waste; Thy cities shall be destroyed, So as to
be without an inhabitant.

<span id="xx.iv-p10"></span>**8** For this gird yourselves with
sackcloth, Lament and howl; for turned away from us Is not the fury of
Jehovah’s wrath.

<span id="xx.iv-p11"></span>**9** And it shall be in that day, saith
Jehovah, That perish shall the heart of the king, And the heart of the
princes; And amazed shall be the priests, And the prophets shall be
astonished. (**1:212**)

<span id="xx.iv-p12"></span>**10** Then I said, Ah! Lord Jehovah!
Surely, deceiving thou hast deceived This people and Jerusalem, by
saying, “Peace shall be to you;” Yet reached has the sword to the soul.
(**1:214**)

<span id="xx.iv-p13"></span>**11** At that time it shall be said To this
people and to Jerusalem, — A dry wind from the heights of the desert
*Shall be* towards the way of the daughter of my people, Not to fan nor
to cleanse;

<span id="xx.iv-p14"></span>**12** A wind stronger than this shall come
for me; Now also will I pronounce judgments on them. (**1:217**)

<span id="xx.iv-p15"></span>**13** Behold as clouds shall he ascend, And
as a whirlwind his chariots; Swifter than eagles his horses: Woe to us!
for we are lost.

<span id="xx.iv-p16"></span>**14** Cleanse from evil the heart,
Jerusalem; That thou mayest be saved: How long will remain within thee
The thoughts of vanity! (**1:221**)

<span id="xx.iv-p17"></span>**15** For a voice proclaims from Dan And
publishes ruin from Mount Ephraim.

<span id="xx.iv-p18"></span>**16** Rehearse it to the nations; Behold,
publish against Jerusalem, — Besiegers come from a remote land, And
raise over the cities of Judah their voice;

<span id="xx.iv-p19"></span>**17** As keepers of the field they shall be
over her around; Because she hath provoked me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iv-p20"></span>**18** Thy way and thy doings have done this
for thee; This is thy wickedness, though it be bitter, Though it reaches
to thy heart. (**1:227**)

<span id="xx.iv-p21"></span>**19** My bowels! my bowels! I am in pain;
The walls of my heart! My heart is in a tumult within me; I will not be
silent, for the sound of the trumpet Has my soul heard, And the clamor
of war has it heard. (**1:229**)

<span id="xx.iv-p22"></span>**20** Calamity on calamity is cried; For
destroyed is the whole land; Suddenly destroyed are my tents, In an
instant my curtains.

<span id="xx.iv-p23"></span>**21** How long shall I see the standard —
Shall I hear the sound of the trumpet?

<span id="xx.iv-p24"></span>**22** Because foolish are my people, Me
have they not known; Sottish children are they, And they are not
intelligent; Acute are they for evil, But how to do good they know not.

<span id="xx.iv-p25"></span>**23** I beheld the land, and lo, it was
waste and without form; And the heavens, and they had no light:

<span id="xx.iv-p26"></span>**24** I beheld the mountains, and lo, they
trembled; And all the hills were shaking:

<span id="xx.iv-p27"></span>**25** I beheld, and lo, there was no man,
And every bird of the heavens was fled:

<span id="xx.iv-p28"></span>**26** I beheld, and lo, Carmel was a
desert; And all its cities were destroyed, At the presence of Jehovah,
At the presence of the burning of his wrath.

<span id="xx.iv-p29"></span>**27** For thus saith Jehovah, Laid waste
shall be the whole land; But an end will I not make.

<span id="xx.iv-p30"></span>**28** For this mourn shall the land, And
black shall become the heavens above; For I have spoken, I have
purposed, And will not repent nor be turned from this.

<span id="xx.iv-p31"></span>**29** At the voice of the horseman and of
the bowmen, Flee shall the whole city; They shall penetrate into thick
clouds, They shall ascend into rocks; Every city shall be forsaken, And
no man shall dwell in them. (**1:245**)

<span id="xx.iv-p32"></span>**30** And thou, wretched one, what wilt
thou do? Though thou puttest on crimson, Though thou deckest thyself
with ornaments of gold, Though thou adornest with paint thine eyes, In
vain wilt thou decorate thyself; Hate thee will thy lovers, Thy life
will they seek.

<span id="xx.iv-p33"></span>**31** Surely, the voice of one in travail
have I heard, The distress as of one giving birth to a first-begotten,
The voice of the daughter of Sion; Who mourns, who spreads her hands, —
“Wo to me now! for fainted has my soul On account of murderers.”
(**1:251**)

<span id="xx.v"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xx.v-p3"></span>**1** Go round through the streets of
Jerusalem, And see, I pray, and know, Inquire also in its cross-ways,
Whether ye shall find a man, Whether there be any, who doeth judgment,
Who seeketh the truth, And I will spare it. (**1:252**)

<span id="xx.v-p4"></span>**2** Though they say, “Live does Jehovah;”
Yet in this they swear falsely.

<span id="xx.v-p5"></span>**3** Jehovah! are not thine eyes on the
truth? Thou hast smitten them, But they have not grieved; Thou hast
consumed them, But they have not received correction: They have made
their faces harder than a rock, They have refused to return.

<span id="xx.v-p6"></span>**4** But I said, Surely the poor are these;
They have acted foolishly, Because they knew not the way of Jehovah, The
judgment of their God:

<span id="xx.v-p7"></span>**5** I will go to the great and speak to
them, For they know the way of Jehovah, The judgment of their God: But
these have altogether broken the yoke, They have burst the bonds.

<span id="xx.v-p8"></span>**6** Therefore smite them shall the lion from
the forest, The wolf of the desert shall spoil them, The leopard shall
watch over their cities; Whosoever goeth out shall be torn: For manifold
are their transgressions, Increased are their defections.

<span id="xx.v-p9"></span>**7** How for this shall I spare thee? Thy
children have forsaken me, And have sworn by one that is not a god; When
I fully satisfied them, they committed adultery, And at the house of the
harlot they assembled:

<span id="xx.v-p10"></span>**8** Fed horses! rising early in the
morning, Every one at his neighbor’s wife neigheth.

<span id="xx.v-p11"></span>**9** Should I not for these things visit?
saith Jehovah, And on such a nation as this Shall not my soul be
avenged?

<span id="xx.v-p12"></span>**10** Ascend her walls and demolish, But an
end make not; Take away her foundations, For they are not Jehovah’s:

<span id="xx.v-p13"></span>**11** For by transgressing they have
transgressed against me, The house of Israel and the house of Judah
saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.v-p14"></span>**12** They have denied Jehovah and said, “He
is not, and come on us shall no evil; Yea, the sword and the famine we
shall not see:

<span id="xx.v-p15"></span>**13** And the prophets shall be wind, For
the word is not in them: Thus shall it be done to them.”

<span id="xx.v-p16"></span>**14** Therefore, thus saith Jehovah, the God
of hosts, — Because you have uttered this word, Behold, I will make my
words in thy mouth fire, And this people wood, And it shall devour them:

<span id="xx.v-p17"></span>**15** Behold I will bring on you a nation
from far, O house of Israel, saith Jehovah, A strong nation, an ancient
nation, A nation whose language thou knowest not, And understandest not
what it says: (**1:286**)

<span id="xx.v-p18"></span>**16** Their quiver *is* like an open
sepulcher, All of them *are* valiant;

<span id="xx.v-p19"></span>**17** And they will devour thy harvest and
thy bread; They will devour thy sons and thy daughters, They will devour
thy flocks and thy herds, They will devour thy vine and thy fig-tree; To
want shall they reduce thy fortified cities, To which thou trustest, by
the sword:

<span id="xx.v-p20"></span>**18** But even in those days, saith Jehovah,
I will not make with you an end.

<span id="xx.v-p21"></span>**19** And it shall be, when ye say, “Why
hath Jehovah our God done to us All these things?” that thou wilt say to
them, — As ye have forsaken me, And served foreign gods in your land, So
shall ye serve foreigners in a land not your own.

<span id="xx.v-p22"></span>**20** Declare this in the house of Jacob,
And publish it in Judah, saying, —

<span id="xx.v-p23"></span>**21** Hear this, I pray, Ye foolish people
and void of heart, Who have eyes and see not, Who have ears and hear
not:

<span id="xx.v-p24"></span>**22** Will ye not fear me? saith Jehovah;
Will ye not at my presence tremble? Who have set the sand a bound to the
sea, By a perpetual decree that it cannot pass it; Though its waves
rage, yet they cannot prevail; Though they roar, yet they cannot pass
over it.

<span id="xx.v-p25"></span>**23** But this people hath a perverse and
rebellious heart; They have turned aside and departed:

<span id="xx.v-p26"></span>**24** And they have not said in their heart,
— Let us now fear Jehovah our God, Who giveth rain, both the early And
the latter shower in its season, Who keeps to us the appointed weeks of
harvest.

<span id="xx.v-p27"></span>**25** Your iniquities have prevented these
things, And your sins have restrained good from you.

<span id="xx.v-p28"></span>**26** For found among my people are the
wicked; They look, as though they would set snares; A trap they set, in
which they catch men. (**1:303**)

<span id="xx.v-p29"></span>**27** As a cage is full of birds So their
houses are full of fraud: Therefore they are increased and become rich;

<span id="xx.v-p30"></span>**28** They are become fat, they shine; They
even surpass the deeds of the wicked: The cause they judge not, The
cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper; And the judgment of the poor
they judge not. (**1:306**)

<span id="xx.v-p31"></span>**29** Shall I not for this visit, saith
Jehovah? On such a nation as this Shall not my soul be avenged?

<span id="xx.v-p32"></span>**30** A monstrosity and baseness is in the
land!

<span id="xx.v-p33"></span>**31** The prophets prophesy falsely, And the
priests rule by their means; (**1:309**) And my people wish it to be so:
But what will ye do at the end of it?

<span id="xx.vi"></span>

<span id="xx.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="xx.vi-p3"></span>**1** Be assembled, ye children of Benjamin,
From the midst of Jerusalem, And in Tekoa sound the trumpet; In
Beth-haccerem also set up a sign; For evil is seen from the north, And
great distress.

<span id="xx.vi-p4"></span>**2** To a quiet and delicate *woman* Have I
likened the daughter of Sion:

<span id="xx.vi-p5"></span>**3** To her shall come shepherds and their
flocks; They shall pitch their tents near her around, Feed shall each in
his own place.

<span id="xx.vi-p6"></span>**4** Prepare ye war against her: “Arise ye,
and let us ascend at mid-day; Alas for us! for declined has the day, For
extended are the evening shadows:

<span id="xx.vi-p7"></span>**5** Arise, and let us ascend in the night,
And let us demolish her palaces.” (**1:319**)

<span id="xx.vi-p8"></span>**6** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — Cut
ye down wood, And form against. Jerusalem a mound; It is a city of
visitation, Entire oppression is in the midst of her:

<span id="xx.vi-p9"></span>**7** As a fountain casts out its waters, So
she casts out her wickedness; Violence and plunder is heard of in her;
Before me continually is grief and smiting.

<span id="xx.vi-p10"></span>**8** Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, Lest
my soul be torn from thee, Lest I make thee a desert, A land not
inhabited.

<span id="xx.vi-p11"></span>**9** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — By
gleaning they shall glean, as a vine, The remnant of Israel: Turn back
thine hand, As a grape-gatherer into the baskets. (**1:326**)

<span id="xx.vi-p12"></span>**10** To whom shall I speak and protest,
That they may hear? Behold, uncircumcised is their ear, And they cannot
hear; Behold, the word of Jehovah *is* to them a reproach; They delight
not in it.

<span id="xx.vi-p13"></span>**11** Of Jehovah’s indignation therefore am
I full, I am wearied with refraining To pour it on the children in the
streets, And on the assembly of young men also; For the husband with his
wife shall be taken, The aged with the full of days:

<span id="xx.vi-p14"></span>**12** And turned shall be their houses to
aliens, Their fields and their wives in like manner; For I will stretch
out my hand On the inhabitants of the land, saith Jehovah:

<span id="xx.vi-p15"></span>**13** For from the least to the greatest of
them, Every one is given to covetousness; And from the prophet to the
priest, Every one acts deceitfully;

<span id="xx.vi-p16"></span>**14** And healed have they the wound Of the
daughter of my people slightly By saying, “Peace, peace,” when there was
no peace. (**1:336**)

<span id="xx.vi-p17"></span>**15** Were they ashamed, that they had done
abomination? Even of shame they were not ashamed, And how to blush they
knew not: Fall therefore shall they among the fallen; At the time of
their visitation They shall perish, saith Jehovah. (**1:339**)

<span id="xx.vi-p18"></span>**16** Thus said Jehovah, — Stand in the
ways and see, Inquire also concerning the old paths, Which is the right
way, and walk ye in it, That ye may find rest to your soul: And they
said, “We will not walk *in* *it*.”

<span id="xx.vi-p19"></span>**17** I also set over them watchmen, That
they might, attend to the sound of the trumpet; But they said, “We will
not attend.”

<span id="xx.vi-p20"></span>**18** Hear therefore, ye nations, And know,
thou assembly, what shall be to them:

<span id="xx.vi-p21"></span>**19** Hear, thou land; behold I bring an
evil On this people, the fruit of their thoughts; Because to my words
they have not hearkened, And my law have they despised.

<span id="xx.vi-p22"></span>**20** To what purpose is this to me?
Incense cometh from Sheba, And the sweet came from a far country; Your
burnt-offerings are not acceptable, And your sacrifices are not pleasant
to me.

<span id="xx.vi-p23"></span>**21** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, —
Behold, I lay before this people stumblingblocks; And stumble shall
fathers and sons alike; Neighbor and friend, they shall perish.

<span id="xx.vi-p24"></span>**22** Thus saith Jehovah, — Behold, a
people shall corns from the north country, And a great nation shall be
roused From the sides of the earth:

<span id="xx.vi-p25"></span>**23** On the bow and spear shall they lay
hold; They are cruel and will not spare; Their voice, like the sea, will
roar, And on horses shall they mount; Arrayed shall they be as men for
war, Against thee, O daughter of Sion.

<span id="xx.vi-p26"></span>**24** We have heard its fame; Relaxed are
our hands, Anguish has laid hold on us, The pain as of one in travail.

<span id="xx.vi-p27"></span>**25** Go not forth into the field, Nor walk
by the way; For the sword of the enemy *Is* a terror on every side.

<span id="xx.vi-p28"></span>**26** Daughter of my people! gird on
sackcloth, And roll thyself in the dust; Make thee mourning, as for an
only son, Most bitter lamentation; For suddenly shall come on thee the
spoiler.

<span id="xx.vi-p29"></span>**27** A tower have I made thee to my
people, — A fortress; that thou mightest know And try their ways:

<span id="xx.vi-p30"></span>**28** All are entire apostates, Walking in
detraction; Brass and iron *are they*; All of them are corrupters.
(**1:358**)

<span id="xx.vi-p31"></span>**29** Burnt are the bellows by the fire,
Entire is the lead, In vain has melted the melter; For the wicked have
not been refined:

<span id="xx.vi-p32"></span>**30** Reprobate silver shall they call
them, Because rejected them has Jehovah (**1:360**)

<span id="xx.vii"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xx.vii-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, saying, —

<span id="xx.vii-p4"></span>**2** Stand in the gate of the house of
Jehovah, And proclaim there this word, and say, — Hear the word of
Jehovah, all ye Judah, Who enter through these gates to worship Jehovah:

<span id="xx.vii-p5"></span>**3** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, — Make good your ways and your doings, And I will dwell with
you in this place:

<span id="xx.vii-p6"></span>**4** Trust not in words of falsehood, by
saying, “The temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, The temple of
Jehovah, are *these buildings.”* (**1:364**)

<span id="xx.vii-p7"></span>**5** Surely, if by making good ye make good
Your ways and your doings, If by doing ye do judgment Between man and
his neighbor,

<span id="xx.vii-p8"></span>**6** If the stranger, the orphan and the
widow, Ye oppress not, and innocent blood Ye shed not in this place, And
after strange gods Ye walk not to your hurt, —

<span id="xx.vii-p9"></span>**7** Then will I cause you to dwell in this
places In the land which I gave to your fathers, For ever and ever.

<span id="xx.vii-p10"></span>**8** Behold, ye trust in words of
falsehood, Which are without profit.

<span id="xx.vii-p11"></span>**9** Will ye steal, kill, and commit
adultery, Swear falsely, burn incense to Baal, And walk after alien
gods, Whom ye do not know;

<span id="xx.vii-p12"></span>**10** And come and stand before me in this
house, Which is called by my name, and say, “We have been made free To
do all these abominations?” (**1:373**)

<span id="xx.vii-p13"></span>**11** Is this house, called by my name,
Become a den of robbers in your eyes? Even I, behold I see, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="xx.vii-p14"></span>**12** But go now to my place in Shilo,
Where I made to dwell my name at first, And see what I did there, For
the wickedness of my people Israel:

<span id="xx.vii-p15"></span>**13** And now, because ye have done All
these works, saith Jehovah, And I spoke to you, rising early, And when I
spoke, ye heard not, When I called you, ye answered not;

<span id="xx.vii-p16"></span>**14** I will therefore do to this place,
Which is called by my name, In which ye trust — Even to the place which
I gave to you And to your fathers, as I did to Shilo;

<span id="xx.vii-p17"></span>**15** And I will cast you out from my
presence, As I have cast out all your brethren, The whole seed of
Ephraim.

<span id="xx.vii-p18"></span>**16** And thou, pray not for this people,
And raise not for them a cry and a prayer, And intercede not with me;
For I will not hear thee. (**1:384**)

<span id="xx.vii-p19"></span>**17** Seest thou not what they do in the
cities of Judah And in the streets of Jerusalem?

<span id="xx.vii-p20"></span>**18** Children gather wood, And fathers
kindle a fire, And women knead a dough, To make cakes for the queen of
heaven; And they pour libations to alien gods, That they may provoke me
to wrath! (**1:387**)

<span id="xx.vii-p21"></span>**19** Do they provoke me to wrath, saith
Jehovah? Is it not to the shame of their own faces?

<span id="xx.vii-p22"></span>**20** Therefore thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, — Behold my wrath, even my fury, It shall be poured on this
place, Upon men and upon beast, Upon the tree of the field and the fruit
of the land; And it shall burn, and none shall quench *it.*

<span id="xx.vii-p23"></span>**21** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, — Your burnt-offerings add to your sacrifices, And eat ye the
flesh:

<span id="xx.vii-p24"></span>**22** For I spoke not to your fathers, Nor
commanded them in the day, In which I brought them out of the land of
Egypt, Concerning burnt-offerings and sacrifices;

<span id="xx.vii-p25"></span>**23** But this is what I commanded them,
saying, — “Hear my voice, And I will be to you a God, And you shall be
to me a people; And walk ye in all the ways Which I have commanded you.
That it may be well with you:

<span id="xx.vii-p26"></span>**24** Yet they heard not, nor inclined
their car; But walked in perverse counsels, In the wickedness of their
own evil heart, And went backward and not forward.

<span id="xx.vii-p27"></span>**25** From the day in which your fathers
came out From the land of Egypt, to this day, Have I sent to you all my
servants, the prophets, Every day rising early and sending *them:*

<span id="xx.vii-p28"></span>**26** Yet they heard not nor inclined
their ear, But hardened their neck; They have acted more perversely than
their fathers.

<span id="xx.vii-p29"></span>**27** Thou also shalt say to them all
these words, But they will not hear thee; And thou shalt call to them,
But they will not answer thee:

<span id="xx.vii-p30"></span>**28** Therefore say to them, — This is a
nation, Which have not hearkened to the voice Of Jehovah, their God, And
have not received correction: Perished has the truth, And cut off has it
been from their mouth.

<span id="xx.vii-p31"></span>**29** Shave off thy hair and cast it away,
Raise on the heights a lamentation; Nor rejected thee has Jehovah; And
forsaken hath he the generation of his wrath:

<span id="xx.vii-p32"></span>**30** For the children of Judah have done
evil Before mine eyes, saith Jehovah; They have set their abominations
in the house, On which my name is called, to pollute it;

<span id="xx.vii-p33"></span>**31** And they have built the high places
of Tophet, Which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, To burn their
sons and their daughters in the fire; Which I have not commanded, Nor
has it ever come into my heart.

<span id="xx.vii-p34"></span>**32** Therefore, behold the days come,
saith Jehovah, That it shall no more be called Tophet, And The valley of
the son of Hinnom, But, The valley of slaughter; And they shall bury in
Tophet, For *elsewhere* there will be no place:

<span id="xx.vii-p35"></span>**33** And the carcasses of this people
shall be for meat To the birds of heaven and to the beasts of the earth;
And there will be none to frighten them:

<span id="xx.vii-p36"></span>**34** And to cease will I make, from the
cities of Judah And from the streets of Jerusalem, The voice of joy and
the voice of gladness, The voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the
bride; For to a waste shall the land be reduced.

<span id="xx.viii"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xx.viii-p3"></span>**1** In that day, saith Jehovah, they
shall bring forth The bones of the kings of Judah, And the bones of his
princes, And the bones of the priests, And the bones of the prophets,
And the bones of the citizens of Jerusalem, Out of their graves;

<span id="xx.viii-p4"></span>**2** And they shall spread them before the
sun, And the moon, and all the host of heaven, Which they have loved and
served, And after which they have walked, And which they have sought,
And before which they have bowed themselves; They shall not be gathered
nor buried; For dung on the face of the land shall they be:

<span id="xx.viii-p5"></span>**3** And chosen shall be death, Rather
than life, by all the residue, Who shall remain of this wicked nation,
Who shall remain in all the places Where I shall drive them, saith
Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="xx.viii-p6"></span>**4** Thou shalt also say to them, Thus
saith Jehovah, — Shall not they who have fallen rise again? If any one
turns aside shall he not return?

<span id="xx.viii-p7"></span>**5** Why rebel does this people at
Jerusalem With a perpetual rebellion? They have held fast deceit, They
have refused to return.

<span id="xx.viii-p8"></span>**6** I hearkened and heard; they will not
speak aright; There is no one who repents of his wickedness, And says,
“What have I done?” Every one turns to his own course, Like a horse who
rushes into battle. (**1:425**)

<span id="xx.viii-p9"></span>**7** Even the stork in the heavens knows
its times; The turtle also, and the swallow and the crane, Observe the
time of their journey; But my people know not the judgment of Jehovah.

<span id="xx.viii-p10"></span>**8** How say ye, “We are wise And the law
of Jehovah is with us:” Surely, behold in vain Hath the writer prepared
his pen, In vain are the scribes!

<span id="xx.viii-p11"></span>**9** Ashamed are the wise, terrified and
taken; Behold the word of Jehovah have they rejected; And wisdom, what
is it to them! (**1:432**)

<span id="xx.viii-p12"></span>**10** I will therefore give their wives
to aliens, And their fields to inheritors; For from the least even to
the greatest, Every one is given to covetousness; From the prophet even
to the priest, All have acted deceitfully;

<span id="xx.viii-p13"></span>**11** And healed have they the wound Of
the daughter of my people slightly, By saying, “Peace, peace,” when
there was no peace.

<span id="xx.viii-p14"></span>**12** Had they shame, that they had done
abomination? Even of shame they were not ashamed, And how to blush they
knew not: Fall therefore shall they with the fallen; At the time of
their visitation They shall perish, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.viii-p15"></span>**13** Destroying, I will destroy them,
saith Jehovah; No grapes *shall be* on the vine, And no figs on the
fig-tree; The leaf also shall fall, And what I gave them shall pass from
them.

<span id="xx.viii-p16"></span>**14** Why do we sit still? Assemble ye,
And let us enter into fortified cities, And let us rest there: Surely,
Jehovah our God hath made us silent, And given us waters of gall to
drink: Because we have sinned against Jehovah. (**1:442**)

<span id="xx.viii-p17"></span>**15** We looked for peace, but there was
no good; For time of healing, but behold terror.

<span id="xx.viii-p18"></span>**16** From Dan is heard the snorting of
his horses; At the sound of the neighing of his strong ones, Tremble
does the whole land; For they will come and devour The land and its
abundance, The city and its inhabitants.

<span id="xx.viii-p19"></span>**17** For behold, I will send among you
Serpents and basilisks, Which will not be charmed; And they shall bite
you, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.viii-p20"></span>**18** I would strengthen myself against
grief: *But* within me my heart is weak.

<span id="xx.viii-p21"></span>**19** Behold the voice of the crying Of
the daughter of my people from a far country! “Is not Jehovah in Sion?
Is not her king within her?” — Why have they provoked me to wrath With
their images, with foreign vanities?

<span id="xx.viii-p22"></span>**20** Past has the harvest, ended is the
summer, And we have not been saved! (**1:452**)

<span id="xx.viii-p23"></span>**21** For the hurt of the daughter of my
people I am hurt, I am become black; Astonishment has laid hold on me.

<span id="xx.viii-p24"></span>**22** Is there no balm in Gilead? Is
there no physician there? For why is not restored The healing of the
daughter of my people! (**1:456**)

<span id="xx.ix"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xx.ix-p3"></span>**1** Who will make my head waters And mine
eye a fountain of tears! Then would I bewail, day and night, The slain
of the daughter of my people.

<span id="xx.ix-p4"></span>**2** Who will set me in the desert, In the
lodging of travelers! Then would I leave my people And depart from them:
For all of them are adulterers, An assembly of perfidious men.

<span id="xx.ix-p5"></span>**3** And they shoot lies with their tongue
as with a bow; But not for truth are they strong in the land; For from
evil to evil they proceed; (**1:462**) And me they know not, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="xx.ix-p6"></span>**4** And every one of his friend take ye
heed, And in a brother trust ye not; For every brother by supplanting
will supplant, And every friend walks fraudulently:

<span id="xx.ix-p7"></span>**5** And a man deceives his neighbor, And
the truth he speaks not; They have taught their tongues to speak
falsehood; With doing evil they weary themselves.

<span id="xx.ix-p8"></span>**6** Thou dwellest in the midst of deceit;
Through deceit they refuse To know me, saith Jehovah. (**1:469**)

<span id="xx.ix-p9"></span>**7** Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
— Behold, I will try them, and will prove them; For how should I deal
With the daughter of my people?

<span id="xx.ix-p10"></span>**8** A sharpened arrow is their tongue,
Falsehood it speaks; His mouth speaks peace to his neighbor, But within
he sets up intrigues.

<span id="xx.ix-p11"></span>**9** For this shall I not visit, saith
Jehovah, On such a nation as this Shall not my soul be avenged?

<span id="xx.ix-p12"></span>**10** For the mountains will I raise up
weeping and wailing, For the pastures of the wilderness, lamentation;
Because they are laid waste, So that there is not a man passing through,
And they hear not the voice of cattle; From the bird of heaven to the
beast. Have they fled, have they departed. (**1:475**)

<span id="xx.ix-p13"></span>**11** I will also make Jerusalem heaps, A
place for dragons; And the cities of Judah will I make a waste, So that
there shall be no inhabitant.

<span id="xx.ix-p14"></span>**12** Who is a wise man to understand this?
And to whom has Jehovah’s mouth spoken, That he may declare why the land
is to perish — Is to be laid waste like the desert, So that no man
should pass through? (**1:480**)

<span id="xx.ix-p15"></span>**13** Then Jehovah said, — Because they
have forsaken my law, Which I have set before them, And hearkened not to
my voice, Nor walked according to it;

<span id="xx.ix-p16"></span>**14** But walked after the imaginations Of
their own hearts, and after Baalim, As their fathers taught them;

<span id="xx.ix-p17"></span>**15** Therefore, thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, The God of Israel, — Behold, I will feed this people with
bitterness, And will give them the water of gall to drink;

<span id="xx.ix-p18"></span>**16** I will also scatter them among the
nations, Whom they have not known nor their fathers, And I will send
after them the sword, Until I shall have consumed them.

<span id="xx.ix-p19"></span>**17** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — Attend
ye and call for the mourning women, That they may come, And send for
those who are skillful, That they may come.

<span id="xx.ix-p20"></span>**18** And let them hasten and make a
wailing for us, That our eyes may let fall tears, And our eyelids drop
down waters. (**1:489**)

<span id="xx.ix-p21"></span>**19** For a voice of wailing is heard from
Sion, “How we are wasted! How greatly shamed! Because we have left the
land, They have cast down our dwellings.”

<span id="xx.ix-p22"></span>**20** Therefore hear, ye women, the word of
Jehovah, And let your ears receive the word of his mouth, And teach your
daughters wailing, And each one her friend lamentation:

<span id="xx.ix-p23"></span>**21** For come up is death to our windows,
It has entered into our palaces, To cut off the infirm from the street,
The young men in the broad places. (**1:493**)

<span id="xx.ix-p24"></span>**22** Speak, thus saith Jehovah, fall shall
the carcasses of men As dung on the face of the field, And as the
handful after the reaper, And none gathering *it.*

<span id="xx.ix-p25"></span>**23** Thus saith Jehovah, — Let not the
wise glory in his wisdom, And let not the brave glory in his courage,
Let not the rich glory in his riches;

<span id="xx.ix-p26"></span>**24** But in this let him glory who
glorieth, In understanding, and in knowing me, That I am Jehovah, who
doeth mercy, Judgment and righteousness in the land; For in these things
I delight, saith Jehovah. (**1:502**)

<span id="xx.ix-p27"></span>**25** Behold the days are coming, saith
Jehovah, That I will visit every one circumcised, *Who is* in
uncircumcision, —

<span id="xx.ix-p28"></span>**26** Egypt and Judah and Edom, The sons of
Ammon and Moab, And all those who are in extreme recesses, Who dwell in
the wilderness; For all these nations are uncircumcised, And the whole
house of Israel, They are uncircumcised in heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc17020)
