[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc17005)  [Next](cc17007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 17: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part I*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>TO THE

<span id="vii-p2"></span>MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE,

<span id="vii-p3"></span>D. FREDERICK,

<span id="vii-p4"></span>LORD PALATINE OF THE RHINE, AND ELECTOR OF THE
ROMAN EMPIRE, ETC.,

<span id="vii-p5"></span>AND HIS MOST BENEVOLENT LORD,

<span id="vii-p6"></span>JOHN CALVIN

<span id="vii-p7"></span>WISHES ALL HAPPINESS.

<span id="vii-p8"></span>As your heroic valor, Most Illustrious Prince,
has been acknowledged by superior men and competent judges, and
especially your singular piety, your labor to cherish and to promote
true Religion, and uniform moderation through life; and also your great
courtesy, such as can hardly be found in a private individual, and which
I have not only known by report, but have also myself experienced, I
have long wished by some public act to testify to posterity the high
regard I entertain for you, being not satisfied with having it only in
secret. This is well known to the noble — minded Edward, the Count or
Espach, whom I have consulted on the subject.

<span id="vii-p9"></span>But to discharge this duty at this time, not
only an opportunity seems to be offered to me, but a certain necessity
appears to constrain me; for, as you have reverently embraced the sound
and orthodox doctrine concerning the Holy Supper of Christ, and have not
hesitated freely and wisely to avow the same in your dominion, so
turbulent and unreasonable men rage against you, as though you had upset
all Germany! Hence they rush headlong to assail your Highness with
violent clamors; and as they cannot prevail by authority and power,
being full of presumption and insolence, they hesitate not to vomit
forth their curses, of which men in their right mind would be ashamed;
and not only so, but as it is not in their power to kill you, they
fabricate shameful rumors respecting your death, as though a plot of
flies were sufficient to darken the sun. And you, indeed, Most
Illustrious Prince, according to the magnanimity of your mind, and in
accordance with the high dignity in which God has placed you, do
altogether disregard their mad conduct; but as they so busily labor to
provoke you, and at the same time bring in my name to create an ill —
will to you, I have thought it my duty, in refuting these calumnies, to
set up as a shield against them the very name which they wish to make so
odious; for certainly they are wholly unworthy that your Highness should
raise your little finger against them, or utter the smallest word. Were
I indeed disposed to expostulate with them on account of their madness
in hating so much a man who has done something for the Church of God,
and of whose labors they avail themselves with the unlearned, though
they acknowledge it not, they would have no plea for their ingratitude.
While, then, they endeavor, by bringing forward Calvinism, to affix to
your Highness some mark of infamy, they do nothing more than betray
their own perversity, and also their folly and disgrace. But if they
think that they gain something among those who are like themselves, my
voice, on the other hand, in speaking of your just praises, will, I
hope, be attended to by the godly, the well — informed, and men of calm
minds and sound judgment.

<span id="vii-p10"></span>Unprincipled men of this character do indeed
pretend and loudly exclaim that they fight for God and their country;
but whether it be so, it is easy for any one to judge: and I will not
indeed discuss at large their delirious notions, as the greater part of
them understand not what they vainly talk; I will only touch briefly on
the main points in which we differ from their masters, for whom,
nevertheless, I have a sincere regard.

<span id="vii-p11"></span>That we really feed in the Holy Supper on the
flesh and blood of Christ, no otherwise than as bread and wine are the
aliments of our bodies, we freely confess. If a clearer explanation is
asked, we say, that the substance of Christ’s flesh and blood is our
spiritual life, and that it is communicated to us under the symbols of
bread and wine; for Christ, in instituting the mystery of The Supper,
promised nothing falsely, nor mocked us with a vain shew, but
represented by external signs what he has really given us.

<span id="vii-p12"></span>Now the question rests on the mode of
communication; and hence the conflict arises, because we refuse to
subscribe to their fancy respecting a local presence. We say, that
though Christ is in heaven, yet through the hidden and incomprehensible
power of his Spirit, this favor comes to us that His flesh becomes life
to us, so that we become flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones.
(<span id="vii-p12.1"></span>[Eph
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030)<span id="vii-p12.1"></span>.) By
them, on the contrary, it is maintained, that except Christ comes down
on earth, there is no participation. That they may, however, get rid of
the absurdity of a local presence, it has been found necessary to
fabricate the strange notion of ubiquity; which, if we think it not
possible to reconcile to the principles of faith, we must beg them at
least to pardon our ignorance. Here we follow not our own understanding;
but according to the knowledge given us from above, we cannot comprehend
that it is at all agreeable to Scripture to say that the body of Christ
is everywhere. Both Christ himself and His Apostles clearly shew that
the immensity of God does not belong to the flesh; a personal union is
what they teach; and no one, except *Eutyches,* has hitherto taught,
that the two natures became so blended, that when Christ became man, the
attributes of Deity were communicated to his human nature. I am not
indeed disposed to raise an odium against them by means of a man who has
been condemned; they are yet to be reminded to think more attentively,
and to consider how contention leads astray even good, learned, and
acute men, when they are led away only by a desire to defend their own
cause. Doubtless the best and the shortest way of confronting
*Nestorius* at the Council of Ephesus would have been to say, that
personal union communicates to two natures what is peculiar to each: to
adduce this no one thought of doing on account of its absolute
absurdity. I therefore greatly wonder that they who oppose us do not
consider into what labyrinth they plunge themselves.

<span id="vii-p13"></span>For if the infinity of God appertains to the
flesh of Christ, because God was manifested in the flesh, with equal
reason His Divinity may be said to have grieved and to have been
thirsty, and to have been subject to death, and, in short, to have died;
for they cannot escape, as it is a similar mode of reasoning. Christ,
while yet a mortal, declared that He knew not when the day of judgment
would be. Does He not in these words clearly and distinctly ascribe
something to His human nature which could not justly be ascribed to His
Divinity? What they bring forward as to the communication of properties,
it is unreasonable, and what I may say without offending them, they
mistake in a matter that is very simple and plain; for to ascribe what
is peculiar to Deity to the Son of man, and again to attribute to Deity
what belongs only to humanity, is very improper and rash. To prevent the
ignorant from stumbling by blending together different things, and to
take away from the dishonest any occasion for contending, orthodox
writers have called this figure, “The communication of properties.”
 <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="vii-p15"></span>What they have said of certain expressions,
has been with little thought applied to the subject. While Christ was on
earth he said that the Son of man was in heaven. That no one, ill —
informed, might think Christ’s body to be infinite, it has been deemed
necessary to meet this case by a plain admonition, that on account of
the unity of person what is suitable only to Divinity has been said of
the Son of man. Paul says, as it is recorded by Luke, that God redeemed
the Church by His own blood. (<span id="vii-p15.1"></span>[Ac
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span id="vii-p15.1"></span>.)
Lest no one may hence conceive that God has blood, the same admonition
ought to be sufficient to untie the knot; for as Christ was man and God,
what is peculiar to His human nature is ascribed to His Divinity. As it
was the Father’s design to employ this figure of speech for the purpose
of teaching the simple and ignorant, it is absurd and even shameful to
apply it for a different purpose, and to say that the communication of
properties is the real blending of two natures.

<span id="vii-p16"></span>But Christ, it is said, sits at the Father’s
right hand, which is to be taken as meaning everywhere, confined within
no limits. I indeed allow that God’s right hand is unlimited, and that
wherever it is there is the kingdom of Christ; which is metaphorically
represented in Scripture by the tern sitting: for whatever is declared
of God is beyond controversy to be now ascribed to Christ; and therefore
to sit, which means to govern the world, is what Christ has in common
with the Father; and still more, as the Father by Him sustains the
world, rules all things by His power, and especially manifests the
presence of His grace in governing His Church, He may be said, strictly
speaking, to reign in His own person. It hence follows, that he in a
manner is everywhere; for He can be limited to no place who sustains and
protects all parts of heaven and earth, and rules and regulates by His
power all things above and below. When now I name Christ, I include the
whole Person of the only — begotten Son, as manifested in the flesh. He,
I say, God and man, is everywhere as to his authority and
incomprehensible power, and infinite glory, according to what the
faithful experience by evident effects, as they know and feel His
presence. It is not then without reason that Paul declares, that He
dwells in us. (<span id="vii-p16.1"></span>[Eph
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="vii-p16.1"></span>.) But
to distort what is said of His infinite power, which is evident in His
spiritual gifts, in the invisible aid which He affords, and in the whole
of our salvation, and to apply it to His flesh, is by no means
reasonable or consistent.

<span id="vii-p17"></span>I wish that many of those who are with little
reason angry with us, were at least to recall to mind that common and
notable saying used in the Papal Schools, “Christ is whole everywhere,
but not altogether.”  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) They may repeat’
it as it is in the barbarous language of *Peter Lombard*, which is not
pleasant to their tender and delicate ears. It is yet wisely expressed,
from whomsoever it may have come, and I willingly adopt it. But I wonder
whence is this daintiness! Seeing the Recantation of *Berengarius*
delights *Westphalus* and those who are like him that Christ’s body is
broken by the teeth and digested by the stomach — why is this sober
distinction to be loathed, that Christ our Mediator is every — where
entire, but not as to His flesh, which is confined within certain
limits, while this power is infinite, and its operation felt on earth as
well as in heaven?

<span id="vii-p19"></span>There are two words commonly used, Union
(*unio*) and Unity (*unitas*;) the first is applied to the two Natures,
and the second to the Person alone. To assert the unity of the flesh and
of Divinity, those would be ashamed to do, if I am not deceived, who yet
inconsiderately adopt this absurdity; for, except the flesh differs and
is distinct in its own peculiar properties from the Divine nature, they
are by blending together become one. They, cavilling, facetiously ask,
“In what region of the empyreal heaven does Christ sit?” let them indeed
enjoy these fine speculations. I am taught by the Holy Spirit, that He
is above all heavens, (<span id="vii-p19.1"></span>[Eph
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span id="vii-p19.1"></span>)
according to the common mode of speaking in Scripture, I call whatever
is beyond the world heaven. Hence it is enough for me, when Christ is to
be sought, that our minds are to be raised above, that they may not
remain on the earth and be entangled in gross superstitions.

<span id="vii-p20"></span>This, then, is the sum and substance of the
whole controversy, which the chief leaders of the adverse party too
pertinaciously agitate, unless, indeed, we add another subject that the
wicked, as they contend, partake of the flesh and blood of Christ no
less than the true servants of God. And we indeed allow that they are
equally offered to both; and that whatever may be the difference between
men, yet God ever continues like himself the same; and that hence the
difference in those who presumptuously thrust themselves does not arise
from the nature of the sacrament. When, therefore, Christ gives his body
to the unworthy, the difference proceeds from the manner in which it is
received. But we deny that those are capable of receiving Christ whom
the devil holds as his slaves, and in whom he has his habitation. We do
not, however, reject the usual mode of speaking, that Christ is received
by them sacramentally, provided absurd interpreters pervert not the
words of *Augustine,* in which sacramental eating is said to be the
reception of the substance without the grace; but this is a foolish
remark, and unknown to *Augustine*. The reason they adduce, as it is
weak, may easily be refuted. They say, that Christ came not only for
salvation to the elect, but also for condemnation to the reprobate,
because the Gospel being not received, but rejected, is the savor of
death unto death to those who perish. But who has ever heard that the
participation of Christ produces death? But if Christ be the occasion of
condemnation to unbelievers because He is rejected by them, I see not
how it can be that they procure for themselves condemnation by receiving
his flesh. They answer and say, that they are, nevertheless, closed up
so as not to admit His grace. But that they may gain credit to what they
say, they must first prove their strange notion that those who are
alienated from Christ eat His flesh, while it is to those without life
destitute of its own virtue, and empty.

<span id="vii-p21"></span>I have now faithfully and plainly explained
why they who boast themselves to be the followers of Luther so hastily
contend with us at this day. For the same reason they pour forth their
execrations on *Phillip Melancthon,* now dead, a man who, for his
incomparable knowledge in the highest branches of literature, his deep
piety, and other endowments, deserves to be remembered by all ages, and
whom they have hitherto regarded as their leader: and it is strange,
that in order to obtain the favor of the public, they pretend to adopt
that noble Confession Of Augsburg, of which he was especially the
author, and ought to be deemed its true interpreter. I regard them as
turbulent and unprincipled men, who possess no common courtesy, and feel
no shame.

<span id="vii-p22"></span>But there are those who, in this respect, are
different, and observe some moderation: and yet I have a just reason to
complain, for some of them have acted so unfairly as to give my name in
what they have published in German, and to withhold it in the Latin
editions. Now this is to curse the deaf!

<span id="vii-p23"></span>But, to omit other things, I revert again to
their violent clamors, which are similar to the clamors of those frantic
zealots, mentioned by *Josephus,* through whose excesses a cruel war was
kindled, which involved Judea in entire ruin. (De Bell. Jude., lib. 14
et 15.) They can find nothing more atrocious by which they can irritate
your Highness, Most Illustrious Prince, than the word Calvinism. But
whence this bitter hatred towards me it is not difficult to conjecture.
For as they have thought the shortest way to victory to be by
suppressing and concealing the real state of the case, and by dazzling
the eyes of the simple, it is no wonder that they burn with rage when
the clouds of ignorance in which they securely exulted were dissipated;
and what especially drives them even to madness, is the fact, that they
find that the whole subject is fully and really known by you, so that
the doctrine, for which they triumphed while it was unknown, having
obtained the patronage of high authority, and being supported by the
pious and strong defense of a wise Prince, makes a freer progress.

<span id="vii-p24"></span>It would indeed be superfluous to exhort you,
who are of yourself sufficiently disposed, to persevere. That you may,
however, disregard their impotency, and pursue the object so happily as
well as judiciously undertaken, it seems not an useless attempt to
confirm you in your course by leaving a pledge of the high regard I
entertain for you. And I thought it no act of ingratitude for your
incredible courtesy to dedicate to your renowned name my Commentaries On
Jeremiah. I indeed confess that it has not been elucidated with that
care which so excellent a Book deserves; for as I delivered the Lectures
from the pulpit, they were taken from my mouth; and I have indeed been
before ashamed, that what might have been more accurately revised and
polished by a longer meditation has come forth to light. I am also
afraid lest the malevolent should accuse me of arrogance, for having
obtruded on the public discourses extemporaneous and unwritten, and
designed for a small auditory. It is easy to reply to the latter charge,
for the first volume was sent to press against my will. That I may not,
however, be without excuse, what I have to say is, that I have been led
by the judgment of others. I hear of impartial and plain readers, who
declare that they have received no small benefit from this kind of
labor. And further, some think that a good end may be attained by making
known my *extempore* mode of teaching, as its simplicity may cure many,
who are too anxious of display, of that vice. Though learning and
aptness to teach cannot satisfy all, I have yet carefully endeavored
that Religion and Faith should not be found wanting by the impartial and
well disposed. Nor do I, indeed, fear the charge of arrogance, when I
fully avow, that I would have by no means suffered this Book to go forth
to the public had I not thought that it would be useful and profitable
to the Church of God.

<span id="vii-p25"></span>But it may be that some rigid and severe
critics will deem it a present unworthy of your Highness; but relying on
your rare courtesy, Most Illustrious Prince, I hope it will be favorably
accepted. And if Jeremiah himself were now alive on earth, he would add,
if I am not deceived, his recommendation; for he would acknowledge that
his Prophecies have been explained by me not less honestly than
reverently; and further, that they have been usefully accommodated to
present circumstances. I feel not, however, over anxious to find an
excuse, provided I know that I have done no wrong, except through an
excessive desire to testify the veneration with which I regard your
Highness.

<span id="vii-p26"></span>But, to omit now what I have slightly
mentioned at the beginning, I should condemn myself for ingratitude,
were I not to consider myself under obligations to you for being so
ready and disposed to receive The Christian Exiles who flee to you. It
is the saying of a heathen woman, as mentioned by a poet-

<span id="vii-p27"></span><span id="vii-p27.1"></span>“**Being** <span
id="vii-p27.2"></span>acquainted with evil, I learn to aid the
miserable.”  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

<span id="vii-p29"></span>Let all who worship God and serve Christ be
not ashamed, under similar circumstances, to be at least of the same
mind. As my power of aiding is not equal to my wish, it becomes me at
least to regard every kindness shewn to them as done to myself. Thirty
years have passed away since my voluntary exile from France, because
thence were exiled the truth of the Gospel, pure Religion, and the true
Worship of God. I am now become so inured to my peregrination, that I
feel no desire to return to my country. I am indeed here so far a
stranger, (though once banished, I was yet so recalled, that I never
feel ashamed,) that they deem me no more a foreigner than if I could
name my ancestors as the citizens of this place. But the more kindly God
has dealt with me, the greater concern ought I to feel for my brethren
from France as well as from Flanders: and as they have been received
with the same kindness by your Highness, this stimulates and constrains
me to avow my gratitude to one so much entitled to it.

<span id="vii-p30"></span>Nor let it cause you any regret, Most
Illustrious Prince, that you have been sometimes deceived in foreigners,
and indeed in men of our language, but go on in your wonted course of
benevolence. All know how basely you have been deceived by that most
audacious and unprincipled man, at the same time vile, proud, and
perfidious-in short, a monster, made up of a mass of filthy materials,
even *Francis Baldwin,* and yet a skillful collector of the Civil Law.
For having been in The University Of Heidelberg, and having, under the
pretext of the Gospel, been received under your patronage, and being
made a Professor of the Civil Law through your liberality in The
University Of Heidelberg, he ought to have considered himself as
altogether bound by kindness to so munificent a Prince; but he regarded
his elevation as advantageous to him to seek, after his own manner, a
new situation. Hence, as soon as hope appeared, he deserted his station,
having despised the honorable office which he had fraudulently attained,
and passed over to the enemies of true and pure Religion, the name of
which he had assumed. And first indeed (as though he retained some
portion of shame) he went on stealthily in a clandestine manner, he
discussed some secret treacheries with *The Cardinal of Lorraine,* into
whose favor he had insinuated himself. The object of the whole was to
subvert the Churches Of France by means of a spurious doctrine and a
mixture of ceremonies. But as there appeared no reward for masked and
hidden perfidy, he not only rushed headlong into open defection, but so
insolently boasted of his wickedness, that he has surpassed similar
apostates in canine wantonness. It is however well, that the perfidy of
one unprincipled man does not stop the course of your kindness towards
others; and you have some recompense for your perseverance, for among
the ornaments of your University are to be found some foreigners well
known for their high character, whom it is unnecessary for me to name.

<span id="vii-p31"></span>Though I can add nothing to the character of
your Highness, either by my praise or by the dedication of this Work,
yet I could not restrain myself from doing what I thought to be my duty.
Farewell, Most Illustrious Prince. May God enrich you more and more with
His spiritual gifts, keep you long in safety, and render your dignified
station prosperous to you and yours.

<span id="vii-p32"></span>GENEVA, *July* 23, 1563.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc17006.htm#fr_1) <span
id="vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p14"></span> <span id="vii-p14.1"></span>Ιδιομάτων
κοινώνιαν, which may be rendered “The communication of peculiarities.” —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc17006.htm#fr_2) <span
id="vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p18"></span> “<span id="vii-p18.1"></span>Christus ubique
totus est, sed non totum.” Lib. 3, Senten. dist. 22.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc17006.htm#fr_3) <span
id="vii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="vii-p28"></span> <span id="vii-p28.1"></span>Non ignora mali,
miseris succurrere disco

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Printer's to the Reader](cc17007)
