[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tsb04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1425488269/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Transmigration of the Seven Brahmans*, by Henry David Thoreau,
\[1932\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### THE WORLD IS FOUNDED UPON THE SRADDHA <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) RITES IN HONOR OF ANCESTORS

# THE TRANSMIGRATION OF THE SEVEN BRAHMANS

THE divine eye, which Santacoumara had given me, made me perceive the
seven Brahmans, of whom he had spoken, unfaithful to their sacred rules,
but yet attached to the worship of the Pitris. They bore names answering
to their works: they were called *Vagdouchta*, *Crodhana*, *Hinsa*,
*Pisouna*, *Cavi*, *Swasrima* and *Pitrivarttin:* they were sons of
Cosica, and disciples of Gargya. Their father dying, they commenced the
prescribed ceremonies under the direction of their master. By his order
they guarded his foster cow, named Capila, who was accompanied by her
calf already as large as herself. On the way, the sight of this
magnificent cow, who supplied all the wants of Gargya, tempted them:
hunger impelled them, their reason was blinded; they conceived the cruel
and mad project of slaying her. Cavi and Swasrima endeavored to prevent
them from it. What could they against the others? But Pitrivarttin, that
one among them who was always occupied with the *sraddha*, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_0) having his mind then on the duty the
thought of which possessed him, said to his wondering brothers with
anger: "Since we have a sacrifice to make to the Pitris, let this cow be
sacrificed by us with devotion, and her death will profit us. Let us
honor the Pitris and no reproach can

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

be made to us." "Well," said they all, and the cow was sacrificed in
honor of the Pitris. They told their master afterwards: "Your cow has
been slain by a tiger, but here is her calf." The Brahman, without
suspecting evil, took the calf which they delivered to him.

But they failed in the respect which they owed to their master; and when
Time came to take them all together from this world, for having been
cruel and wicked, for having rendered themselves guilty of impiety
toward their preceptor, they all seven reappeared in life in the family
of a hunter, of the country of Dasarna. However, as in sacrificing the
cow of their master, they had rendered homage to the Pitris, these
brothers, filled with force and intelligence, preserved in this
existence the remembrance of the past: they showed themselves attached
to their duties, performing their functions with zeal, and abstaining
from every act of cupidity and injustice: now holding in their breath as
long a time as endured the recitation of a *mantra*, <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_1) now plunging themselves into profound
meditations on their destiny. These were the names of these pious
hunters: *Nirvera*, *Nirvriti*, *Kchanta*, *Nirmanyou*, *Criti*,
*Veghasa*, and *Matrivarttin*. Thus these same men who had formerly
loved evil and injustice, were now so changed that they honored their
mother bent under the weight of age and rejoiced the heart of their
father. When death had taken away their parents, then leaving their bow,
they fixed themselves in the forest, where soon after, they themselves
also surrendered their souls.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

As a recompense for their good conduct they retained still in their
following life the remembrance of the past: they were born upon the
agreeable mountain Calandyara, under the form of stags with high arching
horns, by turns experiencing and inspiring fear. Their names were then
*Ounmoukha*, *Nityavitrasta*, *Stabdacarna*, *Vilotchana*, *Pandita*,
*Ghasmara* and *Nadin*. Thus going over in memory their ancient actions,
they wandered in the woods, detached from every sentiment, from every
affection, submitting with resignation to the duties which they had to
fulfill, and in their solitude delivering themselves to the exercises of
the *Yoga*. <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_2) Extenuated by fasting and
penitence, they died in the course of pious practices, by which the
earth was worn bare and one sees yet, O son of Bharata, upon the
mountain Calandyara the mark of their feet.

Their piety caused that they passed into a class of beings more
elevated; transported into the beautiful country of Sarodwipa, they had
the form of those geese which inhabit the abode of the lakes: entirely
isolated from all society, true Mounis occupied only with divine things,
they were named then *Nihspriha*, *Nirmama*, *Kchanta*, *Nirdwandwa*,
*Nichparigraha*, *Nirvriti*, and *Nirbhrita*. In the midst of their
austerities and their fastings they died, and returned to life under the
form of swans, frequenting the waves of Manasa. The names of these seven
brothers were *Padmagarbha*, *Ravindakcha*, *Kchiragarbha*,
*Soulotchana*, *Ourouvindou*, *Souvindou* and *Himagarbha*. In the
remembrance of

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

their past life, they pursued their holy exercises; the fault committed
toward their master, when they were Brahmans, had caused them to
retrograde in the scale of beings; but the worship which they had then,
in the midst even of their slaying, rendered to the Pitris, had procured
for them the faculty of adding to their knowledge at each new birth.
Finally they returned to the world under the appearance of wild ducks,
with the names of *Soumanas*, *Swani*, *Souvak*, *Souddha*,
*Tchitradarsana*, *Sounetra* and *Soutantra*. By the effect of the acts
of penitence which they had performed in their various states, their
exercises of devotion and their good works, the divine science which
they had formerly learned in the lessons of their different masters,
formed a treasure which went on always accumulating by their
transmigrations. In their new condition of inhabitants of the air, they
continued their holy practices; in their language they spoke only of
sacred things, and the *Yoga* was the only object of their meditations.

Such was their existence, when Vibhradja, descendant of Pourou and
prince of the family of the Nipas, brilliant with beauty, illustrious in
power, stately, and surrounded by all his house, entered into the forest
where these birds lived. Soutantra saw him, and suddenly dazzled by so
much riches, formed this desire: "Might I become like this king, if I
have acquired any merit by my austerities and my penitence! I am unhappy
to have fasted and mortified myself without any fruit."

Then two of the wild ducks his companions said to him: "We

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

wish to follow you, and share the destiny of our friend." "So be it,"
replied Soutantra, till then only animated by religious thoughts, and
they associated themselves all three in this resolution. Souvak said to
him: "Since consulting only your passion, you reject our pious
exercises, in order to form earthly desires, hear my words. Be cursed by
us: you shall be king at Campilya, and these two friends shall follow
you there." Thus the four birds, faithful to their vocation, addressed
imprecations and reproaches to their old companions, whom the desire of
a throne had turned aside from the good way. Cursed, fallen from their
devotion, all lost, these three unhappy ones asked pardon from their
comrades. Their despair was touching, and Soumanas spoke to them in the
name of the others: "Our curse shall have its effect. You shall become
men, but you shall return one day to the holy practices of devotion.
Soutantra shall know the languages of all animals. It is to him we owe
the favors with which the Pitris have loaded us. When we slew the cow of
our master, it was he who counselled us to offer her as a sacrifice to
the manes: it is therefore to him that we are to attribute the science
which we possess, and the devotion which we have practiced. Yes, one
day, hearing some words which will recall to you in a concise manner, a
past, the knowledge of which shall have been concealed at the bottom of
your souls, you shall abandon all to return to devotion."

As I was saying, while these seven birds, on the waves of the Manassa,
nourishing themselves only on air and water, suffered

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

their bodies to waste away, the king Vibhradja betook himself to these
woods, surrounded by all his court, and shining like Indra in the midst
of his celestial garden of Nandana. <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_3)
He saw there these seven birds occupied with their pious practices:
humbled by the comparison which he made of them and himself, he came
back all pensive into his city. He had a son extremely religious who was
named *Anouha*, because forgetting this body composed of material atoms,
he elevated himself ever to the contemplation of the soul. Souca gave
him for wife his daughter, the illustrious Critwi, no less estimable for
her good qualities than for her devotion . . .

Vibhradja, having yielded the throne to his son Anouha, gave his last
advice to his subjects, made his adieu to the Brahmans, and betook
himself to the borders of the lake where he had seen the seven friends,
in order to do penance there. There, fasting, contenting himself with
air for all nourishment, renouncing every kind of desire, he thought
only of mortifying the body. His object, however, was to obtain by force
of his austerities the privilege of becoming the son of one of these
beings whom he admired. The ardor of his penitence soon gave to
Vibhradja a luminous appearance. He was like a sun which enlightened all
the forest. O son of Courou, this wood was from his name called
*Vebhradja*, as well as the lake, where the four birds, constant in
devotion, and the three others, who had strayed from the good road,
abandoned their mortal coil.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

Then all together and in harmony they betook themselves to Campilya; and
there these seven noble and holy souls, purified by science, meditation
and penitence, and instructed in the Vedas and the Vedangas, underwent a
new birth. But there were only four who preserved a memory of the past;
the three others found themselves in the shades of their folly.

Soutantra became the son of Anouha, and was the glorious Brahmadatta;
the desire which he had formed, when he was a bird, was thus
accomplished. As for Tchitradarsana and Sounetra, they were born into a
family of Brahmans: they were sons of Babhravya and of Vatsa, able in
the science of the Vedas and of the Vedangas, and friends of
Brahmadatta, as they had been in their preceding births. One was named
*Pantchala:* it was he who, in the various transmigrations, had been the
fifth; the sixth was called then *Candarica*. Brahmadatta had been the
seventh. Pantchala, learned in the Rig-veda, was a great Atcharya; <span
id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_4) Candarica possessed two Vedas, the Sama and
the Yadjour. The king, son of Anouha, had the privilege of knowing the
language of all beings. He cultivated the friendship of Pantchala and of
Candarica. Delivered, like common men, to the empire of the senses and
the passions, on account of what they had done in their preceding
births, they nevertheless knew how to distinguish the requirements of
duty from desires and from luxury.

The excellent prince Anouha, after having crowned king the virtuous
Brahmadatta, animated by devotion, entered on the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

way which leads to heaven. Brahmadatta married the daughter of Devala,
called *Sannati*, and who owed this name to the respect which she
inspired. Her father had instructed her himself in the great science of
devotion, and her virtue was such that she was destined to be born only
once on earth.

The four friends, who had followed Pantchala, Candarica, and Brahmadatta
to Campilya, were born into a family of Brahmans very poor. These four
brothers were named *Dhritiman*, *Soumanas*, *Vidwan* and *Tatwadarsin;*
profound in the reading of the Vedas, and penetrating all the secrets of
nature, they united all the knowledge which they had gathered in their
previous existences. Happy in the exercise of their devotion, they
wished still to go and perfect themselves in solitude. They told it to
their father, who cried out: "It is to fail in your duty to abandon me
thus. How can you quit me, leaving me in poverty, taking away from me my
children who are my only riches, and depriving me of their services."
These Brahmans replied to this afflicted and disconsolate father: "We
are about to give you the means of coming out of this state of poverty.
Hear these words: they will procure you great riches. Go find the
virtuous king Brahmadatta, repeat them to him before his counsellors.
Happy at hearing you, he will give you lands and riches, he will crown
at last all your desires. Go, and be satisfied." Then they told him
certain words, and after having honored him as their spiritual master,
they gave themselves only to the practice of the Yoga, and obtained the
final emancipation. <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_5)

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

The son of Brahmadatta was Vibhradja himself, born again; animated by
piety, and covered with glory, he was named *Viswaksena*. One day
Brahmadatta, his soul content and happy, was walking in a wood with his
wife: he resembled Indra accompanied by Satchi. This prince heard there
the voice of an ant: it was a lover who sought to bend his mistress by
his tender language. In picking up the answer of the passionate lover,
and thinking of the littleness of their being, Brahmadatta could not
help laughing out loud. Sannati appeared offended at it and blushed. Her
resentment went so far as to make her refuse to eat: her husband wished
in vain to appease her. She replied to him with a bitter smile: "O
prince, you laughed at me, I can no longer live." The king told her the
truth such as it was. She was unwilling to believe it, and replied to
him with wounded feelings: "O prince, that is not in nature. What man
can know the language of the ants? unless it is an effect of the favor
of a god recompensing the good actions of a preceding life, or the fruit
of a great penitence, or the result of a supernatural science. O king,
if it is true that you have this power, if you know the language of all
beings, deign to communicate to me your knowledge, or let me die, as
truly cursed by you."

Brahmadatta was touched by the tender complaints of the queen: he had
recourse to the protection of Narayana, lord of all beings. Abstracted
and fasting for six nights, he adored him: then this glorious prince, in
a vision perceived the god, who is the love of all nature, and who said
to him: "Brahmadatta, tomorrow

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

morning thou shalt have good fortune." Thus spoke the god, and
disappeared.

In the meanwhile the father of the four Brahmans having learned from his
children the mysterious words which they had communicated to him,
regarded himself as sure of his object. He sought a moment when he might
meet the king with his counsellors, and could not for some time find the
moment to make him hear the words which he had to say to him. Narayana
had rendered his oracle; the king, satisfied with his answer, had
performed the ablution of his head, and mounted upon a chariot all
shining with gold, was reentering into the city. The chief of the
Brahmans, Candarica, was holding the reins of the horses, and the son of
Babhravya was bearing the chowri <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_6) and
the royal fan. "This is the moment," said the Brahman to himself, and
immediately he addressed these words to the king and to his two
companions: "The seven hunters of the country of Dasarna, the stags of
mount Calandjara, the geese of Sarodwipa, the swans of Manassa were
anciently in Couroukchetra <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*\*](#fn_7) Brahmans
instructed in the Vedas: in this long voyage why then do you remain
behind?" At these words Brahmadatta remained speechless, as well as his
two friends Pantchala and Candarica. Seeing the one let fall the reins
and the standard, and the other the royal fan, the spectators and
courtiers were struck with astonishment. In a moment, the king elevated
upon the car with his two companions, recovered his senses and continued
his route. But all three recalling to

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

mind the borders of the sacred lake, recovered at the same time their
ancient sentiments of devotion. They loaded with riches the Brahman,
giving him precious stones and other presents. Brahmadatta yielded his
throne to Viswaksena, and caused him to be crowned king: as for him, he
retired into the forest with his wife. There the pious daughter of
Devala, Sannati, happy to give herself only to devotion, said to her
husband: "O great king, I knew very well that you were acquainted with
the language of the ants; but by feigning anger, I wished to warn you
that you were in the chains of the passions. We are going now to follow
the sublime road which is the object of our desires. It is I who have
reawakened in you this love of devotion which was there only
slumbering." The prince was charmed at this discourse of his wife: and
by means of devotion, to which he consecrated himself with all the
forces of his soul he entered into that superior way to which it is
difficult to arrive.

Candarica, animated by the same zeal, was as able in the science of the
*Sankhya* as in that of the Yoga, and purified by his works, he obtained
perfection and the mysterious union with God.

Pantchala labored to explain the rules of the holy law, and applied
himself to develop all the precepts of pronunciation; he was master in
the divine art of devotion, and by his penitence he acquired a high
glory.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:\*](tsb05.htm#fr_1) Worship offered to the
Pitris or fathers.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:\*](tsb05.htm#fr_2) An act of piety in which
the penitent collects himself, and holds his breath, until the prayer
which he repeats mentally is ended.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:\*](tsb05.htm#fr_3) An exercise of penance or
extreme devotion.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[8:\*](tsb05.htm#fr_4) The Elysium of Indra.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[9:\*](tsb05.htm#fr_5) A spiritual teacher.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[10:\*](tsb05.htm#fr_6) That is, they died to be
born no more on earth.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[12:\*](tsb05.htm#fr_7) A fly-flap made of the
tail of a Tartary cow.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[12:\*\*](tsb05.htm#fr_8) A part of India.

 
