<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](lam005)  [Next](eze001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 0:0</span></span>

The character of Ezekiel, as a Writer and Poet, is thus admirably drawn
by the masterly hand of Bishop Lowth: "Ezekiel is much inferior to
Jeremiah in elegance; in sublimity he is not even excelled by Isaiah;
but his sublimity is of a totally different kind. He is deep, vehement,
tragical; his sentiments are elevated, animated, full of fire and
indignation; his imagery is crowded, magnificent, terrific; his language
is grand, solemn, austere, rough, and at times unpolished; he abounds in
repetitions, not for the sake of grace or elegance, but from vehemence
and indignation. Whatever subject he treats of, that he sedulously
puruses; from that he rarely departs, but cleaves, as it were, to it;
whence the connexion is in general evident and well preserved. In other
respects he may perhaps be exceeded by the other prophets; but, for that
species of composition to which he seems adapted by natural gifts, the
forcible, impetuous, grave, and grand, not one of the sacred writers is
superior to him. His diction is sufficiently perspicuous; all his
obscurity arises from the nature of his subjects. Visions (as for
instance, among others, those of Hosea, Amos, and Zechariah), are
necessarily dark and confused. The greater part of Ezekiel, particularly
towards the middle of the book, is poetical, whether we regard the
matter of the language." Abp. Newcombe judiciously observes, The Prophet
is not to be considered merely as a poet, or as a framer of those august
and astonishing visions, and of those admirable poetical
representations, which he committed to writing; but as an instrument in
the hands of God, who vouchsafed to reveal himself, through a long
succession of ages, not only in divers parts constituting a magnificant
and uniform whole, but also in different manners, as by voice, by
dreams, by inspiration, and by plain or enigmatical vision. "Ezekiel is
a great poet, full of originality; and, in my opinion, whoever censures
him as if he were only an imitator of the old prophets, can never have
felt his power. He must not, in general, be compared with Isaiah, and
the rest of the old prophets. Those are great, Ezekiel is also great;
those in their manner of poetry, Ezekiel in his." To justify this
character the learned prelate descends to particulars, and gives
apposite examples, not only of the clear, flowing, and nervous, but also
of the sublime; and concludes his observations on his style, by stating
it to be his deliberate opinion, that if his "style is the old age of
Hebrew language and composition (as has been alleged), it is a firm and
vigorous one, and should induce us to trace its youth and manhood with
the most assiduous attention." As a Prophet, Ezekiel must ever be
allowed to occupy a very high rank; and few of the prophets have left a
more valuable treasure to the church of God than he has. It is true, he
is in several places obscure; but this resulted either from the nature
of his subjects, or the events predicted being still unfulfilled; and,
when time has rolled away the mist of futurity, successive generations
will then perceive with what heavenly wisdom this much neglected prophet
has spoken. There is, however, a great proportion of his work which is
free from every obscurity, and highly edifying. He has so accurately and
minutely foretold the fate and condition of various nations and cities,
that nothing can be more interesting than to trace the exact
accomplishment of these prophecies in the accounts furnished by
historians and travellers; while, under the elegant type of a new temple
to be erected, a new worship to be introduced, and a new Jerusalem to be
built, with new land to be allotted to the twelve tribes, may be
discovered the vast extent and glory of the New Testament Church.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 1](eze001)

</div>
