<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](luk024)  [Next](joh001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 0:0</span></span>

John, who, according to the unanimous testimony of the ancient fathers
and ecclesiastical writers, was the author of this Gospel, was the son
of Zebedee, a fisherman of Bethsaida, by Salome his wife (compare [Mat
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002), with [Mat
27:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#055), [Mat
27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056) and [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040)), and brother of James the
elder, whom "Herod killed with the sword," ([Act
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002)). Theophylact says that Salome
was the daughter of Joseph, the husband of Mary, by a former wife; and
that consequently she was our Lord's sister, and John was his nephew. He
followed the occupation of his father till his call to the apostleship
([Mat 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#021), [Mat
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#022), [Mar
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#019), [Mar
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#020), [Luk
5:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001)), which is supposed to have
been when he was about twenty five years of age; after which he was a
constant eye-witness of our Lord's labours, journeyings, discourses,
miracles, passion, crucifixion, resurrection, and ascension. After the
ascension of our Lord he returned with the other apostles to Jerusalem,
and with the rest partook of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the
day of Pentecost, by which he was eminently qualified for the office of
an Evangelist and Apostle. After the death of Mary, the mother of
Christ, which is supposed to have taken place about fifteen years after
the crucifixion, and probably after the council held in Jerusalem about
ad 49 or 50 (Acts 15), at which he was present, he is said by
ecclesiastical writers to have proceeded to Asia Minor, where he formed
and presided over seven churches in as many cities, but chiefly resided
at Ephesus. Thence he was banished by the emperor Domitian, in the
fifteenth year of his reign, ad 95, to the isle of Patmos in the Agean
sea, where he wrote the Apocalypse ([Rev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009)). On the accession of Nerva the
following year, he was recalled from exile and returned to Ephesus,
where he wrote his Gospel and Epistles, and died in the hundredth year
of his age, about ad 100, and in the third year of the emperor Trajan.
It is generally believed that St. John was the youngest of the twelve
apostles, and that he survived all the rest. Jerome, in his comment on
Gal VI., says that he continued preaching when so enfeebled with age as
to be obliged to be carried into the assembly; and that, not being able
to deliver any long discourse, his custom was to say in every meeting,
My dear children, love one another. The general current of ancient
writers declares that the apostle wrote his Gospel at an advanced period
of life, with which the internal evidence perfectly agrees; and we may
safely refer it, with Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Mill, Lev. Clerc, and
others, to the year 97. The design of St. John in writing his Gospel is
said by some to have been to supply those important events which the
other Evangelists had omitted, and to refute the notions of the
Cerinthians and Nicolaitans, or according to others, to refute the
heresy of the Gnostics and Sabians. But, though many parts of his Gospel
may be successfully quoted against the strange doctrines held by those
sects, yet the apostle had evidently a more general end in view than the
confutation of their heresies. His own words sufficiently inform us of
his motive and design in writing this Gospel: "These things are written
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that
believing, ye might have life through his name" ([Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031)). Learned men are not wholly
agreed concerning the language in which this Gospel was originally
written. Salmasius, Grotius, and other writers, have imagined that St.
John wrote it in his own native tongue, the Aramean or Syriac, and that
it was afterwards translated into Greek. This opinion is not supported
by any strong arguments, and is contradicted by the unanimous voice of
antiquity, which affirms that he wrote it in Greek, which is the general
and most probable opinion. The style of this Gospel indicates a great
want of those advantages which result from a learned education; but this
defect is amply compensated by the unexampled simplicity with which he
expresses the sublimest truths. One thing very remarkable is an attempt
to impress important truths more strongly on the minds of his readers,
by employing in the expression of them both an affirmative proposition
and a negative. It is manifestly not without design that he commonly
passes over those passages of our Lord's history and teaching which had
been treated at large by other Evangelists, or if he touches them at
all, he touches them but slightly, whilst he records many miracles which
had been overlooked by the rest, and expatiates on the sublime doctrines
of the pre-existence, the divinity, and the incarnation of the Word, the
great ends of His mission, and the blessings of His purchase.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 1](joh001)

</div>
