<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](ezr010)  [Next](neh001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 0:0</span></span>

Of Nehemiah, the author and principal actor in the events recorded in
this book, the Jews speak as one of the greatest men of their nation.
His concern for his country entitles him to the character of the first
patriot that ever lived. Descended, according to some, of the family of
Aaron, or according to others, of the tribe of Judah and allied to the
royal family of David, in the course of Divine Providence, he was a
captive in Babylon, but there his excellences were so apparent, that he
was chosen by the Persian king to fill an office the most respectable
and the most confidential in the whole court. Here he lived in ease and
affluence. he lacked no good thing; and here he might have continued to
live, in the same affluence, and in the same confidence; but he could
enjoy neither, so long as he knew his people distressed, the sepulchres
of his fathers trodden under foot, the altars of his God overturned, and
his worship either totally neglected or corrupted. He sought the peace
of Jerusalem; prayed for it; and was willing to sacrifice wealth, ease,
safety, and even life itself, if he might be the instrument of restoring
the desolations of Israel. And God, who saw the desire of his heart, and
knew the excellences with which he had endowed him, granted his request,
and gave him the high honour of restoring the desolated city of his
ancestors, and the pure worship of their God. The opposition of
Sanballat and the Samaritans, and the firmness and zeal with which he
repelled their insults and ineffectual efforts cannot be read without
the liveliest emotions; and will afford to the latest times, a noble and
animating example of distinguished patriotism, united with the sincerest
devotion to the interests of religion. The virtue and piety of this
great and good man, appear with equal lustre in the numerous and
important reformations he effected. He relieved the people from their
hardships and oppressions, by abolishing the harsh and usurious
practices of the nobles and rulers; gave up his own revenue, as governor
of the province, for the benefit of the people; and, as a further means
of conciliating their affections, exhibited an example of the most
princely hospitality. As the best security for good morals, and the
better observance of the laws of God, he re-established the offices of
public worship, and prevented the profanation of the sabbath, which had
arrived at a shameful excess; he furnished the returned captives with
authentic registers, and enabled them, in the best manner possible,
after so long and calamitous an interval, to trace the genealogies, and
claim the inheritance of their respective families; and further, he
accomplished the separation of the Jewish people from the mixed
multitude, with which they had been incorporated, and annulled the
numerous marriages which they had made with heathens and idolaters of
every description. For disinterestedness, philanthropy, patriotism,
prudence, courage, zeal, humanity, and every virtue that constitutes a
great mind, and proves a soul in deep communion with God, Nehemiah will
ever stand conspicuous among the greatest men of the Jewish nation; and
an exemplar worthy of being copied by the first patriots in every nation
under heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 1](neh001)

</div>
