<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](psa150)  [Next](pro001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 0:0</span></span>

The wisdom of all ages, from the highest antiquity, has chosen to
compress and communicate its lessons in short, compendious sentences,
and in poetic language, which were readily conceived and easily
retained, and circulated in society as useful principles, to be unfolded
as occasion required. Indeed, such short maxims, comprehending much
instruction in a few words, and carrying their own evidence with them,
are admirably adapted to direct the conduct, without overburdening the
memory, or perplexing the mind with abstract reasonings; and hence there
are, in all countries and in all languages, old proverbs, or common
sayings, which have great authority and influence on the opinions and
actions of mankind. Such maxims, however, want their proper basis, the
sanction of a Divine Original; and being generally the mere result of
worldly prudence, are often calculated to impose on the judgment, and to
mislead those who are directed by them. But the proverbs in this book
not only are far more ancient than any others extant in the world, and
infinitely surpass all the ethical sayings of the ancient sages; but
have also received a Divine imprimatur, and are infallible rules to
direct our conduct in every circumstance of human life. They are so
justly founded on the principles of human nature, and so adapted to the
permanent interests of man, that they agree with the manners of every
age; and are adapted to every period, condition, or rank in life,
however varied in its complexion or diversified by circumstance. Kings
and subjects, rich and poor, wise and foolish, old and young, fathers
and mothers, husbands and wives, sons and daughters, masters and
servants, may here learn their respective duties, and read lessons of
instruction for the regulation of their conduct in their various
circumstances; while the most powerful motives, derived from honour,
interest, love, fear, natural affection, and piety, are exhibited to
inspire an ardent love of wisdom and virtue, and the greatest
detestation of ignorance and vice. These maxims are laid down so
clearly, copiously, impressively, and in such variety, that every man
who wishes to be instructed may take what he chooses, and, among
multitudes, those which he likes best. "He is wise," say St. Basil, "not
only who hath arrived at a complete habit of wisdom, but who hath made
some progress towards it; nay, who doth as yet but love it, or desire
it, and listen to it. Such as these, by reading this book, shall be made
wiser; for they shall be instructed in much divine, and in no less human
learning....It bridles the injurious tongue, corrects the wanton eye,
and ties the unjust hand in chains. It persecutes sloth, chastises all
absurd desires, teaches prudence, raises man's courage, and represents
temperance and chastity after such a fashion that one cannot but have
them in veneration.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 1](pro001)

</div>
