<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](jdg021)  [Next](rut001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Treasury of Scriptural Knowledge*, by R.A. Torrey, \[ca. 1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 0:0</span></span>

This book is evidently a supplement to the book of Judges, and an
introduction to that of Samuel, between which it is placed with great
propriety. In the ancient Jewish canon, it formed a part of the book of
Judges; but the modern Jews make it one of the five Megilloth, which
they place towards the end of the Old Testament. This book has been
attributed to various authors; but the best founded and generally
received opinion, and in which the Jews coincide, is that which ascribes
it to the prophet Samuel; before whose time it could not have been
written, as is evident from the genealogy recorded in [Jdg
4:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#017). The time in which the events
detailed in this book happened is involved in much obscurity and
uncertainty. Augustine refers it to the time of the regal government of
the Hebrews; Josephus to the administration of Eli; Moldenhawer, after
some Jewish writers, to the time of Ehud; Rabbi Kimichi, and other
Jewish authors, to the time of Ibzan; Bps. Patrick and Horne to the
judicature of Gideon; Lightfoot to the period between Ehud and Deborah;
and Usher, who is followed by most chronologers, to the time of Shamgar.
The authenticity and canonical authority of this sacred book cannot be
questioned; and the Evangelists, in describing our Saviour's descent,
have followed its genealogical accounts. To delineate part of this
genealogy appears to be the principal design of the book; it had been
foretold that the Messiah should be of the tribe of Judah, and it was
afterwards revealed that he should be of the family of David; and
therefore it was necessary, to prevent the least suspicion of fraud or
design, that the history of that family should be written before these
prophecies were revealed. And thus this book, these prophecies, and
their accomplishment, serve mutually to illustrate each other. The whole
narrative is extremely interesting and instructive, and is written with
the most beautiful simplicity. The distress of Naomi; her affectionate
concern for her daughter-in-law; the reluctant departure of Orpah; the
dutiful attachment of Ruth; and the sorrowful return to Bethlehem, are
very beautifully told. The simplicity of manners, likewise, which is
shown in the account of Ruth's industry and attention to Naomi; of the
elegant charity of Boaz; and of his acknowledgment of his kindred with
Ruth, afford a very pleasing contrast to the turbulent scenes described
in the preceding book. And while it exhibits, in a striking and
affecting manner, the care of Divine Providence over those who sincerely
fear God, and honestly aim at fulfilling his will, the circumstance of a
Moabitess becoming an ancestor of the Messiah seems to have been a
pre-intimation of the admission of the Gentiles into his church It must
be remarked, that in the estimation of the Jews, it was disgraceful to
David to have derived his birth from a Moabitess; and Shimei, in his
revilings against him, is supposed by them to have tauntingly reflected
on his descent from Ruth. This book, therefore, contains an intrinsic
proof of its own verity, as it reveals a circumstance so little
flattering to the sovereign of Israel; and it is scarcely necessary to
appeal to its admission into the canon of Scripture, for a testimony of
its authentic character. Add to which, that the native, the amiable
simplicity in which the story is told, is sufficient proof of its
genuineness. There are several sympathetic circumstances recorded which
no forger could have invented. there is too much of nature to admit
anything of art.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 1](rut001)

</div>
