[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ftft29)  [Next](ftft31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Forty-four Turkish Fairy Tales \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span id="img_22800"></span> ![Shah Meram and Sultan
Sade](img/22800.jpg)

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![T](img/tinit.jpg) |

HERE was once a Padishah who had three sons, and when the Padishah their
father died the three brothers disputed for the succession to the
throne. At length the youngest made the following proposition: "Let each
of us take bow and arrow, and whichever shall shoot farthest to him
shall belong the throne." This met with favour from the others, so all
three repaired to the open plain and shot their arrows. The arrow of the
eldest fell at a certain part of the plain, that of the second brother
at a point somewhat more distant, and the youngest brother's came down
into a bush.<span id="img_22801"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/22801.jpg) |

While they were engaged in recovering their arrows darkness came upon
them, and not only was the search for the arrows futile, but they could
not even find each other.

The youngest, how ever, espied a small light in the distance, and as he
was benighted and unable to find his way home, he went in its direction.
In course of time he came to a serai, around which forty men were
gathered. Accosting them and asking what they were doing, he was
answered: "We are robbers who for many years have been trying to get
into this serai, but so far

<span id="img_22802"></span>

[![](tn/22802.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22802.jpg)

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

we have been unable to accomplish our purpose." After some investigation
the young man discovered a place where he could scale the wall. He
climbed up, and when he had reached the top he invited the others to
follow him one by one. As they came up he cut off their heads and threw
their bodies into the courtyard. When all the forty had been destroyed
in this manner he entered the serai and began to wander through the
halls and corridors.

While engaged in this manner he came upon three rooms, in each of which
was a beautiful maiden asleep. These he disposed of in his mind,
intending to marry one himself and give the others to his elder
brothers. Then he stuck his handschar in the door of the apartment
occupied by his chosen one and departed.

Morning broke and found him near the spot where his arrow had fallen.
All three arrows were eventually recovered, and as it was seen that the
youngest brother had shot the farthest he was set upon the throne with
suitable pomp and ceremony.

On the morning following the youth's adventure with the robbers, the old
Padishah of the serai arose and found the handschar sticking in the door
of his youngest daughter's apartment. He attempted to withdraw the
weapon, but could not. He called his servants, but they had no better
success. Then he issued a proclamation that whosoever should be able to
withdraw the handschar from the door should receive the Princess in
marriage. Suitors came from many lands, but none could be found to pull
the weapon from the door. Only the three brothers remained, and these
were now invited to come and test their strength and skill. First the
eldest tried but without success; the second brother was equally
unfortunate; but when the youngest grasped the handschar he released it
without apparent effort and replaced it in its sheath.

Then said the Padishah: "My son, my daughter is yours." "But I have two
brothers," observed the young man. "Then they shall have my two eldest
daughters," rejoined the Padishah. The triple marriage

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

ceremony was performed forthwith, after which the three brothers with
their wives mounted their horses and rode away.

As they went along something came like a lightning-flash from the
cloudless sky, tore the maiden from the lap of the youngest brother, and
disappeared with her. It was a Dew; and the forty robbers whose heads
the youngest brother had cut off were his servants, who had undertaken
the task of carrying away the maiden at the behest of their master.

Now the young man said to his brothers: "Go home with your wives, and
when I have found mine I will follow you." With these words he parted
from them to prosecute his difficult and dangerous enterprise.

Wandering up hill and down dale, over forest and meadow, he met a
Dew-woman, the mother of the Dew who had carried off his bride. When he
saw her he was afraid and said to himself: "She will surely cut me to
pieces." Nevertheless he approached her with apparent boldness, embraced
her, and accosted her as "Mother." "My son,"

<span id="img_23000"></span> ![The Dew disappeared with the
girl](img/23000.jpg)

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

returned the Dew woman," whence do you come, and whither do you go?" He
informed her of the object of his journey, and the woman said: "The Dew
who bore away your wife is my son, who has for years been seeking an
opportunity to carry her off. It will be very difficult to take her from
him, but nevertheless you can try. Go the way I will show you, and you
will meet my elder sister. Greet her from me, and perhaps she may be
disposed to help you."<span id="img_23100"></span>

|                                              |
|----------------------------------------------|
| ![He embraced the Dew-Mother](img/23100.jpg) |

The youth accordingly set out; and when he found the Dew-woman's elder
sister, he embraced her, addressed her as "Mother," and delivered his
message. Afterwards he recounted his trouble and begged her aid. This
Dew-woman now dispatched him to another elder sister, who might be able
to help him.

Again he set off, came to the eldest sister, and having exchanged
greetings, related his trouble and begged for help as before. The old
woman then said: "It is a hard task to reach the Dew's abode, but I will
tell you of a means whereby you may succeed. Seek a certain place by the
sea shore and wait there for a space of forty days. Once only in that
period the young sea. horses come to the shore.

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

Take a skein of wool in your hand, and should you succeed in catching
one of the creatures bring it here. We will then feed it and train it
for forty days, after which you may mount it and it will convey you
wheresoever you desire to go."

<span id="img_23200"></span>

|                                                   |
|---------------------------------------------------|
| ![The youth mounted the Sea Horse](img/23200.jpg) |

So the young man set off once more, and, arriving at the seashore, he
prepared for his forty days vigil. On the fortieth day the little
sea-horses made their appearance. He caught one with his skein of wool
and returned with it to the Dew-mother. When the forty days had nearly
expired she said to the horse: "Can you take this young man whither he
would go?" The horse answered: "I am still small, and the Dew who has
carried off this young man's wife is my father, however quickly I might
run, my father would surely overtake me. However, if when I am
returning, with the youth and the maiden on my back, he would stick a
pin in my neck, the pain might make me go faster. Should the Dew catch
us we are all lost."

At these words the youth mounted the horse and set off directly for the
abode of the Dew. Arrived there they found him sleeping. When the
Princess saw her husband she cried: "O my Shahzada, now is the time to
rescue me and to escape for when the Dew awakes he will kill us."
Quickly the Prince seized his wife, lifted her beside him on the horse's
back, and away they went.

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

After they had gone, the Dew's horse neighed and woke the sleeper, who
locked round and saw that the maiden was missing. Like a lightning-flash
the Dew bestrode his horse and gave chase.

By constant pinpricking the youth endeavoured to increase his horse's
speed. The horse himself was in despair. "O my Shahzada," he exclaimed,
"my father is coming; he will surely catch us." At this the Prince
buried the pin up to its head in the horse's body, and the brave animal
made a frantic effort to reach the Dew-mother. As soon as she saw them
she shouted: "Now you have nothing further to fear; otherwise he would
have caught you both before this and torn you to pieces. You can now
depart with your wife, but forget not to send me a man every day. If you
fail in this, I shall visit you at night while you sleep and devour both
you and your wife."

In the meantime his brothers awaited their arrival. They rejoiced to see
them both, and celebrated their homecoming with forty days and forty
nights of feasting and revelry.

No wonder that in the midst of all this merrymaking the Prince forgot
one day to send a man to the Dew-woman. The result of this negligence
was that the Dew-woman appeared that same night, as the Prince and his
wife slept; she carried off the bed with its occupants, and next morning
they woke to find themselves in her clutches. The Prince's despair was
deepened by the melancholy reflection that the misfortune was due solely
to his own thoughtlessness. The Dew-woman, moreover, reproached him for
his ingratitude, and made preparations to eat them both. He wept and
implored her mercy so piteously, however, that at length the Dew-woman
pardoned him on condition that he should repair the omission as soon as
he arrived back home. Promising to do so, they were set at liberty.
While on the way home, being tired, they sat down to rest, and the
Prince, with his head on his wife's knees, fell asleep. Suddenly the Dew
appeared and carried off the Princess before the youth was sufficiently
awake to make any attempt to prevent him.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span id="img_23400"></span>

|                                                                    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ![''What seek you here young man,'' asked the bird](img/23400.jpg) |

For the second time bereft, gazing around in despair he saw a well from
which he was astonished to hear an earsplitting noise and uproarious
singing. "I wonder what can be the matter down there?" he said to
himself, and while thus musing a bird flew out of the well. Seeing the
Prince it addressed him: "What seek you here, young man?" "I am a
stranger," he answered. "Coming this way and hearing the noise from the
well, I was curious to know what it could mean." The bird answered: "It
is the wedding-day of the son of the Peri-Padishah, and I am just going
to fetch water for the guests." The Prince asked whether it were
possible for him to see the wedding. The bird said: "I must go for the
water, but if you will await my return I will take you down the well."
So the Prince decided to wait. Presently the bird returned with the
water, and said: "If I take you down and they see you, they will all run
to you and cry that a mortal has no business there. In that event, turn
to the Padishah and ask his aid and support in your misfortune. When he
asks what troubles you, tell him whatsoever you will." On this the bird
took the Prince by the hand and led him down the well.

At the bottom he found himself in a garden containing many trees and
flowers, so magnificent and delightful that he imagined himself in
Paradise. He saw also innumerable birds, which, as soon as they observed
him, flew at him, crying: "O son of men, why have you come to us, and
what do you want here?" Immediately the Shahzada turned to the Padishah

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

and related his grief. "O youth, how was it possible for a son of earth
to penetrate here?" demanded the King of the Peris. The Prince pointed
to the bird that had carried the water, and the Padishah beckoned it to
him, saying: "Take this youth wherever he wishes to go. Should
misfortune befall you, exclaim but 'My shah!' and I will deliver you."

The bird took the Prince on its back and flew away with him direct to
the place where the Dew lived. They delivered the Princess, and flew up
with her to the seventh heaven. The Dew followed, but he could not find
them, and so went back disappointed.

The danger now being over, the bird flew down with the youth and the
maiden to the well, and conducted them before the Padishah, who
addressed the Prince as follows: "If henceforth you will be known as
Shah Meram and your wife as Sade Sultan, there is no cause for fear; but
beware of using your former names by mistake." The youthful pair took
careful note of their new names and departed on their homeward journey.

Arriving there by good fortune in safety, they celebrated their wedding
a second time by forty days of feasting and revelry.

On the forty-first night the Dew penetrated to their sleeping-chamber,
picked up the Princess, and was carrying her off again, when she woke up
and shrieked: "Shah Meram!" "What ails you, Sade Sultan?" demanded the
Prince. At these words the Dew was turned to stone, and in the morning
he was carried out and set up for a statue by the pond in the garden of
the Palace.

The Shahzada and his Princess took their daily walks in the garden, and
often sat down by the pond. Sometimes they forgot the Peri-Padishah's
warning, and called each other by their original names, when the stone
Dew split and cracked. Seeing this, however, they quickly repaired their
fault by addressing each other as Shah Meram and Sade Sultan, which
caused the stone to close together again, so that the Dew was not
delivered from the spell upon him.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span id="img_23600"></span>

|                                                              |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| ![He drew his handschar and attacked the Dew](img/23600.jpg) |

One day, long after these events, it came to pass that in a dream the
Princess saw a dervish, who addressed her as follows: "Should you again
forget your new names and the Dew escape from the stone, take water from
the pond and sprinkle the head of the stone form therewith. Gold and
diamonds will fall from the stone into the pond, and you will be
delivered from the Dew for ever." Waking up, the Princess told her
husband of the dream. The Shahzada asked: "What if, forgetting my new
name, you should also forget to sprinkle the stone--what would then be
the consequence?" But the Princess answered "Let us hope we may not
forget it." With that the Prince had to be content.

One day when they were sitting by the pond the stone statue split
asunder, and to their amazement they saw the Dew step forth. "Oh, woe is
me, Shah Meram!" shrieked the Princess; and the Shahzada, instead of
sprinkling the stone with water, drew his handschar and attacked the
Dew. The latter grasped the youth round the waist and was about to carry
him off when the Prince cried: "O Sade Sultan!" Immediately the Dew was
changed again into stone and fell into the pond, the water of which was
dyed with blood.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

A few days afterwards they were again sitting by the pond and looking at
the stone, when there appeared the dervish the Princess had seen in her
dream. "If you had done exactly as I told you," he said, "gold and
diamonds, and not blood, would have come from the stone. Beware of
saying, 'Had we only done so,' lest the Dew even now appear again and
carry you off in such wise that you may never meet any more."

When the dervish had disappeared the Shahzada said earnestly: "Let us
henceforth shun this place, O my Sade Sultan, for if we should by chance
forget again, there is no further prospect of deliverance." So they
forsook the garden for ever. Blood continues to flow from the stone and
the pond is quite full, but beyond the garden the Prince and Princess
pass their lives in happiness and peace.

<span id="img_23700"></span> ![](img/23700.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wizard and his Pupil](ftft31)
