<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fsgr05)  [Next](fsgr07.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Five Stages of Greek Religion*, by Gilbert Murray, \[1925\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

## II

### THE OLYMPIAN CONQUEST

#### I. *Origin of the Olympians*

The historian of early Greece must find himself often on the watch for a
particular cardinal moment, generally impossible to date in time and
sometimes hard even to define in terms of development, when the clear
outline that we call Classical Greece begins to take shape out of the
mist. It is the moment when, as Herodotus puts it, 'the Hellenic race
was marked off from the barbarian, as more intelligent and more
emancipated from silly nonsense'.<span
id="an_fr_39_1"></span>[39\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_39_1.md) In the eighth
century <span class="smcap">b. c.</span>, for instance, so far as our
remains indicate, there cannot have been much to show that the
inhabitants of Attica and Boeotia and the Peloponnese were markedly
superior to those of, say, Lycia or Phrygia, or even Epirus. By the
middle of the fifth century the difference is enormous. On the one side
is Hellas, on the other the motley tribes of 'barbaroi'.

When the change does come and is consciously felt we may notice a
significant fact about it. It does not announce itself as what it was, a
new thing in the <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> world. It professes to
be a revival, or rather an emphatic realization, of something very old.
The new spirit of classical Greece, with all its humanity, its
intellectual life, its genius for poetry and art, describes itself
merely as being 'Hellenic'—like the Hellenes. And the Hellenes were
simply, as far as we can make out, much the same as the Achaioi, one of
the many tribes of predatory Northmen who had swept down on the Aegean
kingdoms in the dawn of Greek history.<span
id="an_fr_40_1"></span>[40\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_40_1.md)

This claim of a new thing to be old is, in varying degrees, a common
characteristic of great movements. The Reformation professed to be a
return to the Bible, the Evangelical movement in England a return to the
Gospels, the High Church movement a return to the early Church. A large
element even in the French Revolution, the greatest of all breaches with
the past, had for its ideal a return to Roman republican virtue or to
the simplicity of the natural man.<span
id="an_fr_40_2"></span>[40\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_40_2.md) I noticed quite
lately a speech of an American Progressive leader claiming that his
principles were simply those of Abraham Lincoln. The tendency is due in
part to the almost insuperable difficulty of really inventing a new word
to denote a new thing. It is so much easier to take an existing word,
especially a famous word with fine associations, and twist it into a new
sense. In part, no doubt, it comes from mankind's natural love <span
id="page_41">p. 41</span> for these old associations, and the fact that
nearly all people who are worth much have in them some instinctive
spirit of reverence. Even when striking out a new path they like to feel
that they are following at least the spirit of one greater than
themselves.

The Hellenism of the sixth and fifth centuries was to a great extent
what the Hellenism of later ages was almost entirely, an ideal and a
standard of culture. The classical Greeks were not, strictly speaking,
pure Hellenes by blood. Herodotus, and Thucydides<span
id="an_fr_41_1"></span>[41\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_41_1.md) are quite clear
about that. The original Hellenes were a particular conquering tribe of
great prestige, which attracted the surrounding tribes to follow it,
imitate it, and call themselves by its name. The Spartans were, to
Herodotus, Hellenic; the Athenians on the other hand were not. They were
Pelasgian, but by a certain time 'changed into Hellenes and learnt the
language'. In historical times we cannot really find any tribe of pure
Hellenes in existence, though the name clings faintly to a particular
district, not otherwise important, in South Thessaly. Had there been any
undoubted Hellenes with incontrovertible pedigrees still going, very
likely the ideal would have taken quite a different name. But where no
one's ancestry would bear much inspection, the only way to show you were
a true Hellene was to behave as such: that is, to approximate to some
constantly rising ideal of what the true Hellene should be. In all
probability if a Greek of the fifth century, like Aeschylus or even
Pindar, had met a group of the real Hellenes or Achaioi of the
Migrations, he would have set them down as so many obvious and flaming
barbarians.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

We do not know whether the old Hellenes had any general word to denote
the surrounding peoples ('Pelasgians and divers other barbarous
tribes'<span id="an_fr_42_1"></span>[42\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_42_1).md) whom
they conquered or accepted as allies.<span
id="an_fr_42_2"></span>[42\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_42_2.md) In any case by the
time of the Persian Wars (say 500 <span class="smcap">b. c.</span>) all
these tribes together considered themselves Hellenized, bore the name of
'Hellenes', and formed a kind of unity against hordes of 'barbaroi'
surrounding them on every side and threatening them especially from the
east.

Let us consider for a moment the dates. In political history this
self-realization of the Greek tribes as Hellenes against barbarians
seems to have been first felt in the Ionian settlements on the coast of
Asia Minor, where the 'sons of Javan' (Yawan = <u>Ἰάων</u>) clashed as
invaders against the native Hittite and Semite. It was emphasized by a
similar clash in the further colonies in Pontus and in the West. If we
wish for a central moment as representing this self-realization of
Greece, I should be inclined to find it in the reign of Pisistratus
(560-527 <span class="smcap">b. c.</span>) when that monarch made, as it
were, the first sketch of an Athenian empire based on alliances and took
over to Athens the leadership of the Ionian race.

In literature the decisive moment is clear. It came when, in Mr.
Mackail's phrase, 'Homer came to Hellas'.<span
id="an_fr_42_3"></span>[42\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_42_3.md) The date is
apparently the same, and the <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> influences
at work are the same. It seems to have been under Pisistratus that the
Homeric Poems, in some form or other, came from Ionia to be recited in a
fixed order at the Panathenaic Festival, and to find a canonical form
and a central home in Athens till the end of the classical period.
Athens is the centre from which Homeric influence radiates over the
mainland of Greece. Its effect upon literature was of course enormous.
It can be traced in various ways. By the content of the literature,
which now begins to be filled with the heroic saga. By a change of style
which emerges in, say, Pindar and Aeschylus when compared with what we
know of Corinna or Thespis. More objectively and definitely it can be
traced in a remarkable change of dialect. The old Attic poets, like
Solon, were comparatively little affected by the epic influence; the
later elegists, like Ion, Euenus, and Plato, were steeped in it.<span
id="an_fr_43_1"></span>[43\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_43_1.md)

In religion the cardinal moment is the same. It consists in the coming
of Homer's 'Olympian Gods', and that is to be the subject of the present
essay. I am not, of course, going to describe the cults and characters
of the various Olympians. For that inquiry the reader will naturally go
to the five learned volumes <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> of my
colleague, Dr. Farnell. I wish merely to face certain difficult and, I
think, hitherto unsolved problems affecting the meaning and origin and
history of the Olympians as a whole.

Herodotus in a famous passage tells us that Homer and Hesiod 'made the
generations of the Gods for the Greeks and gave them their names and
distinguished their offices and crafts and portrayed their shapes' (2.
53). The date of this wholesale proceeding was, he thinks, perhaps as
much as four hundred years before his own day (*c.* 430 <span
class="smcap">b. c.</span>) but not more. Before that time the
Pelasgians—i. e. the primitive inhabitants of Greece as opposed to the
Hellenes—were worshipping gods in indefinite numbers, with no particular
names; many of them appear as figures carved emblematically with
sex-emblems to represent the powers of fertility and generation, like
the Athenian 'Herms'. The whole account bristles with points for
discussion, but in general it suits very well with the picture drawn in
the first of these essays, with its Earth Maidens and Mothers and its
projected Kouroi. The background is the pre-Hellenic 'Urdummheit'; the
new shape impressed upon it is the great anthropomorphic Olympian
family, as defined in the Homeric epos and, more timidly, in Hesiod. But
of Hesiod we must speak later.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now who are these Olympian Gods and where do they come from? Homer did
not 'make' them out of nothing. But the understanding of them is beset
with problems.

In the first place why are they called 'Olympian'? Are they the Gods of
Mount Olympus, the old sacred <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> mountain
of Homer's Achaioi, or do they belong to the great sanctuary of Olympia
in which Zeus, the lord of the Olympians, had his greatest festival? The
two are at opposite ends of Greece, Olympus in North Thessaly in the
north-east, Olympia in Elis in the south-west. From which do the
Olympians come? On the one hand it is clear in Homer that they dwell on
Mount Olympus; they have 'Olympian houses' beyond human sight, on the
top of the sacred mountain, which in the *Odyssey* is identified with
heaven. On the other hand, when Pisistratus introduced the worship of
Olympian Zeus on a great scale into Athens and built the Olympieum, he
seems to have brought him straight from Olympia in Elis. For he
introduced the special Elean complex of gods, Zeus, Rhea, Kronos, and Gê
Olympia.<span id="an_fr_45_1"></span>[45\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_45_1.md)

Fortunately this puzzle can be solved. The Olympians belong to both
places. It is merely a case of tribal migration. History, confirmed by
the study of the Greek dialects, seems to show that these northern
Achaioi came down across central Greece and the Gulf of Corinth and
settled in Elis.<span
id="an_fr_45_2"></span>[45\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_45_2.md) They brought with
them their Zeus, who was already called 'Olympian', and established him
as superior to the existing god, Kronos. The Games became Olympian and
the sanctuary by which they were performed 'Olympia'.<span
id="an_fr_45_3"></span>[45\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_45_3.md)

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

As soon as this point is clear, we understand also why there is more
than one Mount Olympus. We can all think of two, one in Thessaly and one
across the Aegean in Mysia. But there are many more; some twenty-odd, if
I mistake not, in the whole Greek region. It is a pre-Greek word applied
to mountains; and it seems clear that the 'Olympian' gods, wherever
their worshippers moved, tended to dwell in the highest mountain in the
neighbourhood, and the mountain thereby became Olympus.

The name, then, explains itself. The Olympians are the mountain gods of
the old invading Northmen, the chieftains and princes, each with his
*comitatus* or loose following of retainers and minor chieftains, who
broke in upon the ordered splendours of the Aegean palaces and, still
more important, on the ordered simplicity of tribal life in the
pre-Hellenic villages of the mainland. Now, it is a canon of religious
study that all gods reflect the social state, past or present, of their
worshippers. From this point of view what appearance do the Olympians of
Homer make? What are they there for? What do they do, and what are their
relations one to another?

The gods of most nations claim to have created the world. The Olympians
make no such claim. The most they ever did was to conquer it. Zeus and
his *comitatus* conquered Cronos and his; conquered and expelled
them—sent them migrating beyond the horizon, Heaven knows where. Zeus
took the chief dominion and remained a permanent overlord, but he <span
id="page_47">p. 47</span> apportioned large kingdoms to his brothers
Hades and Poseidon, and confirmed various of his children and followers
in lesser fiefs. Apollo went off on his own adventure and conquered
Delphi. Athena conquered the Giants. She gained Athens by a conquest
over Poseidon, a point of which we will speak later.

And when they have conquered their kingdoms, what do they do? Do they
attend to the government? Do they promote agriculture? Do they practise
trades and industries? Not a bit of it. Why should they do any honest
work? They find it easier to live on the revenues and blast with
thunderbolts the people who do not pay. They are conquering chieftains,
royal buccaneers. They fight, and feast, and play, and make music; they
drink deep, and roar with laughter at the lame smith who waits on them.
They are never afraid, except of their own king. They never tell lies,
except in love and war.

A few deductions may be from this statement, but they do not affect its
main significance. One god, you may say, Hephaistos, is definitely a
craftsman. Yes: a smith, a maker of weapons. The one craftsman that a
gang of warriors needed to have by them; and they preferred him lame, so
that he should not run away. Again, Apollo herded for hire the cattle of
Admetus; Apollo and Poseidon built the walls of Troy for Laomedon.
Certainly in such stories we have an intrusion of other elements; but in
any case the work done is not habitual work, it is a special punishment.
Again, it is not denied that the Olympians have some effect on
agriculture and on justice: they destroy the harvests of those who
offend them, they punish oath-breakers and the like. Even in the Heroic
<span id="page_48">p. 48</span> Age itself—if we may adopt Mr.
Chadwick's convenient title for the Age of the Migrations—chieftains and
gods probably retained some vestiges of the functions they had exercised
in more normal and settled times; and besides we must always realize
that, in these inquiries, we never meet a simple and uniform figure. We
must further remember that these gods are not real people with a real
character. They never existed. They are only concepts, exceedingly
confused cloudy and changing concepts, in the minds of thousands of
diverse worshippers and non-worshippers. They change every time they are
thought of, as a word changes every time it is pronounced. Even in the
height of the Achaean wars the concept of any one god would be mixed up
with traditions and associations drawn from the surrounding populations
and their gods; and by the time they come down to us in Homer and our
other early literature, they have passed through the minds of many
different ages and places, especially Ionia and Athens.

The Olympians as described in our text of Homer, or as described in the
Athenian recitations of the sixth century, are *mutatis mutandis*
related to the Olympians of the Heroic Age much as the Hellenes of the
sixth century are to the Hellenes of the Heroic Age. I say '*mutatis
mutandis*', because the historical development of a group of imaginary
concepts shrined in tradition and romance can never be quite the same as
that of the people who conceive them. The realm of fiction is apt both
to leap in front and to lag in the rear of the march of real life.
Romance will hug picturesque darknesses as well as invent perfections.
But the gods of Homer, as we have them, certainly seem to show <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> traces of the process through which they have
passed: of an origin among the old conquering Achaioi, a development in
the Ionian epic schools, and a final home in Athens.<span
id="an_fr_49_1"></span>[49\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_49_1.md)

For example, what gods are chiefly prominent in Homer? In the *Iliad*
certainly three, Zeus, Apollo, and Athena, and much the same would hold
for the *Odyssey*. Next to them in importance will be Poseidon, Hera,
and Hermes.

Zeus stands somewhat apart. He is one of the very few gods with
recognizable and undoubted Indo-germanic names, Djëus, the well-attested
sky- and rain-god of the Aryan race. He is Achaian; he is 'Hellanios',
the god worshipped by all Hellenes. He is also, curiously enough,
Pelasgian, and Mr. A. B. Cook<span
id="an_fr_49_2"></span>[49\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_49_2.md) can explain to us
the seeming contradiction. But the Northern elements in the conception
of Zeus have on the whole triumphed over any Pelasgian or Aegean sky-god
with which they may have mingled, and Zeus, in spite of his dark hair,
may be mainly treated as the patriarchal god of the invading Northmen,
passing from the Upper Danube down by his three great sanctuaries,
Dodona, Olympus, and Olympia. He had <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> an
extraordinary power of ousting or absorbing the various objects of
aboriginal worship which he found in his path. The story of Meilichios
above ([14](fsgr05.htm#page_14).md) is a common one. Of course, we must not
suppose that the Zeus of the actual Achaioi was a figure quite like the
Zeus of Pheidias or of Homer. There has been a good deal of expurgation
in the Homeric Zeus,<span
id="an_fr_50_1"></span>[50\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_50_1.md) as Mr. Cook
clearly shows. The Counsellor and Cloud-compeller of classical Athens
was the wizard and rainmaker of earlier times; and the All-Father
surprises us in Thera and Crete by appearing both as a babe and as a
Kouros in spring dances and initiation rituals.<span
id="an_fr_50_2"></span>[50\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_50_2.md) It is a long way
from these conceptions to the Zeus of Aeschylus, a figure as sublime as
the Jehovah of Job; but the lineage seems clear.

Zeus is the Achaean Sky-god. His son Phoebus Apollo is of more complex
make. On one side he is clearly a Northman. He has connexions with the
Hyperboreans.<span id="an_fr_50_3"></span>[50\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_50_3.md)
He has a 'sacred road' leading far into the North, along which offerings
are sent back from shrine to shrine beyond the bounds of Greek
knowledge. Such 'sacred roads' are normally the roads by which the God
himself has travelled; the offerings are sent back from the new
sanctuary to the old. On the other side Apollo reaches back to an Aegean
matriarchal Kouros. His home is Delos, where he has a mother, Leto, but
no very visible father. He leads the ships of his islanders, sometimes
in the form of a dolphin. He is no 'Hellene'. In the fighting <span
id="page_51">p. 51</span> at Troy he is against the Achaioi: he destroys
the Greek host, he champions Hector, he even slays Achilles. In the
Homeric hymn to Apollo we read that when the great archer draws near to
Olympus all the gods tremble and start from their seats; Leto alone, and
of course Zeus, hold their ground.<span
id="an_fr_51_1"></span>[51\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_51_1.md) What this god's
original name was at Delos we cannot be sure: he has very many names and
'epithets'. But he early became identified with a similar god at Delphi
and adopted his name, 'Apollôn', or, in the Delphic and Dorian form,
'Apellôn'—presumably the Kouros projected from the Dorian gatherings
called '*apellae*'.<span
id="an_fr_51_2"></span>[51\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_51_2.md) As Phoibos he is a
sun-god, and from classical times onward we often find him definitely
identified with the Sun, a distinction which came easily to a Kouros.

In any case, and this is the important point, he is at Delos the chief
god of the Ionians. The Ionians are defined by Herodotus as those tribes
and cities who were sprung from Athens and kept the Apaturia. They
recognized Delos as their holy place and worshipped Apollo Patrôos as
their ancestor.<span
id="an_fr_51_3"></span>[51\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_51_3.md) The Ionian Homer
has naturally brought us the Ionian god; and, significantly enough,
though the tradition makes him an enemy of the Greeks, and the poets
have to accept the tradition, there is no tendency to crab or belittle
him. He is the most splendid and awful of Homer's Olympians.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

The case of Pallas Athena is even simpler, though it leads to a somewhat
surprising result. What Apollo is to Ionia that, and more, Athena is to
Athens. There are doubtless foreign elements in Athena, some Cretan and
Ionian, some Northern.<span
id="an_fr_52_1"></span>[52\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_52_1.md) But her whole
appearance in history and literature tells the same story as her name.
Athens is her city and she is the goddess of Athens, the Athena or
Athenaia Korê. In Athens she can be simply 'Parthenos', the Maiden;
elsewhere she is the 'Attic' or 'Athenian Maiden'. As Glaucopis she is
identified or associated with the Owl that was the sacred bird of
Athens. As Pallas she seems to be a Thunder-maiden, a sort of Keraunia
or bride of Keraunos. A Palladion consists of two thunder-shields, set
one above the other like a figure 8, and we can trace in art-types the
development of this 8 into a human figure. It seems clear that the old
Achaioi cannot have called their warrior-maiden, daughter of Zeus, by
the name Athena or Athenaia. The Athenian goddess must have come in from
Athenian influence, and it is strange to find how deep into the heart of
the poems that influence must have reached. If we try to conjecture
whose place it is that Athena has taken, it is worth remarking that her
regular epithet, 'daughter of Zeus', belongs in Sanskrit to the
Dawn-goddess, Eôs.<span
id="an_fr_52_2"></span>[52\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_52_2.md) The transition
might be helped by some touches of the Dawn-goddess that seem to linger
about Athena in myth. The rising Sun stayed his horses while Athena was
born from <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> the head of Zeus. Also she was
born amid a snowstorm of gold. And Eôs, on the other hand, is, like
Athena, sometimes the daughter of the Giant Pallas.<span
id="an_fr_53_1"></span>[53\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_53_1.md)

Our three chief Olympians, then, explain themselves very easily. A body
of poetry and tradition, in its origin dating from the Achaioi of the
Migrations, growing for centuries in the hands of Ionian bards, and
reaching its culminating form at Athens, has prominent in it the Achaian
Zeus, the Ionian Apollo, the Athenian Korê—the same Korê who descended
in person to restore the exiled Pisistratus to his throne.<span
id="an_fr_53_2"></span>[53\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_53_2.md)

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

We need only throw a glance in passing at a few of the other Olympians.
Why, for instance, should Poseidon be so prominent? In origin he is a
puzzling figure. Besides the Achaean Earth-shaking brother of Zeus in
Thessaly there seems to be some Pelasgian or Aegean god present in him.
He is closely connected with Libya; he brings the horse from there.<span
id="an_fr_54_1"></span>[54\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_54_1.md) At times he exists
in order to be defeated; defeated in Athens by Athena, in Naxos by
Dionysus, in Aegina by Zeus, in Argos by Hera, in Acrocorinth by Helios
though he continues to hold the Isthmus. In Trozen he shares a temple on
more or less equal terms with Athena.<span
id="an_fr_54_2"></span>[54\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_54_2.md) Even in Troy he is
defeated and cast out from the walls his own hands had built.<span
id="an_fr_54_3"></span>[54\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_54_3.md) These problems we
need not for the present face. By the time that concerns us most the
Earth-Shaker is a sea-god, specially important to the sea-peoples of
Athens and Ionia. He is the father of Neleus, the ancestor of the Ionian
kings. His temple at Cape Mykale is the scene of the Panionia, and
second only to Delos as a religious centre of the Ionian tribes. He has
intimate relations with Attica too. Besides the ancient contest with
Athena for the possession of the land, he appears <span id="page_55">p.
55</span> as the father of Theseus, the chief Athenian hero. He is
merged in other Attic heroes, like Aigeus and Erechtheus. He is the
special patron of the Athenian knights. Thus his prominence in Homer is
very natural.

What of Hermes? His history deserves a long monograph to itself; it is
so exceptionally instructive. Originally, outside Homer, Hermes was
simply an old upright stone, a pillar furnished with the regular
Pelasgian sex-symbol of procreation. Set up over a tomb he is the power
that generates new lives, or, in the ancient conception, brings the
souls back to be born again. He is the Guide of the Dead, the
Psychopompos, the divine Herald between the two worlds. If you have a
message for the dead, you speak it to the Herm at the grave. This notion
of Hermes as herald may have been helped by his use as a
boundary-stone—the Latin *Terminus*. Your boundary-stone is your
representative, the deliverer of your message, to the hostile neighbour
or alien. If you wish to parley with him, you advance up to your
boundary-stone. If you go, as a Herald, peacefully, into his territory,
you place yourself under the protection of the same sacred stone, the
last sign that remains of your own safe country. If you are killed or
wronged, it is he, the immovable Watcher, who will avenge you.

Now this phallic stone post was quite unsuitable to Homer. It was not
decent; it was not quite human; and every personage in Homer has to be
both. In the *Iliad* Hermes is simply removed, and a beautiful creation
or tradition, Iris, the rainbow-goddess, takes his place as the
messenger from heaven to earth. In the *Odyssey* he is admitted, but so
changed and castigated that no one would recognize the old Herm <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> in the beautiful and gracious youth who
performs the gods' messages. I can only detect in his language one
possible trace of his old Pelasgian character.<span
id="an_fr_56_1"></span>[56\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_56_1.md)

Pausanias knew who worked the transformation. In speaking of Hermes
among the other 'Workers', who were 'pillars in square form', he says,
'As to Hermes, the poems of Homer have given currency to the report that
he is a servant of Zeus and leads down the spirits of the departed to
Hades'.<span id="an_fr_56_2"></span>[56\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_56_2.md) In
the magic papyri Hermes returns to something of his old functions; he is
scarcely to be distinguished from the Agathos Daimon. But thanks to
Homer he is purified of his old phallicism.

Hera, too, the wife of Zeus, seems to have a curious past behind her.
She has certainly ousted the original wife, Dione, whose worship
continued unchallenged in far Dodona, from times before Zeus descended
upon Greek lands. When he invaded Thessaly he seems to have left Dione
behind and wedded the Queen of the conquered territory. Hera's permanent
epithet is 'Argeia', 'Argive'. She is the Argive Korê or Year-Maiden, as
Athena is the Attic, Cypris the Cyprian. But Argos in Homer denotes two
different places, a watered plain in the Peloponnese and a watered plain
in Thessaly. Hera was certainly the chief goddess of Peloponnesian Argos
in historic times, and had brought her consort Herakles<span
id="an_fr_56_3"></span>[56\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_56_3.md) along with her,
but at one time she seems to have belonged to the Thessalian Argos.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

She helped Thessalian Jason to launch the ship *Argo*, and they launched
it from Thessalian Pagasae. In the Argonautica she is a beautiful
figure, gracious and strong, the lovely patroness of the young hero. No
element of strife is haunting her. But in the *Iliad* for some reason
she is unpopular. She is a shrew, a scold, and a jealous wife. Why? Miss
Harrison suggests that the quarrel with Zeus dates from the time of the
invasion, when he was the conquering alien and she the native queen of
the land.<span id="an_fr_57_1"></span>[57\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_57_1.md) It
may be, too, that the Ionian poets who respected their own Apollo and
Athena and Poseidon, regarded Hera as representing some race or tribe
that they disliked. A goddess of Dorian Argos might be as disagreeable
as a Dorian. It seems to be for some reason like this that Aphrodite,
identified with Cyprus or some centre among Oriental barbarians, is
handled with so much disrespect; that Ares, the Thracian Kouros, a
Sun-god and War-god, is treated as a mere bully and coward and general
pest.<span id="an_fr_57_2"></span>[57\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_57_2.md)

There is not much faith in these gods, as they appear to us in the
Homeric Poems, and not much respect, except perhaps for Apollo and
Athena and Poseidon. The buccaneer kings of the Heroic Age, cut loose
from all local and tribal pieties, intent only on personal gain and
glory, were not the people to build up a powerful religious faith. They
left that, as they left agriculture and handiwork, to the nameless
common folk.<span id="an_fr_57_3"></span>[57\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_57_3.md)
And <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> it was not likely that the bards of
cultivated and scientific Ionia should waste much religious emotion on a
system which was clearly meant more for romance than for the guiding of
life.

Yet the power of romance is great. In the memory of Greece the kings and
gods of the Heroic Age were transfigured. What had been really an age of
buccaneering violence became in memory an age of chivalry and splendid
adventure. The traits that were at all tolerable were idealized; those
that were intolerable were either expurgated, or, if that was
impossible, were mysticized and explained away. And the savage old
Olympians became to Athens and the mainland of Greece from the sixth
century onward emblems of high humanity and religious reform.

#### II. *The Religious Value of the Olympians*

Now to some people this statement may seem a wilful paradox, yet I
believe it to be true. The Olympian religion, radiating from Homer at
the Panathenaea, produced what I will venture to call exactly a
religious reformation. Let us consider how, with all its flaws and
falsehoods, it was fitted to attempt such a work.

In the first place the Poems represent an Achaian tradition, the
tradition of a Northern conquering race, organized on a patriarchal
monogamous system vehemently distinct from the matrilinear customs of
the Aegean or Hittite races, with their polygamy and polyandry, their
agricultural rites, their sex-emblems and fertility goddesses. Contrast
for a moment the sort of sexless Valkyrie who appears in the *Iliad*
under the name of Athena with the Korê of Ephesus, strangely called
Artemis, a shapeless fertility figure, <span id="page_59">p. 59</span>
covered with innumerable breasts. That suggests the contrast that I
mean.

Secondly, the poems are by tradition aristocratic; they are the
literature of chieftains, alien to low popular superstition. True, the
poems as we have them are not Court poems. That error ought not to be so
often repeated. As we have them they are poems recited at a Panegyris,
or public festival. But they go back in ultimate origin to something
like lays sung in a royal hall. And the contrast between the Homeric
gods and the gods found outside Homer is well compared by Mr.
Chadwick<span id="an_fr_59_1"></span>[59\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_59_1.md) to
the difference between the gods of the Edda and the historical traces of
religion outside the Edda. The gods who feast with Odin in Asgard,
forming an organized community or *comitatus*, seem to be the gods of
the kings, distinct from the gods of the peasants, cleaner and more
warlike and lordlier, though in actual religious quality much less
vital.

Thirdly, the poems in their main stages are Ionian, and Ionia was for
many reasons calculated to lead the forward movement against the
'Urdummheit'. For one thing, Ionia reinforced the old Heroic tradition,
in having much the same inward freedom. The Ionians are the descendants
of those who fled from the invaders across the sea, leaving their homes,
tribes, and tribal traditions. Wilamowitz has well remarked how the
imagination of the Greek mainland is dominated by the gigantic
sepulchres of unknown kings, which the fugitives to Asia had left behind
them and half forgotten.<span
id="an_fr_59_2"></span>[59\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_59_2.md)

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Again, when the Ionians settled on the Asiatic coasts they were no doubt
to some extent influenced, but they were far more repelled by the
barbaric tribes of the interior. They became conscious, as we have said,
of something that was Hellenic, as distinct from something else that was
barbaric, and the Hellenic part of them vehemently rejected what struck
them as superstitious, cruel, or unclean. And lastly, we must remember
that Ionia was, before the rise of Athens, not only the most imaginative
and intellectual part of Greece, but by far the most advanced in
knowledge and culture. The Homeric religion is a step in the
self-realization of Greece, and such self-realization naturally took its
rise in Ionia.

Granted, then, that Homer was calculated to produce a kind of religious
reformation in Greece, what kind of reformation was it? We are again
reminded of St. Paul. It was a move away from the 'beggarly elements'
towards some imagined person behind them. The world was conceived as
neither quite without external governance, nor as merely subject to the
incursions of *mana* snakes and bulls and thunder-stones and monsters,
but as governed by an organized body of personal and reasoning rulers,
wise and bountiful fathers, like man in mind and shape, only unspeakably
higher.

For a type of this Olympian spirit we may take a phenomenon that has
perhaps sometimes wearied us: the reiterated insistence in the reliefs
of the best period on the strife of men against centaurs or of gods
against giants. Our modern sympathies are apt to side with the giants
and centaurs. An age of order likes romantic violence, as landsmen safe
in their houses like <span id="page_61">p. 61</span> storms at sea. But
to the Greek, this battle was full of symbolical meaning. It is the
strife, the ultimate victory, of human intelligence, reason, and
gentleness, against what seems at first the overwhelming power of
passion and unguided strength. It is Hellas against the brute
world.<span id="an_fr_61_1"></span>[61\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_61_1.md)

The victory of Hellenism over barbarism, of man over beast: that was the
aim, but was it ever accomplished? The Olympian gods as we see them in
art appear so calm, so perfect, so far removed from the atmosphere of
acknowledged imperfection and spiritual striving, that what I am now
about to say may again seem a deliberate paradox. It is nevertheless
true that the Olympian Religion is only to the full intelligible and
admirable if we realize it as a superb and baffled endeavour, not a
*telos* or completion but a movement and effort of life.

We may analyse the movement into three main elements: a moral
expurgation of the old rites, an attempt to bring order into the old
chaos, and lastly <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> an adaptation to new
social needs. We will take the three in order.

In the first place, it gradually swept out of religion, or at least
covered with a decent veil, that great mass of rites which was concerned
with the Food-supply and the Tribe-supply and aimed at direct
stimulation of generative processes.<span
id="an_fr_62_1"></span>[62\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_62_1.md) It left only a few
reverent and mystic rituals, a few licensed outbursts of riotous
indecency in comedy and the agricultural festivals. It swept away what
seems to us a thing less dangerous, a large part of the worship of the
dead. Such worship, our evidence shows us, gave a loose rein to
superstition. To the Olympian movement it was vulgar, it was
semi-barbarous, it was often bloody. We find that it has almost
disappeared from Homeric Athens at a time when the monuments show it
still flourishing in un-Homeric Sparta. The Olympian movement swept away
also, at least for two splendid centuries, the worship of the man-god,
with its diseased atmosphere of megalomania and blood-lust.<span
id="an_fr_62_2"></span>[62\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_62_2.md) These things
return with the fall of Hellenism; but the great period, as it urges man
to use all his powers of thought, of daring and endurance, of social
organization, so it bids him remember that he is a man like other men,
subject to the same laws and bound to reckon with the same death.

So much for the moral expurgation: next for the bringing of intellectual
order. To parody the words of Anaxagoras, 'In the early religion all
things were together, till the Homeric system came and arranged them'.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

We constantly find in the Greek pantheon beings who can be described as
<u>πολλῶν ὀνομάτων μορφὴ μἴα</u>, 'one form of many names'. Each tribe,
each little community, sometimes one may almost say each caste—the
Children of the Bards, the Children of the Potters—had its own special
gods. Now as soon as there was any general 'Sunoikismos' or
'Settling-together', any effective surmounting of the narrowest local
barriers, these innumerable gods tended to melt into one another. Under
different historical circumstances this process might have been carried
resolutely through and produced an intelligible pantheon in which each
god had his proper function and there was no overlapping—one Korê, one
Kouros, one Sun-God, and so on. But in Greece that was impossible.
Imaginations had been too vivid, and local types had too often become
clearly personified and differentiated. The Maiden of Athens, Athena,
did no doubt absorb some other Korai, but she could not possibly combine
with her of Cythêra or Cyprus, or Ephesus, nor with the Argive Korê or
the Delian or the Brauronian. What happened was that the infinite cloud
of Maidens was greatly reduced and fell into four or five main types.
The Korai of Cyprus, Cythêra, Corinth, Eryx, and some other places were
felt to be one, and became absorbed in the great figure of Aphrodite.
Artemis absorbed a quantity more, including those of Delos and Brauron,
of various parts of Arcadia and Sparta, and even, as we saw, the
fertility Korê of Ephesus. Doubtless she and the Delian were originally
much closer together, but the Delian differentiated towards ideal
virginity, the Ephesian towards ideal fruitfulness. The Kouroi, or
Youths, in the same way were absorbed into some <span id="page_64">p.
64</span> half-dozen great mythological shapes, Apollo, Ares, Hermes,
Dionysus, and the like.

As so often in Greek development, we are brought up against the immense
formative power of fiction or romance. The simple Korê or Kouros was a
figure of indistinct outline with no history or personality. Like the
Roman functional gods, such beings were hardly persons; they melted
easily one into another. But when the Greek imagination had once done
its work upon them, a figure like Athena or Aphrodite had become, for
all practical purposes, a definite person, almost as definite as
Achilles or Odysseus, as Macbeth or Falstaff. They crystallize hard.
They will no longer melt or blend, at least not at an ordinary
temperature. In the fourth and third centuries we hear a great deal
about the gods all being one, 'Zeus the same as Hades, Hades as Helios,
Helios the same as Dionysus',<span
id="an_fr_64_1"></span>[64\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_64_1.md) but the
amalgamation only takes place in the white heat of ecstatic philosophy
or the rites of religious mysticism.

The best document preserved to us of this attempt to bring order into
Chaos is the poetry of Hesiod. There are three poems, all devoted to
this object, composed perhaps under the influence of Delphi and
certainly under that of Homer, and trying in a quasi-Homeric dialect and
under a quasi-Olympian system to bring together vast masses of ancient
theology and folk-lore and scattered tradition. The *Theogony* attempts
to make a pedigree and hierarchy of the Gods; *The Catalogue of Women*
and the *Eoiai*, <span id="page_65">p. 65</span> preserved only in
scanty fragments, attempt to fix in canonical form the cloudy mixture of
dreams and boasts and legends and hypotheses by which most royal
families in central Greece recorded their descent from a traditional
ancestress and a conjectural God. The *Works and Days* form an attempt
to collect and arrange the rules and tabus relating to agriculture. The
work of Hesiod as a whole is one of the most valiant failures in
literature. The confusion and absurdity of it are only equalled by its
strange helpless beauty and its extraordinary historical interest. The
Hesiodic system when compared with that of Homer is much more explicit,
much less expurgated, infinitely less accomplished and tactful. At the
back of Homer lay the lordly warrior-gods of the Heroic Age, at the back
of Hesiod the crude and tangled superstitions of the peasantry of the
mainland. Also the Hesiodic poets worked in a comparatively backward and
unenlightened atmosphere, the Homeric were exposed to the full light of
Athens.

The third element in this Homeric reformation is an attempt to make
religion satisfy the needs of a new social order. The earliest Greek
religion was clearly based on the tribe, a band of people, all in some
sense kindred and normally living together, people with the same
customs, ancestors, initiations, flocks and herds and fields. This
tribal and agricultural religion can hardly have maintained itself
unchanged at the great Aegean centres, like Cnossus and Mycenae.<span
id="an_fr_65_1"></span>[65\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_65_1.md) It <span
id="page_66">p. 66</span> certainly did not maintain itself among the
marauding chiefs of the heroic age. It bowed its head beneath the
sceptre of its own divine kings and the armed heel of its northern
invaders, only to appear again almost undamaged and unimproved when the
kings were fallen and the invaders sunk into the soil like storms of
destructive rain.

But it no longer suited its environment. In the age of the migrations
the tribes had been broken, scattered, re-mixed. They had almost ceased
to exist as important social entities. The social unit which had taken
their place was the political community of men, of whatever tribe or
tribes, who were held together in times of danger and constant war by
means of a common circuit-wall, a Polis.<span
id="an_fr_66_1"></span>[66\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_66_1.md) The idea of the
tribe remained. In the earliest classical period we find every Greek
city still nominally composed of tribes, but the tribes are fictitious.
The early city-makers could still only conceive of society on a tribal
basis. Every local or accidental congregation of people who wish to act
together have to invent an imaginary common ancestor. The clash between
the old tribal traditions that have lost their meaning, though not their
sanctity, and the new duties imposed <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> by
the actual needs of the Polis, leads to many strange and interesting
compromises. The famous constitution of Cleisthenes shows several. An
old proverb expresses well the ordinary feeling on the subject:

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i0"><u>ὥς κε πόλις ῥέξειε, νόμος δ' ἀρχαῖος ἅριστος.</u>  
</span>

</div>

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i0">'Whatever the City may do; but the old custom is the
best.'  
</span>

</div>

</div>

Now in the contest between city and tribe, the Olympian gods had one
great negative advantage. They were not tribal or local, and all other
gods were. They were by this time international, with no strong roots
anywhere except where one of them could be identified with some native
god; they were full of fame and beauty and prestige. They were ready to
be made 'Poliouchoi', 'City-holders', of any particular city, still more
ready to be 'Hellânioi', patrons of all Hellas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the working out of these three aims the Olympian religion achieved
much: in all three it failed. The moral expurgation failed owing to the
mere force of inertia possessed by old religious traditions and local
cults. We must remember how weak any central government was in ancient
civilization. The power and influence of a highly civilized society were
apt to end a few miles outside its city wall. All through the backward
parts of Greece obscene and cruel rites lingered on, the darker and
worse the further they were removed from the full light of Hellenism.

But in this respect the Olympian Religion did not merely fail: it did
worse. To make the elements of <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> a
nature-religion human is inevitably to make them vicious. There is no
great moral harm in worshipping a thunder-storm, even though the
lightning strikes the good and evil quite recklessly. There is no need
to pretend that the Lightning is exercising a wise and righteous choice.
But when once you worship an imaginary quasi-human being who throws the
lightning, you are in a dilemma. Either you have to admit that you are
worshipping and flattering a being with no moral sense, because he
happens to be dangerous, or else you have to invent reasons for his
wrath against the people who happen to be struck. And they are pretty
sure to be bad reasons. The god, if personal, becomes capricious and
cruel.

When the Ark of Israel was being brought back from the Philistines, the
cattle slipped by the threshing floor of Nachon, and the holy object was
in danger of falling. A certain Uzzah, as we all know, sprang forward to
save it and was struck dead for his pains. Now, if he was struck dead by
the sheer holiness of the tabu object, the holiness stored inside it
like so much electricity, his death was a misfortune, an interesting
accident, and no more.<span
id="an_fr_68_1"></span>[68\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_68_1.md) But when it is
made into the deliberate act of an anthropomorphic god, who strikes a
well-intentioned man dead in explosive rage for a very pardonable
mistake, a dangerous element has been introduced into the ethics of that
religion. A being who is the moral equal of man must not behave like a
charge of dynamite.

Again, to worship emblems of fertility and generation, as was done in
agricultural rites all through the Aegean <span id="page_69">p.
69</span> area, is in itself an intelligible and not necessarily a
degrading practice. But when those emblems are somehow humanized, and
the result is an anthropomorphic god of enormous procreative power and
innumerable amours, a religion so modified has received a death-blow.
The step that was meant to soften its grossness has resulted in its
moral degradation. This result was intensified by another well-meant
effort at elevation. The leading tribes of central Greece were, as we
have mentioned, apt to count their descent from some heroine-ancestress.
Her consort was sometimes unknown and, in a matrilinear society,
unimportant. Sometimes he was a local god or river. When the Olympians
came to introduce some order and unity among these innumerable local
gods, the original tribal ancestor tended, naturally enough, to be
identified with Zeus, Apollo, or Poseidon. The unfortunate Olympians,
whose system really aimed at purer morals and condemned polygamy and
polyandry, are left with a crowd of consorts that would put Solomon to
shame.

Thus a failure in the moral expurgation was deepened by a failure in the
attempt to bring intellectual order into the welter of primitive gods.
The only satisfactory end of that effort would have been monotheism. If
Zeus had only gone further and become completely, once and for all, the
father of all life, the scandalous stories would have lost their point
and meaning. It is curious how near to monotheism, and to monotheism of
a very profound and impersonal type, the real religion of Greece came in
the sixth and fifth centuries. Many of the philosophers, Xenophanes,
Parmenides, and others, asserted it clearly or assumed it without
hesitation. Aeschylus, Euripides, Plato, in their deeper <span
id="page_70">p. 70</span> moments point the same road. Indeed a
metaphysician might hold that their theology is far deeper than that to
which we are accustomed, since they seem not to make any particular
difference between <u>οἱ θεοί</u> and <u>ὁ θεός</u> or <u>τὸ θεῖον</u>.
They do not instinctively suppose that the human distinctions between
'he' and 'it', or between 'one' and 'many', apply to the divine.
Certainly Greek monotheism, had it really carried the day, would have
been a far more philosophic thing than the tribal and personal
monotheism of the Hebrews. But unfortunately too many hard-caked
superstitions, too many tender and sensitive associations, were linked
with particular figures in the pantheon or particular rites which had
brought the worshippers religious peace. If there had been some Hebrew
prophets about, and a tyrant or two, progressive and bloody-minded, to
agree with them, polytheism might perhaps actually have been stamped out
in Greece at one time. But Greek thought, always sincere and daring, was
seldom brutal, seldom ruthless or cruel. The thinkers of the great
period felt their own way gently to the Holy of Holies, and did not try
to compel others to take the same way. Greek theology, whether popular
or philosophical, seldom denied any god, seldom forbade any worship.
What it tried to do was to identify every new god with some aspect of
one of the old ones, and the result was naturally confusion. Apart from
the Epicurean school, which though powerful was always unpopular, the
religious thought of later antiquity for the most part took refuge in a
sort of apotheosis of good taste, in which the great care was not to
hurt other people's feelings, or else it collapsed into helpless
mysticism.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

The attempt to make Olympianism a religion of the Polis failed also. The
Olympians did not belong to any particular city: they were too
universal; and no particular city had a very positive faith in them. The
actual Polis was real and tangible, the Homeric gods a little alien and
literary. The City herself was a most real power; and the true gods of
the City, who had grown out of the soil and the wall, were simply the
City herself in her eternal and personal aspect, as mother and guide and
lawgiver, the worshipped and beloved being whom each citizen must defend
even to the death. As the Kouros of his day emerged from the social
group of Kouroi, or the Aphiktor from the band of suppliants, in like
fashion <u>ἡ Πολιάς</u> or <u>ὁ Πολιεύς</u> emerged as a personification
or projection of the city. <u>ἡ Πολιάς</u> in Athens was of course
Athena; <u>ὁ Πολιεύς</u> might as well be called Zeus as anything else.
In reality such beings fall into the same class as the hero Argos or
'Korinthos son of Zeus'. The City worship was narrow; yet to broaden it
was, except in some rare minds, to sap its life. The ordinary man finds
it impossible to love his next-door neighbours except by siding with
them against the next-door-but-one.

It proved difficult even in a city like Athens to have gods that would
appeal to the loyalty of all Attica. On the Acropolis at Athens there
seem originally to have been Athena and some Kouros corresponding with
her, some Waterer of the earth, like Erechtheus. Then as Attica was
united and brought under the lead of its central city, the gods of the
outlying districts began to claim places on the Acropolis. Pallas, the
thunder-maid of Pallene in the south, came to form a joint personality
with Athena. Oinoe, a town in the north-east, <span id="page_72">p.
72</span> on the way from Delos to Delphi, had for its special god a
'Pythian Apollo'; when Oinoe became Attic a place for the Pythian Apollo
had to be found on the Acropolis. Dionysus came from Eleutherae, Demeter
and Korê from Eleusis, Theseus himself perhaps from Marathon or even
from Trozên. They were all given official residences on Athena's rock,
and Athens in return sent out Athena to new temples built for her in
Prasiae and Sunion and various colonies.<span
id="an_fr_72_1"></span>[72\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_72_1.md) This development
came step by step and grew out of real worships. It was quite different
from the wholesale adoption of a body of non-national, poetical gods:
yet even this development was too artificial, too much stamped with the
marks of expediency and courtesy and compromise. It could not live. The
personalities of such gods vanish away; their prayers become prayers to
'all gods and goddesses of the City'—<u>θεοῖς καὶ θεῇσι πᾶσι καὶ
πάσῃςι</u>; those who remain, chiefly Athena and Theseus, only mean
Athens.

What then, amid all this failure, did the Olympian religion really
achieve? First, it debarbarized the worship of the leading states of
Greece—not of all Greece, since antiquity had no means of spreading
knowledge comparable to ours. It reduced the horrors of the
'Urdummheit', for the most part, to a romantic memory, and made religion
no longer a mortal danger to humanity. Unlike many religious systems, it
generally permitted progress; it encouraged not only the obedient
virtues but the daring virtues as well. It had in it the spirit that
saves from disaster, that <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> knows itself
fallible and thinks twice before it hates and curses and persecutes. It
wrapped religion in Sophrosynê.

Again, it worked for concord and fellow-feeling throughout the Greek
communities. It is, after all, a good deal to say, that in Greek history
we find almost no warring of sects, no mutual tortures or even
blasphemies. With many ragged edges, with many weaknesses, it built up
something like a united Hellenic religion to stand against the 'beastly
devices of the heathen'. And after all, if we are inclined on the purely
religious side to judge the Olympian system harshly, we must not forget
its sheer beauty. Truth, no doubt, is greater than beauty. But in many
matters beauty can be attained and truth cannot. All we know is that
when the best minds seek for truth the result is apt to be beautiful. It
was a great thing that men should envisage the world as governed, not by
Giants and Gorgons and dealers in eternal torture, but by some human and
more than human Understanding (<u>Ξύνεσις</u>),<span
id="an_fr_73_1"></span>[73\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_73_1.md) by beings of quiet
splendour like many a classical Zeus and Hermes and Demeter. If
Olympianism was not a religious faith, it was at least a vital force in
the shaping of cities and societies which remain after two thousand
years a type to the world of beauty and freedom and high endeavour. Even
the stirring of its ashes, when they seemed long cold, had power to
produce something of the same result; for the <span id="page_74">p.
74</span> classicism of the Italian Renaissance is a child, however
fallen, of the Olympian spirit.

Of course, I recognize that beauty is not the same as faith. There is,
in one sense, far more faith in some hideous miracle-working icon which
sends out starving peasants to massacre Jews than in the Athena of
Phidias. Yet, once we have rid our minds of trivial mythology, there is
religion in Athena also. Athena is an ideal, an ideal and a mystery; the
ideal of wisdom, of incessant labour, of almost terrifying purity, seen
through the light of some mystic and spiritual devotion like, but
transcending, the love of man for woman. Or, if the way of Athena is too
hard for us common men, it is not hard to find a true religious ideal in
such a figure as Persephone. In Persephone there is more of pathos and
of mystery. She has more recently entered the calm ranks of Olympus; the
old liturgy of the dying and re-risen Year-bride still clings to her. If
Religion is that which brings us into relation with the great
world-forces, there is the very heart of life in this home-coming Bride
of the underworld, life with its broken hopes, its disaster, its
new-found spiritual joy: life seen as Mother and Daughter, not a thing
continuous and unchanging but shot through with parting and death, life
as a great love or desire ever torn asunder and ever renewed.

'But stay,' a reader may object: 'is not this the Persephone, the
Athena, of modern sentiment? Are these figures really the goddesses of
the *Iliad* and of Sophocles?' The truth is, I think, that they are
neither the one nor the other. They are the goddesses of ancient
reflection and allegory; the goddesses, that is, of the best and most
characteristic worship that <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> these
idealized creations awakened. What we have treated hitherto as the
mortal weakness of the Olympians, the fact that they have no roots in
any particular soil, little hold on any definite primeval cult, has
turned out to be their peculiar strength. We must not think of allegory
as a late post-classical phenomenon in Greece. It begins at least as
early as Pythagoras and Heraclitus, perhaps as early as Hesiod; for
Hesiod seems sometimes to be turning allegory back into myth. The
Olympians, cut loose from the soil, enthroned only in men's free
imagination, have two special regions which they have made their own:
mythology and allegory. The mythology drops for the most part very early
out of practical religion. Even in Homer we find it expurgated; in
Pindar, Aeschylus, and Xenophanes it is expurgated, denied and
allegorized. The myths survive chiefly as material for literature, the
shapes of the gods themselves chiefly as material for art. They are both
of them objects not of belief but of imagination. Yet when the religious
imagination of Greece deepens it twines itself still around these
gracious and ever-moving shapes; the Zeus of Aeschylus moves on into the
Zeus of Plato or of Cleanthes or of Marcus Aurelius. Hermes, Athena,
Apollo, all have their long spiritual history. They are but little
impeded by the echoes of the old frivolous mythology; still less by any
local roots or sectional prejudices or compulsory details of ritual. As
the more highly educated mind of Greece emerged from a particular,
local, tribal, conception of religion, the old denationalized Olympians
were ready to receive her.

The real religion of the fifth century was, as we have said, a devotion
to the City itself. It is expressed <span id="page_76">p. 76</span>
often in Aeschylus and Sophocles, again and again with more discord and
more criticism in Euripides and Plato; for the indignant blasphemies of
the Gorgias and the Troades bear the same message as the ideal
patriotism of the Republic. It is expressed best perhaps, and that
without mention of the name of a single god, in the great Funeral Speech
of Pericles. It is higher than most modern patriotism because it is set
upon higher ideals. It is more fervid because the men practising it
lived habitually nearer to the danger-point, and, when they spoke of
dying for the City, spoke of a thing they had faced last week and might
face again to-morrow. It was more religious because of the unconscious
mysticism in which it is clothed even by such hard heads as Pericles and
Thucydides, the mysticism of men in the presence of some fact for which
they have no words great enough. Yet for all its intensity it was
condemned by its mere narrowness. By the fourth century the average
Athenian must have recognized what philosophers had recognized long
before, that a religion, to be true, must be universal and not the
privilege of a particular people. As soon as the Stoics had proclaimed
the world to be 'one great City of gods and men', the only Gods with
which Greece could satisfactorily people that City were the idealized
band of the old Olympians.

They are artists' dreams, ideals, allegories; they are symbols of
something beyond themselves. They are Gods of half-rejected tradition,
of unconscious make-believe, of aspiration. They are gods to whom
doubtful philosophers can pray, with all a philosopher's due caution, as
to so many radiant and heart-searching hypotheses. They are not gods in
whom any one <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> believes as a hard fact.
Does this condemn them? Or is it just the other way? Is it perhaps that
one difference between Religion and Superstition lies exactly in this,
that Superstition degrades its worship by turning its beliefs into so
many statements of brute fact, on which it must needs act without
question, without striving, without any respect for others or any desire
for higher or fuller truth? It is only an accident—though perhaps an
invariable accident—that all the supposed facts are false. In Religion,
however precious you may consider the truth you draw from it, you know
that it is a truth seen dimly, and possibly seen by others better than
by you. You know that all your creeds and definitions are merely
metaphors, attempts to use human language for a purpose for which it was
never made. Your concepts are, by the nature of things, inadequate; the
truth is not in you but beyond you, a thing not conquered but still to
be pursued. Something like this, I take it, was the character of the
Olympian Religion in the higher minds of later Greece. Its gods could
awaken man's worship and strengthen his higher aspirations; but at heart
they knew themselves to be only metaphors. As the most beautiful image
carved by man was not the god, but only a symbol, to help towards
conceiving the god;<span
id="an_fr_77_1"></span>[77\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fn_77_1.md) <span
id="page_78">p. 78</span> so the god himself, when conceived, was not
the reality but only a symbol to help towards conceiving the reality.
That was the work set before them. Meantime they issued no creeds that
contradicted knowledge, no commands that made man sin against his own
inner light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FOOTNOTES:

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_39_1"></span>[39\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_39_1.md) Hdt. i. 60
<u>ἐπεί γε ἀπεκρίθη ἐκ παλαιτέρου</u> <u>τοῦ βαρβάρου ἔθνεος τὸ
Ἑλληνικὸν</u> <u>ἐὸν καὶ δεξιώτερον καὶ εὐηθίης</u> <u>ἠλιθίου
ἀπηλλαγμένον μᾶλλον.</u> As to the date here suggested for the definite
dawn of Hellenism Mr. Edwyn Bevan writes to me: 'I have often wondered
what the reason is that about that time a new age began all over the
world that we know. In Nearer Asia the old Semitic monarchies gave place
to the Zoroastrian Aryans; in India it was the time of Buddha, in China
of Confucius.' <u>Εὐηθίη ἠλίθιος</u> is almost '*Urdummheit*'.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_40_1"></span>[40\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_40_1.md) See in
general Ridgeway, *Early Age of Greece*, vol. i; Leaf, *Companion to
Homer*, Introduction: *R. G. E.*, chap. ii; Chadwick, *The Heroic Age*
(last four chapters); and J. L. Myres, *Dawn of History*, chaps. viii
and ix.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_40_2"></span>[40\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_40_2.md) Since
writing the above I find in Vandal, *L'Avènement de Bonaparte*, p. 20,
in Nelson's edition, a phrase about the Revolutionary soldiers: 'Ils se
modelaient sur ces Romains . . . sur ces Spartiates . . . et ils
créaient un type de haute vertu guerrière, quand ils croyaient seulement
le reproduire.'

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_41_1"></span>[41\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_41_1.md) Hdt. i. 56
f.; Th. i. 3 (Hellen son of Deucalion, in both).

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_42_1"></span>[42\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_42_1.md) Hdt. i. 58.
In viii. 44 the account is more detailed.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_42_2"></span>[42\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_42_2.md) The Homeric
evidence is, as usual, inconclusive. The word <u>βάρβαροι</u> is absent
from both poems, an absence which must be intentional on the part of the
later reciters, but may well come from the original sources. The
compound <u>βαρβαρόφωνοι</u> occurs in B 867, but who knows the date of
that particular line in that particular wording?

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_42_3"></span>[42\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_42_3.md) Paper read
to the Classical Association at Birmingham in 1908.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_43_1"></span>[43\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_43_1.md) For Korinna
see Wilamowitz in *Berliner Klassikertexte*, V. xiv, especially p. 55.
The Homeric epos drove out poetry like Corinna's. She had actually
written: 'I sing the great deeds of heroes and heroines' (<u>ἰώνει δ'
εἱρώων ἀρετὰς χεὶρωιάδων ἀίδω</u>, fr. 10, Bergk), so that presumably
her style was sufficiently 'heroic' for an un-Homeric generation. For
the change of dialect in elegy, &c., see Thumb, *Handbuch d. gr.
Dialekte*, pp. 327-30, 368 ff., and the literature there cited. Fick and
Hoffmann overstated the change, but Hoffmann's new statement in *Die
griechische Sprache*, 1911, sections on *Die Elegie*, seems just. The
question of Tyrtaeus is complicated by other problems.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_45_1"></span>[45\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_45_1.md) The facts
are well known: see Paus. i. 18. 7. The inference was pointed out to me
by Miss Harrison.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_45_2"></span>[45\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_45_2.md) I do not
here raise the question how far the Achaioi have special affinities with
the north-west group of tribes or dialects. See Thumb, *Handbuch d. gr.
Dialekte* (1909), p. 166 f. The Achaioi must have passed through South
Thessaly in any case.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_45_3"></span>[45\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_45_3.md) That Kronos
was in possession of the Kronion and Olympia generally before Zeus came
was recognized in antiquity; Paus. v. 7. 4 and 10. Also Mayer in
Roscher's Lexicon, ii, p. 1508, 50 ff.; *Rise of Greek
Epic*<sup>3</sup>, pp. 40-8; J. A. K. Thomson, Studies in the Odyssey
(1914), chap. vii, viii; Chadwick, *Heroic Age* (1911), pp. 282, 289.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_49_1"></span>[49\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_49_1.md) I do not
touch here on the subject of the gradual expurgation of the Poems to
suit the feelings of a more civilized audience; see *Rise of the Greek
Epic*,<sup>3</sup> pp. 120-4. Many scholars believe that the Poems did
not exist as a written book till the public copy was made by
Pisistratus; see Cauer, *Grundfragen der Homerkritik*<sup>2</sup>,
(1909), pp. 113-45; *R. G. E.*,<sup>3</sup> pp. 304-16; Leaf, *Iliad*,
vol. i, p. xvi. This view is tempting, though the evidence seems to be
insufficient to justify a pronouncement either way. If it is true, then
various passages which show a verbal use of earlier documents (like the
Bellerophon passage, *R. G. E.*,<sup>3</sup> pp. 175 ff.) cannot have
been put in before the Athenian period.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_49_2"></span>[49\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_49_2.md) In his
*Zeus, the Indo-European Sky-God* (1914, 1924). See *R. G.
E.*,<sup>3</sup> pp. 40 ff.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_50_1"></span>[50\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_50_1.md) A somewhat
similar change occurred in Othin, though he always retains more of the
crooked wizard.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_50_2"></span>[50\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_50_2.md) *Themis*,
chap. i. On the Zeus of Aeschylus cf. *R. G. E.*,<sup>3</sup> pp. 277
ff.; Gomperz, *Greek Thinkers*, ii. 6-8.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_50_3"></span>[50\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_50_3.md) Farnell,
*Cults*, iv. 100-4. See, however, Gruppe, p. 107 f.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_51_1"></span>[51\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_51_1.md) *Hymn. Ap.*
init. Cf. Wilamowitz's Oxford Lecture on 'Apollo' (Oxford, 1907).

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_51_2"></span>[51\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_51_2.md) *Themis*, p.
439 f. Cf. <u>ὁ Ἀγοραῖος</u>. Other explanations of the name in Gruppe,
p. 1224 f., notes.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_51_3"></span>[51\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_51_3.md) Hdt. i. 147;
Plato, *Euthyd.* 302 c: *Socrates*. 'No Ionian recognizes a Zeus
Patrôos; Apollo is our Patrôos, because he was father of Ion.'

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_52_1"></span>[52\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_52_1.md) See Gruppe,
p. 1206, on the development of his 'Philistine thunderstorm-goddess'.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_52_2"></span>[52\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_52_2.md) Hoffmann,
*Gesch. d. griechischen Sprache*, Leipzig, 1911, p. 16. Cf. Pind. *Ol.*
vii. 35; Ov. *Metam.* ix. 421; xv. 191, 700, &c.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_53_1"></span>[53\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_53_1.md) As to the
name, <u>Ἁθηναία</u> is of course simply 'Athenian'; the shorter and
apparently original form <u>Ἀθάνα</u>, <u>Ἀθήνη</u> is not so clear, but
it seems most likely to mean 'Attic'. Cf. Meister, *Gr. Dial.* ii. 290.
He classes under the head of Oertliche Bestimmungen: <u>ἁ θεὸς ἁ
Παφία</u> (Collitz and Bechtel, *Sammlung der griechischen
Dialekt-Inschriften*, 2, 3, 14<sup>a</sup>, <sup>b</sup>, 15, 16). 'In
Paphos selbst hiess die Göttin nur <u>ἁ θεός</u> oder <u>ἁ
ϝάνασσα</u>;—<u>ἁ θιὸς ἁ Γολγία</u> (61)—<u>ἁ θιὸς ἁ Ἀθάνα ἁ πὲρ
Ἠδάλιον</u> (60, 27, 28), 'die Göttin, die Athenische, die über Edalion
(waltet)'; '<u>Ἀθ-άνα</u> ist, wie J. Baunack (*Studia Nicolaitana*, s.
27) gezeigt hat, das Adjectiv zu (\*<u>Ἀσσ-ίς</u> 'Seeland'):
<u>Ἀττ-ίς</u>; <u>Ἀτθ-ίς</u>; \*<u>Ἀθ-ίς</u>; also <u>Ἀθ-άνα</u> =
<u>Ἀττ-ική</u>, <u>Ἀθ-ῆναι</u> ursprünglich <u>Ἀθ-ῆναι κῶμαι</u>.' Other
derivations in Gruppe, p. 1194. Or again <u>αἱ Ἀθῆναι</u> may be simply
'the place where the Athenas are', like <u>οἱ ἰχθύες</u>, the
fish-market; 'the Athenas' would be statues, like <u>οἱ Ἑρμαῖ</u>—the
famous 'Attic Maidens' on the Acropolis. This explanation would lead to
some interesting results.

We need not here consider how, partly by identification with other
Korae, like Pallas, Onka, &c., partly by a genuine spread of the cult,
Athena became prominent in other cities. As to Homer, Athena is far more
deeply imbedded in the *Odyssey* than in the *Iliad*. I am inclined to
agree with those who believe that our *Odyssey* was very largely
composed in Athens, so that in most of the poem Athena is original. (Cf.
O. Seeck, *Die Quellen der Odyssee* (1887), pp. 366-420; Mülder, *Die
Ilias and ihre Quellen* (1910), pp. 350-5.) In some parts of the *Iliad*
the name Athena may well have been substituted for some Northern goddess
whose name is now lost.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_53_2"></span>[53\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_53_2.md) It is worth
noting also that this Homeric triad seems also to be recognized as the
chief Athenian triad. Plato, *Euthyd.* 302 c, quoted above, continues:
*Socrates.* 'We have Zeus with the names Herkeios and Phratrios, but not
Patrôos, and Athena Phratria.' *Dionysodorus.* 'Well that is enough. You
have, apparently, Apollo and Zeus and Athena?' *Socrates.*
'Certainly.'—Apollo is put first because he has been accepted as
Patrôos. But see *R. G. E.*,<sup>3</sup> p. 49, n.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_54_1"></span>[54\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_54_1.md) Ridgeway,
*Origin and Influence of the Thoroughbred Horse*, 1905, pp. 287-93; and
*Early Age of Greece*, 1901, p. 223.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_54_2"></span>[54\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_54_2.md) Cf. Plut.
*Q. Conv.* ix. 6; Paus. ii. 1. 6; 4. 6; 15. 5; 30. 6.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_54_3"></span>[54\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_54_3.md) So in the
non-Homeric tradition, Eur. *Troades* init. In the *Iliad* he is made an
enemy of Troy, like Athena, who is none the less the Guardian of the
city.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_56_1"></span>[56\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_56_1.md) *Od.*
<u>θ</u> 339 ff.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_56_2"></span>[56\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_56_2.md) See Paus.
viii. 32. 4. *Themis*, pp. 295, 296.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_56_3"></span>[56\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_56_3.md) For the
connexion of <u>Ἥρα ἤρως Ἡρακλῆς</u> (<u>Ἡρύκαλος</u> in Sophron, fr.
142 K) see especially A. B. Cook, *Class. Review*, 1906, pp. 365 and
416. The name <u>Ἥρα</u> seems probably to be an 'ablaut' form of
<u>ὥρα</u>: cf. phrases like <u>Ἥρα τελεία</u>. Other literature in
Gruppe, pp. 452, 1122.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_57_1"></span>[57\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_57_1.md)
*Prolegomena*, p. 315, referring to H. D. Müller, *Mythologie d. gr.
Stämme*, pp. 249-55. Another view is suggested by Mülder, *Die Ilias und
ihre Quellen*, p. 136. The jealous Hera comes from the Heracles-saga, in
which the wife hated the bastard.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_57_2"></span>[57\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_57_2.md) P. Gardner,
in *Numismatic Chronicle*, N.S. xx, 'Ares as a Sun-God'.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_57_3"></span>[57\_3](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_57_3.md) Chadwick,
*Heroic Age*, especially pp. 414, 459-63.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_59_1"></span>[59\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_59_1.md) Chap. xviii.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_59_2"></span>[59\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_59_2.md) Introduction
to his edition of the *Choëphoroe*, p. 9.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_61_1"></span>[61\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_61_1.md) The spirit
appears very simply in Eur. *Iph. Taur.* 386 ff., where Iphigenia
rejects the gods who demand human sacrifice:

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i0">These tales be false, false as those feastings wild  
</span> <span class="i0">Of Tantalus, and gods that tare a child.  
</span> <span class="i0">This land of murderers to its gods hath given  
</span> <span class="i0">Its own lust. Evil dwelleth not in heaven.  
</span>

</div>

</div>

Yet just before she has accepted the loves of Zeus and Leto without
objection. 'Leto, whom Zeus loved, could never have given birth to such
a monster!' Cf. Plutarch, *Vit. Pelop.* xxi, where Pelopidas, in
rejecting the idea of a human sacrifice, says: 'No high and more than
human beings could be pleased with so barbarous and unlawful a
sacrifice. It was not the fabled Titans and Giants who ruled the world,
but one who was a Father of all gods and men.' Of course, criticism and
expurgation of the legends is too common to need illustration. See
especially Kaibel, *Daktyloi Idaioi*, 1902, p. 512.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_62_1"></span>[62\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_62_1.md) Aristophanes
did much to reduce this element in comedy; see *Clouds*, 537 ff.: also
*Albany Review*, 1907, p. 201.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_62_2"></span>[62\_2](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_62_2.md) *R. G.
E.*,<sup>3</sup> p. 139 f.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_64_1"></span>[64\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_64_1.md) Justin,
*Cohort.* c. 15. But such pantheistic language is common in Orphic and
other mystic literature. See the fragments of the Orphic <u>Διαθῆκαι</u>
(pp. 144 ff. in Abel's *Hymni*).

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_65_1"></span>[65\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_65_1.md) I have not
attempted to consider the Cretan cults. They lie historically outside
the range of these essays, and I am not competent to deal with evidence
that is purely archaeological. But in general I imagine the Cretan
religion to be a development from the religion described in my first
essay, affected both by the change in social structure from village to
sea-empire and by foreign, especially Egyptian, influences. No doubt the
Achaean gods were influenced on their side by Cretan conceptions, though
perhaps not so much as Ionia was. Cf. the Cretan influences in Ionian
vase-painting, and e. g. A. B. Cook on 'Cretan Axe-cult outside Crete',
*Transactions of the Third International Congress for the History of
Religion*, ii. 184. See also Sir A. Evans's striking address on 'The
Minoan and Mycenaean Element in Hellenic Life', *J. H. S.* xxxii.
277-97.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_66_1"></span>[66\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_66_1.md) See *R. G.
E.*,<sup>3</sup> p. 58 f.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_68_1"></span>[68\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_68_1.md) 2 Sam. vi.
6. See S. Reinach, *Orpheus*, p. 5 (English Translation, p. 4).

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_72_1"></span>[72\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_72_1.md) Cf. Sam Wide
in Gercke and Norden's *Handbuch*, ii. 217-19.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_73_1"></span>[73\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_73_1.md) The
<u>Ξύνεσις</u> in which the Chorus finds it hard to believe,
*Hippolytus*, 1105. Cf. *Iph. Aul.* 394, 1189; *Herc.* 655; also the
ideas in *Suppl.* 203, Eur. Fr. 52, 9, where <u>Ξύνεσις</u> is implanted
in man by a special grace of God. The gods are <u>ξυνετοί</u>, but of
course Euripides goes too far in actually praying to <u>Ξύνεσις</u>, Ar.
*Frogs*, 893.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<span id="an_fn_77_1"></span>[77\_1](fsgr06.htm#an_fr_77_1.md) Cf. the
beautiful defence of idols by Maximus of Tyre, Or. viii (in Wilamowitz's
*Lesebuch*, ii. 338 ff.). I quote the last paragraph:

'God Himself, the father and fashioner of all that is, older than the
Sun or the Sky, greater than time and eternity and all the flow of
being, is unnameable by any lawgiver, unutterable by any voice, not to
be seen by any eye. But we, being unable to apprehend His essence, use
the help of sounds and names and pictures, of beaten gold and ivory and
silver, of plants and rivers, mountain-peaks and torrents, yearning for
the knowledge of Him, and in our weakness naming all that is beautiful
in this world after His nature—just as happens to earthly lovers. To
them the most beautiful sight will be the actual lineaments of the
beloved, but for remembrance' sake they will be happy in the sight of a
lyre, a little spear, a chair, perhaps, or a running-ground, or anything
in the world that wakens the memory of the beloved. Why should I further
examine and pass judgement about Images? Let men know what is divine
(<u>τὸ θεῖον γένος</u>), let them know: that is all. If a Greek is
stirred to the remembrance of God by the art of Pheidias, an Egyptian by
paying worship to animals, another man by a river, another by fire—I
have no anger for their divergences; only let them know, let them love,
let them remember.'

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Great Schools](fsgr07.md)

</div>
