[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31006)  [Next](sbe31008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

### YASNA XXVIII.

#### PRAYERS CHIEFLY FOR GRACE AND FOR THE WORDS OF REVELATION.

2\. Zarathu*s*tra, having entered upon the duties of his office (XXIX,
11), composes a liturgy for the use of some of his more eminent
colleagues, possibly, but not at all probably, for the original mover in
the entire religious effort (see the expressions 'to Zarathu*s*tra and
to us,' 'to Vî*s*tâspâ and to me,' 'to Frashao*s*tra and to me'). This
reciter, whoever he may have been intended to be, is represented as
standing in the appropriate place as a priest, with hands stretched
toward Ahura, or His Fire, and praying for the possession of spiritual
graces from an unselfish motive, and in order that he might appease the
grief of the Kine's Soul, for whose relief Zarathu*s*tra had just been
appointed (see XXIX, 1, 6, 8).

3\. He approaches Ahura Mazda, spiritually inspired by the Good Mind as
he declares, and asking for attainments and boons for both the bodily
and spiritual lives, derived from Righteousness, whereby that
personified Righteousness might establish the elect in a beatified
state.

4\. The personality of the Ameshôspends comes again strongly forward, as
it does so often in worship, in addresses in which Righteousness (Asha),
the Good Mind (Vohu Manah), Khshathra (the active Power of the Divine
Sovereignty), and Âramaiti (practical piety in the souls of believers),
are besought to come, as the Vedic Gods so often are, to the appeals of
the supplicant, and to his help in the act of worship itself, which is
recognised to be the one efficient means for furthering the cause of
redemption which is ever held in view.

5\. As one who offered his soul to heaven, and would know by actual
experience the blessed rewards bestowed by the holy ceremonial and moral
actions prescribed by Ahura Mazda, the reciter declares that he will
teach on in the effort to propagate the holy Religious Order, and
possessed by the one desire for its increase, while power shall last.

6\. With a piety as fervent as it is profound, and speaking with great
earnestness, he asks Righteousness, as a person, when he shall see him,
becoming fully acquainted with the Good Mind of God, the way which leads
to Him, and above all with Obedience. But although he addresses these
lofty abstractions as persons, it is utterly

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

out of the question to suppose that he did not speak in the deepest
meaning of the words as expressing states of mind, and qualities of
character: O thou Divine Righteous Order! (Thus he seems to have meant),
O thou divine Righteous Order! when shall I see Thee as if present in my
own soul and in those of the people whom Ahura has committed to my
charge? When shall I know the Divine Benevolence as made one with the
disposition of my congregation? When shall I possess by knowledge that
only way to our most bountiful Ahura which is, not a mythical angel
Sraosha only, but that angel interpreted 'Obedience to Ahura' (observe
the dative). One cannot well exaggerate the religious depth or
subjectivity. Then, with a bathos which shows how then as ever
superstition could hold its own side by side with the truest piety, he
exclaims (if the third line was really so composed by him as it has come
down to us); 'By such a prayer as a Mãthra spell we can with the
greatest vigour repel the unclean beasts and creatures which defile our
sanctity, or endanger our lives.'

7\. Alluding immediately to this revelation, he beseeches Ahura once
more to 'come with His Good Mind,' and to grant, not booty, nor even
wealth, but 'Asha-gifts,' and (as a bestower of righteousness) long life
and powerful spiritual grace to the leading agent Zarathu*s*tra (in all
probability the composer of the section), and to himself, the
officiating priest with his helpers, in order that, not with carnal
weapons, but by his 'lofty' and holy 'words,' they all combined may
overcome the torments of the ravagers who had made havoc of the
settlements, and who were still liable to overwhelm the faithful with
their raids and rapine (see XLIV, 20).

8\. With an intentional and interesting alliteration he prays to Asha
for an ashi; that is, a blessing, even the strenuously attained-to gifts
of the great Benevolence. Âramaiti likewise becomes the object of his
petition together with Ahura; and this time for the benefit of
Vî*s*tâspa the monarch, and for himself that they might hear the
gracious Mãthras, which is indeed the burden of the entire piece.

9\. Once more he affords an early (or the earliest (?)) instance of the
rhetorical trick, and fills one line with three 'vahi*s*tas,' praying
Ahura, as being of one mind with Asha (here, for the first time in the
Avesta, called 'the best'), to grant the same blessing; and this time
again with an intentional change, 'to himself and to Frashao*s*tra;' and
not for this world, but for 'all the duration of the Good Mind,' using
the expression in its concrete sense as heaven; for heaven to him
consisted in an inward state. (So also elsewhere in the Avesta,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

even where the palate and the olfactory nerve are the media of felicity
or of torture, there also conciliating language on the one side, or
'vile speech' pointed with finest irony on the other, is equally
prominent. It is the mind which chiefly enjoys or suffers.)

10\. Deeply sensible of the spiritual benefits for which he is asking,
he seems touched with gratitude. Accordingly he adds one more petition,
which is, that he and his coadjutors, the three just mentioned, may
never anger the indulgent mercy which had granted them their request;
and that they may persevere, as they have begun, in the strenuous
service of Ahura, Asha, and Vohu Manah. For they are, as he declares,
easy to be entreated, and beings who desire to bestow spiritual
blessings upon mortals, rather than to exercise merely capricious favour
or cruelty, and who also possess the power to bring their benevolence to
effect.

11\. As if unwilling to trust his own perception as to his real
spiritual needs, he prays Ahura 'to fill up his desire,' not with what
he, the reciter, may in particular request, but with what He, Ahura,
knows to be the gifts of Righteousness and the divine Benevolence. And
these gifts are again mainly the holy revelation, for he knows, so he
earnestly declares, the words of those mighty three to be never void,
and to be a sustenance able indeed to fill up his wishes, giving him
more than he has of himself either the intelligence or the grace to ask.

12\. Having added, in verse after verse, some particular to heighten the
fervour of his request, he sums up all in a final expression, as
remarkable for its earnestness as for its depth, and begs Ahura, as one
set for ever for the defence of the Righteous Order and the Good Mind
(whose hallowed influences he accurately foresaw were destined to endure
for ages), to tell him, with His very 'voice of spirit,' in order that
he may declare them to the waiting masses, the laws which pervade the
moral universe, and according to which it arose. For according to these
holy principles and so alone, could he promulgate a system which might
reclaim society from its imperfections and the Iranian saint from his
sufferings. Ahura who, be it remarked, is alone addressed in this
culminating verse, hears and answers by a revelation of these eternal
principles, and this answer is contained in chapter XXX. By a thorough
comprehension of that most important document, I hold that we may see
how it met its purpose as indicated by the capacities and needs of those
to whom it was addressed, and how by discriminating truth from falsehood
it helped on the defence of Asha, and the founding of the true
Benevolence.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

Translation.

1\. (A strengthening blessing <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_88) is the
thought, a blessing is the word, a blessing is the deed of the righteous
Zarathu*s*tra. May the Bountiful Immortals <span
id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_89) accept and help on <span
id="fr_91"></span>[3](#fn_90) the chants. Homage to you, O sacred
Gâthas <span id="fr_92"></span>[4](#fn_91)!)

2\. With venerating (desire) for this (gift) of gracious help, O
Mazda <span id="fr_93"></span>[5](#fn_92), and stretching forth my hands
(to Thee) I pray for the first (blessing) of (Thy) bountiful Spirit;
(that is, I beseech of Thee that my) actions

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (toward) all (may
be performed) in (the Divine) Righteousness; and with this I implore
from Thee the understanding of Thy Benevolent Mind, in order that I may
propitiate the Soul of the Kine <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_93) (our
herds and folk, which cries so bitterly to Thee).

3\. And therefore, O Great Creator, the Living Lord! (inspired) by Thy
Benevolent Mind, I approach You <span id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_94),
(and beseech of Thee <span id="fr_96"></span>[3](#fn_95)) to grant me
(as a bountiful gift) for both the worlds, the corporeal and (for that)
of mind, those attainments which are to be derived from the (Divine)
Righteousness, and by means of which (that personified
Righteousness <span id="fr_97"></span>[4](#fn_96) within us) may
introduce those who are its recipients into beatitude and glory <span
id="fr_98"></span>[5](#fn_97)!

4\. O (thou Divine) Righteousness, and thou Benevolent

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mind (of Deity)! I
will worship you, and Ahura Mazda the first <span
id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_98), for all of whom the Pious ready mind
(within us) is <span id="fr_100"></span>[2](#fn_99) causing the
imperishable Kingdom to advance. (And while I thus utter my
supplications to You), come Ye to my calls to help <span
id="fr_101"></span>[3](#fn_100)!

5\. (Yea, I will approach You with my supplications, I) who am
delivering up (my) <span id="fr_102"></span>[4](#fn_101) mind and soul
to that (heavenly) Mount (whither all the redeemed at last must
pass <span id="fr_103"></span>[5](#fn_102)), knowing (full well) the
holy characteristics and rewards <span id="fr_104"></span>[6](#fn_103)
of the (ceremonial and moral) actions (prescribed) by Ahura Mazda. (And)

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

so long as I am able and may have the power, so long will I teach <span
id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_104) (Your people concerning these holy deeds
to be done by them with faith toward God, and) in the desire (for the
coming) of the (Divine) Righteousness (within their souls) <span
id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_105).

6\. And, thou Righteousness! when shall I see <span
id="fr_107"></span>[3](#fn_106) (thee, knowing the Good Mind (of God),
and above all the personified) Obedience <span
id="fr_108"></span>[4](#fn_107) (of our lives which constitutes) the
way <span id="fr_109"></span>[5](#fn_108) to the most beneficent Ahura
Mazda. (Asking this, I thus beseech thee, for) with this holy word of
supplication we most hold off <span id="fr_110"></span>[6](#fn_109) with
tongue the flesh-devouring fiends, (the very sign and power of all
spiritual foulness) <span id="fr_111"></span>[7](#fn_110)!

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

7\. And do Thou, O Lord, the Great Creator! come to me with Thy Good
Mind; and do Thou, who bestowest gifts through Thy Righteousness, bestow
alike long-lasting life on us. And (that this life may be spent aright,
do) Thou by means of Thy lofty words (bestow) the (needed) powerful
spiritual help upon Zarathu*s*tra and upon us <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_111), whereby we may overcome <span
id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_112) the torments of the tormentor.

8\. (And) do thou, O (Divine) Righteousness, bestow (upon me) that
sacred blessing which is constituted by the attainments of the Good Mind
(within my soul) <span id="fr_114"></span>[3](#fn_113); and do thou
also, O Piety! grant unto

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vî*s*tâspa and to
me our wish; (yea) may’st Thou grant (us), O Mazda, ruler <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_114) (as Thou art! that grace) whereby we may
hear <span id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_115) (with understanding) Thy
benignant words.

9\. That best (of gifts therefore) do I beseech (of Thee), O Thou best
(of beings) Ahura! who art one in will with (Thy Divine) Righteousness
(within us, likewise), the best <span id="fr_117"></span>[3](#fn_116)
(of spirits), desiring it (as I now do) for the (heroic) man
Frashao*s*tra, and for me <span id="fr_118"></span>[4](#fn_117), upon
whom also may’st Thou bestow it (not for time alone), but for all the
ages of Thy Good Mind (that reign of Thy Benevolence which shall be to
us as Heaven <span id="fr_119"></span>[5](#fn_118))!

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

10\. And (impressed and moved) by these gifts of strengthening
grace <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_119) (which Thou may’st give in
answer to these prayers) may we never anger You, O Ahura Mazda! (nor
Thy) Righteousness (within us), nor yet Thy Kindly Mind (toward us),
since we have most earnestly made effort (helping to advance Your cause)
in the (chanted) <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_120) offering of Your
praisers, for most easy to be invoked (are Ye). (Yours are verily both)
the desire for (spiritual) blessings (for us), and the (Divine)
Possession (of their power) <span id="fr_122"></span>[3](#fn_121).

11\. And therefore do Thou, O Lord, the Great Creator! fill up and
satisfy (my <span id="fr_123"></span>[4](#fn_122)) desire with these
attainments (of the grace) of Thy Good Mind, which Thou dost know to be
derived from Righteousness, (and) which (are verily) sublime <span
id="fr_124"></span>[5](#fn_123), for I have known <span
id="fr_125"></span>[6](#fn_124)

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thine instructions
to be never void <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_125) of their effect
(in the struggles) for our (daily) food <span
id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_126), and therefore worthy objects of
desire <span id="fr_128"></span>[3](#fn_127).

12\. (Yea, I approach Thee with my prayers, I) who by these (great gifts
of grace) will <span id="fr_129"></span>[4](#fn_128) protect ((Thy)
Divine Righteousness, and (Thy) Good Mind within us) for ever. And do
Thou therefore, O Ahura Mazda! teach me from Thyself, yea, from Thine
own mouth of spirit, that I may declare it forth to (these Thy waiting
people) by what (powers and according to what laws <span
id="fr_130"></span>[5](#fn_129)) the primeval world arose <span
id="fr_131"></span>[6](#fn_130)!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[17:1](sbe31007.htm#fr_89) Yânîm cannot well
mean 'revealed,' except by the most farfetched conception. The Indian
yâna, as in devâ´yna, should give the fundamental idea, easily
reconcileable as it is with the ancient rendering of the Pahlavi
translator.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[17:2](sbe31007.htm#fr_90) Notice that the
Ameshôspends are mentioned in this early heading. In the Gâthas
themselves the name, 'Bountiful Immortals,' does not occur.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[17:3](sbe31007.htm#fr_91) Possibly, 'take up
and continue on the Gâthas.' Literally, 'seize forth.'

<span id="fn_91"></span>[17:4](sbe31007.htm#fr_92) It is hardly
necessary to say that this is no part of the Gâthas. It is, however, in
the Gâthic dialect, and as it needs not, or perhaps cannot, be
considered an intentional imitation, it must be very old.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[17:5](sbe31007.htm#fr_93) Vocative with the
Vendîdâd Sâdah, otherwise the accumulation of genitives would be
suspicious. Ahura is, however, beyond any question elsewhere spoken of
as 'the most bounteous Spirit.' The usage is like that of the Semitic
scriptures; the Holy Spirit is both God and 'of God.' As to the
rendering 'bounteous,' I fear that 'holiest' (so many) is too bold.
Ashavan occurs side by side with spe*n*ta as applied to Ahura, and
ashavan cannot mean 'righteous' there, but must mean 'holy.' The Pahlavi
renders etymologically afzûnîk. Comp. *s*vânta. The sole etymological
bases for the meaning 'holy' are presented by the Lithuanian and
Ecclesiastical Sclavonic; but, as Justi has well remarked, in the
conceptions of the Avesta that which increases the kingdom of Ahura is
equivalent to what is holy. 'Bountiful' must therefore be understood in
a particular sense, only to be rendered by the words, 'gracious, sacred,
and august.'

<span id="fn_93"></span>[18:1](sbe31007.htm#fr_94) See Y. XXIX, 1.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[18:2](sbe31007.htm#fr_95) The plural of
majesty, or the literal plural, referring to the Bountiful Immortals as
together.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[18:3](sbe31007.htm#fr_96) Plural and singular
interchange throughout.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[18:4](sbe31007.htm#fr_97) Possibly, 'one may
introduce.'

<span id="fn_97"></span>[18:5](sbe31007.htm#fr_98) See Y. L, 5.
*Hv*âthrâ and its allied forms are so often associated with rao*k*ah and
the like, that I do not hesitate to accept an Iranian *hv*an = to shine
(with Justi). As there is an Indian svar which means 'to roar,' and
another 'to shine,' and again a svan = to sound, so in Iranian there is
a *hv*an = to sound, and another = to shine, as in asmanem
*hv*anva*n*tem. The 'comfortable stone heaven' is difficult.
Comfortable, or even 'delectable mountains' so we should have to say
elsewhere), are not very likely to have been recognised or appreciated
in the Avesta. 'Glorious beatitude' is a better rendering here. If
*hv*âthrâ always means 'comfort,' how comes it that *hv*arenô is said to
be *hv*âthrava*t*? 'Comfortable glory' is hardly probable. Compare also
the ancient *s*ubha. When it is the fashion to accept a separate Iranian
root at every difficulty, small and great, I see no reason for stopping
here, where the pressure is considerable. The Pahlavi also may be read
to favour my view. (Comp. *hv*eng = *hv*an.)

<span id="fn_98"></span>[19:1](sbe31007.htm#fr_99) Or, 'having no first'
(Roth, reading apourvîm).

<span id="fn_99"></span>[19:2](sbe31007.htm#fr_100) I am very far from a
positive rejection of the forms suggested by the Pahlavi translator,
although he should never be pressed on such a point, being often free.
As alternative read 'may Piety who bestows increase (fem. participle)
come to my calls to give grace.'

<span id="fn_100"></span>[19:3](sbe31007.htm#fr_101) The Pahlavi
translator, unable to credit 'y*e* as = I who' (so also modern authority
sometimes with regard to other occurrences of y*e* in this chapter),
renders as follows: When I shall be your own (thus for 'worship,' and
possibly deceived by the form of the words, ufyânî and naf*s*man being
nearly alike in the Pahlavi character), O Ashavahi*s*t and Vohûman! the
first \[ \], Aûharmazd's also \[his own I shall be\], through whose
unweakened acquisition his rule over them exists \[ \], and \[hers also
I shall be\], Spendarmad's, the giver of increase. She comes to me with
joy when I invoke her \[when I shall call upon you, come ye on toward me
with joy\]. (A plain and noticeable instance of an alternative rendering
in the gloss. The verb was first thought of as a 3rd sing. middle
subjunctive, afterwards as an imperative 2nd plural.)

<span id="fn_101"></span>[19:4](sbe31007.htm#fr_102) M*eñ* = m + the
nasal vowel, and may represent man, or I think also mãm, adverbially for
m*e*nâ; or 'mân' = 'demânê.'

<span id="fn_102"></span>[19:5](sbe31007.htm#fr_103) Mount Albor*g*,
where the *K*inva*t* Bridge extends; so also important authority; but we
might read m*en*gairê = mângairê (Garô*d*man).

<span id="fn_103"></span>[19:6](sbe31007.htm#fr_104) Ashi, a blessing
given in reward; so elsewhere.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[20:1](sbe31007.htm#fr_105) I think it is
better to hold by the parallel passage and the sense of 'teach' here.
The Pahlavi has an irregular form which probably means 'I teach,' but
might be intended for 'I am taught.'

After the words 'so long as I have the power,' 'I will teach' is rather
more natural than 'I will learn.' Haug's rendering of this word has
never been accepted. Those most opposed to tradition follow it here.
Perhaps, 'I will teach to desire R.'

<span id="fn_105"></span>[20:2](sbe31007.htm#fr_106) The Pahlavi
translation corrected by MSS. may be rendered thus: He who gives up his
soul within Garô*d*mân does so by the aid of Vohûman \[ \], and is also
intelligent concerning the veneration which belongs to the doers of good
works \[ \] in that which is Aûharmazd's \[religion\]; as long as I am a
suppliant and have \[the power, so long do I inculcate the desire of
Righteousness which is, duty and good works\].

<span id="fn_106"></span>[20:3](sbe31007.htm#fr_107) Kadâ´ m*ril*îkám
sumánâ abhí khyam (Rv. VII, 86, 2).

<span id="fn_107"></span>[20:4](sbe31007.htm#fr_108) Obedience,
throughout the Avesta and Parsi literature, guides the soul to heaven.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[20:5](sbe31007.htm#fr_109) Or, 'knowing the
throne of Ahura' (so the Pahlavi, most scholars following); but the
construction would be awkward. 'Finding the way' occurs in the *Ri*ks,
and gâtu need not always mean 'place' in the Gâthic, because it has that
sense most frequently in the Zend.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[20:6](sbe31007.htm#fr_110) Possibly, 'we may
teach the foul polluted men.' Or, 'confess the greatest One with
Khrafstra(-slaying) tongue.' Perhaps the text is to be amended; yet see
XXXIV, 5, 9.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[20:7](sbe31007.htm#fr_111) The Pahlavi
translation may be rendered thus: O Ashavahi*s*t! when do (shall) I see
thee? I know this one by means <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> of a good
mind's instruction \[that is, I see thee in that time when every man is
intelligent because he is pious; but when shall it be?\]. And the place
of Aûharmazd, when do (shall) I see it, I who am a suppliant for a
benefit? That place is known through Srôsh \[ \], that greatest of
Mãthras is to be taught, given forth with tongue to him whose
understanding is confused.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[21:1](sbe31007.htm#fr_112) It certainly
involves a question how the words 'to Zarathu*s*tra and to us' can be
compatible with Zarathu*s*tra's authorship. Vî*s*tâspa and Frashao*s*tra
(verses 8, 9) are equally excluded. Who is then the individual who thus
refers to himself with others? And is this verse an interpolation, and
with it 8 and 9? This last seems to me a very feeble suggestion. Was
this piece, together with the rest (for they all are connected), the
work of some unnamed man of influence, the true author of
Zarathu*s*trianism? I think that there is also little gained by this
supposition. There is no particular reason why Zarathu*s*tra's name
should have come down to us as the chief figure, while that of the prime
mover failed to reach us. I should say that the piece was composed by
Zarathu*s*tra and put into the mouth of a leading priest, or that it was
composed with many others under his inspiration. Or, can there have been
a school, or family, of Zarathu*s*trians, religious poets, similar to
the Vedic seers? (See chap. LIII, 2 Zarathu*s*tri*s* Spitâmô.)

<span id="fn_112"></span>[21:2](sbe31007.htm#fr_113) This mention of
'overcoming an enemy,' strengthens the probability of my view of
vâvarôimaidî (vâurôimaidî).

<span id="fn_113"></span>[21:3](sbe31007.htm#fr_114) The Good Mind is
now, as we should say, 'the Spirit of God' in the mind of God, and again
His Spirit in the human soul.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[22:1](sbe31007.htm#fr_115) The Pahlavi
correctly renders pâdakhshâ.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[22:2](sbe31007.htm#fr_116) Probably originally
heard, inspired words. Compare Many*e*u*s* ha*k*â Thwâ *a*unghâ, verse
12. So often. Oral communications are figuratively alluded to
everywhere. No literal articulation or sound (!) is of course intended.
(Or 'sravayaêmâ = proclaim.')

Neryosangh may be rendered as follows: Grant, O Sanctity! this devotion
which (results) from the priority (an error from misreading the
characters of the Pahlavi, chiefly his original) of the Good Mind \[that
is, make me so religious that prosperity may result \[to me from my good
conduct\]. Grant thou to the perfect mind in, or to, the earth (so the
Parsis understood Âramaiti)\] the wish that proceeds from Gustâspa and
from my people \[ \]. Grant praisers, O great wise One! kings, who may
be announcers of your word, and bestowers of arrangements (for the
service); \[that is, who may teach thy word, and render it
progressive\].

<span id="fn_116"></span>[22:3](sbe31007.htm#fr_117) The earliest
occurrence of Asha Vahi*s*ta. The Pahlavi: 'Since the best thing that
Thou hast \[Thy Religion\] is better than all other things, the best
through Righteousness.'

<span id="fn_117"></span>[22:4](sbe31007.htm#fr_118) See verses 7 and 8.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[22:5](sbe31007.htm#fr_119) In the millennial
(sic) renovation as well as in heaven. See chap. XXX, 4, where Vahi*s*ta
Manah is equivalent to heaven. The Pahlavi gloss has: Aîgh Frashô*s*tar
va hâvi*s*tân î Frashô*s*tar, vad tanû î pasînŏ hamâî nadûkîh pa*d*a*s*
vâdan; that is, for Frashô*s*tar and the disciples of Frashô*s*tar for
ever, until the final body provide a benefit thereby.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[23:1](sbe31007.htm#fr_120) Possibly, 'may we
not anger you with our prayers for these blessings.' Kím me havyám
áh*rin*âno *g*usheta.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[23:2](sbe31007.htm#fr_121) That dasemê may now
better be referred to a similar root with dasvare, I regard the more
probable because the Pahlavi also freely renders as if it so understood.
Its author knew the meaning of dasema = da*s*ama. One is reminded of
course of the dá*s*a-gva.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[23:3](sbe31007.htm#fr_122) The Pahlavi with
its peculiar view of anâi*s* (not to be rejected too confidently; see
note at another occurrence of it) is interesting (as corrected by the
Persian MS.): On account of a not-coming to you, O Aûharmazd! This I
would not do \[ \]. Ashavahi*s*t also I will not pain for the sake of a
blessing; \[that is, I do not desire a single blessing which appears
displeasing to Ashavahi*s*t (this turn of the sense is followed by some
who have hitherto opposed tradition, but I cannot follow it, although I
value every hint of the ancient writers). Also Vohûman, the excellent
\[I do not harass him\].

<span id="fn_122"></span>[23:4](sbe31007.htm#fr_123) Or, 'to those whom
thou seest as creatures (?) of V. fill up the desire with attainments.'

<span id="fn_123"></span>[23:5](sbe31007.htm#fr_124) Possibly, 'the
righteous,' erethw*en*g; cp. *ri*tâ´vânas (?). Pahl. trans. 'î frârûnŏ.'

<span id="fn_124"></span>[23:6](sbe31007.htm#fr_125) Possibly, 'I
obtain.'

<span id="fn_125"></span>[24:1](sbe31007.htm#fr_126) Ner. has
analaso(-a*h*) for asûnâ more correctly than the Pahlavi asû*d*ak.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[24:2](sbe31007.htm#fr_127) Or, 'well reaching
their aim;' but the Pahlavi translator gives his evidence for the
meaning 'food'—khûri*s*nŏ. Recall the constant prayers for nourishment
in the *Ri*ks. And as favouring the ancient translation, see XXIX, 7,
where 'food for the eaters' is declared to be the gift of God, who is at
the same time 'bounteous with his doctrine.'

<span id="fn_127"></span>[24:3](sbe31007.htm#fr_128) Neryosangh: Eva*m*
ye dharmasya vettâra*h*\* uttamasya*k*a dâter manasa*h* \[ \]
ekahelayâ\* Mahâ*gñ*ânin Svâmin! tebhya*h*\* pûr*n*a*m* pari*k*inohi\*
kâma*m*; \[kila, \[ \] *s*ubha*m* tebhya*h* kuru\]. Eva*mk*a
i*g*isne*h*\* analaso labhatâ*m* khâdyâni vastrâ*n*i*k*a vadanena.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[24:4](sbe31007.htm#fr_129) One is tempted to
read nip*a*ungh*ê* as an infinitive, but the Pahlavi translation
anticipates us all with its more critical barâ netrûnam.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[24:5](sbe31007.htm#fr_130) This question is
answered in Y. XXX.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[24:6](sbe31007.htm#fr_131) Ner. improving upon
the Pahlavi has as follows: Yadi sunirîksha*n*atayâ dharma*m* pâlayâmi
mana*sk*a\* uttama*m* sadâprav*ri*ttaye; \[kila, *k*et satyasya
sadvyâpârasya*k*a rakshâ*m* karomi\]. Tvam tat\* Mahâ*gñ*ânin Svâmin!
prak*ri*sh*t*am me *s*ikshâpaya\* \[ \] vâ*k*i. Ad*ris*ya Tvatto mukhena
\[sphu*t*aya\] antar bhuvane pûrva*m* babhûva \[tâm s*ri*sh*t*im me
brûhi\].

A translation truly remarkable considering the circumstances under which
it was made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna XXX](sbe31008)
