[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31004)  [Next](sbe31006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE GÂTHAS.

THE five Gâthas of Zarathu*s*tra and his immediate followers are placed
here before the other parts of the Yasna on account of their higher
antiquity. There existed no other Yasna for years or centuries beside
them.

The more remarkable circumstances connected with them have been already
discussed in the Introduction.

If it is necessary to recall any of them here, the most prominent would
be that they are undoubtedly the productions of a small group of
influential men who are referred to in them for the most part by name;
that Zarathu*s*tra, everywhere else nearly or quite a demi-god, is here
a struggling and suffering man. He is a prophet, or a divinely appointed
instructor, but thoroughly human and real, so far as his situations
become apparent.

Secondly, their historical tone may be emphasised. Their doctrines and
exhortations concern an actual religious movement taking place
contemporaneously with their composition; and that movement was
exceptionally pure and most earnest. Their tone is therefore everywhere
serious. Nearly all myths are dropped, and likewise, as perhaps their
most striking peculiarity, even the old Aryan gods, who reappear in the
later Yasna, Vendîdâd, and Ya*s*ts, are, save one, wholly absent.

The movement in its reformatory character seems to have thrown them out,
not perhaps with definite intention, but because the minds of the devout
enthusiasts excluded them as having inferior interest, in view of the
results immediately before them.

So far as a claim to a high position among the curiosities of ancient
moral lore is concerned, the reader may trust himself freely to the
impression that he has before him an anthology which was probably
composed with as fervent a desire to benefit the spiritual and moral
natures of those to

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

whom it was addressed as any which the world had yet seen. Nay, he may
provisionally accept the opinion that nowhere else are such traces of
intelligent religious earnestness to be found as existing at the period
of the Gâthas or before them, save in the Semitic scriptures.

As to their speculative depth; wherever theosophical speculation is put
into words, the evidence of their grasp and subjectivity becomes
positive. As the extent of documents necessarily produces a certain
impression upon the mind of an investigator, it must not be forgotten
that the Gâthas were in all probability many times more voluminous than
the fragments which now remain to us. The historian may argue from what
has survived to what once existed, and the inevitable conclusion is
imposing.

For additional details see the Introduction, and the summaries at the
head of each Gâtha and chapter.

### THE GÂTHA(Â) AHUNAVAITI(Î).

This Gâtha, consisting of seven chapters of the Yasna (XXVIII-XXXIV),
takes its name from the similarity of its metre to that of the
Ahuna-vairya formula which also occurs before it in the Yasna. It is
composed of homogeneous material. but as its material is also
homogeneous with that of the other Gâthas, it probably owes its
existence as a group of sections to its metrical form. Its lines were
intended to number sixteen syllables, and they are put together in
stanzas of three. It is all very ancient and probably nearly all
original with Zarathu*s*tra himself, though parts seem to be put into
the mouths of his immediate associates and disciples. Whether any
persons existed in the immediate circle of the sage capable of composing
hymns like these unaided, is of course a question; but that some were
able to put poetical matter together under his guidance or inspiration
seems certain.

An analysis and general summary is placed before each chapter as more
convenient than massing them all together. The reader is reminded that
the rhythm of the original, so far as it could be reasonably
conjectured, is somewhat imitated in parts of the translations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna XXIX](sbe31006.md)
