[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31100)  [Next](sbe31102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ÂFRÎNAGÂN.

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

### ÂFRÎNAGÂN.

As to the present use of these blessings, says Haug (ed. West):
'Âfrînagân are blessings which are to be recited over a meal consisting
of wine, milk, and fruits, to which an angel, or the spirit of a
deceased person, is invited, and in whose honour the meal is prepared.
After the consecration (which only a priest can perform) is over, the
meal is eaten by those who are present. The performance of these
Âfrînagân is required of every Parsi at certain fixed seasons of the
year. These are the six Gahanbârs, each lasting five days (at the six
original seasons of the year) for which the Âfrînagân Gahanbâr is
intended, the five Gâtha-days (the five last days of the year), during
which the Âfrînagân Gâtha must be used; and, lastly, the third day
(Ardibahi*s*t) of the first month (Fravardin) in the year, at which the
performance of Âfrînagân Rapithwin, devoted to the spirit presiding over
the southern quarter (who is the guardian of the way to paradise), is
enjoined to every Parsi whose soul wants to pass the *K*inva*d* after
death.' (Essays, 2nd edition, page 224.)

### I. ÂFRÎN\[-AGÂN\] GAHANBÂR <span id="fr_1524"></span>[1](#fn_1507).

1\. I confess myself a Mazda-worshipper, and of Zarathustra's order, a
foe of the Daêvas, devoted to the lore of the Lord, for the holy
Hâvani <span id="fr_1525"></span>[1](#fn_1507), the regulator of the
ritual order (and its lord in its turn), for its sacrifice, homage,
propitiation, and praise; (and I confess myself) for Sâvanghi and for
Vîsya, the holy lords of the ritual order, for their sacrifice, homage,

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

propitiation, and praise, and for that of the Asnya, the day-lords of
the days during daylight, and of the days in their length, for the
Mâhya, month-lords, and the Yâirya, year-lords, and for those of the
especial seasons, and for the worship, homage, propitiation, and praise
of that lofty lord who is the Ritual Righteousness (itself); yea, for
the worship, homage, propitiation, and praise of the lords of the days,
months, years, and seasons—for those lords of the ritual order who are
of all the greatest, who are the regulators of the ritual at the time of
Hâvani.

2\. To Maidhyô-zaremya <span id="fr_1526"></span>[1](#fn_1508), the lord
\[or to Maidhyô-shema <span id="fr_1527"></span>[1](#fn_1508), the lord,
or to Paiti*s*hahya <span id="fr_1528"></span>[1](#fn_1508), the lord,
or to Ayâthrima <span id="fr_1529"></span>[1](#fn_1508),
Maidhyâirya <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1](#fn_1508), or
Hamaspathmaêdhaya\], be propitiation, homage, and praise.

3\. O ye Mazdayasnians who are here present! offer ye <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[2](#fn_1509) this ritual service, and present ye
the Myazda which is that of the Maidhyô-zaremaya, taking a piece of
sound flesh from a choice beast, with a full flow of milk.

4\. If ye are able to do this, (well); if ye are unable to do it, ye may
take then (a portion) of some liquor of equal value, it matters not
which it is, and have it consumed as it is proper; and so be ye discreet
from your obedience, most correctly faithful in your speech, most
saintly from your sanctity, best ordered in your exercise of power,
least straitened by oppressions, heart-easy with rejoicings, most
merciful of givers, most helpful to the poor, fulfilling most the
ritual, the blest and longed-for Asha, (coy?) riches woman-minded (?)
bringing (as reward). If ye can do this

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

and with vigour, (well); (5) if not, bring wood to the Ratu's house. It
matters not what kind, so it be well cut, and very dry, and in loads of
fitting size. If that is possible, (well); if not, then let a man bring
wood to the Ratu's dwelling, and heap it up as high as the ear, or to
reach the fore-shoulder, or with the fore-arm measure, (or at least as
high as the end of the hanging hand). If that is possible, (well); (6)
but if it has not been possible, then let the worshipper (with the
mind's offering) ascribe the power to him who rules the best, Ahura,
(saying <span id="fr_1532"></span>[1](#fn_1510)): Wherefore for this
cause verily we offer and ascribe the Sovereign Power to Ahura Mazda,
who rules the best, and to Righteousness (the ritual and moral Order),
and we complete our sacrifice to them. Thus is the Myazda offered with
the well-timed prayer for blessings.

7\. In case that a man does not give of the first Myazda which is that
of the Maidhyô-zaremaya, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! the Ratu that has the
right to that Myazda, and who has this person under his guidance,
expels <span id="fr_1533"></span>[2](#fn_1511) that (false) disciple who
has not his Myazda with him, as a man that does not worship, from the
midst of the Mazda-worshippers. 8. In the case that a man does not give
of the second Myazda, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! which is that of the
Maidhyô-shema, then let <span id="fr_1534"></span>[2](#fn_1511) the Ratu
to whom the Myazda should come, and who has the person under his
guidance, expel that disciple, since he comes without his Myazda, as he
would a man who refuses to recite his vows, from among the number of the
Mazda-worshippers.

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 9. In the case
that a man does not give of the third Myazda, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra!
which is that of Paiti*s*hahya, then let the Ratu who ought to receive
that Myazda, and who has had the person under his guidance, expel that
disciple which brings no Myazda, as a detected <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1](#fn_1512) reprobate, from among the number of
the Mazdayasnians. 10. In case that a man does not offer of the fourth
Myazda, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! which is that of the Ayâthrima, let the
Ratu who ought to receive that Myazda, and who has the person under his
guidance, expel that disciple, since he brings no Myazda, as a
refuse <span id="fr_1536"></span>[2](#fn_1513) beast from among the
number of the Mazdayasnians. 11. In the case that a man does not give of
the fifth Myazda, which is that of the Maidhyâirya, then let the Ratu to
whom that Myazda belongs as a perquisite, and who has that person under
his guidance, expel him, since he brings no Myazda, as an alien <span
id="fr_1537"></span>[3](#fn_1514), from among the number of the
Mazdayasnians. 12. In case that a man does not give of the sixth Myazda,
which is that of the Hamaspathmaêdhaya, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! let the
Ratu to whom that Myazda belongs as a perquisite, and who has this
person under his discipline to learn him the lore of Ahura, expel him,
(as ignorant) since he brings no Myazda, from among the number of the
Mazdayasnians. 13. And let him decry him afterwards without
hesitation <span id="fr_1538"></span>[4](#fn_1515), and drive <span
id="fr_1539"></span>[5](#fn_1516) him out; and let that Ratu lay upon
him afterwards

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

the expiating deeds without reserve; and in accordance with these rules,
let the disciple treat the Ratu. (Let him beware of failure to bring his
Myazda, or if he fails let the disciple bear, as is befitting, what is
due.) A blessing is Righteousness (called) the Best, it is weal, it is
weal for this (man) when toward Righteousness Best there is right. 14. I
bless with my prayer the royal Province-chiefs (who are faithful
worshippers) of Ahura Mazda, the resplendent, the glorious, (beseeching)
for superior strength for them, and for more important victory, and more
influential rule, and desiring for them further authoritative power, and
helpful support, and long duration to their reign, and the prolonged
vitality of their frames, and health. 15. And I pray in my benediction
for strength well-shaped and stately of growth, and which smites
victoriously, Ahura-made, and crushing, and for an ascendency abundantly
subduing all who are filled with furious hate, assaulting the
evil-minded enemies, and destroying, as if at once, the deadly,
godless <span id="fr_1540"></span>[1](#fn_1517) foes.

16\. And I pray in my blessing that he (the province-governor) may
conquer in victorious battles every malicious foe, and each malignant,
profane in thoughts, and words, and actions, (17) that he may indeed be
constantly victorious in his own religious thoughts. and words, and
deeds, and unvarying in the smiting of every foe, and of every
Daêva-worshipper, and that he may, as he proceeds <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[2](#fn_1518), be well rewarded, and of good repute,
possessing a far-foreseeing preparation of the soul. 18. And I pray with
blessings thus: Live thou long and blessed be

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

thou, 'hail' to thee; live for the aid of holy men, and for the crushing
of the evil; and I pray for Heaven (for thee) the best world of the
saints, shining, all glorious. And thus may it happen as I pray— <span
id="fr_1542"></span>[1](#fn_1519). 19. And I bless in my prayer the
sacrifice, and homage, and the strength, and swiftness of the day-lords
during daylight, and of the lords of the days in their length, of the
month-lords, and the year-lords, and of the lords of the seasons <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[2](#fn_1520) (in their course), and for the
worship, homage, propitiation, and praise of the lofty lord who is the
Righteous Ritual itself, and of those lords of the ritual who are of all
the greatest, and who are the lords of the ritual at the time of Hâvani,
for Maidhyô-zaremaya the lord, \[(or) for Maidhyô-shema the lord, (or)
for Paiti*s*hahya <span id="fr_1544"></span>[2](#fn_1520) the lord, or
for Ayâthrima, Maidhyâirya, or Hamaspathmaêdhaya  <span
id="fr_1545"></span>[2](#fn_1520)+ <span
id="fr_1546"></span>[3](sbe31102.htm#fn_1521)\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[367:1](sbe31101.htm#fr_1525) The Âfrîn for
the morning hours from 6 to 10.

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[368:1](sbe31101.htm#fr_1530) The name of the
season at the time present, when the text is recited, is to be used.

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[368:2](sbe31101.htm#fr_1531) Bring ye, O
these Mazdayasnians!

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[369:1](sbe31101.htm#fr_1532) Or, 'because we
offer.'

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[369:2](sbe31101.htm#fr_1534) Not 'renders him
(detected) among the Mazdayasnians;' compare for form a*n*tarê-mrûyê;
see also fra-dasti and fra-perenaoiti; also the present may be used for
the imperative.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[370:1](sbe31101.htm#fr_1535) Possibly 'having
a breast burnt by the ordeal,' and so 'detected;' or 'hot-breasted,
vehement' (?); comp. uras.

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[370:2](sbe31101.htm#fr_1536) It may be '(his)
excluded beast,' or 'his stray beast' (?).

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[370:3](sbe31101.htm#fr_1537) Or, possibly,
'he is rejected when offering himself as arrived from the settlements'
(?).

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[370:4](sbe31101.htm#fr_1538) 'Without
recoiling.'

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[370:5](sbe31101.htm#fr_1539) Syazdayôi*t*.

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[371:1](sbe31101.htm#fr_1540) Unfriendly and
untrue; '\*avratyá.'

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[371:2](sbe31101.htm#fr_1541) Recall yôi
zaze*n*tê vanghâu sravahî.

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[372:1](sbe31101.htm#fr_1542) See Y. XXXV, 2.
The Ahuna follows.

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[372:2](sbe31101.htm#fr_1545) The name varies
with the season in which the sacrifice is made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Âfrînagân Gâtha](sbe31102)
