[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31030)  [Next](sbe31032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### YASNA IX.

#### THE HÔM YA*S*T.

The Haoma-ya*s*t has claims to antiquity (owing to its subject, but not
to its dialect), next after the Srô*s*-ya*s*t. H(a)oma = Soma, as a
deity, flourished not only before the Gâthas, but before the *Ri*ks of
the Veda, in Aryan ages before Iranian and Indian became two peoples.

The astonishing circumstance has been elsewhere noted that a hymn, which
is a reproduction of an Aryan original, should, notwithstanding its
earlier characteristics, be necessarily assigned to

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

a date much later than the Gâthas in which H(a)oma worship is not
mentioned.

Probably on account of bitter animosities prevailing between their more
southern neighbours and themselves, and the use of Soma by the Indians
as a stimulant before battle, the Iranians of the Gâthic period had
become lukewarm in their own H(a)oma worship. But that it should have
revived, as we see it in this Ya*s*t, after having nearly or quite
disappeared, is most interesting and remarkable. Was it definitively and
purposely repudiated by Zarathu*s*tra, afterwards reviving as by a
relapse? I do not think that it is well to hold to such deliberate and
conscious antagonisms, and to a definite policy and action based upon
them. The Soma-worship, like the sacramental acts of other religions
which have become less practised after exaggerated attention, had simply
fallen into neglect, increased by an aversion to practices outwardly
similar to those of 'Daêva-worshippers.' The Ya*s*t is, of course, made
up of fragments, which I have endeavoured to separate by lines. In the
translation I have given a rhythmical rendering, necessarily somewhat
free. It was difficult to import sufficient vivacity to the piece, while
using a uselessly awkward literalness. The freedom, as elsewhere, often
consists in adding words to point the sense, or round the rhythm.
(Expressions for identical Zend words have been here, as elsewhere,
purposely varied.)

1\. At the hour of Hâvani <span id="fr_957"></span>[1](#fn_951). H(a)oma
came to Zarathu*s*tra, as he served the (sacred) Fire, and sanctified
(its flame), while he sang aloud the Gâthas.

And Zarathu*s*tra asked him: Who art thou, O man! who art of all the
incarnate world the most beautiful in Thine own body <span
id="fr_958"></span>[2](#fn_952) of those whom I have seen, (thou)
glorious \[immortal\]?

2\. Thereupon gave H(a)oma answer <span id="fr_959"></span>[3](#fn_953),
the holy one who driveth death afar: I am, O Zarathu*s*tra

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> H(a)oma, the holy
and driving death afar; pray to me, O Spitâma, prepare me for the taste.
Praise toward me in (Thy) praises as the other \[Saoshya*n*ts\] praise.

3\. Thereupon spake Zarathu*s*tra: Unto H(a)oma be the praise <span
id="fr_960"></span>[1](#fn_954). What man, O H(a)oma! first prepared
thee for the corporeal world? What blessedness was offered him? what
gain did he acquire?

4\. Thereupon did H(a)oma answer me, he the holy one, and driving death
afar: Vîvanghva*n*t <span id="fr_961"></span>[2](#fn_955) was the first
of men who prepared me for the incarnate world. This blessedness was
offered him; this gain did he acquire, that to him was born a son who
was Yima, called the brilliant, (he of the many flocks, the most
glorious of those yet born, the sunlike-one of men <span
id="fr_962"></span>[3](#fn_956)), that he made from his authority both
herds and people free from dying, both plants and waters free from
drought, and men could eat imperishable food.

5\. In the reign of Yima swift of motion was there neither cold nor
heat, there was neither age nor death, nor envy <span
id="fr_963"></span>[4](#fn_957) demon-made. Like fifteen-yearlings <span
id="fr_964"></span>[5](#fn_958) walked the two forth, son and father, in
their stature and their form, so long as Yima, son of Vîvanghva*n*t
ruled, he of the many herds!

6\. Who was the second man, O H(a)oma! who

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

prepared thee for the corporeal world? What sanctity was offered him?
what gain did he acquire?

7\. Thereupon gave H(a)oma answer, he the holy one, and driving death
afar: Âthwya <span id="fr_965"></span>[1](#fn_959) was the second who
prepared me for the corporeal world. This blessedness was given him,
this gain did he acquire, that to him a son was born, Thraêtaona <span
id="fr_966"></span>[2](#fn_960) of the heroic tribe,

8\. Who smote the dragon Dahâka <span id="fr_967"></span>[3](#fn_961),
three jawed and triple-headed, six-eyed, with thousand powers, and of
mighty strength, a lie-demon of <span id="fr_968"></span>[4](#fn_962)
the Daêvas, evil for our settlements, and wicked, whom the evil spirit
Angra Mainyu made as the most mighty Dru*g*(k) \[against the corporeal
world\], and for the murder of (our) settlements, and to slay the
(homes) of Asha!

9\. Who was the third man, O H(a)oma! who prepared thee for the
corporeal world? What blessedness was given him? what gain did he
acquire?

10\. Thereupon gave H(a)oma answer, the holy one, and driving death
afar: Thrita <span id="fr_969"></span>[5](#fn_963), \[the most helpful
of the Sâmas <span id="fr_970"></span>[6](#fn_964)\], was the third man
who prepared me for the corporeal world. This blessedness was given

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

him, this gain did he acquire, that to him two sons were born,
Urvâkhshaya and Keresâspa, the one a judge confirming order, the other a
youth of great ascendant, ringlet-headed <span
id="fr_972"></span>[1](#fn_966), bludgeon-bearing.

11\. He who smote the horny dragon swallowing men, and swallowing
horses, poisonous, and green of colour, over which, as thick as thumbs
are, greenish poison flowed aside, on whose back once Keresâspa cooked
his meat in iron caldron at the noonday meal; and the deadly, scorched,
upstarted <span id="fr_973"></span>[2](#fn_967), and springing off,
dashed out the water as it boiled. Headlong fled affrighted
manly-minded <span id="fr_974"></span>[3](#fn_968) Keresâspa.

12\. Who was the fourth man who prepared thee,

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> O H(a)oma! for the
corporeal world? What blessedness was given him? what gain did he
acquire?

13\. Thereupon gave H(a)oma answer, he the holy, and driving death afar:
Pourushaspa <span id="fr_976"></span>[1](#fn_970) was the fourth man who
prepared me for the corporeal world. This blessedness was given him,
this gain did he acquire, that thou, O Zarathu*s*tra! wast born to him,
the just, in Pourushaspa's house, the D(a)êva's foe, the friend of
Mazda's lore, (14) famed in Airyêna Vaê*g*ah; and thou, O Zarathu*s*tra
I didst recite the first the Ahuna-vairya <span
id="fr_977"></span>[2](#fn_971), four times intoning it, and with verses
kept apart \[(Pâzand) each time with louder and still louder voice\].

15\. And thou didst cause, O Zarathu*s*tra! all the demon-gods to vanish
in the ground who aforetime flew about this earth in human shape (and
power. This hast thou done), thou who hast been the strongest, and the
staunchest, the most active, and the swiftest, and (in every deed) the
most victorious in the two spirits’ <span
id="fr_978"></span>[3](#fn_972) world.

16\. Thereupon spake Zarathu*s*tra: Praise to H(a)oma. Good is H(a)oma,
and the well-endowed, exact and righteous in its nature, and good
inherently, and healing, beautiful of form, and good in deed, and most
successful in its working <span id="fr_979"></span>[4](#fn_973),
golden-hued, with bending sprouts. As it is the best for drinking, so
(through its sacred stimulus) is it the most nutritious <span
id="fr_980"></span>[5](#fn_974) for the soul.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

17\. I make my claim on thee, O yellow one! for

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

inspiration <span id="fr_981"></span>[1](#fn_975). I make my claim on
thee for strength; I make my claim on thee for victory; I make my claim
on thee for health and healing (when healing is my need); I make my
claim on thee for progress and increased prosperity, and vigour of the
entire frame, and for understanding <span
id="fr_982"></span>[2](#fn_976), of each adorning kind, and for this,
that I may have free course among our settlements, having power where I
will, overwhelming angry malice, and a conqueror of lies.

18\. Yea, I make my claim on thee that I may overwhelm the angry hate of
haters, of the D(a)êvas and of mortals, of the sorcerers and
sirens <span id="fr_983"></span>[3](#fn_977), of the tyrants <span
id="fr_984"></span>[4](#fn_978), and the Kavis, of the Karpans,
murderous bipeds, of the sanctity-destroyers, the profane apostate
bipeds, of the wolves four-footed monsters, of the invading host,
wide-fronted, which with stratagems <span
id="fr_985"></span>[5](#fn_979) advance.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

19\. This first blessing I beseech of thee, O H(a)oma, thou that drivest
death afar! I beseech of thee for (heaven), the best life of the saints,
the radiant, all-glorious <span id="fr_986"></span>[6](#fn_980).

This second blessing I beseech of thee, O H(a)oma, thou that drivest
death afar! this body's health (before that blest life is attained).

This third blessing I beseech of thee, O H(a)oma, thou that drivest
death afar! the long vitality of life.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

20\. This fourth blessing I beseech of thee, O H(a)oma, thou that
drivest death afar! that I may stand forth on this earth with desires
gained <span id="fr_987"></span>[1](#fn_981), and powerful, receiving
satisfaction, overwhelming the assaults of hate, and conquering the lie.

This fifth blessing, O H(a)oma, I beseech of thee, thou that drivest
death afar! that I may stand victorious on earth, conquering in
battles <span id="fr_988"></span>[2](#fn_982), overwhelming the assaults
of hate, and conquering the lie.

21\. This sixth blessing I ask of thee, O H(a)oma, thou that drivest
death afar! that we may get good warning of the thief, good warning of
the murderer, see first the bludgeon-bearer, get first sight of the
wolf. May no one whichsoever get first the sight of us. In the strife
with each may we be they who get the first alarm!

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

22\. H(a)oma grants to racers <span id="fr_989"></span>[3](#fn_983) who
would run a course with span both speed and bottom (in their horses).
H(a)oma grants to women come to bed with child a brilliant offspring and
a righteous line.

H(a)oma grants to those (how many!) who have long sat searching books,
more knowledge and more wisdom.

23\. H(a)oma grants to those long maidens, who sit at home unwed, good
husbands, and that as soon as asked, he H(a)oma, the well-minded.

24\. H(a)oma lowered Keresâni <span id="fr_990"></span>[4](#fn_984),
dethroned him from his throne, for he grew so fond of power, that

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

he treacherously said: No priest behind <span
id="fr_991"></span>[1](#fn_985) (and watching) shall walk the lands for
me, as a counsellor to prosper them, he would rob everything of
progress, he would crush the growth of all!

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

25\. Hail to thee, O H(a)oma, who hast power as thou wilt, and by thine
inborn strength! Hail to thee, thou art well-versed in many sayings, and
true and holy words. Hail to thee for thou dost ask no wily questions,
but questionest direct.

26\. Forth hath Mazda borne to thee, the star-bespangled girdle <span
id="fr_992"></span>[2](#fn_986), the spirit-made, the ancient one, the
Mazdayasnian Faith.

So with this thou art begirt on the summits of the mountains, for the
spreading of the precepts, and the headings <span
id="fr_993"></span>[3](#fn_987) of the Mãthra, (and to help the Mãthra's
teacher),

27\. O H(a)oma, thou house-lord, and thou clan-lord, thou tribe-lord,
and chieftain of the land, and thou successful learned teacher, for
aggressive strength I speak to thee, for that which smites with victory,
and for my body's saving, and for manifold delight!

28\. Bear off from us the torment and the malice of the hateful. Divert
the angry foe's intent!

What man soever in this house is violent and wicked, what man soever in
this village, or this tribe, or province, seize thou away the fleetness
from

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

his feet; throw thou a veil of darkness o’er his mind; make thou his
intellect (at once) a wreck!

29\. Let not the man who harms us, mind or body, have power to go forth
on both his legs, or hold with both his hands, or see with both his
eyes, not the land (beneath his feet), or the herd before his face.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

30\. At the aroused and fearful <span id="fr_994"></span>[1](#fn_988)
Dragon, green, and belching forth his poison, for the righteous saint
that perishes, yellow H(a)oma, hurl thy mace <span
id="fr_995"></span>[2](#fn_989)!

At the (murderous) bludgeon-bearer, committing deeds unheard of <span
id="fr_996"></span>[3](#fn_990), blood-thirsty, (drunk) with fury,
yellow H(a)oma, hurl thy mace!

31\. Against the wicked human tyrant, hurling weapons at the head, for
the righteous saint that perishes, yellow H(a)oma, hurl thy mace!

Against the righteousness-disturber, the unholy life-destroyer, thoughts
and words of our <span id="fr_997"></span>[4](#fn_991) religion
well-delivering, yet in actions never reaching, for the righteous saint
that perishes, yellow H(a)oma, hurl thy mace!

32\. Against the body of the harlot, with her magic minds o’erthrowing
with (intoxicating) pleasures <span id="fr_998"></span>[5](#fn_992), to
the lusts her person offering, whose <span
id="fr_999"></span>[6](#fn_993) mind as vapour wavers as it flies before
the wind, for the righteous saint that perishes, yellow H(a)oma, hurl
thy mace!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_951"></span>[231:1](sbe31031.htm#fr_957) In the morning
from six to ten.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[231:2](sbe31031.htm#fr_958) Or, 'beautiful of
life'

<span id="fn_953"></span>[231:3](sbe31031.htm#fr_959) 'Me,' omitted as
interrupting rhythm, seems to be merely dramatic; or did it indicate
that there was an original Zarathu*s*trian Haoma Gâtha from which this
is an extension?

<span id="fn_954"></span>[232:1](sbe31031.htm#fr_960) Might not the
entire sixteenth verse be placed here?

<span id="fn_955"></span>[232:2](sbe31031.htm#fr_961) The fifth from
Gaya Maretan the Iranian Adam, but his counterpart, the Indian Vivasvat,
appears not only as the father of Yama, but of Manu, and even of the
gods, (as promoted mortals?).

<span id="fn_956"></span>[232:3](sbe31031.htm#fr_962) Compare
svar-d*rí*sas pávamânâs.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[232:4](sbe31031.htm#fr_963) So the Pahlavi.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[232:5](sbe31031.htm#fr_964) Males, like
females, seem to have been considered as developed at fifteen years of
age.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[233:1](sbe31031.htm#fr_965) Comp. Tritá âptiá.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[233:2](sbe31031.htm#fr_966) Comp. the Indian
Traitaná connected with Tritá.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[233:3](sbe31031.htm#fr_967) Let it be
remembered that Tritá smote the Ahi before Indra, Indra seeming only to
re-enact the more original victory which the Avesta notices. Concerning
Azhi Dahâka, see Windischmann's Zendstudien, s. 136.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[233:4](sbe31031.htm#fr_968) Free.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[233:5](sbe31031.htm#fr_969) In the *Ri*g-veda
âptyá seems only an epithet added to the name Tritá, <span
id="fr_971"></span>[\*](#fn_965); and the two serpents of the Avesta are
suspicious. Two names seem to have become two persons, or has the Avesta
the more correct representation?

<span id="fn_964"></span>[233:6](sbe31031.htm#fr_970) Have we the
Semites here? They certainly penetrated as conquerors far into Media,
and it seems uncritical to deny their leaving traces. The gloss may be
very old.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[233:\*](sbe31031.htm#fr_971) And to that of
other gods.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[234:1](sbe31031.htm#fr_972) Comp. Kapardínam.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[234:2](sbe31031.htm#fr_973) I abandon
reluctantly the admirable comparison of hvîs with the Indian svid
(Geldner), also when explained as an inchoative (Barth.), but the
resulting meaning is far from natural either here or in Vend. III, 32
(Sp. 305). That the dragon should begin to sweat (!) under the fire
which was kindled upon his back, and which caused him to spring away,
seems difficult. The process was not so deliberate. He was scorched,
started, and then sprang. Also in Vend. III, 32 when the barley is
produced the demons hardly 'sweat (with mental misery).' The idea is too
advanced for the document. Burnouf's and Haug's 'hiss' was much better
in both places. But I prefer the hint of the Pahlavi lâlâ vazlûn*d*. In
Vend. III, 32 (Sp. 305), khîst-hômand. Ner. tapta*sk*a sa
n*ris*a*m*sa*h* *k*ukshubhe \[dvipâdo\* babhûva\]. Whether *hv*îsa*tk*a
= hîsa*tk*a (?) has anything to do with hiz or khiz = Pahlavi
âkhîzîdanŏ <span id="fr_975"></span>[†](#fn_969), N. P. ‘hizîdan, is a
question. I follow tradition without etymological help; perhaps we might
as well write the word like the better known form as a conjecture.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[234:3](sbe31031.htm#fr_974) The Pahlavi
translator makes the attempt to account for the epithet 'manly-minded'
as applied to Keresâspa while yet he fled affrighted; he says: Hôman*d*
mar*d*mîni*s*nîh hanâ yehevûn*d*, aîgha*s* libbemman pavan gâsdâ*s*t;
Ner. asya paurushamânasatvam\* ida*m* babhûva yad asau *k*aitanya*m*
sthâne dadhau, 'his manly-mindedness was this, that he kept his wits on
the occasion.' See the same story treated somewhat differently in the
Ya*s*ts by Darmesteter (p. 295, note 2).

<span id="fn_969"></span>[234:†](sbe31031.htm#fr_975) Or, âkhêzîdanŏ.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[235:1](sbe31031.htm#fr_976) Son of Pâîtirasp
or Spêtârasp; Bundahi*s* XXXII, 1, 2, &c.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[235:2](sbe31031.htm#fr_977) The Ahuna-vairya
is in the Gâthic dialect, and in the Ahunavaiti metre; it may have been
composed by Z. It named the Gâtha.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[235:3](sbe31031.htm#fr_978) Comp. Y. XXX, 6?

<span id="fn_973"></span>[235:4](sbe31031.htm#fr_979) Free.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[235:5](sbe31031.htm#fr_980) Comp. pathm*e*ng
gavôi.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[236:1](sbe31031.htm#fr_981) Or, is madhem
related to medhâ´ as well as mazdâ (fem.)?

<span id="fn_976"></span>[236:2](sbe31031.htm#fr_982) Pahl. farzânakîh.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[236:3](sbe31031.htm#fr_983) Hardly 'witches;'
outwardly attractive, but evil female beings.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[236:4](sbe31031.htm#fr_984) Pahl. sâstârânŏ.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[236:5](sbe31031.htm#fr_985) Pahl. pavan
frîftârîh; Ner. pratâra*n*atayâ.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[236:6](sbe31031.htm#fr_986) Vîspô-*hv*âthrem
does not mean 'comfortable' here. *Hv*an is the root; comp. *hv*e*n*g =
sun.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[237:1](sbe31031.htm#fr_987) Pahl. min
*hv*âstâr.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[237:2](sbe31031.htm#fr_988) Pahl. vânî*d*âr
pavan kûshânŏ.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[237:3](sbe31031.htm#fr_989) Arva*n*tô =
aurva*n*tô; so the Pahl. arvand.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[237:4](sbe31031.htm#fr_990) Comp. the Vedic
K*ris*â´nu, archer and demi-god who guarded the Soma. Ner. seems to
notice that the name recalls that of the Christians.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[238:1](sbe31031.htm#fr_991) So the Pahlavi,
before others, read apãs; comp. frãs.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[238:2](sbe31031.htm#fr_992) Haug's
keen-sighted suggestion, pourvanîm = paurva = the Pleiades + nî =
leading the P., looks doubtful, and seems refuted by Ya*s*t XXIV, 29,
where Darmesteter renders a word probably akin, as 'the many.' I would
here render 'the former.'

<span id="fn_987"></span>[238:3](sbe31031.htm#fr_993) The 'grasp,' the
summary of them.'

<span id="fn_988"></span>[239:1](sbe31031.htm#fr_994) Pahl. sakhmakan;
Ner. bhaya*m*kare.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[239:2](sbe31031.htm#fr_995) Or, 'strike thy
club.'

<span id="fn_990"></span>[239:3](sbe31031.htm#fr_996) 'Deeds apart,'
'evil deeds.'

<span id="fn_991"></span>[239:4](sbe31031.htm#fr_997) Free.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[239:5](sbe31031.htm#fr_998) Or, 'holding.'

<span id="fn_993"></span>[239:6](sbe31031.htm#fr_999) YêNhê must be an
error; otherwise 'offering the person to him whose mind as vapour
waters.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna X](sbe31032)
