[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31049)  [Next](sbe31051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### YASNA XXXV.

#### YASNA HAPTANGHÂITI.

With the Yasna of the 'Seven Chapters' which ranks next in antiquity
after the Gâthas, we already pass into an atmosphere distinct from
theirs. The dialect still lingers, but the spirit is changed. We have
advanced personification of the Bountiful Immortals; that is, their
personification seems more prominent, while the ideas of which they are
the personification already, and to a proportionate degree, have grown
dim. The name Amesha Spe*n*ta occurs: the Fravashis appear; the Fire is
worshipped, the Earth, and the Grass.

To the waters, to the Soul of the Kine, and to all holy or clean

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

beings, the very word yazamaidê is applied for the first time. On the
other hand, many later objects of worship are totally absent, the six
seasons of the creation, the five divisions of the day, the five Gâthas,
Zarathu*s*tra, the Baresman, the Haoma, &c. A considerable period of
time must have elapsed since the Gâthas had been composed, and a lengthy
period must also be supposed to have passed before the Avesta of the
later type began to be sung and recited. The chapter numbered XLII in
the Vendîdâd Sâdah of Brockhaus (1850), and in the edition of
Westergaard (1852), and numbered XLI, 18-35 in Spiegel's edition, seems
a later addition; but it cannot be very much later, as it preserves the
dialect and general features. An intentional imitation is not probable.
Spiegel has included it with chapter XLI to preserve the number 'seven;'
and if the entire section is to be called 'the Yasnas of the Seven
Chapters,' it should most certainly not be numbered XLIII! so number
merely to follow Westergaard, as do the first two parts of these
translations from the Avesta. This portion should neither be
incorporated with chapter XLI, nor numbered as a separate one; it should
be noted as a supplement. The name 'Seven Chapters' was of course given
to the pieces long after their composition.

PRAISE TO AHURA AND THE IMMORTALS; PRAYER FOR THE PRACTICE AND DIFFUSION
OF THE FAITH.

1\. We sacrifice to Ahura Mazda, the holy Lord of the ritual order, and
to the Bountiful Immortals, who rule aright, who dispose of all aright;
and we sacrifice to the entire creation of the clean, the spiritual and
the mundane, with the longing blessing of the beneficent ritual, with
the longing blessing of the benignant Religion, the Mazdayasnian Faith.

2\. We are praisers of good thoughts, of good words, and of good
actions, of those now and those hereafter <span
id="fr_1191"></span>[1](#fn_1182) \[(Pâzand) of those being done, and of
those

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

completed\]. We implant <span id="fr_1192"></span>[1](#fn_1183) (?) them
(with our homage, and we do this) the more, and yet the more since we
are (praisers) of the good (from whom they spring).

3\. That, therefore, would we choose, O Ahura Mazda! and thou, O
Righteousness the beauteous! that we should think, and speak, and do
those thoughts, and words, and deeds, among actual good <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[2](#fn_1184) thoughts, and words, and actions,
which are the best for both the worlds; (4) and together with these
gifts (?) and actions which are thus the best, we would pray for the
Kine (which represents the pure creation), that she may have comfort and
have fodder from the famed, and from the humble, from the potent and the
weak.

5\. To the best of good rulers (is) verily the Kingdom, because we
render and ascribe it to Him, and make it thoroughly His own (?), to
Mazda Ahura do we ascribe it, and to Righteousness the Best. 6. As thus
both man or woman knows (the duty), both thoroughly and truly, so let
him, or her, declare it and fulfil it, and inculcate it upon those who
may perform it as it is. 7. We would be deeply mindful of Your sacrifice
and homage, Yours, O Ahura Mazda! and the best, (and we would be
mindful) of the nurture of the Kine. And that let us inculcate and
perform for You according as we may, and (for) such (praisers as we
are).

8\. Under the shelter <span id="fr_1194"></span>[3](#fn_1185) of the
ritual Order let us do so in the active fulfilment <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[3](#fn_1185) of its (precepts) toward every one of
the (clean) and better creatures which

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

are fit to live <span id="fr_1196"></span>[1](#fn_1186), with a gift for
both the worlds. 9. Yea, those words and sayings, O Ahura Mazda! we
would proclaim as Righteousness, and as of the better mind (?); and we
would make Thee the one who both supports (us in our proclamation) of
them, and who throws still further light upon them (as they are),

10\. And by reason of Thy Righteous Order, Thy Good Mind, and Thy
Sovereign Power, and through the instrumentality of our praises of Thee,
O Ahura Mazda! and for the purpose of (still further) praises, by Thy
spoken words, and for (still further) spoken words, through Thy Yasna,
and for (still further) Yasnas (would we thus proclaim them, and make
Thee the bestower of our light).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[282:1](sbe31050.htm#fr_1191) The Pahlavi
translator, as so often, first saw the proper explanation here.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[283:1](sbe31050.htm#fr_1192) Or, we are
'purifiers,' or 'adorners.' Tradition 'spreading from man to man,' so
thoroughly implanting themselves; comp. perhaps nî*d*.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[283:2](sbe31050.htm#fr_1193) Hâtãm in this
sense.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[283:3](sbe31050.htm#fr_1195) Or, 'in the
house and stall.'

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[284:1](sbe31050.htm#fr_1196) Or,
'live-stock.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna XXXVI. To Ahura and the Fire](sbe31051)
