[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ic24)  [Next](ic26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

###  <span id="fr_84"></span>[XXV](#fn_84.md). THE WÛ WANG HEXAGRAM

<span id="img_hex111001"></span> ![](img/hex111001.jpg)

Wû Wang indicates great progress and success, while there will be
advantage in being firm and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

correct. If (its subject and his action) be not correct, he will fall
into errors, and it will not be advantageous for him to move in any
direction.

1\. The first NINE, undivided, shows its subject free from all
insincerity. His advance will be accompanied with good fortune.

2\. The second SIX, divided, shows one who reaps without having ploughed
(that he might reap), and gathers the produce of his third year's fields
without having cultivated them the first year for that end. To such a
one there will be advantage in whatever direction he may move.

3\. The third SIX, divided, shows calamity happening to one who is free
from insincerity;--as in

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

the case of an ox that has been tied up. A passer by finds it (and
carries it off), while the people in the neighbourhood have the calamity
(of being accused and. apprehended).

4\. The fourth NINE, undivided, shows (a case) in which, if its subject
can remain firm and correct, there will be no error.

5\. The fifth NINE, undivided, shows one who is free from insincerity,
and yet has fallen ill. Let him not use medicine, and he will have
occasion for joy (in his recovery).

6\. The topmost NINE, undivided, shows its subject free from
insincerity, yet sure to fall into error, if he take action. (His
action) will not be advantageous in any way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[111:XXV](ic25.htm#fr_84.md) Wang is the symbol of
being reckless, and often of being insincere; Wû Wang is descriptive of
a state of entire freedom from such a condition; its subject is one who
is entirely simple and sincere. The quality is characteristic of the
action of Heaven, and of the highest style of humanity. In this hexagram
we have an essay on this noble attribute. An absolute rectitude is
essential to it. The nearer one comes to the ideal of the quality, the
more powerful will be his influence, the greater his success. But let
him see to it that he never swerve from being correct.

The first line is strong; at the commencement of the inner trigram
denoting movement, the action of its subject will very much characterise
all the action set forth, and will itself be fortunate.

Line 2 is weak, central, and in its correct place. The quality may be
predicated of it in its highest degree. There is an entire freedom in
its subject from selfish or mercenary motive. He is good simply for
goodness' sake. And things are so constituted that his action will be
successful.

But calamity may also sometimes befal the best, and where there is this
freedom from insincerity; and line 3 being weak, and in the place of an
even line, lays its subject open to this misfortune. 'The people of the
neighbourhood' are of course entirely innocent.

Line 4 is the lowest in the trigram of strength, and 1 is not a <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> proper correlate, nor is the fourth the
place for a strong line. Hence the paragraph must be understood as a
caution.

Line 5 is strong, in the central place of honour, and has its proper
correlate in 2. Hence its subject must possess the quality of the
hexagram in perfection. And yet he shall he sick or in distress. But he
need not be anxious. Without his efforts a way of escape for him will be
opened.

Line 6 is at the top of the hexagram, and comes into the field when the
action has run its course. He should be still, and not initiate any
fresh movement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVI. The Tâ Khû Hexagram](ic26.md)
