[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ic27)  [Next](ic29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

###  <span id="fr_87"></span>[XXVIII](#fn_87.md). THE TÂ KWO HEXAGRAM

<span id="img_hex011110"></span> ![](img/hex011110.jpg)

Tâ Kwo suggests to us a beam that is weak. There will be advantage in
moving (under its conditions) in any direction whatever; there will be
success.

1\. The first SIX, divided, shows one placing mats of the white mâo
grass under things set on the ground. There will be no error.

2\. The second NINE, undivided, shows a decayed

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

willow producing shoots, or an old husband in possession of his young
wife. There will be advantage in every way.

3\. The third NINE, undivided, shows a beam that is weak. There will be
evil.

4\. The fourth NINE, undivided, shows a beam curving upwards. There will
be good fortune. If (the subject of it) looks for other (help but that
of line one), there will be cause for regret.

5\. The fifth NINE, undivided, shows a decayed willow producing flowers,
or an old wife in possession of her young husband. There will be
occasion neither for blame nor for praise.

6\. The topmost SIX, divided, shows its subject with extraordinary
(boldness) wading through a stream, till the water hides the crown of
his head. There will be evil, but no ground for blame.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[117:XXVIII](ic28.htm#fr_87.md) Very extraordinary
times require very extraordinary gifts in the conduct of affairs in
them. This is the text on which king Wăn and his son discourse after
their fashion in this hexagram. What goes, in their view, to constitute
anything extraordinary is its greatness and difficulty. There need not
be about it what is not right.

Looking at the figure we see two weak lines at the top and bottom, and
four strong lines between them, giving us the idea of a great beam
unable to sustain its own weight. But the second and fifth lines are
both strong and in the centre; and from this and the attributes of the
component trigrams a good auspice is obtained.

Line 1 being weak, and at the bottom of the figure, and of the trigram
Sun, which denotes flexibility and humility, its subject is
distinguished by his carefulness, as in the matter mentioned; and there
is a good auspice.

Line 2 has no proper correlate above. Hence he inclines to the weak 1
below him; and we have the symbolism of the line. An <span
id="page_118">p. 118</span> old husband with a young wife will yet have
children; the action of the subject of 2 will be successful.

Line 3 is strong, and in an odd place. Its subject is confident in his
own strength, but his correlate in 6 is weak. Alone, he is unequal to
the extraordinary strain on him, and has for his symbol the weak beam.

Line 4 is near 5, the ruler's place. On its subject devolves the duty of
meeting the extraordinary exigency of the time; but he is strong; and,
the line being in an even place, his strength is tempered. He will be
equal to his task. Should he look out for the help of the subject of 1,
that would affect him with another element of weakness; and his action
would give cause for regret.

Line 5 is strong and central. Its subject should be equal to achieve
extraordinary merit. But he has no proper correlate below, and as 2
inclined to 1, so does this to 6. But here the willow only produces
flowers, not shoots;--its decay will soon reappear. An old wife will
have no children. If the subject of the line is not to be condemned as
that of 3, his action does not deserve praise.

The subject of 6 pursues his daring course, with a view to satisfy the
extraordinary exigency of the time, and benefit all under the sky. He is
unequal to the task, and sinks beneath it; but his motive modifies the
judgment on his conduct.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIX. The Khan Hexagram](ic29.md)
