[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](icap5)  [Next](icap7.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

# APPENDIX VI

The Orderly Sequence of the Hexagrams  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[a](#fn_297.md)

### SECTION I

1-3. When there were heaven and earth, then afterwards all things were
produced. What fills up (the space) between heaven and earth are (those)
all things. Hence (*Kh*ien and Khwăn) are followed by *K*un <span
id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_298.md). *K*un denotes filling up.

3-6. *K*un is descriptive of things on their first production. When so
produced, they are sure to be in an undeveloped condition. Hence *K*un
is followed by Măng. Măng is descriptive of what is undeveloped,--the
young of creatures and things. These in that state require to be
nourished. Hence Măng is followed by Hsü. Hsü is descriptive of the way
in which meat and drink (come to be supplied) <span
id="fr_299"></span>[2](#fn_299.md). Over meat and drink there are sure to
be contentions <span id="fr_300"></span>[2](#fn_299.md). Hence Hsü is
followed by Sung.

6-8. Sung is sure to cause the rising up of the multitudes <span
id="fr_301"></span>[3](#fn_300.md); and hence it is followed by Sze. Sze
has the signification of multitudes <span
id="fr_302"></span>[3](#fn_300.md), and between multitudes there must be
some bond of union. Hence it is followed by Pî, which denotes being
attached to.

8-11. (Multitudes in) union must be subjected to some restraint. Hence
Pî is followed by Hsiâo

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Khû. When things axe subjected to restraint,
there come to be rites of ceremony, and hence Hsiâo Khû is followed by
Lî <span id="fr_303"></span>[4](#fn_301.md). The treading (on what is
proper) leads to Thâi, which issues in a state of freedom and repose,
and hence Lî is followed by Thâi.

11-16. Thâi denotes things having free course. They cannot have that for
ever, and hence it is followed by Phî (denoting being shut up and
restricted). Things cannot for ever be shut up, and hence Phî is
followed by Thung Žân. To him who cultivates union with men, things must
come to belong, and hence Thung Žân. is followed by Tâ Yû. Those who,
have what is great should not allow in themselves the feeling of being
full, and hence Tâ Yû is followed by *Kh*ien. When great possessions are
associated with humility, there is sure to be pleasure and satisfaction;
and hence *Kh*ien is followed by Yü.

16-19. Where such complacency is awakened, (he who causes it) is sure to
have followers <span id="fr_304"></span>[5](#fn_302.md). They who follow
another are sure to have services (to perform), and hence Sui is
followed by Kû <span id="fr_305"></span>[6](#fn_303.md). Kû means (the
performance of) services. He who performs such services may afterwards
become great, and hence Kû is followed by Lin. Lin means great <span
id="fr_306"></span>[6](#fn_303.md).

19-23. What is great draws forth contemplation, and hence Lin is
followed by Kwân. He who attracts contemplation will then bring about
the union of others with himself, and hence Kwân is followed by Shih Ho.
Shih Ho means union. But things should not be united in a reckless or
irregular way, and hence Shih Ho is followed by

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Pî. Pî denotes adorning. When ornamentation has
been carried to the utmost, its progress comes to an end; and hence Pî
is followed by Po. Po denotes decay and overthrow.

23-26. Things cannot be done away for ever. When decadence and overthrow
have completed their work at one end, [reintegration](errata.htm#1.md)
commences at the other; and hence Po is followed by Fû. When the return
(thus indicated) has taken place, we have not any rash disorder, and Fû.
is followed by Wû Wang. Given the freedom from disorder and insincerity
(which this name denotes), there may be the accumulation (of virtue),
and Wû Wang is followed by Tâ *Kh*û.

26-30. Such accumulation having taken place, there will follow the
nourishment of it; and hence Tâ *Kh*û is followed by Î. Î denotes
nourishing. Without nourishment there could be no movement, and hence Î
is followed by Tâ Kwo. Things cannot for ever be in a state of
extraordinary (progress); and hence Tâ Kwo is followed by Khân. Khân
denotes falling into peril. When one falls into peril, he is sure to
attach himself to some person or thing; and hence Khân is followed by
Lî. Lî denotes being attached, or adhering, to.

### SECTION II

31, 32. Heaven and earth existing, all (material) things then got their
existence. All (material) things having existence, afterwards there came
male and female. From the existence of male and female there came
afterwards husband and wife. From

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

husband and wife there came father and son. From father and son there
came ruler and minister. From ruler and minister there came high and
low. When (the distinction of) high and low had existence, afterwards
came the arrangements of propriety and righteousness.

The rule for the relation of husband and wife is that it should be
long-enduring. Hence Hsien is followed by Hăng. Hăng denotes long
enduring <span id="fr_307"></span>[7](#fn_304.md).

32-37. Things cannot long abide in the same place; and hence Hăng is
followed by Thun. Thun denotes withdrawing. Things cannot be for ever
withdrawn; and hence Thun is succeeded by Tâ *K*wang. Things cannot
remain forever (simply) in the state of vigour; and hence Tâ *K*wang is
succeeded by Žin. Žin denotes advancing. (But) advancing is sure to lead
to being wounded; and hence Žin is succeeded by Ming Î. Î denotes being
wounded. He who is wounded abroad will return to his home; and hence
Ming Î is followed by Kiâ *Z*ăn.

37-40. When the right administration of the family is at an end,
misunderstanding and division will ensue; and hence Kiâ *Z*ăn is
followed by Khwei. Khwei denotes misunderstanding and division; and such
a state is sure to give rise to difficulties and complications. Khwei
therefore is followed by *K*ien. *K*ien denotes difficulties; but things
cannot remain for ever in such a state. *K*ien therefore is followed by
*K*ieh, which denotes relaxation and ease.

40-44. In a state of relaxation and ease there are sure to be losses;
and hence *K*ieh is followed

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

by Sun. But when Sun (or diminution) is going on without end, increase
is sure to come. Sun therefore is followed by Yî. When increase goes on
without end, there is sure to come a dispersing of it, and hence Yî is
followed by Kwâi. Kwâi denotes dispersion. But dispersion must be
succeeded by a meeting (again). Hence Kwâi is followed by Kâu, which
denotes such meeting.

44-48. When things meet together, a collection is then formed. Hence Kâu
is followed by Žhui, which name denotes, being collected. When (good
men) are collected and mount to the highest places, there results what
we call an upward advance; and hence Žhui is followed by Shăng. When
such advance continues without stopping, there is sure to come distress;
and hence Shăng is followed by Khwăn. When distress is felt in the
height (that has been gained), there is sure to be a return to the
ground beneath; and hence Khwăn is followed by Žing.

48, 49. What happens under Žing requires to be changed, and hence it is
followed by Ko (denoting change).

49-55. For changing the substance of things there is nothing equal to
the caldron; and hence Kö is followed by Ting. For presiding over (that
and all other) vessels, no one is equal to the eldest son, and hence
Ting is followed by *K*ăn. *K*ăn conveys the idea of putting in motion.
But things cannot be kept in motion forever. The motion is stopped; and
hence *K*ăn is followed by Kăn, which gives the idea of arresting or
stopping. Things cannot be kept for ever in a state of repression, and
hence Kăn is followed by *K*ien, which gives the idea of

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

(gradually) advancing. With advance there must be a certain point that
is arrived at, and hence Kien is succeeded by Kwei Mei. When things thus
find the proper point to which to come, they are sure to become great.
Hence Kwei Mei is succeeded by Făng, which conveys the idea of being
great.

55-57. He whose greatness reaches the utmost possibility, is sure to
lose his dwelling; and hence Făng is succeeded by Lü (denoting
travellers or strangers). We have in it the idea of strangers who have
no place to receive them, and hence Lü is followed by Sûn, which gives
the idea of (penetrating and) entering.

57-59. One enters (on the pursuit of his object), and afterwards has
pleasure in it; hence Sûn is followed by Tui. Tui denotes pleasure and
satisfaction. This pleasure and satisfaction (begins) afterwards to be
dissipated, and hence Tui is followed by Hwan, which denotes separation
and division.

59-62. A state of division cannot continue for ever, and therefore Hwan
is followed by Žieh. Žieh (or the system of regulations) having been
established, men believe in it, and hence it is followed by *K*ung Fû.
When men have the belief which *K*ung Fû implies, they are sure to carry
it into practice; and hence it is succeeded by Hsiâo Kwo.

62-64. He that surpasses others is sure to remedy (evils that exist),
and therefore Hsiâo Kwo is succeeded by *K*î Žî. But the succession of
events cannot come to an end, and therefore *K*î Žî is

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

succeeded by Wei Žî, with which (the hexagrams) come to a close.

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_297"></span>[439:a](icap6.htm#fr_297.md) The few sentences on
this Appendix in the Introduction, pp. 54, 55, are sufficient. It shows
the importance of the meaning of the name in an attempt to explain the
lineal figures, and prepares us to expect on each one a brief
enigmatical essay, which, it has been seen, is the nature of the Text.
But the writer, whoever he was, is by no means careful always to follow
that Text in the significance of the characters, as will appear in the
few instances to which attention is called in the following notices. The
treatise is too slight to require, or to justify, an exhibition of all
its inaccuracies.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[439:1](icap6.htm#fr_298.md) But *K*un does not
denote filling up. It is the symbol of being in a state of distress and
difficulty. The writer is thinking of the result of the interaction of
heaven and earth as being to fill all between them with the various
forms of living beings; and to represent that he gives the result of
Kun, and not its meaning. He makes a blunder which might have been
easily avoided, for he adds immediately that the character is
descriptive of things on their first production.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[439:2](icap6.htm#fr_300.md) It is difficult to
follow the writer here. Hsü in the Text is the symbol of the idea of
waiting. Does he mean that a provision of food and drink can only be
made gradually? There is nothing in the character Hsü to awaken in the
mind the idea of nourishment, Then the genesis of contention which is
given is strange. The writer probably had in his mind the lines of the
Shih, II, i, ode 5. 3:--

'The loss of kindly feeling oft  
   From slightest things shall grow.  
Where all the fare is dry and spare,  
   Resentments fierce may glow.'

But what is allowable, good even, in poetry, is out of place in this
treatise.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[439:3](icap6.htm#fr_302.md) Contention on a great
scale will put all the population of a state in excitement and motion,
and military measures of repression will be necessary. But the idea of
the multitudes in Sze would seem to be simply that of number, and not
that of a numerous host. In a feudal kingdom, however, all the
able-bodied people might be required to join the army.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[440:4](icap6.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="page_440">p. 440</span> Lî, the name of the 10th hexagram, is the
symbol for a shoe, and the act of treading or walking. It seems here to
be derived from the homophonous lî, the symbol of acts of ceremony. The
identity of sound or name must be considered as accidental. A measured
step would be one of the first ways in which the inward sense of
propriety would manifest itself.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[440:5](icap6.htm#fr_304.md) By the subject of Tâ
Yû and *Kh*ien we must understand the possessor of the kingdom--the
great man who in his greatness is yet distinguished by humility. He
attracts followers.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[440:6](icap6.htm#fr_306.md) For the true meaning
of *K*û and Lin, the names of hexagrams 18, 19, see what is said in the
notes on the Text of them.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[440:7](icap6.htm#fr_307.md) The same reference
should be made to the notes on the Text of Hsien and many of the other
hexagrams that follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix VII](icap7.md)
