[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](icap4-1)  [Next](icap5) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

# SECTION II: KHWĂN <span id="fr_285"></span>[1](#fn_285)

Chapter I. 1. (What is indicated by) Khwăn is most gentle and weak, but,
when put in motion, is

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

hard and strong; it is most still, but is able to give every definite
form.

2\. 'By following, it obtains its (proper) lord,' and pursues its
regular (course).

3\. It contains all things in itself, and its transforming (power) is
glorious.

4\. Yes, what docility marks the way of Khwăn! It receives the
influences of heaven, and acts at the proper time.

Chapter II. 5. The family that accumulates goodness is sure to have
superabundant happiness, and the family that accumulates evil is sure to
have superabundant misery. The murder of a ruler by

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

his minister, or of his father by a son, is not the result of the events
of one morning or one evening. The causes of it have gradually
accumulated,--through the absence of early discrimination. The words of
the Yî, 'He treads on the hoar-frost; the strong ice will come (by and
by),' show the natural (issue and growth of things).

6\. 'Straight' indicates the correctness (of the internal principle),
and 'square,' the righteousness (of the external act). The superior man,
(thus represented), by his self-reverence maintains the inward
(correctness), and in righteousness adjusts his external acts. His
reverence and righteousness being (thus) established, his virtues are
not solitary instances or of a single class. 'Straight, square, and
great, working his operations, without repeated efforts, in every
respect advantageous:'--this shows how (such a one) has no doubts as to
what he does.

7\. Although (the subject of) this divided line has excellent qualities,
he (does not display them, but) keeps them under restraint. 'If he
engage with them in the service of the king, and be successful, he will
not claim that success for himself:'--this is the way of the earth, of a
wife, of a minister. The way of the earth is-'not to claim the merit of
achievement,' but on behalf (of heaven) to bring things to their proper
issue.

8\. Through the changes and transformations produced by heaven and
earth, plants and trees grow luxuriantly. If (the reciprocal influence
of) heaven and earth were shut up and restrained, we should have (a
state that might suggest to us) the case of men of virtue and ability
lying in obscurity. The words of the Yî, 'A sack tied up:--there will be

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

no ground for blame or for praise,' are in reality a lesson of caution.

9\. The superior man (emblemed here) by the yellow' and correct
(colour), is possessed of comprehension and discrimination. He occupies
the correct position (of supremacy), but (that emblem) is on (the lower
part of) his person. His excellence is in the centre (of his being), but
it diffuses a complacency over his four limbs, and is manifested in his
(conduct of) affairs:--this is the perfection of excellence.

10\. (The subject of) the yin (or divided line) thinking himself equal
to the (subject of the) yang, or undivided line, there is sure to be 'a
contest.' As if indignant at there being no acknowledgment of the
(superiority of the subject of the) yang line, (the text) uses the term
'dragons.' But still the (subject of neither line) can leave his class,
and hence we have 'the blood' mentioned. The mention of that as being
(both) 'azure and yellow' indicates the mixture of heaven and earth.
Heaven's (colour) is azure and earth's is yellow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_285"></span>[421:1](icap4-2.htm#fr_285) The hexagram Khwăn
is dealt with in Section ii, and much wore briefly than *Kh*ien in
Section i. Much less distinct, moreover, is the attempt in it to show
how the attributes of the hexagram are to be understood of the
principles of human nature. The most important portion of the Section,
perhaps, is paragraph 5, the first of chapter II, and I have spoken of
it in the Introduction, pages [47](icintr03.htm#page_47) and
[48](icintr03.htm#page_48).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix V: Treatise of Remarks on the Trigrams](icap5)
