[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cbc06)  [Next](cbc08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# II.

### (THE RISE OF HUNAC CEEL TO POWER)

Ah Itzimthul Chac <span id="fr_61"></span>[9](#fn_61) was their
commander at Ichcanzihoo. Uayom-c~~h~~ic~~h~~ <span
id="fr_62"></span>[10](#fn_62) was their priest at Ichcanzihoo. Canul
&lt;occupied&gt; the jaguar-mat. <span id="fr_63"></span>[11](#fn_63)
The

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

second Priest Chable was their ruler. Cabal Xiu was their priest. Uxmal
Chac <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) was their commander; formerly
he was their priest.

Then Hapay Can <span id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) was brought to
Chemchan. <span id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66) He was pierced &lt;by an
arrow&gt; when he arrived at the bloody wall there at Uxmal. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[4](#fn_67)

Then Chac-xib-chac was despoiled of his insignia. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[5](#fn_68) Zac-xib-chac and Ek

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Yuuan Chac were also despoiled of their
insignia. Ix Zacbeliz <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) was the name
of the maternal grandmother of the Chacs. Ek Yuuan Chac was their
father. Hun Yuuan Chac was their youngest brother; Uooh-puc was his
name. There was a glyph (*uooh*) written on the palm of his hand. Then a
glyph was written

 

<span id="img_fig02"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig02.jpg)  
FIG. 2--Chac-xib-chac, the God Impersonator at Chichen Itzá. Fresco,
Temple of the Warriors. Drawing by Ann Axtell Morris.

 

below his throat, was also written on the sole of his foot and written
within the ball of the thumb of Ah Uooh-puc. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70) The Chacs were not gods. The only true God
is our Lord Dios; they worshipped him according to the word and the
wisdom of Mayapan. <span id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_71)

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

Ah Kin Coba /

|         |
|---------|
| p\. 4 C |

was their priest there in the fortress &lt;of Mayapan&gt;. Zulim Chan
was at the west &lt;gate&gt;. Nauat <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72)
was the guardian <span id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73) of the

 

<span id="img_fig03"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig03.jpg)  
FIG. 3--Mexican warrior occupying the jaguar-seat. Fresco, Temple of the
Warriors, Chichen Itzá. (After Ann Axtell Morris.)  
The translator believes that this figure is also representative of the
guardians of the gates at Mayapan mentioned in the Chumayel.

 

south gate. Couoh was the guardian of the east gate. Ah Ek was his
companion. This was their ruler: Ah Tapay Nok Cauich <span
id="fr_74"></span>[3](#fn_74) was the name of their head-chief; Hunac
Ceel was the representative <span id="fr_75"></span>[4](#fn_75) of Ah
Mex Cuc. <span id="fr_76"></span>[5](#fn_76) Then he

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

demanded one complete Plumeria flower. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) Then he demanded a white mat. Then he
demanded a mantle faced on two sides. Then he demanded a green turkey.
Then he demanded a mottled snail. <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78)
Then he demanded the gourds called *homa*. <span
id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_79)

 <span id="fr_80"></span>[4](#fn_80)Whereupon they departed and arrived
at Ppoole, where the remainder of the Itzá were increased in number;
they took the women of Ppole as their mothers. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[5](#fn_81) Then they arrived at Ake; <span
id="fr_82"></span>[6](#fn_82) there they were born at Ake. Ake it was
called here, as they said. Then they arrived at Alaa; Alaa was its name
here, they said. Then they came to Tixchel, where their words and
discourse were prolonged. <span id="fr_83"></span>[7](#fn_83) Then they
arrived at Ninum, where their words and conversations were many. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[8](#fn_84) Then they arrived at Chikin-¢onot, <span
id="fr_85"></span>[9](#fn_85) where their faces were turned to the west.
Chikin-¢onot was its name here, so they said. Then they arrived at
Tzuc-oop, where they remained apart under the Anona tree. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[10](#fn_86) Tzuc-op was its name here, so they said.
Then they arrived at Tah-cab (Tahcabo), where the Itzas stirred the
honey. Then it was drunk by X-koh-takin. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[11](#fn_87)

|         |
|---------|
| p\. 5 C |

When the honey was stirred, she drank it at Cabilneba, <span
id="fr_88"></span>[12](#fn_88) as it was called. Then they arrived/at
Kikil, <span id="fr_89"></span>[13](#fn_89) where they contracted
dysentery. Kikil was its name here, so they said. Then they arrived at
Panabhaa, where they dug for water. <span id="fr_90"></span>[13](#fn_89)
Then they came to Cucuchilhaa; they settled at the deep water. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[14](#fn_90) Then they arrived at Yalzihon; Yalzihon
was its name here, where they settled the town. Then they arrived at
Xppitah (Espita), also a town. Then they arrived at

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kancab¢onot. They departed and arrived at
<u>¢</u>ula. Then they came to Pibhaal¢onot. Then they arrived at
Tahaac, as it was called. Then they came to Ticooh, where they haggled
for that which was dear. <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_91) Ticoh was
its name here. Then they arrived at Tikal, where they shut themselves
in. <span id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_92)Tikal was its name here. Then
they came to Timaax, where they made complete rogues of
themselves. <span id="fr_94"></span>[3](#fn_93) Then they arrived at
Buctzotz, where they covered the hair of their heads with a garment.
Buctzotz was its name here, so they said. Then they arrived at
<u>¢</u>i¢ontun, where a malevolent man began to seize the land. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[4](#fn_94) It was called <u>¢</u>iholtun here. Then
they arrived at Yobain, where the crocodile <span
id="fr_96"></span>[5](#fn_95) bewitched them through their maternal
grandfather, Ah Yamazi, their ruler at the seashore. Then they arrived
at Zinanche, where the devil bewitched them. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[6](#fn_96) Zinanche was its name here. Then they
arrived at the town of Chac. <span id="fr_98"></span>[7](#fn_97) Then
they arrived at <u>¢</u>euc; their companions contended with one
another. Then the maternal grandfather of their companions arrived to
reconcile them at <u>¢</u>emul, <span id="fr_99"></span>[8](#fn_98) as
it was called here. Then they arrived at Kini at the home of Xkil Itzam
Pech. <span id="fr_100"></span>[9](#fn_99) Their companions were at
X¢euc when they /

|         |
|---------|
| p\. 6 C |

arrived at the home of Xkil Itzam Pech, the ruler of the people of Kini.
Then they arrived at Baca, <span id="fr_101"></span>[10](#fn_100) where
water was poured out for them. It was Baca here, so they said. Then they
arrived at Zabacnail, the home of their maternal grandfather, the first
of the men of the Na &lt;family&gt;; this was Chel Na, their maternal
grandfather. Then they arrived at Tebenaa, where they remembered their
mother. Then they went to Ixil. Then they went to Chulul. Then they went
to Holtun-chable. Then they came to Itzamna (Itzimná). Then they came to
Chubulna. Then they arrived at Caucel, where they all shivered with
cold. <span id="fr_102"></span>[11](#fn_101) It was Caucel here, so they
said. Then they arrived at Ucu, where they said: "*ya ucu*." <span
id="fr_103"></span>[12](#fn_102) Then they went to Hunucma. Then they
arrived at Kinchil. Then they went to &lt;Can&gt;kana. Then they arrived
at Tixpetoncah. Then they arrived at Zahab-balam. Then they arrived at
Tahcum-chakan. Then they arrived at Tixbalche. Then they arrived at
Uxmal. Then they departed and arrived at Tixyubak. Then they arrived at
Munaa, where their words were

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

soft. <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_103) Then they went to Oxlochhok.
Then they went to Chac-akal. <span id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_104) Then
they went to Xocneceh; the deer was their familiar spirit <span
id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_105) when they arrived. Then they went to
Ppuztunich. Then they went to Pucnalchac. Then they went to Ppencuyut.
Then they went to Paxueuet. <span id="fr_107"></span>[4](#fn_106) Then
they arrived at Tixaya (Xaya). Then they arrived at Tiztiz, as it is
called. Then they arrived at Chican. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[5](#fn_107) Then they arrived at Tixmeuac. /

|         |
|---------|
| p\. 7 C |

Then they arrived at Hunacthi. <span id="fr_109"></span>[6](#fn_108)
Then they arrived at Titzal. <span id="fr_110"></span>[7](#fn_109) Then
they arrived at Tamuzbulna. Then they arrived at Tixcan. Then they
arrived at Lop. <span id="fr_111"></span>[8](#fn_110) Then they arrived
at Cheemiuan. Then they arrived at Oxcauanka. Then they went to
Zacbacelcan. Then they arrived at Cetelac. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[9](#fn_111)

These are the names of whatever towns there were and the names of the
wells, in order that it may be known where they passed in their march to
see whether this district was good, whether it was suitable for
settlement here. They set in order the names of the district according
to the command of our Lord God. He it was who set the land in order. He
created everything on earth. He set it in order also. But these were the
people who named the district, who named the wells, who named the
villages, who named the land because no one had arrived here in this
neck of the land <span id="fr_113"></span>[10](#fn_112) when we arrived
here. <span id="fr_114"></span>[11](#fn_113)

Zubinche, Kaua, Cumcanul (Cuncunul), Tiemtun <span
id="fr_115"></span>[12](#fn_114) (Ebtun), where the precious stones
descended, Zizal, Zacii (Valladolid), Ti¢ooc (Tesoco), where the law of
the katun was fulfilled, Timozon, Popola, where the mat of the katun was
spread, Tipixoy (Pixoy), Uayumhaa (Uayma), Zacbacelean, Tinum where
little was said to them, Timacal, Popola where they counted the mat of
the katun in its order, <span id="fr_116"></span>[13](#fn_115)
Tixmaculum where they interrupted with

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

words, <u>¢</u>ithaaz (<u>¢</u>itas), Bon-kauil, Tixmex, Kochila, <span
id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_116) Tix-xocen (Xocen), Chunpak, Pibahul,
Tunkaaz (Tunkas), Haltunhaa, Kuxbila, <u>¢</u>i¢ilche, Zitilpech,
Chalamte where their anger was appeased, Itzamthulil (Izamal), Tipakab
(Tepakam?) where they were united, /

|         |
|---------|
| p\. 8 C |

Tiya (Teya), Caanzahcab, <u>¢</u>i¢omtun, together with their maternal
grandfather . . . <span id="fr_118"></span>[2](#fn_117)
<u>¢</u>i¢holtun, Popola to the south of Zinanche. Then they came to
Muci, Zacnicte-c~~h~~een, Zo¢il; here they had a council of war at
Multumut, as it was called here, Mutul. Muxuppipp, Ake, Hoctun, where
they settled at the base of the stone, Xoc-c~~h~~el, Bohe, Zahcabhaa
(Sancaba?), Tzanlahcat (Sanahcat), Human where there were noisy talk and
rumors about them. Chalamte, Pacaxua <span
id="fr_119"></span>[3](#fn_118) was its name here they said. Tekit where
the remainder of the Itzá were dispersed, Yokolc~~h~~een,
Ppuuppulni-huh <span id="fr_120"></span>[4](#fn_119) (Huhi?) the iguana
was their familiar spirit when they came forth. <u>¢</u>o¢il, Tiab
(Teabo), Bitun-c~~h~~een. Then they entered Tipikal, as the well was
called, after which they came up out of it. Then they went to Poc-huh,
as the well was named, where they roasted the iguana. Then they went to
Mani, where their language was forgotten by them. Then they arrived at
Ti¢aan (<u>¢</u>am); three days they were submerged. Then they went to
Ticul, Zacluum-c~~h~~een (Sacalum), Tixtohil-c~~h~~een (Xtohil), where
they recovered their health. Then they went to Balam-kin, the district
of the priests. C~~h~~eenc~~h~~omac, Zacnicteel¢onot (Sacnicte),
Tiyaxcab (Yaxcaba?), Uman, Oxcum, Zanhil (Samahil), Ichcanzihoo
(Mérida), Ti-noh-naa, Nohpat, Poychena, Chulul (Cholul). Then they
arrived at the corner of the land, Cumkal (Conkal), where the corner of
the district was set. Zicpach, Yaxkukul, /

|         |
|---------|
| p\. 9 C |

Tixkokob, Cuca, C~~h~~een-balam, Bolon-nic-xan, Ekol, Ekol was the name
of the well here. Tixueue, Tixueue was the name of the well here.
Uhumtal, &lt;where&gt; one part came. Tixkanimacal, Tixaan (Texan),
Yumxul, where they took their father-in-law as their lord. Holtun-ake
(Ake?), Acanceh, Ticooh (Tecoh), Tic~~h~~ahil, Tichac (Telchaquillo?),
Mayapan the fortress, Yokol-haa. Then they went to Nabula, Tixmucuy
(Timucuy), Tixkanhube, <u>¢</u>oyila (<u>¢</u>oyola). Then they arrived
at Tizip, where their words and conversation were sinful.

Then the rulers began to establish the country. There was the priest at
Paloncab; there was the priest at Mutupul (Mutul), as it was called. The

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

priest at Paloncab was Ah May; <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_120) The
priest at Mutul <span id="fr_122"></span>[2](#fn_121) was Ah Canul, also
&lt;entitled&gt; Uayom Chich, <span id="fr_123"></span>[3](#fn_122) who
spoke brokenly also; <span id="fr_124"></span>[4](#fn_123) also the
second Chable man, <span id="fr_125"></span>[5](#fn_124) the man of
Ichcanziho, Holtun Balam, his son. <span id="fr_126"></span>[6](#fn_125)
Then &lt;the province of&gt; Chakan received the quetzal. <span
id="fr_127"></span>[7](#fn_126) Then their associate rulers arrived.
These rulers were the intimate associates of the rulers in Tun 11 Ahau.
Then they established the land; then they established the country. Then
they settled at Ichcanziho. Then came the people of Holtun-Ake; <span
id="fr_128"></span>[8](#fn_127) then came the people of Zabacna. Then
the rulers came, all together. The man of Zabacna was the first of the
men of the Na family. Then they assembled at Ichcanziho, where the
official mat was, <span id="fr_129"></span>[9](#fn_128) during the reign
of Holtun /

|          |
|----------|
| p\. 10 C |

Balam, there at the well, during the reign of Pochek-ix-¢oy. <span
id="fr_130"></span>[10](#fn_129) He was the first of the men of Copo;
Tutul Xiu might have been there also. Chacte was the ruler, Chacte was
the land where their rulers arrived. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[11](#fn_130) Teppanciz was their priest, he was
looked upon as such. It was Ah Ppizte <span
id="fr_132"></span>[12](#fn_131) who measured their land. But Lubte was
the land where they rested, there were seven leagues of land. Ah May it
was who fixed the corners <span id="fr_133"></span>[13](#fn_132) of the
land, he who set the corners in their places; the sweeper who swept the
land was Mizcit Ahau. But the land which was established for them was
Hoyahelcab; there they came to the use of their reason. They proved
their ruler, they proved their reason.

Then began the introduction of tribute to them at Chic~~h~~en. At Tikuch
arrived the tribute of the four men. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[14](#fn_133) 11 Ahau was the name of the katun when
the tribute was handled. There at Cetelac it was assembled; there it
was. Then came <span id="fr_135"></span>[15](#fn_134) the tribute of
Holtun Zuiua, there at Cetelac, where they agreed in

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

their opinions. 13 Ahau was the name of the katun <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_135) when the head-chiefs received the
tribute.

Then began their reign; then began their rule. Then they began to be
served; then those who were to be thrown (into the cenote) arrived; then
they began to throw them into the well that their prophecy might be
heard by their rulers. Their prophecy did not come. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_136) It was Cauich, Hunac Ceel, Cauich was
the name of the man there, who put out his head at the opening of the
well/

|          |
|----------|
| p\. 11 C |

on the south side. <span id="fr_138"></span>[3](#fn_137) Then he went to
take it. <span id="fr_139"></span>[4](#fn_138) Then he came forth to
declare the prophecy. <span id="fr_140"></span>[5](#fn_139) Then began
the taking of the prophecy. Then began his prophecy. Then they began to
declare him ruler. Then he was set in the seat of the rulers by them.
Then they began to declare him head-chief. He was not the ruler
formerly; that was only the office of Ah Mex Cuc. Now the
representative <span id="fr_141"></span>[6](#fn_140) of Ah Mex Cuc was
declared ruler. The eagle, they say, was his mother. Then, they say, he
was sought on his hill. Then they began to take the prophecy of this
ruler after it was declared. Then they began to set aloft the house on
high for the ruler. Then began the construction of the stairway. Then he
was set in the house on high in 13 Ahau, <span
id="fr_142"></span>[7](#fn_141) the sixth reign. Then began the hearing
of the prophecy, of the news, <span id="fr_143"></span>[8](#fn_142) of
the setting up <span id="fr_144"></span>[9](#fn_143) of Ah Mex Cuc, as
he was called. Then he carried nearly to Baca <span
id="fr_145"></span>[10](#fn_144) the news of Ah Mex Cuc. He was placed
there. <span id="fr_146"></span>[11](#fn_145) Then he began to be
treated as a lord; <span id="fr_147"></span>[12](#fn_146) then
obedience <span id="fr_148"></span>[13](#fn_147) to the name of Ah Mex
Cuc began. Then he was obeyed; then he was served there at the mouth of
the well. Chic~~h~~en Itzam was its name because the Itza

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

went there. Then he removed the stones <span
id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_148) of the land, the stones of the
sowed <span id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_149) land, the place of Itzam,
and they went into the water. <span id="fr_151"></span>[3](#fn_150) Then
began the introduction of misery there at Chic~~h~~en Itzá. Then he went
to the east and arrived at the home of Ah Kin Coba.

Katun 8 Ahau came. 8 Ahau was the name of the katun when their
government occurred. Then there was a change of the katun, then there
was a change of rulers./

|          |
|----------|
| p\. 12 C |

. . . when our rulers increased in numbers, according to the words of
their priest to them. Then they introduced the drought. That which came
was a drought, according to their words, when the hoofs &lt;of the
animals&gt; burned, when the seashore burned, a sea of misery. So it was
said on high, so it was said. Then the face of the sun was eaten; <span
id="fr_152"></span>[4](#fn_151) then the face of the sun was darkened;
then its face was extinguished. They were terrified on high, when it
burned at the word of their priest to them, when the word of our ruler
was fulfilled at the word of their priest to them. Then began the idea
of painting the exterior of the sun. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[5](#fn_152) When they heard of that, they saw the
moon. Then came the rulers of the land. It was Ix-Tziu-nene <span
id="fr_154"></span>[6](#fn_153) who introduced sin to us, the slaves of
the land, <span id="fr_155"></span>[7](#fn_154) when he came. Then the
law <span id="fr_156"></span>[8](#fn_155) of the katun, the divination
of the katun shall be fulfilled. When he was brought, what was your
command, you, the rulers of the land? Then the law of another katun was
introduced, at the end of the katun when Ix-Tziu-nene was brought.
Whereupon a numerous army was seen, and they began to be killed. Then a
thing of terror was constructed, a gallows for their death. Now began
the archery <span id="fr_157"></span>[9](#fn_156) of Ox-halal
Chan. <span id="fr_158"></span>[10](#fn_157) Then the rulers of the land
were called. Their

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

blood flowed, and it was taken by the archers. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_158) They were terrified . . . the time when
the katun ended for them . . . / <span id="fr_160"></span>[2](#fn_159)

|          |
|----------|
| p\. 13 C |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[66:9](cbc07.htm#fr_61) Here we have a new
account of the conquest of Chichen Itzá by Hunac Ceel, the head-chief of
Mayapan. Various versions of this episode will be found in Chapter: XIX,
XX and XXI of the present work as well in the Mani and Tizimin
chronicles (Brinton 1882, pp. 102, 146; Martinez 1927, pp. 8, 16). *Cf.*
Appendix C.

Chac was formerly an important title, but at the time of the Spanish
conquest the term merely designated four old men who represented the
rain-gods in certain religious ceremonies (Landa 1928, p. 180). Ah
Itzimthul appears to be a variant of the name of the ruler of Izamal,
afterward deified. He is called Itzmatul by Lizana (1893, ff. 4 and 14)
and Itzmal Ulil in the Tizimin chronicle. Historical references to the
ancient city of Ichcanzihoo, or Tihoo, the site of Merida, are so
extremely rare that it is of especial interest to read that this city
was under the command of the ruler of Izamal at this time.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[66:10](cbc07.htm#fr_62)

Uayom-c~~h~~ic~~h~~: *uay* means a familiar spirit, and -*om* is an
archaic suffix indicating either a participial or a future form of a
verb.

C~~h~~ic~~h~~ signifies a bird. *Ah uay c~~h~~amac* was a wizard who
could turn himself into a fox, and the translator believes

uayom c~~h~~ic~~h~~ indicates a similar relationship with a bird. This
title may be associated with the figures of birds worn by the carved
figures at Chichen Itzá.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[66:11](cbc07.htm#fr_63) Maya,
*ix-pop-ti-balam*. The mat (*pop*) was the seat of authority in a Maya
council, and *balam* means jaguar, although it is also a term applied to
the priests and officials of a village. We are reminded of the jaguar
seats portrayed at Chichen Itzá (*Cf.* fig. 3 and Morris, Charlot and
Morris 1931, pp. 368, 373). In these frescos, which are of the Toltec
period, we note that such seats are occupied by warriors. It is also
known that the Mexican allies of the rulers of Mayapan were called the
Ah Canuls (Landa 1928, p. 86; Crónica de Calkini, p. 35). Consequently
the statement that one of the Canuls occupied the jaguar-seat accords
with both the archæological and historical evidence. We are reminded of
the *ocelo-petlatzine*, or "jaguar-mat" used at Temimilzinco in Mexico.
It was so named because it was woven with dark spots to imitate a jaguar
skin. Here, however, it was used to sleep on (Ruíz de Alarcón 1892, p.
155).

<span id="fn_64"></span>[67:1](cbc07.htm#fr_64) One of the first rulers
of Uxmal was called Hun Uitzil-Chae (Relaciones de Yucatan, I, p. 287;
Tizimin p. 13). Evidently the ruler at Uxmal still retained the title of
Chac.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[67:2](cbc07.htm#fr_65) Although not mentioned
in any of the chronicles, Hapay Can figures prominently in a fragmentary
account of the Hunac Ceel episode in the Tizimin (pp. 23-24) and Mani
(pp. 166-167) manuscripts. The name, Hapay Can, means sucking-snake. The
Lacandon Indians believe in a certain evil spirit of this name "in the
form of a snake who draws people to him with his breath ... At the end
of the world Nohochchacyum (the head of the Lacandon Pantheon) will wear
around his waist as a belt the body of Hapay Can" (Tozzer 1907, p. 94).

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67:3](cbc07.htm#fr_66) Chemchan is a suburb of
Uxmal, recently located by Frans Blom.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[67:4](cbc07.htm#fr_67) Possibly his head was
pierced by a stake and the reference is to a tzompantli (the Aztec name
of a wooden rack on which the skulls of sacrificed victims were
displayed) at Uxmal.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[67:5](cbc07.htm#fr_68) In the Mani chronicle it
is indicated that Chac-xib-chac was the governor or head-chief of
Chichen Itzá. In Appendix A evidence is presented that Chac-xib-chac,
said by Landa to be one of the names of the Red Bacab, was probably in
reality the Red Rain-god, who lived at the east of the world. Here we
have an important personage bearing the name of the rain-god, and we may
infer that he figured as the representative of the god. In the Temple of
the Chac Mool found in the substructure of the Temple of the Warriors at
Chichen Itzá there is a fresco representing five men wearing the mask
and head-dress of God B, the Maya rain-god (Morris, Charlot and Morris
1931, pp. 375 and 454 and pl. 133). These are called God Impersonators,
and the translator believes that they impersonated the five Maya
rain-gods who, like the five Mexican Tlaloque, were set at the four
cardinal points and at the center of the heavens.

To identify the insignia of which Chac-xib-chac was "despoiled" is more
difficult. It is called *canhel* in Maya, a word which Beltran defines
as "dragon." There are reasons for believing that this canhel is the
ceremonial staff carried by the God Impersonators of the fresco in the
Chac Mool Temple. In the mixture of Christianity and paganism on page
[110](cbc16.htm#page_110) of the present work we read of God the Father
grasping in his hand his *canhel*, so it is evidently something that
could be held in the hand. Again, the figure in Maya art most obviously
suggested by Beltran's "*dragon*" is the snake-like head of the God K
and, as Ann Axtell Morris has conclusively shown in her analysis of the
fresco, this ceremonial object is a vestigial form of the Manikin
Scepter with its serpent handle and surmounted by the head or entire
figure of the God K. Schellhas (1904, pp. 32-33) has shown the frequent
association of God K with God B, who is impersonated in this case.
Consequently the ceremonial staff retained its name *canhel*, even
though it did not always bear the head of the god. In the Chumayel text
*canhel* is written *cangel*, although the g is almost never employed in
writing a Maya word. Evidently the writer associated the word with the
Spanish *angel*, and we are reminded of the so-called *angel* which
Landa tells us was set on the back of the figure of Kan-u-uayab-haab,
the spirit who ruled over the five unlucky days immediately preceding
the Kan years. He says that these "*angeles*" were frightful in
appearance, but that they presaged rain and a good year (Landa 1929, p.
22). In the picture of the New Year's ceremony on page 25 of the Dresden
Codex, a human figure with an animal's head, apparently representing the
last day of the old year, bears on his back the God K, quite like the
*angel* of which Landa tells. The passage on page
[110](cbc16.htm#page_110) of the Chumayel indicates that the *canhel*
was closely connected with the winds. Solís Alcalá and Solís M. (1927,
p. 245) have associated the *canhel* with the winds but identify it with
the wheel-like object held in the left hand of the figure with the
animal's head mentioned above.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[68:1](cbc07.htm#fr_69) Ix Zacbeliz could be
translated either as "the white woman who travels on foot," or as "the
woman who travels on the white causeway."

<span id="fn_70"></span>[68:2](cbc07.htm#fr_70) This appears to have
been the procedure followed by one who wished to set himself up as a
leader. At the time of the fall of Mayapan, Ah Kin Chel also "wrote on
the fleshy part of his left arm certain letters of great importance in
order to be esteemed" (Landa 1928, p. 8; *Cf.* Spinden 1913, fig. 10).

<span id="fn_71"></span>[68:3](cbc07.htm#fr_71) Probably a reference to
Hunabku, "the only living and true god, also the greatest of the gods of
the people of Yucatan" (Motul).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[69:1](cbc07.htm#fr_72) Nauat is still a family
name in Yucatan. We may well infer that this Nauat was one of the
Mexican guards of Mayapan mentioned by Landa, as it is a Mexican word.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[69:2](cbc07.htm#fr_73) Maya, *Ah-canul*, which
has been translated as guardian or care-taker (Tozzer 1921, p. 125). It
is not unlikely, however, that the reference is to the people called Ah
Canul, the so-called Mexican mercenaries who afterward settled in the
Province of Ah Canul. *Cf.* [p. 66](cbc06.htm#page_66), note 11.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[69:3](cbc07.htm#fr_74) Literally, Cauich with
the embroidered mantle. Cauich is still a common family name in Yucatan.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[69:4](cbc07.htm#fr_75) Maya, pulben. *Pul*
means to carry, to throw, to offer and to cast a spell. *Pulben* is a
passive verbal noun meaning that which is to be carried, thrown or
offered, probably the person who was carried in the place of or thrown
into the cenote for Ah Mex Cuc.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[69:5](cbc07.htm#fr_76) Ah Mex Cuc, literally
whiskered squirrel, is said to have had the surname Chan and to have
been one of the four greatest men of the Maya (*Cf.* [p.
147](cbc27.htm#page_147), note 5). A squirrel of this description
appears on one of the sculptured friezes of the Temple of the Warriors.
*Cf.* [Plate 1, b](cbc03.htm#img_pl1b).

<span id="fn_77"></span>[70:1](cbc07.htm#fr_77) The Plumeria still has a
mythological significance among the Lacandones (Tozzer 1907, p. 93).

<span id="fn_78"></span>[70:2](cbc07.htm#fr_78) Maya, *ul*, "certain
small mottled snails found among the bushes and rocks" (Motul). Priests
wore snail-shells sewn on their robes (Relaciones de Yucatan, II, p.
27).

<span id="fn_79"></span>[70:3](cbc07.htm#fr_79) The homa is a long
narrow gourd with a small mouth. Dr. Redfield reports that it is still
exclusively used to contain balché for religious ceremonies.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[70:4](cbc07.htm#fr_80) Here we have the
beginning of what is evidently a migration legend referring to a much
earlier period than the time of the Hunac Ceel episode.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[70:5](cbc07.htm#fr_81) Ppole was the port on
the mainland from which travelers usually embarked for the Island of
Cozumel (Aguilar 1900, p. 83). We have here a pun on the name, as *ppol*
means to multiply or increase in numbers. The reference to taking the
women of Ppole as their mothers is of interest, as it shows a
recollection of the first Itzá taking the women of the country as their
wives. These invaders were probably largely men.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[70:6](cbc07.htm#fr_82) This is not the Ake
noted for its ruins, but no doubt the modern town of <u>¢</u>onot-ake,
as it is here associated with Sucopo, Kikil and other towns in that
neighborhood. Aké is also a family name.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[70:7](cbc07.htm#fr_83) The name Tixchel
probably comes from Ix Chel, the goddess of medicine and the rainbow,
but a pun is made on the verbal root, *chel*, which means to stretch out
or prolong.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[70:8](cbc07.htm#fr_84) Ninum may be derived
from *num*, a wild prickly pear (*Acanthocereus pentagonus* Britt. &
Rose), but *num* also means much or too much.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[70:9](cbc07.htm#fr_85) Chikin-¢onot means west
cenote. It was probably in the neighborhood of Tizimin, and not the
village of that name south of Valladolid.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[70:10](cbc07.htm#fr_86) Tzuc-op, the modern
Sucopo, probably means a clump of Anona trees, but *tzuc-ba* means to
remain apart, hence the pun.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[70:11](cbc07.htm#fr_87) X-koh-takin, literally
she who wears a gold mask.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[70:12](cbc07.htm#fr_88) Cabilneba may be
derived from *cabil*, sweet like honey, and *neba* (lit. gopher-tail) an
unidentified plant. Many place-names are derived from plants.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[70:13](cbc07.htm#fr_90) Kikil means bloody, and
Panabhaa, an artificial well.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[70:14](cbc07.htm#fr_91) Cucuchil-haa means very
full of water and *cuch* can mean to settle.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[71:1](cbc07.htm#fr_92) *Coh* means dear or high
priced.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[71:2](cbc07.htm#fr_93) *Kal* means to shut in.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[71:3](cbc07.htm#fr_94) Timaax is the modern
Temax. *Maax* means a monkey or a rogue.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[71:4](cbc07.htm#fr_95) Maya, *chuc lum ¢i¢i*, a
stock phrase. The Indians told Martin Sanchez that <u>¢</u>i¢ontun was
so named because they had an idol which had a jacket of green and red
beads and named Ah Kin Pekual (Relaciones de Yucatan, I, p. 299).

<span id="fn_95"></span>[71:5](cbc07.htm#fr_96) Maya, *ain*, or *ayin*.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[71:6](cbc07.htm#fr_97) Zinanche, lit. scorpion
tree, is the *Zanthoxylum caribæum* Lam.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[71:7](cbc07.htm#fr_98) Probably Telchac is
intended.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[71:8](cbc07.htm#fr_99) <u>¢</u>emul means
little mound; *¢emlah yol* means to reconcile.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[71:9](cbc07.htm#fr_100) Another Ixkil Itzam
Pech was chief of Conkal at the time of the Spanish conquest (Brinton
1882, p. 219).

<span id="fn_100"></span>[71:10](cbc07.htm#fr_101) Baca, or *bac-haa*,
means to pour water.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[71:11](cbc07.htm#fr_102) *Cel*, the last
syllable in Caucel, means cold in Maya.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[71:12](cbc07.htm#fr_103) *Ya ucu* is probably
an exclamation of sorrow or pain.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[72:1](cbc07.htm#fr_104) Maya, *munhi*
(translated: "were soft,") is a pun on the name, Munaa, which the
Indians themselves derived from *muan-a*, the water (or well) of the
sparrow-hawk. Relaciones de Yucatan, I, p. 155.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[72:2](cbc07.htm#fr_105) Chac-akal, literally
red pond, may be modern Yakal.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[72:3](cbc07.htm#fr_106) *Ceh*, the last
syllable in Xocneceh, means deer in Maya.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[72:4](cbc07.htm#fr_107) Pax-ueuet is probably
derived from the Maya *pax*, to drum with the hand, and *ueuet*, or
*huehuetl*, the Nahuatl for drum.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[72:5](cbc07.htm#fr_108) Probably Chichican.
Mani map of 1557 apud Stephens 1843, II, p. 264.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[72:6](cbc07.htm#fr_109) Mentioned on [p.
142](cbc26.htm#page_142); evidently between Tixmeuac and Tetzal.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[72:7](cbc07.htm#fr_110) Located from
description in Relaciones de Yucatan, I, p. 296.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[72:8](cbc07.htm#fr_111) Lop is probably the
modern Tiholop.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[72:9](cbc07.htm#fr_112) Cetelac is the name of
a hacienda close to the ruined city now named for the neighboring town
of Yaxuná. These ruins are, at the western end of the ancient causeway
which extends to Cobá.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[72:10](cbc07.htm#fr_113) Maya, *u cal peten*,
in imitation of the Spanish name, Yucatan.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[72:11](cbc07.htm#fr_114) This is the end of
the first migration narrative, apparently an intrusion here, as it
refers to a time when much of northern Yucatan was not settled, and the
events of this chapter occurred in the time of Hunac Ceel about the end
of the Twelfth Century A. D. What follows may refer to the reduction of
the country after the fall of Chichen Itzá.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[72:12](cbc07.htm#fr_115) Instead of precious
stones (*tun*) this may refer to the descent or arrival of the Tun
family who are very numerous in this neighborhood (Titulos de Ebtun).
The modern name, Ebtun, means a stone stairway.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[72:13](cbc07.htm#fr_116) Maya: *ti u tzolahob
u pop katun*. Here we have an explanation of the phrase in the Tizimin
Chronicle which Brinton (1882, p. 144) has translated: "then Pop (the
first Maya month) was counted in order," and on which some change in the
annual calendar has been predicated. It was the mat (pop) of the katun
that was counted in order. The conception <span id="page_73">p.
73</span> is an ancient one, for the face of Stela J at Copan,
containing an Initial Series inscription, is carved to represent a woven
mat. No doubt the expression refers simply to the erection of the katun
marker in this instance. it is of interest to note a secondary meaning
also given to the word. "*Num pop, num ¢am: Trabajo y miseria. Num,
pop.l. num ¢am en ti numya mabal yan ten. Soy pobre miserable, no tengo
tras que parar.l. ah numya pop en. Vocablos son antiguos*." Motul.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[73:1](cbc07.htm#fr_117) Kochila is just north
of the causeway from Cobá to Yaxuná. Tit. Ebtun, pp. 284 and 320.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[73:2](cbc07.htm#fr_118) Maya: *ti che choc
¢ii¢*. <u>¢</u>i¢ is defined as hoof, left hand and to conquer in a
dispute. *Che choc* may be intended for *chochoc*, which would mean
loosely tied.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[73:3](cbc07.htm#fr_119) Pacaxua is on the
border of the Province of Mani between Chumayel and Sotuta. Mani map of
1557 (Stephens 1843, 11, p. 264).

<span id="fn_119"></span>[73:4](cbc07.htm#fr_120) *Ppuppulni-huh*: lit.
the iguana was swollen.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[74:1](cbc07.htm#fr_121) The chief priest of
Yucatan was called Ah Kin May (Landa 1928, p. 72). May is still a common
family name in Yucatan.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[74:2](cbc07.htm#fr_122) A brief summary of the
history of Motul is found in Relaciones de Yucatan, I, p. 77.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[74:3](cbc07.htm#fr_123) See p. 66, note
 [10](#fn_62).

<span id="fn_123"></span>[74:4](cbc07.htm#fr_124) *Nun*, or *ah-nun*
means a newcomer who does not know the language of the country; a
stammerer; a stupid unteachable person.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[74:5](cbc07.htm#fr_125) *Ah Chable* could mean
a member of the Chable family or a man of the town of Chable. Probably
the former is intended here. It is implied on page [67](#page_67) that
he was the chief of Ichcanziho.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[74:6](cbc07.htm#fr_126) *Cf.* p. 147.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[74:7](cbc07.htm#fr_127) Maya, *Yaxum*, the
symbol of Kukulcan, or Quetzalcoatl (*Cf.* p. 63, note
 [6](cbc06.htm#fn_33)). *Yaxum* is also the name of an unidentified
tree.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[74:8](cbc07.htm#fr_128) Probably Ake, noted
for the unique character of its ruins.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[74:9](cbc07.htm#fr_129) *Ix pop ti balam*.
Lit. the mat for the *balam*. *Balam* means jaguar, priest, and town
officials generally, including the priesthood. It seems likely that the
seat of government is meant (*Cf.* p. 66, note  [11](#fn_63)).

<span id="fn_129"></span>[74:10](cbc07.htm#fr_130) Lit. "he who tramples
on the conquered women." (*Cf.* Naranjo, Stelæ 14, 21, and 24. Maler
1908 b, Pl. 33, 35 and 39).

<span id="fn_130"></span>[74:11](cbc07.htm#fr_131) Place-names in
Yucatan are often derived from trees. *Chacte* is the Brazil tree, but
if it were changed to *chacet*, the passage would read: Great was the
ruler, great the land where their rulers arrived.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[74:12](cbc07.htm#fr_132) Ah Ppizte: cf. p. 65,
note  [2](cbc06.htm#fn_45).

<span id="fn_132"></span>[74:13](cbc07.htm#fr_133) A play on words: Ah
May---*amay* (corner).

<span id="fn_133"></span>[74:14](cbc07.htm#fr_134) Apparently a
reference to the four main divisions of the typical Nahua tribe or
nation.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[74:15](cbc07.htm#fr_135) Lit. descended.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[75:1](cbc07.htm#fr_136) As we know that the
Hunac Ceel episode occurred in Katun 8 Ahau, either this passage is an
intrusion, or else Tun 13 Ahau of Katun 8 Ahau is intended. The same
applies to the mention of Katun 11 Ahau a few lines above.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[75:2](cbc07.htm#fr_137) It was a serious
matter if none of those thrown into the cenote returned to declare the
prophecy. See Appendix B.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[75:3](cbc07.htm#fr_138) The stone platform
from which victims were flung into the cenote is still to be seen on the
south side.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[75:4](cbc07.htm#fr_139) Maya, *ca bini
c~~h~~abil*; from the verb, c~~h~~a, to take. *C~~h~~abil* usually a
passive form, is here employed as an active verb. *Cf.* "*Xiic pulbil
huun Cumkal*, let them go carry the letter to Cumkal." Motul.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[75:5](cbc07.htm#fr_140) Maya, *than*.
Literally, the word. One secondary meaning is "law," and in the Chumayel
it is frequently employed in contexts which plainly call for the
meaning, prophecy.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[75:6](cbc07.htm#fr_141) See p. 69, note
 [4](#fn_75).

<span id="fn_141"></span>[75:7](cbc07.htm#fr_142) Probably Tun 13 Ahau
is meant, as it is known that Hunac Ceel lived in a Katun 8 Ahau. Why it
is the sixth reign is not clear.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[75:8](cbc07.htm#fr_143) Maya, *kin*. Besides
meaning news, this word could also mean reign, sun, time, day and
festival.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[75:9](cbc07.htm#fr_144) Maya, *ua*, as in
*ua-cunah*, to set up or erect something.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[75:10](cbc07.htm#fr_145) Baca is a town a few
miles west of Motul.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[75:11](cbc07.htm#fr_146) Here the page has
crumbled and Berendt's copy has been followed. He gives this word as
*yancuntabi*, and it is so translated. *Yacuntabi* would mean loved or
guarded. It might be ye¢*euntabi*, established.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[75:12](cbc07.htm#fr_147) Maya, *yumintabali*.
This could also mean "treated as a father."

<span id="fn_147"></span>[75:13](cbc07.htm#fr_148) Maya, *tzicile*. It
means to honor or respect as well as obey.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[76:1](cbc07.htm#fr_149) Maya, *tunil*. This
usually means precious stones, unless the word occurs in a compound,
when it can mean an ordinary stone. While it is true that many precious
stones were thrown into the water at Chichen Itzá, the context indicates
that landmarks are meant here.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[76:2](cbc07.htm#fr_150) The place of the Itzá
may be meant. It is uncertain just who or what Itzam was. It is an
element in the name Itzamná as well as in that of the whale or monster
called Itzam-cab-ain, discussed on page 101, note 4. We find also the
name Xkil Itzam Pech (p. 71, note  [9](#fn_99)).

<span id="fn_150"></span>[76:3](cbc07.htm#fr_151) We are reminded of the
great stones which they threw into the Sacred Cenote when none of the
victims returned with the prophecy. Appendix B.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[76:4](cbc07.htm#fr_152) "During lunar eclipses
... They say that the moon is dying, or that it is being bitten by a
certain kind of ant (Aguilar 1921, p. 204). A similar belief was held of
solar eclipses.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[76:5](cbc07.htm#fr_153) An alternative
translation would be: "They began to imagine the reverse side of the
sun."

<span id="fn_153"></span>[76:6](cbc07.htm#fr_154) Tziu is a family name,
and *nen* means mirror. Here it may be feminine.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[76:7](cbc07.htm#fr_155) *u mun nal cab* might
also mean: "the tender green corn of the land."

<span id="fn_155"></span>[76:8](cbc07.htm#fr_156) *Than* has many
meanings in Maya. The *than* of the katun is interpreted as "ordenansas"
by the Kaua MS, p. 171 (Gates Reproduction).

<span id="fn_156"></span>[76:9](cbc07.htm#fr_157) Maya, *chulul*. This
word has a number of meanings. In the Maya texts it usually signifies
either a bow or the chulul-tree from which bows were made (*Apoplanesia
paniculata* Presl.)

<span id="fn_157"></span>[76:10](cbc07.htm#fr_158) Literally, Chan of
the three arrows. Chan is a common family name.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[77:1](cbc07.htm#fr_159) Maya, *ah-cehob*. The
term implies hunters who use the bow and arrow rather than warriors. Ah
Cehob could also mean the men of the Ceh family.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[77:2](cbc07.htm#fr_160) The order in which the
place-names occur in the first migration narrative in this chapter
indicates roughly a great eclipse which covers much of northern Yucatan,
running west, south, east and north. The course of the second migration
is much more irregular. Both narratives suggest that the people
concerned in these movements started in the east and first traveled
toward the west.

It is significant that Uxmal was the only place southwest of the *puuc*,
or low mountain range, which was visited, for this is the district which
is so thickly occupied by the imposing remains of what must have been
important cities, such as Sacbé, Kabah, Sayi, Tabi, Labná and Keuic, to
mention only a few of the best-known sites. Hardly a tradition has come
down to us regarding this once densely populated region, although the
Xius must have come through it when they settled in Uxmal. Evidently it
was a country apart, and the people from the east (or southeast) with
whom this chapter is concerned did not attempt to penetrate it.

Equally significant is the fact that in the area covered by these two
lists of place-names we find no mention of the towns supposed to have
been founded by the Cocoms after the fall of Mayapan, such as Sotuta,
Tabi and Tibolon, nor of those settled by the Ah Canuls in western
Yucatan, such as Calkini, Numkini and Maxcanu. These omissions are a
confirmation of the historical value of these old migration narratives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III: A Prophecy For Katun 11 Ahau](cbc08)
