[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cbc29)  [Next](cbc31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

# APPENDIX A

### THE FOUR WORLD-QUARTERS

Few religious ideas were more widely spread among the aboriginal peoples
of America than that of the sacred character of the four cardinal
points. The Plains Indians of North America are said to ascribe the
origin of this conception to the apparent motions of the sun to the
east, north, west and south, <span id="fr_936"></span>[1](#fn_930) and
the same explanation would appear to hold good for the peoples of
Central America. The Maya connected the idea with a system of color
symbolism: red with the east, white with the north, black with the west
and yellow with the south. In the Dresden Codex we frequently find the
glyphs for these directions associated with those representing the four
colors in the order named. Each successive year followed the same
rotation according to the day with which it began. The Kan years were
ascribed to the east, the Muluc years to the north, the Ix years to the
west and the Cauac years to the south, as shown by the calendar wheel of
the Book of Chilam Balam of Ixil. <span id="fr_937"></span>[2](#fn_931)
The same system governed the katun-wheel, only here we find whole groups
of katuns associated with each of the cardinal points, as we see from
the wheel on page [132](cbc23.htm#page_132) of the present work. On
pages 41 and 42 of the Maya Codex Cortesianus there is a picture of the
four world-quarters, each marked with its appropriate glyph, and in the
Mexican Codex Fejérváry-Mayer <span id="fr_938"></span>[3](#fn_932) is a
similar picture showing the trees and birds mentioned in Chapter X of
the Chumayel. It is evident that the Mexican and Maya myths relating to
this subject were very similar in some respects.

In Chapter X we have seen how the gods set up the four Trees of
Abundance at the cardinal points to commemorate the previous destruction
of the world. Like the conventionalized trees of the Palenque reliefs,
the so-called crosses, these trees were surmounted by birds of
mythological significance. From the four world-quarters came the winds,
and here in all probability were the four great jars of water which
supplied the rains. <span id="fr_939"></span>[4](#fn_933) According to
the Mexican version of this myth the rain was favorable or unfavorable
to the crops depending on the cardinal point from which it came. <span
id="fr_940"></span>[5](#fn_934)

From Landa we learn that "among the multitude of gods worshipped by
these people they adored four, each of whom was called Bacab. These,
they said, were four brothers whom God, when he created the world,
placed at its four quarters to hold up the sky, so that it should not f
all. They also state that these Bacabs were saved when the world was
destroyed by a deluge.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Other names are &lt;also&gt; given to each of
these, and with them they designate the world quarter where God set them
to hold up the sky." <span id="fr_941"></span>[1](#fn_935) The same
writer goes on to tell us their names. In the east was Chacal Bacab,
literally the Red Bacab, whose name was Cantzicnal, <span
id="fr_942"></span>[2](#fn_936) and Landa also ascribes to him the names
Chac Pauahtun and Chac-xib-chac. In the north was Zac-cimi, <span
id="fr_943"></span>[3](#fn_937) as Zacal Bacab, or the White Bacab, was
named, and he is also called Zac Pauahtun and Zac-xib-chac. In the west
was Hozan-ek, or Ekel Bacab, the Black Bacab, also called Ek Pauahtun
and Ek-xib-chac. In the south was Hobnil, or Kanal Bacab, the Yellow
Bacab, to whom Landa also gives the names, Kan Pauahtun and
Kan-xib-chac. Connected with the worship of these Bacabs were four
stones, the Red, White, Black and Yellow Acantuns, which were anointed
with the blood of the worshippers. Acantun might be translated as stone
stela, and each of these probably had its mythological counterpart at
one of the four cardinal points. <span id="fr_944"></span>[4](#fn_938)

In the Motul Dictionary the word *bacab* is defined as
"*representante*," possibly indicating that the Bacabs were the
representatives of the gods. They were the advocates or patrons of the
bee-keepers, <span id="fr_945"></span>[5](#fn_939) and it has been
thought that their name was in some way connected with bees or honey, as
*cab* can mean honey and bee-hive as well as earth and land. In the
ritual in Chapter I we have noted that there were red, white, black and
yellow bees, each sort ascribed to the world-quarter corresponding to
their color. Of the individual names of the Bacabs, Cantzicnal and
Hozan-ek mean little to the writer. Zac-cimi means a swoon, and Hobnil,
which primarily means something hollow, is a term applied to a bee-hive,
probably because it is made of the hollow section of a tree-trunk.

It seems likely that the four Pauahtuns were not quite the same as the
Bacabs. Brinton gives an account of the *misa milpera*, or cornfield
mass, as described by Baeza in a report written in 1813. <span
id="fr_946"></span>[6](#fn_940) Here it is stated that "they are
identical with the winds, and the four cardinal points from which they
blow," and we find this confirmed in Chapter XI of the Chumayel which
contains the Ritual of the Angels. In the modern ceremonies the red,
white and black wind-spirits are identified with St. Dominic, St.
Gabriel, and St. James; only the Yellow Pauahtun has the name of a Maya
deity. This is Ix-Kan-le-ox, the goddess named for the yellow
ramon <span id="fr_947"></span>[7](#fn_941) leaf. The word, Pauahtun, is
difficult to translate. The last two syllables, Uah and tun, suggest

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

a stone or a pillar set up or erected; but they are evidently
personages, and the writer is inclined to identify them with the
"angels" described by Landa in his account of the ceremonies preceding
the New Year. <span id="fr_948"></span>[1](#fn_942) We have already seen
in Chapter XI that the four Pauahtuns were set up before the world was
created and were either identical or closely associated with the
wind-spirits. Possibly they occupied the same position in the heavens
that the Bacabs did on the earthly plane.

Landa has also ascribed to the four Bacabs the names, Chac-xib-chac,
Zac-xib-chac, Ek-xib-chac and Kan-xib-chac. These appear to be the
rain-gods who were four in number and were set at the four cardinal
points. The author of the Motul Dictionary considers them to be one
person and states that Chaac "was a gigantic man who taught agriculture
and whom they later considered the god of bread, water, thunder and
lightning." The names given by Landa could be translated as the Red,
White, Black and Yellow male Chacs, or rain-gods.

We find in Landa a detailed description of the ceremonies performed on
the five unlucky days which concluded the year. <span
id="fr_949"></span>[1](#fn_942) Although they have been considered New
Year's ceremonies, in each case the Bacabs and other personages belong
to the year which is ending, and not to the coming year for which they
are said to be the augury. On pages 25 to 28 of the Dresden Codex is the
portrayal of some very similar ceremonies which Seler has analysed and
compared with the Landa account. <span id="fr_950"></span>[2](#fn_943)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_930"></span>[170:1](cbc30.htm#fr_936) Brinton 1890, pp.
156-157.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[170:2](cbc30.htm#fr_937) Reproduced Bowditch
1910, p. 328.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[170:3](cbc30.htm#fr_938) Codex
Fejérváry-Mayer, p. 1, reproduced in Seler 1923, p. 15.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[170:4](cbc30.htm#fr_939) Codex Cortesianus, p.
40.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[170:5](cbc30.htm#fr_940) Seler 1904, p. 267.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[171:1](cbc30.htm#fr_941) Landa 1929, pp.
14-16. We can not but believe that at least some of the numerous
Atlantean figures found at Chichen Itzá represent these mythological
personages who held up the sky.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[171:2](cbc30.htm#fr_942) The name is supplied
from the Tizimin MS. p. 10; in Landa it is written Canzienal.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[171:3](cbc30.htm#fr_943) Given in Landa as
Zacciui, but the associated prognostic is swooning, which is zac-cimil
in Maya.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[171:4](cbc30.htm#fr_944) Landa, 1929, pp.
16-40.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[171:5](cbc30.htm#fr_945) Ibid., p. 58.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[171:6](cbc30.htm#fr_946) Brinton 1890, p. 166;
Baeza 1845.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[171:7](cbc30.htm#fr_947) *Cf.* p. 103, note
 [10](cbc15.htm#fn_343).

<span id="fn_942"></span>[172:1](cbc30.htm#fr_949) *Cf.* p. 67, note
 [5](cbc07.htm#fn_68); also Landa 1929, p. 22.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[172:2](cbc30.htm#fr_950) Seler 1902, pp.
357-389.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix B: The Sacrificial Cenote at Chichen Itza](cbc31)
