[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cbc35)  [Next](cbc37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

# APPENDIX G

### THE AMERICANIZATION OF CHRISTIANITY

According to the early Spanish writers a considerable proportion of the
Maya of northern Yucatan embraced Christianity quite willingly after the
Spanish occupation of the country. Whether or not this was true, the
Books of Chilam Balam convince us that their faith was genuine, once
they were converted. Even in those books which were frowned upon by the
missionaries, we note an unmistakable spontaneity in the pious phrases
with which the Spanish *Dios*, the Trinity and the Holy Virgin are
frequently invoked. At first sight it is difficult to reconcile this
apparently sincere belief in the new religion with the lapses into
idolatry which continued to recur during a large part of the colonial
period.

The fact of the matter was that their Christianity, however sincere it
may have been, was something quite different from that of their European
conquerors. They simply superimposed it upon their old religion, just as
they had previously superimposed the Quetzalcoatl cult of the Nahua
invaders upon the original Maya faith. <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[1](#fn_1071) They sometimes called their old
deities perishable gods (*hauay kuob*), <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[2](#fn_1072) but they continued to worship them
surreptitiously.

Even in their Christian worship we find among the Maya an unconscious
tendency to adapt the new religion to their own psychology, as we have
seen in Chapters XI and XII of the present work. There is further
evidence of this in the katun prophecies, where the Spanish God is cited
as authority f or prognostications made by their own prophets before the
coming of the white man.

The Spanish missionaries did their best to prevent this Americanization
of Christianity. The historian Cogolludo bitterly deplores the lapses of
the Indians into idolatry, but he appears to be still more horrified at
their attempts to combine the new religion with the old. Probably this
tendency was already anticipated by the statutes of Tomás López little
more than a decade after the country was pacified. In one of these we
find the Indians forbidden to found or conduct schools for the teaching
of Christian doctrine except by the express authority of the prelate of
the province. <span id="fr_1080"></span>[3](#fn_1073)

We do not know just when the Indians of Yucatan began to combine some
form of Christian worship with their old idolatrous practises, but we
learn of an Indian of rank at Zotuta by the name of Don Andres Cocom
who, about the year 1585, was "convicted, not only of idolatry, but also
as a perverse dogmatizer

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

and the inventor of new abominations among the Indians." <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[1](#fn_1074) Condemned to exile and imprisonment,
he escaped and attempted to instigate a native rebellion before he was
finally captured and punished.

In 1597 Andres Chi, also of Zotuta, "incited the Indians of that
territory to go into the forests to practise idolatry. Falsely
pretending and saying that he was another Moses <span
id="fr_1082"></span>[2](#fn_1075) he deceived the people of his town,
persuading them that what he did was revealed to him by the Holy Spirit.
For this purpose he hid a boy in his house to speak to him at night and
say what he wished him to. When the Indians heard this, as they were
ignorant of the fraud, they blindly allowed themselves to be
deceived." <span id="fr_1083"></span>[3](#fn_1076) Chi was convicted and
condemned to death for this offense.

A similar case occurred in 1610. "There were two Indians, one named
Alonso Chablé and the other Francisco Canul. The former pretended to be
the Pope and supreme pontiff and the latter, a bishop, and they
announced themselves to be such among the Indians. Also they caused
themselves to be venerated, deceiving the wretched Catholic Indians with
their infernal doctrine. They said mass at night dressed in the sacred
vestments of the church which no doubt the sacristans had given them.
They profaned the holy chalices and consecrated oils, baptized boys,
confessed adults and gave them communion, while they worshipped the
idols which they placed on the altar. They ordained priests for service,
anointing their hands with the oil and the holy chrism, and when they
ordained them they put on a miter and took a crozier in their hands.
They commanded the Indians to give them offerings and openly taught
other deadly heresies." <span id="fr_1084"></span>[4](#fn_1077)

In addition to all this they were said to have practised witchcraft.

In the year 1636 there was a general uprising of the Indians in the
district of Bacalar in southeastern Yucatan. They relapsed into
idolatry, and many of them fled to Tipu, <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[5](#fn_1078) the southernmost of the towns which
had been christianized up to this time. This place continued to be the
center of the insurrection, and finally in 1641 Fr. Bartolomé
Fuensalida <span id="fr_1086"></span>[6](#fn_1079) and Fr. Juan de
Estrada determined to go there and try to conciliate the inhabitants.
The expedition was a failure and they did not quite reach Tipu. At the
neighboring village of Hubelná the Indian companions of the priests
witnessed a religious ceremony performed by the rebels in which "one of
those apostates was the idolatrous priest of the others. He said mass to
them, and with the mass his

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

food was tortillas and his drink, maize gruel. The other idolatrous
Indians said to them: 'This is indeed a mass which your companion (one
of the two Spanish priests) does not say.' " <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[1](#fn_1080) It was years before these Indians were
again reconciled with the Church, and during this period the people of
the district doubtless had an excellent opportunity to develop a form of
Christianity suited to their own psychology.

We find the tendencies already outlined cropping out in every part of
the Maya-speaking area where the Spanish authorities and missionaries
were not in a position to exercise strict control over the natives. In
1646 two monks were sent from Yucatan to the Usumacinta region to take
charge of the spiritual welfare of some Maya-speaking Indians at a town
called Nohaa situated on the shore of a large lake in the forests beyond
Tenosique. A church had been built and the people somewhat perfunctorily
converted by a Dominican friar who had gone away. The founder of the
town, Don Diego de Vera Ordoñez, had left the place in charge of a
mestizo captain named Juan de Bilbao. When they arrived, the friars
found that this man was not only exploiting the Indians, but also that
he had a wooden idol which he, his native wife and the villagers
worshipped together. "They became drunk in front of it with a drink
called balché. Also they said that on Ash Wednesday he put on a stole,
blessed it and gave it to the Indians. On Palm Sunday he blessed palms
and distributed them. During Holy Week he made a *monumento* <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[2](#fn_1081) and placed on it the idol of his
Indian woman; and on Holy Saturday he blessed the baptismal font. All
these things and others which are unspeakable were done by this insolent
fellow, who possessed an entire set of sacred vestments and a chalice.
He only refrained from saying mass." <span
id="fr_1089"></span>[3](#fn_1082)

The incidents related here are sufficient to account for the mixture of
Christianity and paganism which we find in the Book of Chilam Balam of
Chumayel. This tendency has continued to be effective down to the
present time and its modern manifestations would fill an entire volume.
Not only have the names of saints replaced in many cases those of the
Maya deities in the old native ceremonies which survive, but in parts of
Yucatan, particularly in the Territory of Quintana Roo, many nominal
Catholics are at heart polytheists. "The Christian god is the Zeus of
the Pantheon. The Virgin Mary, the Saints of the Catholic Church, and
such of the old gods as have survived, form a less powerful, but more
friendly group of divinities." <span id="fr_1090"></span>[4](#fn_1083)
The present psychology of the Maya Indian is the result of centuries of
conflict between European and native religious concepts. During this
time each reacted upon the other unceasingly, and the Book of Chilam
Balam of Chumayel is perhaps one of the most illuminating documents we
have to illustrate the history of the process.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[201:1](cbc36.htm#fr_1078) "It is said that
the first founders of Chichen Itzá were not idolaters until Kukulcan, a
Mexican captain, entered these provinces. He it was who taught them
idolatry" (Relaciones de Yucatan, I, p. 270). Kukulcan is the Maya
equivalent of the Nahuatl name, Quetzalcoatl. Although we may doubt the
statement that the original inhabitants did not worship idols, there is
considerable evidence that a new religion was introduced.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[201:2](cbc36.htm#fr_1079) *Cf.* [p.
98](cbc14.htm#page_98).

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[201:3](cbc36.htm#fr_1080) Cogolludo 1868,
Book 5, chap. 17.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[202:1](cbc36.htm#fr_1081) Cogolludo 1868,
Book 7, chap. 11.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[202:2](cbc36.htm#fr_1082) We have already
noted that Moses was identified with the Yellow Pauahtun on page 113.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[202:3](cbc36.htm#fr_1083) Cogolludo 1868,
Book 7, chap. 15.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[202:4](cbc36.htm#fr_1084) Cogolludo 1868,
Book 9, chap. 1.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[202:5](cbc36.htm#fr_1085) Tipu is believed to
have been located on Booths River in what is now British Honduras. See
Means 1917, map.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[202:6](cbc36.htm#fr_1086) This was the same
Fr. Fuensalida who went to Tayasal in 1618 to attempt to convert the
Itzá. Means 1917, pp. 59-74.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[203:1](cbc36.htm#fr_1087) Cogolludo 1868,
Book 11, chap. 14.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[203:2](cbc36.htm#fr_1088) An altar raised in
churches on Holy Thursday to resemble a sepulcher.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[203:3](cbc36.htm#fr_1089) Cogolludo 1868,
Book 12, chap. 5.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[203:4](cbc36.htm#fr_1090) J. E. Thompson
1930, p. 106. See also Tozzer 1907 and Gann 1918.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix H: Chronological Summary](cbc37)
