[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cbc31)  [Next](cbc33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

# APPENDIX C

### THE HUNAC CEEL EPISODE

The conquest of Chichen Itzá by Hunac Ceel and his allies is without
doubt one of the most interesting and puzzling episodes in Maya history.
It might well be called the Trojan War of Yucatan, for tradition
ascribes as its cause the theft of the wife of a powerful ruler by the
chieftain of another great and famous city. As in the case of its
classical counterpart, the immediate cause of the trouble may have been
the abduction of the wife, but the struggle doubtless originated in
political jealousies of long standing and the desire of one city to
obtain control of economic resources previously enjoyed by another.

From about the year 1000 A.D. the three cities of Chichen Itzá, Mayapan
and Uxmal had ruled over the rest of northern Yucatan, and there is
evidence that the most powerful of them was Chichen Itzá. <span
id="fr_967"></span>[1](#fn_960) Then late in the Twelfth Century, Hunac
Ceel, the ruler of Mayapan, organized a conspiracy against Chichen Itzá,
as the result of which he conquered the latter city aided by seven
foreign Mexican captains and probably also by the people of Izamal. The
consequences were far-reaching. Not only was there a permanent
readjustment of the political forces of northern Yucatan by which the
country was governed solely from Mayapan for the next two centuries and
a half, but also it resulted in the migration of a considerable portion
of the Itzá nation to the distant region of Lake Peten in what is now
the Republic of Guatemala.

The [outstanding](errata.htm#4) personality of the episode was Hunac
Ceel. <span id="fr_968"></span>[2](#fn_961) Although we do not know the
details of his conspiracy, it is evident that he played a sinister part
in the affair. Incomplete accounts of the event occur in the formal
chronicles of the Books of Chilam Balam, and confused details are also
contributed by the fragmentary historical narratives which are to be
found in these manuscripts. The episode still remains a puzzle, because
these details are given in a more or less incoherent form and it is
difficult to determine the order in which they occurred.

We have seen a number of references to the event in the present work,
but the most complete account is to be found in the chronicle of the
Book of Chilam Balam of Mani which is as follows: "In &lt;Katun&gt; 8
Ahau the *halach-uinic*, or head-chief, of Chichen Itzá was driven out
because of the treachery of Hunac Ceel; and this happened to
Chac-xib-chac of Chichen Itzá because of the treachery of Hunac
Ceel, <span id="fr_969"></span>[3](#fn_962) the head-chief of Mayapan,
the for-

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

tress. Four score years and ten years; it was in Tun 10 of &lt;Katun&gt;
8 Ahau. That was the year when &lt;Chichen Itzá&gt; was depopulated by
Ah Zinteyut Chan, Tzuntecum, Taxcal, Pantemit, Xucheueut, Itzcuat and
Kakaltecat. It was in this same Katun 8 Ahau that they went to drive out
Ah Ulmil, the ruler, because of the banquet <span
id="fr_970"></span>[1](#fn_963) with Ulil, the ruler of Itzmal. It was
thirteen folds of katuns <span id="fr_971"></span>[2](#fn_964) when they
were driven out by Hunac Ceel because of the giving of the
questionnaire." <span id="fr_972"></span>[3](#fn_965)

So far as we can tell from our present knowledge of Maya history, this
appears to have been a struggle between two branches of the Itzá nation,
one of which was at Chichen Itzá and the other at Mayapan. The Itzá
occupation of Chichen Itzá in the Tenth Century is well known, and we
learn from the Relaciones de Yucatan that "Izamal was conquered by
Kak-u-pacal and Uilo, valorous captains of the Itzá who were the people
who founded Mayapan." <span id="fr_973"></span>[4](#fn_966) Moreover
this was not the first conflict between these two Itzá factions, for we
have already seen in the third Chumayel chronicle that Chakanputun, the
former home of the inhabitants of Chichen Itzá, was depopulated by the
same Kak-u-pacal and Uilo (or Uilu) in the Tenth Century A.D. <span
id="fr_974"></span>[5](#fn_967) It has never been satisfactorily
explained just who the Itzá were. Although their connection with the
history of Yucatan began at a very early period, the native literature
always refers to them as a people apart. They were feared and hated, but
at the same time regarded as holy men. They spoke the Maya language, but
are called *ah-nunob* which means "those who speak our language
brokenly." Their customs were certainly different from those of the rest
of the people of northern Yucatan, for they are called rogues, people
without fathers or mothers and people who are disobedient to their
fathers and mothers. Indeed this last epithet was a very mild statement
of the facts in the case, for Avendaño tells us that they had the custom
of beheading the older men when they passed the age of fifty, "so that
they shall not learn to be wizards and to kill; except the priests of
their idols, for whom they have great respect." <span
id="fr_975"></span>[6](#fn_968)

Of special interest is the part taken in the conquest of Chichen Itzá by
the seven men of Mayapan. Brinton has noted that their names have a
Nahuatl appearance, which seems to confirm the statements of Landa and

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Herrera that at one time the rulers of Mayapan
brought in Mexican warriors from the province of Tabasco to assist them
in controlling the Maya inhabitants of northern Yucatan. These were the
people called Ah Canul who-later settled in the province of that name in
western Yucatan after the fall of Mayapan. <span
id="fr_976"></span>[1](#fn_969)

In the second Chumayel chronicle we read: "then came the treachery of
Hunac Ceel. Their town (Chichen Itzá) was abandoned, and they went into
the heart of the forest to Tan-xuluc-mul, as it is called." This is
important, for Avendaño locates this place near Lake Peten, around which
the Itzá were living at the time of the Spanish Conquest of Mexico and
northern Yucatan. Here they maintained their independence until the
close of the Seventeenth Century. They told Father Fuensalida, a Spanish
missionary who visited them in 1618, that they had come there from
Chichen Itzá. According to their story, in a certain Katun 8 Ahau one of
their rulers at Chichen Itzá stole the bride of another more powerful
chieftain during the wedding festivities. Fearing the consequences of
the act, the offender and his subjects abandoned their city and retired
to Lake Peten. <span id="fr_977"></span>[2](#fn_970) The connection of
this event with the Hunac Ceel episode is further confirmed by the
historical fragment in the Book of Chilam Balam of Mani which tells of
the same affair. Here it is stated that an unspecified person "sinned
against Ah Ulil, the ruler &lt;of Izamal&gt;, against the wife of his
fellow-ruler." <span id="fr_978"></span>[3](#fn_971) We conclude that it
was the ruler of Izamal whose bride was stolen. Why it was Hunac Ceel
and his Mexican captains who avenged the offense by the sack of Chichen
Itzá, and why the Maya chronicles ascribe the trouble to the treachery
of Hunac Ceel, is a problem which the writer is unable to solve.

It appears that the city of Izamal had another grievance against Chichen
Itzá, but the precise nature of it is uncertain. In the obscurely
written historical fragment already cited we read that the son (or
possibly the sons) of "holy Izamal" was given in tribute (or perhaps put
under tribute) to feed and nourish Hapay Can. <span
id="fr_979"></span>[4](#fn_972) We have seen in Chapter II of the
present work that after the fall of Chichen Itzá and the degradation of
Chac-xib-chac Hapay Can was taken to Uxmal, where he was pierced by an
arrow. <span id="fr_980"></span>[5](#fn_973)Unfortunately we are nowhere
told who or what Hapay Can was. The translation of the name is
Sucking-snake. The Lacandons still believe in an evil spirit of this
name who drew people to him with his breath and killed them. At the end
of the world the chief god of the Lacandons will wear the body of Hapay
Can around his waist as a belt. <span id="fr_981"></span>[6](#fn_974)
The historical fragment cited above would imply

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

that this fabulous serpent actually ate the son of the ruler of Izamal,
but the writer would suggest the two following interpretations of the
statement. Either Hapay Can was an idol at Chichen Itzá to which the
people of Izamal were sacrificed, or else it was the title of an
important personage, perhaps a God Impersonator, at Chichen Itzá who was
maintained in state by tribute from Izamal. The latter alternative is
favored by the statement that he was pierced by an arrow at Uxmal, which
suggests a person, while the former is

 

<span id="img_fig44"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig44.jpg)  
FIG. 44--Human sacrifice scene. Temple of the Warriors, Chichen Itzá.
(Restored by Ann Axtell Morris.)

 

supported by the mural fresco in the Temple of the Warriors at Chichen
Itzá, where we see the sacrifice of a human victim who lies stretched
across one of the coils of a huge plumed serpent. <span
id="fr_982"></span>[1](#fn_975) We can find no confirmation for the
possibility that there was a sacred serpent at Chichen Itzá which was
actually fed with human victims.

In any case Chichen Itzá was depopulated at this time, and the
inhabitants fled to Tan-xuluc-mul in the region of Lake Peten. Evidently
a considerable number of them did not remain permanently in the south,
although no doubt many of them did. We have seen in the first Chumayel
chronicle that about forty years later, it was in Katun "4 Ahau, when
the land of Ich-paa

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Mayapan was seized by the Itzá men who had been
separated from their homes because of the people of Izamal and because
of the treachery of Hunac Ceel." <span id="fr_983"></span>[1](#fn_976)
This indicates that the inhabitants of Izamal also had a hand in driving
out the people of Chichen Itzá. After their return these Itzá appear to
have joined forces with their conquered enemies of Mayapan, for from
that

 

<span id="img_fig45"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig45.jpg)  
FIG. 45--Typical Itzá priest. Temple of the Warriors, Chichen Itzá.
Drawing by Ann Axtell Morris.

 

time down to the fall of the latter city in the middle of the Fifteenth
Century we find Mayapan enjoying the hegemony of all northern Yucatan.

After the end of the Twelfth Century we hear nothing more of Chichen
Itzá as an important political power, but its sacred cenote continued to
be a center of pilgrimage down to the time of the Spanish Conquest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_960"></span>[177:1](cbc32.htm#fr_967) Relaciones de
Yucatan, I, pp. 120, 147, 176, 200, 214, 225, 242 and 270.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[177:2](cbc32.htm#fr_968) The episode of the
Sacrificial Cenote, recorded in Chapter II and discussed in Appendix B,
shows that Hunac Ceel was an unusually bold and resourceful person.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[177:3](cbc32.htm#fr_969) This expression, *u
keban-than Hunac Ceel*, can in the writer's opinion be translated only
as the treachery or plot of Hunac Ceel. It has usually been translated
as the plotting or treachery against Hunac Ceel, although Brinton admits
that the former rendering seems more correct (Brinton 1882, p. 129).

<span id="fn_963"></span>[178:1](cbc32.htm#fr_970) Maya, uahaluah. The
writer agrees with Brinton and Martínez who have translated this as
banquet. It must be admitted, however, that the word could also mean an
abundance of bread.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[178:2](cbc32.htm#fr_971) This was thirteen
katuns after the Itzá were driven from Chakanputun.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[178:3](cbc32.htm#fr_972) Brinton 1882, p. 97.
*Cf.* Chumayel p. 137, note  [4](cbc24.htm#fn_649). The writer believes
this to be a reference to the questionnaire given in Chapter IX, the
so-called *naat*. An alternative translation is possible: because they
were so given to understand; but we are told that Chac-xib-chac was
trampled upon, and this was one of the usual penalties for not being
able to answer the questionnaire. *Cf.* Tizimin MS. pp. 22-23, also [p.
93](cbc14.htm#page_93) of the present work.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[178:4](cbc32.htm#fr_973) Relaciones de
Yucatan, I, p. 269.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[178:5](cbc32.htm#fr_974) *Cf.* [p.
141](cbc26.htm#page_141).

<span id="fn_968"></span>[178:6](cbc32.htm#fr_975) Means 1917, p. 132.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[179:1](cbc32.htm#fr_976) Brinton 1882, p. 129;
Landa 1928, p. 80; Herrera 1726, decad. 3, book 6, chap. 3. *Cf.* p. 66,
note  [11](cbc07.htm#fn_63).

<span id="fn_970"></span>[179:2](cbc32.htm#fr_977) Cogolludo 1868, book
9, chap. 14; Villagutierre Soto Mayor 1701, p. 30.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[179:3](cbc32.htm#fr_978) Codex Perez, p. 120.
"*tumenel zipci ti Ah Ulil ti c~~h~~uplal yatan yet-ahaulil*."

<span id="fn_972"></span>[179:4](cbc32.htm#fr_979) Codex Perez, pp.
120-121; Tizimin, pp. 22-23.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[179:5](cbc32.htm#fr_980) *Cf.* [p.
67](cbc07.htm#page_67).

<span id="fn_974"></span>[179:6](cbc32.htm#fr_981) *Cf.* p. 67, note
 [2](cbc07.htm#fn_65): Tozzer 1907, p. 94.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[180:1](cbc32.htm#fr_982) Morris, Charlot and
Morris 1931, Plate 145. See [figure 44](#img_fig44). Here, however, the
serpent appears to be Kukulcan, and not Hapaycan.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[181:1](cbc32.htm#fr_983) *Cf.* [p.
137](cbc24.htm#page_137).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix D: The Maya Prophecies](cbc33)
