[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](tgl010) [Next](tgl2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### THE COSMIC SPIRIT

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top">"</td>
<td>To every form of being is assigned<br />
An active principle:—howe'er removed<br />
From sense and observation, it subsists<br />
In all things, in all natures: in the stars<br />
Of azure Heaven, the unenduring clouds,<br />
In flower and tree, in every pebbly stone<br />
That paves the brooks, the stationary rocks,<br />
The moving waters and the invisible air.<br />
Whate'er exists hath properties that spread<br />
Beyond itself, communicating good,<br />
A simple blessing, or with evil mixed:<br />
Spirit that knows no insulated spot,<br />
No chasm, no solitude; from link to link<br />
It circulates, the soul of all the worlds."<br />
</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td style="text-align: right;">Wordsworth. Excursion. Book VI, 1-15.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Christianity has, also, found a difficulty in finding a term to
express the Divine Being; and so, sometimes, it has been left and
expressed under the general term, T<span class="small">HE</span> N<span
class="small">AME</span>. Christian doctrine found that the term "God"
did not adequately express the great idea in the one word, but was more
complete under the threefold expression: "Father, Son and Holy Spirit."

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

TRANSLATIONS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="dis"></span>DISSERTATION ON  
THE COSMIC SPIRIT

{[notes](tgln1.htm#1)\|[elucidations and analyses](tgln2.htm#1)}

   The Cosmic Spirit (Tao)<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](tgln1.htm#1_note_1)
embraces Heaven and supports Earth. It stretched the four quarters of
the

|                                |
|--------------------------------|
| **The properties of the Tao.** |

Universe and generated the eight points of the the firmament. There is
no limit to its height, and its depth is unfathomable. It constituted
Heaven and Earth and endowed them with the primary elements, when as yet
they were without form. Flowing like a fountain, bubbling like a spring,
impalpable, its energies bubbled forth in the void and filled space.
Continuing to effervesce, it transformed the murky air of chaos into
crystal clearness. Hence it filled Heaven and Earth and stretched to the
uttermost parts of the sea. It spent itself without exhaustion: there
was no morning or evening, i.e., rise and decay, no fatigue and revival.

   Expanding, the Cosmic Spirit overspread every part of the firmament,
earth, time and space. Rolled together, it was not a fistful;
compressed, it can expand; opaque, it can yet be clear; yielding, yet
strong, soft, yet firm. It is a macrocosmos as well as a microcosmos. It
holds, as in a net, the four poles: and comprehends the active and
passive forces of creation. It links the universe together and makes the
sky luminous. It is most substantial and full of sap; most tenuous and
fine: so delicate is it that it penetrates every pore and crevice.

   It gives height to the mountain and depth to the abyss. It fashioned
beasts to walk and birds to fly. Sun

|                          |
|--------------------------|
| **The work of the Tao.** |

and moon are luminous by its power, and the planets revolve in their
courses because of it: the Chilin comes forth through its energy, and
the phoenix wheels in the empyrean through its might.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

   In the beginning, the two forces *Yin* and *Yang*,<span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](tgln1.htm#1_note_2) having obtained the essence of
the Tao, became the central

|                             |
|-----------------------------|
| **Agency of Yin and Yang.** |

organizing powers. Their divinity and influence determined the
transformations of Heaven and the stability of Earth. The revolutions of
the Universe were unfailing. It was through the Tao that the heavens
first revolved and the earth was made fast: the successive revolutions
failed not. The waters eternally flowed without ceasing and were
conterminous with creation. The winds blew; the clouds steamed. There
was nothing which should not be. Every thing was as it should be. The
thunder pealed; rains fell: each and all responding to the movement of
the Tao without cessation. Mysterious in its operations like the
emergence of spirit, or the arrival of the phoenix, or the
transformations of the dragon, its vestiges may be traced.

   As the potter moves the wheel, the hub turns, one complete turn
following on the other. In the universal

|                     |
|---------------------|
| **Flux of matter.** |

flux, organisms, when finished and polished, dissolve again into their
rough elements and constituent parts.

   Without (apparent) doing, things came into existence under the
inspiration of the Tao. There is no sound or speech to indicate
activity: the successive evolutions proceed with energies permeating
all. Without love or hate, impartially, and in no boastful spirit, the
perfect harmony is attained. The myriad varieties are organised each
with its own nature. The energy of the Tao is imparted to the minutest
thing: and, also, it operates in the greatest, composing the mighty
universe. Its virtue gives flexibility to nature and harmonizes into
unity the operations of *Yin* and *Yang*. It divides the four seasons
and co-ordinates the five elements. Its beneficent spirit breathes on
all, fructifying creation and the world of life. It sends forth its
fattening dews on grass and tree; it bathes metal and stone with lustre;
it makes bird and beast strong; it gives sheen to scale and feather, and
strength to wing; and it begets <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> the horns
(of cattle). Through its powers the embryo of beasts do not miscarry nor
the eggs of birds addle.

   It is due to the Tao that fathers have no occasion to mourn over the
untimely death of their children,<span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](tgln1.htm#1_note_3) nor the

|                                          |
|------------------------------------------|
| **The Tao preserves men from calamity.** |

elder brother weep over the untimely death of a younger member. Children
are not made orphans nor wives widows. That the ill-starred rainbow does
not appear, nor unlucky comets career in the sky, is due to the
harmonious control of the Tao.<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](tgln1.htm#1_note_4)

   The supreme Tao begets all creation, but keeps itself as though it
did not exist, i.e. makes no boast of it. It

|                             |
|-----------------------------|
| **Its transforming power.** |

produces all phenomena, yet without appearing as the controller.
Creatures that walk and breathe, that fly to and fro, and all creeping
things depend on it for life, yet are unconscious of the merits of the
Tao in their well-being. They await its behests for death, without
bearing any grudge at the change. The benefits of the Tao in life are
not extolled: the decay of death, through wear and tear, is not blamed.
Accumulations of goods and stores must not be boasted of as wealth, nor
are their distributions and donations to be looked upon as any
impoverishment. Its fluxes are incomprehensible; its delicate operations
are interminable. Build it up and you cannot give it any more height of
glory. Subtract from it and you cannot rob it of any virtue. Multiply it
and it is the same number; detract from it and it is no fewer; hack it
and it is no thinner; slay it yet it is not destroyed; dig into it and
it is without depth; fill it in and it will be no shallower.

   Oh! how swift! how sudden! No form does it take: how exhaustless.
Profound, Oh! Obscure, Oh! Responsive, Oh! Answer there is, Oh!
Effective, Oh! Never does it move in vain, Oh! Conterminous with heaven
and earth in its expansion and contraction, Oh! Ascending and descending
with Yin and Yang, Oh!

   In olden times Feng I and Ta Ping were great charioteers <span
id="page_5">p. 5</span> by virtue of the Tao.<span
id="fr_5"></span>[5](tgln1.htm#1_note_5) They rode on the chariot

|                                |
|--------------------------------|
| **Examples of Tao enduement.** |

of clouds, entering the rainbow and floating on the lambent air: they
raced into the infinite distance and the utmost height. They crossed the
hoarfrost and snow, yet without any vestiges: and no shadow of theirs
fell when the sun shone on them: they were diaphonous. They mounted
aloft in circling spirals like those of the ram's horn, so swift were
they. They crossed mountains and rivers; they vaulted over the K‛un Lun.
They mounted aloft, opened the gate of the Presence and entered the
abode of the Deity. The finest chariot of these latter days, hitched to
the fleetest horses urged by the sharpest thongs could not compete with
them in the race.

   Thus we see that the great man interested in the Tao lives happily
without anxieties: his outlook is without fears because he feels Heaven
is a covering, the Earth is a chariot, the four seasons his steeds,
*Yin* and *Yang* his drivers. He rides on the pinnacle of the clouds,
through space, a compeer of the Creator.<span
id="fr_6"></span>[6](tgln1.htm#1_note_6) He gives reins to his will; he
opens out his mind to travel the great empyrean. He walks when he so
desires, or rushes on when he so wills. He commands the Rain Spirit
(star) to irrigate his way, and employs the Wind God to sweep away the
dust. The lightening he takes for whip, the revolving breath of thunder
as wind for his chariot wheels. Above, he travels in the boundless waste
of space; below, he comes forth at the gates of the great void. He looks
all round in space and gazes abroad on everything, yet keeping all under
the central organ<span id="fr_7"></span>[7](tgln1.htm#1_note_7): master
of the four quarters he brings everything within the range of the master
spirit within. And so it was that, with Heaven canopying all, there was
nothing outside the pale of his influence: with Earth as chariot, there
was nothing outside his range: with the four Seasons as steeds, he has
all things as ministers: with Yin and Yang as charioteers, there is
nothing lacking; the processes of creation are complete. So there is no
instability <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> in this immense effort: there
is no toil in the profound operations. There has been no fatigue of body
nor diminution of intelligence.<span
id="fr_8"></span>[8](tgln1.htm#1_note_8) How was it that they gained a
knowledge of the conditions of Heaven and Earth? It was because they had
the authority of the Tao that they traversed the illimitable world.

   Therefore the affairs of empire should not be regulated in detail by
legal interference, inasmuch as they operate in

|                                                                           |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Four Fundamental Principles. Purity, Quiescence, Peacefulness, Unity.** |

a natural way,<span id="fr_9"></span>[9](tgln1.htm#1_note_9) i.e. Wu
Wei. The fluxes of creation need not be examined into: get the vital Tao
and the fluxes will be understood. Take an illustration from a mirror or
from water. When these receive the form of an object, they mirror it
faithfully without any accretions; so the lineaments are exactly
reflected. The echo is only partly true to the sound: the shadow is not
different from the substance. The sound mysteriously reaches its own
sound-like form. Man is quiescent<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](tgln1.htm#1_note_10) by nature; but desire moves
in response to outward influences which are the outward expression of
things. The spirit responds to the impact of matter, giving rise to
mental perception. The response of inward perception to the impact of
outward things begets love and hate. When love and hate have taken form,
perception is seduced from the right way by outward suggestion: it is
unable to go back on itself; and reason or right is destroyed. Therefore
those who are permeated or possessed of the Tao do not barter away the
Divine for the human.<span id="fr_11"></span>[11](tgln1.htm#1_note_11)
Subject as they are to outward changes, they do not lose the inward
purity of nature; i.e. the impact of the world does not create
concupiscence. This nature is purely spiritual and ready to respond to
every demand of nature. The Seasons run their course; the ever-changing
times circulate, yet without confusing the basal unity.<span
id="fr_12"></span>[12](tgln1.htm#1_note_12) The small and great, the
long and short, are each in their appointed realms. Creation, in all its
mighty leaps and restless movements, proceeds without any dislocation:
<span id="page_7">p. 7</span> everything is in its proper place.
Therefore those who are placed in power are not regarded as a burden by
the people: those who are at the head receive no harm from the people:
that is to say they are looked up to and loved! The whole empire is
drawn to them: the lawless and unruly fear them. Because they have no
strife with creation, therefore no one dares to strive with them.

   An angler who goes to the river bank with the finest of hooks, lines
and bait, who plies his skill with the

|                                                            |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Great Principles are superior to temporary expedients.** |

expertness of Tan Ho<span id="fr_13"></span>[13](tgln1.htm#1_note_13)
and Yuan Huan<span id="fr_14"></span>[14](tgln1.htm#1_note_14) for a
whole day, nevertheless cannot hope to compete with the catch of the net
in magnitude. An archer who can draw the Wu Nao<span
id="fr_15"></span>[15](tgln1.htm#1_note_15) of a Seng Meng Tzu<span
id="fr_16"></span>[16](tgln1.htm#1_note_16) in shooting the bird on the
wing nevertheless, cannot compete with the use of a net in the greatness
of the bag. And the reason is the smaller size of the instrument. Thus
in ruling men, the great law is better than a multitude of minor
regulations.<span id="fr_17"></span>[17](tgln1.htm#1_note_17) A dart is
inferior to a *cho*, a battering ram, and a *cho* is inferior to
something still greater, that is to a great principle of action. The
comparison between the exercise of a great principle and the use of
policies of opportunism, are not unlike the example of setting a shrimp
to catch a rat, or a frog to catch a flea. Opportunist policies are
indeed unequal to arrest evil or stem wickedness: they rather tend to
aggravate them.

   In ancient times, Emperor Kun of Hsia built a towering wall; but the
Lords rebelled and the distant people became

|                           |
|---------------------------|
| **Force leads to force.** |

suspicious and wily. And so Yü, seeing the opposition of the kingdoms,
rased this wall to the ground and filled in the moats, scattered the
wealth accumulated, burnt the implements of war and administered the
empire on the principles of virtue, not of force. As a result, the
distant people brought their tributes and the barbarian tribes their
offerings. The concord sealed at the conclave of the Lords, at T‛u
Shan,<span id="fr_18"></span>[18](tgln1.htm#1_note_18) resulted in
valuable tributes from myriad kingdoms. <span id="page_8">p. 8</span>
From this we see that when a scheming mind is cherished, the sincerity
of purpose is not perfect nor the spiritual energies complete;
(singleness of mind is lacking.) The ruler whose vision is narrow fails
to appreciate how to command the services of those who are far away.
From this we see that militarism begets militarism. A fortified wall
implies war chariots, and a coat of mail leads others to sharpen their
swords. If boiling water is added to boiling water, it will but make it
more violent. Likewise to beat a vicious dog or whip a kicking horse, in
order to correct it, would not succeed even though Yin I or Tsao Fu<span
id="fr_19"></span>[19](tgln1.htm#1_note_19) were to do it. When the
vicious disposition has been quelled within, the tail of a hungry tiger
can be played with: how much more so such creatures as the dog or the
horse!

   It is certain that he who is in sympathy with the Tao and acts
accordingly, wins his end with ease and is never

|                                                    |
|----------------------------------------------------|
| **Tao is expressed in naturalism and adaptation.** |

at a loss. The man of many plans who lives by schemes, on the other
hand, labours away without success. Violent measures and rigorous
punishments are not instruments for either a tyrant or a king. Blows and
flagellations constantly rained on subjects, are not the way to make
dogs and horses travel far. The excellent vision of Li Chu<span
id="fr_20"></span>[20](tgln1.htm#1_note_20) could see the point of a
needle from the distance of more than a hundred paces; yet he could not
discern the fish in a pool. The intelligence of Shih Kuang<span
id="fr_21"></span>[21](tgln1.htm#1_note_21) could distinguish the winds
from the eight quarters and harmonize the five notes of the eight
scales; but his fine sense of hearing could not discern anything more
than ten *li* off. Hence one man's strength, however much, is not enough
to regulate even a small domain.<span
id="fr_22"></span>[22](tgln1.htm#1_note_22) But the man who conforms to
the art of the Tao, in accordance with the natural way of Heaven and
Earth, would find it easy to manage the whole world. Thus it was that Yü
was able to engineer the canals by following the nature of water and
making it his guide. Likewise, <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> Shen Nung,
in the sowing of seed, depended for instruction on the guidance given by
the nature of the germ. The duckweed has its roots in water, and the
tree has its root in earth. The bird stretches his wing and flies in the
void: the feet of beasts clutch the solid ground and walk: the scaly
dragon inhabits the water: the tiger and leopard dwell in mountains.
Such is their inherent nature.

   The rubbing together of two pieces of wood begets heat: when metal is
held in fire it becomes liquid: wheels revolve; cylinders and
scooped-out articles, as boats or shells, float. Natural conditions
these, arising from form and following natural law.

   Similarly when the Spring winds arrive, the gentle rain falls,
bedewing the whole creation into fruitfulness. The feathered tribes
burst the egg, and the hairy creatures conceive and beget. Plants and
trees put on bloom: birds and beasts bear their eggs and conceive their
young. Nothing is seen of these operations, but the results are being
achieved. The autumn chills bring the hoar-frosts, leading to the
drooping and fall of the flora. The eagle and heron strike their prey
mercilessly; creeping things hibernate. Plants and trees live on their
roots: fishes and turtles congregate in the deep pools. Their doing
these things is not seen: traces of these hidden activities is
annihilated. Birds that perch on trees use twigs for nests; water
animals have holes. Wild beasts spread straw in their lairs: human
beings dwell in houses. Cows and horses are for service in dry
districts; boats require much water: the Hsiung Nu produce and wear raw
skins: Hunan and Kuangtung grow fine hemp. Each produces that which is
required for its own climate to meet the conditions of dry and damp.
Each is able to protect itself against the cold and heat, by means of
its own produce, and in order to obtain what is necessary for itself:
convenient goods and commodities meet the requirements of each place.
From these evidences we see that creation is strong in its
*naturalness*. What need then for government by the sage?<span
id="fr_23"></span>[23](tgln1.htm#1_note_23) There is no <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> need for him to *act*. Naturalness is enough.

   South of the Chiu I, dry-land industry is scarce and the water-way
industries are many. The inhabitants use short trousers for convenience
of fording waters: they have short sleeves for convenience in propelling
their boats. These habits arise from the watery nature of the districts.

   North of Yen Men, the natives do not eat cereals. They pay little
regard to seniority and age, admiring rather lusty youth and virility.
The conventional view pays respect to lusty strength. It is a custom for
men never to let go the bow from their hands nor to unsaddle their
horses. Such is their habit. Hence Yü disrobed when he entered the
Nudity (Lo) kingdom, and wore his robes again when he emerged from its
border; this he did because he did not wish to interfere with
custom.<span id="fr_24"></span>[24](tgln1.htm#1_note_24)

   Now if people, in transplanting trees, should digregard the fit time
for doing so, all would wither and decay. On these grounds an orange
tree, when it is transplanted north of the river, changes its nature and
becomes a citron. The mynal and parrot (Ku) never cross the Tsi. If the
Ho, badger (?) crosses the Wen river, it dies. Its nature does not
permit this transmigration. Its habitat cannot be changed. Everything
linked to the Tao rests in undisturbed repose. They who are in line with
the nature of things ultimately rest in *wu wei*.<span
id="fr_25"></span>[25](tgln1.htm#1_note_25) Such nourish their life on
quietism: they rest their spirit in passiveness. By so doing they enter
the gate of Heaven.<span id="fr_26"></span>[26](tgln1.htm#1_note_26)

   What is meant by "Heaven" is purity, clarity, directness, grounded on
reality, luminosity. Such is nature, as endowed by Heaven, when, as yet,
it is unmixed with worldly impurities. What is meant is that man has an
implication of accidental accretions, such as bias, angularity,
sharpness of intellect, duplicity, whereby men follow the world and
traffic in the conventional. Now we see that the natural thing is for
kine to have cloven hoofs and horns in the head and for horses to have
manes and hoofs, undivided and whole: but it is the device of man to put
<span id="page_11">p. 11</span> bits in the horse's mouth and run a
noose through the ox's nose. They who follow Heaven, or the natural
order, flow in the current of the Tao. They who follow men get mixed
with conventional ways. It would be useless to tell the fish in the well
about the horizon of the great ocean, because it is cribbed in a narrow
place. It would be vain to speak of the cold of winter to the creeping
things that know only of the summer's heat: they are cognizant only of
their own seasons. It would be useless to discuss broad views with a
narrow-minded scholar: he is bound to the conventional and tied to his
own orthodoxy. Hence the sage must not tarnish heavenly law by human
things: nor confuse natural laws with concupiscence. Without any
planning, affairs find their correct issues: without a multitude of
words, faith is achieved, credence is found: without anxiety, life is
attained; and without effort, success is won. He whose spirit is
identified with the cosmic soul<span
id="fr_27"></span>[27](tgln1.htm#1_note_27) is partner of the Creator in
governing men.

   A good swimmer may sink; a good horseman may have a fall. That in
which each excels may become an

|                                   |
|-----------------------------------|
| **Clever men may miss the mark.** |

occasion of injury. Hence it is not impossible for the smart man of
affairs not to hit the mark. The polemical person may meet with
embarrassment, and the man who strives for gain may not get all he is
after. The might of the ancient (engineer) Kung Kung<span
id="fr_28"></span>[28](tgln1.htm#1_note_28) struck at the Pu Chou
mountain and crumpled down the South Eastern corner of the Earth; yet in
contending with Kao Hsin for the throne, he was overwhelmed in defeat,
involving ruin to his clan and failure of succession to his family (for
ancestral worship). I,<span id="fr_29"></span>[29](tgln1.htm#1_note_29)
the king of Kuangtung, fled to the hills and dwelt in caves to escape
being king; but the people smoked him out of his cave and he failed to
consummate his own desire for retirement.

   From these examples it is evident that success depends on opportunity
(times) rather than on strength, (for preeminence), government (or
action) should rest on the <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> Tao rather
than on the Sage.<span id="fr_30"></span>[30](tgln1.htm#1_note_30) The
ground is placed low and not high, hence it ever abides in peace, free
from the dangers of a giddy height. Water flows down, the currents do
not compete for precedence. So it flows swift, uninterrupted,
undelayed.<span id="fr_31"></span>[31](tgln1.htm#1_note_31)

   In ancient time, Shun, for a whole year, tilled the land at Li Shan,
and as a result of his example, the tillers of

|                                        |
|----------------------------------------|
| **Success of those who followed Tao.** |

the soil struggled for every crooked and awkward corner, each anxious to
concede the fertile plot to his neighbour. He also fished for a whole
year on the river's bank, and, as a result, the fishermen strove
together for the currents and rapids, each keen to concede the deep
pools and quiet corners to the other. During these times, Shun gave no
lectures on morality nor on conduct, but, maintaining the great way in
his heart, his influence sped as though it were divine. Suppose now that
Shun were without this uprightness of character he would never convert a
single individual, though he were to preach to the public and go talking
from house to house. Thus we see that the unspoken Tao has a mighty
sweep.

   It is able to control the San Miao (aborigines) and induce the Yü
people to offer their tributes. It can

|                          |
|--------------------------|
| **Achievements of Tao.** |

transform the "Unclad Nation" and get revenues from Su Ch‛en (a distant
tribe of the north) without the issuing of a summons, or the heralding
of edicts. The Tao can resolve customs and change habits, by means of
merely spiritual influence. How could laws or punishments ever achieve
so much? For this reason the sage pays every attention to the culture of
the fundamental rather than to the adornment of accidental means (such
as the impositions of laws and punishments). He guards the spirit, and
keeps the intellect in abeyance. Profoundly the work is that of *wu-wei*
"no action"; nevertheless there is nothing left undone. Placidly no
authority is excercised; yet there is nothing which is uncontrolled.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

   The meaning of *Wu wei*,<span
id="fr_32"></span>[{32}](tgln1.htm#1_note_32) is that there is no going
in advance of things. The meaning of "*wu pu wei*" "there

|             |
|-------------|
| **Wu Wei.** |

is nothing undone" is that, in following the cosmic spirit<span
id="fr_33"></span>[33](tgln1.htm#1_note_33) everything is done. The
meaning of "*wu chih chô*," ("not governing") is that there is no
interference with naturalness. And the phrase "there is nothing that is
not governed", means that the end is attained in correspondence with the
mutual fitness of things.

   There is a raison d'être in the springing to birth of all creation;
and each thing knows how to guard its root.<span
id="fr_33a"></span>[33a](tgln1.htm#1_note_33a) There is a raison d'être
in the appearance of hundreds of affairs: attention is only given to the
intrusion of what enters. Hence the exhaustless is probed, the limitless
is reached, and matter is illumined without confusion. There is mutual
response without fatigue. By this is meant that there is an
understanding of the mind of Heaven. The Way is understood.

   Hence they who have attained the Tao, possess a yielding mind;
nevertheless their work is invincible. (The

|                                                                       |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Four Atributes of Tao. Meekness, Tenderness, Humility, Emptiness.** |

heart is humble, but the work is forceful). Now what I mean by this
statement is this: a yielding will has a reposeful ease, soft as downy
feathers,—a quietude, a shrinking from action, an appearance of
inability to do. Placidly free from anxiety, one acts without missing
the opportune time; one moves and revolves in the line of creation, One
does not move ahead but responds to the fitting influence. Hence the
exalted and those placed in high station will inevitably adopt the
symbol of unworthiness,<span id="fr_35"></span>[35](tgln1.htm#1_note_35)
even as a high tower must depend on its lowly base for foundation.
Depending on the small, one comprehends the large; from a circumscribed
central seat (small space) one regulates the outside domains: or the
senses are controlled from within. Exercising a yielding spirit one is
firm: through tenderness one can be strong, and by these evolutionary
movements, in accordance with <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> the number
of things, one attains the doctrine of unity or the one.<span
id="fr_36"></span>[36](tgln1.htm#1_note_36) One is able, through this
Unity, to adjust the interests of all.<span
id="fr_37"></span>[37](tgln1.htm#1_note_37)

   Let us now discuss what is meant by the statement; "His acts are
strong or forceful." During times of change, one is equal to any sudden
crisis; one disposes of calamities, and wards off difficulties, with
invincible strength. There is no enemy that is not overcome. Being
capable of meeting every change and judging the times, nothing can harm
such an one.

   We may see, therefore, that he who would have firmness must do so by
yieldingness. He who would be strong

|                                                |
|------------------------------------------------|
| **The power of yieldingness: non-resistance.** |

must guard it by tenderness. A wealth of yieldingness gives an abundance
of firmness: an accumulation of tenderness yields strength. Take note of
the nature of the predominant events, and you will have an indication of
whether misfortune or happiness impends. Strength will overcome an
unequal combatant; but two of equal strength will have an equal
resultant. Yieldingness will overcome anything superior to itself; its
strength is boundless. For this reason military strength (is as a fire)
will be extinguished. The strength of the tree bends to the wind and is
sawn for timber. The strong skin (of a drum) will crack. Teeth are
stronger than the tongue; but they decay sooner. Hence yieldingness and
non-resistance or tenderness are the mainstay<span
id="fr_38"></span>[38](tgln1.htm#1_note_38) of life; but the firm and
hard are the lackeys of death.

   Pioneers<span id="fr_39"></span>[39](tgln1.htm#1_note_39) come to the
end of their tether and die out early. Those who follow, clutching to
their skirts, reach the goal. How can it be known that it is so? All who
attain the good age of seventy, nevertheless have gained from the past
as regarding their actions and feel dissatisfied with most of their
work, as they look back on their mistakes. It is so even until they are
dead. Hence men like Ch‛ü Pei Yü<span
id="fr_40"></span>[40](tgln1.htm#1_note_40) felt that 49 years out of
the fifty had been ineffectual, the reason being that the pioneer has
<span id="page_15">p. 15</span> the disadvantage of inexperience;
whereas his successor finds it so much easier to achieve the purpose.
The pioneer climbs high; his successor follows and gets help from him.
The pioneer descends to the depths and falls into ruin; he who follows
will step on the shoulder of the pioneer and take measures based on the
experience of his predecessor. The pioneer falls into dangers; the man
who comes after gains from experience. The pioneer is baffled in his
plans, but his successor avoids the pitfalls.

   From this it is seen that the pioneer forms the sharp point of his
successor's arrow. He is, as it were, the point of the lance.

   The point strikes the difficult obstacle, breaks its resistance and
becomes a buffer; but the handle suffers no harm, for the reason that it
occupies a secondary position and is cushioned by the buffer. This may
be taken as the universal view. The worldly-wise and intelligent cannot
avoid the consequences of this impulsion of the senses.

   What I mean by "successors" does not imply that they are immobile and
without initiative, nor that they are petrified and incapabable of
motion. But what these do is to pay attention to the harmonizing of
every plan and act in concert with occasion and take account of times
and seasons. By the power of the Tao one meets the need of every change,
using the beginning to govern the end, and the end to govern the
beginning.<span id="fr_41"></span>[41](tgln1.htm#1_note_41) His
principle is that he does not lose that whereby men are governed i.e.
*tao*, for this reason that acting through the *tao* others cannot
control him. A critical business<span
id="fr_42"></span>[42](tgln1.htm#1_note_42) does not permit of
miscalculation: too early an act may miss fire; too late an act may fail
to hit the occasion. Time is ever on the flux and waits for no man, and
so the Sage<span id="fr_43"></span>[43](tgln1.htm#1_note_43) does not
value a foot of jade, but rather an inch of time. Time is that which it
is difficult to get and easy to lose. Yü<span
id="fr_44"></span>[44](tgln1.htm#1_note_44) took time by the forelock
and never went back for a lost shoe, nor would he delay business by
getting a hat from the peg. Not that he strove for first place with
another, <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> but that he strove to catch
every opportunity.<span id="fr_45"></span>[45](tgln1.htm#1_note_45)
Hence the Sage<span id="fr_46"></span>[46](tgln1.htm#1_note_46) guarded
a freedom from passions, and preserved yielding complaisance.

   Acquiescent, men meet every crisis, always following and not leading.
By yieldingness and tenderness they gain repose;<span
id="fr_47"></span>[47](tgln1.htm#1_note_47) by equanimity and peace they
find stability. Great in achievement, they wear down every difficulty,
and no one can compete with them.

   Nothing in the world is more yielding and softer than water; yet its
greatness cannot be measured, nor its depths

|                                                     |
|-----------------------------------------------------|
| **Greatness of yieldingness illustrated by water.** |

sounded. Its distance<span id="fr_48"></span>[48](tgln1.htm#1_note_48)
is endless; its vast expanse is without horizon. Its rise and fall, its
ebb and flow are immeasurable. Up in the skies it becomes the rain and
dew; down below it forms the fattening moisture, so that the whole
creation springs to birth and everything comes to fruition. Its
greatness embraces all living things; there is no trace of partiality;
its enrichment reaches even to the lowly worms, yet it asks no thanks:
its abundance suffices for the whole world and is never exhausted. Its
virtue is distributed over all nations, yet without self-expenditure.
Its operations can never come to an end; they are inexhaustible. It is
so fine that it is impossible to grasp a handful of it; strike it, yet
it does not suffer hurt: grab it, and it is not wounded: sever it, and
yet it is not divided: burn it, and it does not ignite. Lost in the
slush, flowing into invisibility, disappearing as it gets mixed with
earth, nevertheless, it is not possible to scatter it into nothingness.
Its advantage is that it will penetrate into stone and metal; its
strength consists in going to every shore bearing ships for mankind.
Moving full and free in the immaterial regions, wheeling and revolving
on high, as clouds, it returns again, falling into the rivers and
valleys and courses in bounding floods over the wide plains! All
creation, without partiality, receives its beneficent bounty.<span
id="fr_49"></span>[49](tgln1.htm#1_note_49) Whether enough and to spare,
or given sparsely, it comes from and returns to Heaven and Earth, <span
id="page_17">p. 17</span> and is bestowed on creation without favouring
one or the other. It is copious on every hand. Its heaving movements are
great and concurrent with all nature. It knows neither left nor right,
curls round and encircles everything, and is commensurate and
contemporary with creation. This is termed Supreme Excellency (Chih Te).
Now the reason of water achieving this supreme excellency in the world
lies in its virtue of penetrativeness, in its irrigating and effusive
properties, so that Lao Tan was led to speak of it as the softest thing
in the world galloping through the hardest: issuing from the
non-material, it enters into the non-spatial, i.e. enters everything. "I
know therefore," he said, "that Wu wei is most advantageous." Now the
immaterial, the formless, is the great ancestor of wu, matter: the
soundless, i.e. that which makes no sound, is the great founder of
sound. Their son is light; their grandson is water.<span
id="fr_50"></span>[50](tgln1.htm#1_note_50) All these are begotten of
the formless or immaterial.

   Light, indeed, can be seen but not grasped; water can be handled but
not destroyed. Therefore, of those things that have shape nothing excels
or is more honourable than water. In coming into life it enters into
death i.e. into the shades of the carnal world: from non-existence, it
treads the way of existence, i.e. in having form, it departs from its
original: from existence it passes into non-existence, thus becoming a
ruin.<span id="fr_51"></span>[51](tgln1.htm#1_note_51) Hence this hidden
purity, spiritual repose, is the supreme power (te chih chih yeh).<span
id="fr_52"></span>[52](tgln1.htm#1_note_52) And yieldingness and
tenderness are essentials of the Tao: The immaterial<span
id="fr_53"></span>[53](tgln1.htm#1_note_53) in happy repose gives rise
to all things for the use of man. Reverently responding to influences,
it instantly reverts to its own root and then becomes merged in the
formless.<span id="fr_54"></span>[54](tgln1.htm#1_note_54) What is
expressed by "formless" is Unity. What is termed the Unity<span
id="fr_55"></span>[55](tgln1.htm#1_note_55)

|                   |
|-------------------|
| **Unity of Tao.** |

means something without compeer in the universe. Uniquely it stands
alone. Being-like it is placed alone.<span
id="fr_56"></span>[56](tgln1.htm#1_note_56) Above, it fills the
heavens,<span id="fr_57"></span>[57](tgln1.htm#1_note_57) below it
interpenetrates or connects together <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> the
nine Points, the vastnesses, of the world.<span
id="fr_57"></span>[57](tgln1.htm#1_note_57) No circle can compass, no
square can fit it.<span id="fr_58"></span>[58](tgln1.htm#1_note_58) It
is the Great Absolute and forms the Unity.<span
id="fr_56"></span>[56](tgln1.htm#1_note_56) This unity is the life of
myriad generations, everlasting without beginning, and most mysterious.
It embraces (enfolds) the Universe and opens the portal of the Tao<span
id="fr_59"></span>[59](tgln1.htm#1_note_59) (and is the Tao in
operation). Profound and abstruse, invisible, unalloyed, it alone abides
in pure virtue. It ever gives, but is never exhausted: it labours
without effort. So, in looking for it, you behold not its form:
listening for it, you hear not its sound: feeling for it, you get at no
body. The formless (tao) begets the living form. The soundless
(wu-sheng) begets the five tones.<span
id="fr_60"></span>[60](tgln1.htm#1_note_60) The non-flavour harmonizes,
or gives substance to, the five flavours: the non-colour creates the
five colours. Therefore all that is seen comes from that which is not
seen (wu). The material springs from the immaterial. The Universe is its
sphere. The nominal and the real exist together. The tones are limited
to five: but the variations and combinations of the five tones are more
than can be distinguished by the ear. The composition of flavours<span
id="fr_61"></span>[61](tgln1.htm#1_note_61) is only five; but the
combinations that can be made of them are more than can be tasted. The
colours are not more than five; but their transformations are more than
eye can apprehend. Hence in the matter of tones, when Kung, the key, is
set, the five tones are harmonized. In the matter of taste, with sweet
as base, the five tastes are completed. As regards colour, with white as
the ground, the five colours are blended. As to the Tao, when the
Unity<span id="fr_62"></span>[62](tgln1.htm#1_note_62) is established,
creation comes to birth. Therefore the doctrine of the Unity covers the
deep<span id="fr_62"></span>[62](tgln1.htm#1_note_62) the pervasion of
the Unity forms the mechanism of the world. How pure in its entirety,
similar to the unadorned jade!<span
id="fr_63"></span>[63](tgln1.htm#1_note_63) When scattered, how turbid!
It is opaque, but gradually becomes clear, ethereal, yet gradually it
becomes substantial. How stable! still as a deep pool. How buoyant! It
is like a floating cloud! It is as though it were not, and yet is: as
though lost, yet abiding. Creation massed together <span id="page_19">p.
19</span> passes through the one portal:<span
id="fr_64"></span>[64](tgln1.htm#1_note_64) the root of all things
emerges through one gate (the tao). Its movements have no form: its
transformations are God-like; its actions leave no vestiges, constantly
behind and yet moving in advance. Therefore the *tao-man* in governing
hides his intelligence; he blots out his symbols of majesty. Depending
on the Tao, he does away with cleverness: he acts in common with the
people, and everything is done on public ground. All is law. His
regulations are circumscribed; his demands are few; the lust for glory
is eliminated; concupiscence is expelled; anxieties are renounced.
Regulations, not being multifarious, can be superintended. Demands,
being limited, are easily satisfied, and results are gained. He, on the
other hand, who depends on the seeing of the eye, the hearing of the
ear, going by what he hears and sees, is full of care, yet without clear
vision. He who governs by knowledge and anxious thought, is full of
labour, yet without definite results. Therefore the Sage-King uniformly
follows law,<span id="fr_65"></span>[65](tgln1.htm#1_note_65) he does
not change the ought nor alter the constant of things. He follows the
square; he is guided by the plumb line; he conforms to the varying order
of things.

   Now the movements of pleasure and anger are a corruption of the
Tao;<span id="fr_66"></span>[66](tgln1.htm#1_note_66) trouble and grief
are abortions

|                                                   |
|---------------------------------------------------|
| **Self Culture. Reduce desire restrain feeling.** |

of virtue; love and hate are the failures of the heart; concupiscence
and lust are the embarrassments of nature. Great anger destroys the
negative force (Yin) of man's nature, and great joy disorders the
positive (Yang). Great anger brings dumbness; great fear leads to
madness; sorrow and grief cause rage; sickness gathers strength; when
likes and dislikes come in profusion, then follow adversities in their
train. But a heart free from care and joy, supplies the perfection of
virtue. To be permeated with the Tao and not subject to vacillation.
gives the perfection of repose: not to be loaded with carnal desires
gives perfection of *hsü*, purity. When there <span id="page_20">p.
20</span> is no love and hate, (likes and dislikes) there is the
perfection of equanimity. When the mind is not distracted by things,
there is the perfection of simplicity (or intrinsic truth). Ability to
possess these five attributes ensures true fellowship and communion with
God.<span id="fr_67"></span>[67](tgln1.htm#1_note_67) Fellowship with
God gives possession of the inner self.<span
id="fr_68"></span>[68](tgln1.htm#1_note_68) Hence he who controls the
extraneous, i.e. carnal desires, by this inner self will fail in
nothing. The mind having found itself, there will be full control of the
senses. Possessing the self the five inward parts will be maintained in
peace and anxieties tranquilised; the organs of the body will function
correctly and one will not give way to unseemly joy and anger. One's
nerves will be firm and strong. The sapient ear and eye will have a
comprehensive penetration and not err. Being resolute and firm, one will
never break down.

|                            |
|----------------------------|
| **Autocrat of the World.** |

One will not overshoot the mark nor come short in one's actions. Such an
one will not be unhappy in a lowly position: nor will he eschew great
duties. His soul is not impetuous, his spirit is not unstable
(perturbed). Profound and undefiled, serene and reposeful, he is the
autocrat of the universe.<span
id="fr_69"></span>[69](tgln1.htm#1_note_69)

   The Great Way (Tao) is broad and level, not far from the person. The
seeker finds it in himself: going out for it, again and again, he
returns within for it.<span id="fr_70"></span>[70](tgln1.htm#1_note_70)
Pressure on it will move it; touching it or feeling after it will bring
a response.<span id="fr_71"></span>[71](tgln1.htm#1_note_71) Its
mutations are without substantial form and its visitations are generous
and free; everything is done with deliberation and serenity; to every
matter a suitable solution is found, as fittingly as an echo answering
to the sound or as an image reflecting an object. Whether such an one
mounts to a high station or descends to a low position, he never loses
what he grasps (of the Tao): whether treading the way of danger or
walking in the paths of peril, there is no forgetting the Tao. He who
abides in this frame will lack not in virtue; he disposes successfully
of the myriad affairs of every complexity that <span id="page_21">p.
21</span> crowd before him. In attending to the affairs of empire, he is
expeditious, like (a boat) sailing with the wind.<span
id="fr_72"></span>[72](tgln1.htm#1_note_72) This is the meaning of
Supreme ability,<span id="fr_73"></span>[73](tgln1.htm#1_note_73) and
with this supreme ability comes joy.

   There were men of old who lived in hermit caves without losing their
high spirit. In later times there have been those exercising great
power, but they had daily anxieties and were not free from sorrow.<span
id="fr_74"></span>[74](tgln1.htm#1_note_74) We may gather from this that
the princely state<span id="fr_75"></span>[75](tgln1.htm#1_note_75) does
not lie in actual ruling so much as in getting the Tao: Joy does not lie
in riches and honours, but consists in the possession of virtue and
harmony. Knowing the greatness of the higher self, paying little value
to possession of empire, is indeed to be near the Tao.

   What is termed as joy? How can it be necessary to be placed in
palaces and towers, to serenade on lakes and in gardens,<span
id="fr_76"></span>[76](tgln1.htm#1_note_76) to hear the Chiu Shao and
Liu Ying<span id="fr_77"></span>[77](tgln1.htm#1_note_77) orchestras, to
dine on seasoned meats, to gallop in broad avenues or shoot the
turquoise kingfisher, in order to find it? Can these be said to compose
joy? The joy I speak of is the finding of the true self.<span
id="fr_78"></span>[78](tgln1.htm#1_note_78) The possessor of this true
life will not regard ostentatious expenditure as joy, nor will the
simple life be looked on with regret. He will accept a lot lowly or
bright,—just as the flower shuts and opens in response to the season.
Wen Tzŭ expands the idea in these words:—"He cherishes the truth of
Heaven, he embraces the heart of Heaven; he breathes in the spirit of
Yin and Yang; he blows out the old (foul) and breathes in the new: he
closes with the Yin and opens with the Yang: he contracts with the firm
and expands with the tender: with the Yin and Yang, he looks up and
down: he is of one mind with Heaven and of one body with the Tao: there
are no joys and no sorrows: there are no pleasures and no angers." Thus
Tsû Hsia was thin, so long as his mind was at war with itself, i.e. when
governed by desire; but he became fat on getting the Tao.

   The Sage will not allow his person to be the instrument <span
id="page_22">p. 22</span> of matter, nor permit his peace to be
disturbed by

|                          |
|--------------------------|
| **Spiritual joy lasts.** |

desire. Thus, when he rejoices, it is not with boisterous hilarity. When
he sorrows, he will not suffer his nature to be wounded. Circumstances
ever change and vary; there is nothing stable about life's conditions.
The Tao-man, alone, lives triumphantly (or cherishes the magnanimous
point), abandoning worthless things. He keeps step with the Tao.
Therefore he has the wherewith to find his true nature. Whether his
pilgrimage be under a stately tree, or his dwelling be in a secluded
cave he finds enough to satisfy his nature. But the man who has not
found his true self, though he possess the empire for home, and the
myriad people for ministers and concubines, will not, on that account,
find the satisfaction of life.<span
id="fr_79"></span>[79](tgln1.htm#1_note_79) He who reaches the state of
spiritual joy<span id="fr_80"></span>[80](tgln1.htm#1_note_80) will find
everything minister joy to his person. And he who enjoys this joy has
tasted the supremest joy.

   Suppose every imaginable pleasure were at command of a person. The
bells and drums are prepared; pipes and

|                          |
|--------------------------|
| **Carnal joy vanishes.** |

organs arranged; the richest carpets are spread and the ivory ornamented
poles are gay with embroidered bunting; the ear hears the passion-moving
music of Chao Ko and Pei Pi; the most lovely courtesans are present, the
tables are laden with wines and delicacies, and the carousings are
carried on from evening to dawn. In the daytime he goes hunting,
shooting at the high-flying bird, or with the hounds stalking the wily
hare. These are his pleasures, glowing with excited passions under
sensual enticements. I grant they have attractions; but they are mixed
with mortification, for when the carriage is unhitched, and the horses
unharnessed, the wine has ceased to flow and the music is ended, then
the heart is pulled up, as though the chill of death had passed over it:
it is filled with vexation, as though it had lost something. And the
reason? They have not taken the joy within to supply <span
id="page_23">p. 23</span> the joy without, but rather used adventitious
joys to create an inward pleasure. There is pleasure as long as the
music lasts, but when the song is ended, sadness creeps on. Under such
conditions, sorrow and joy change about and mutually beget each other.
The spirit is disordered. Not a moment's rest can be found!

   If the reasons be examined how it is that one failed to get the
substance of joy and thus continued to injure

|                 |
|-----------------|
| **The reason.** |

one's life daily? The cause is found in this that one has lost that, the
doing of which would give the possession of virtue to the mind.<span
id="fr_81"></span>[81](tgln1.htm#1_note_81) Hence the mind within, not
being at the centre (tao), one decorates oneself with those things which
come from without. These are artificial and do not enter into the marrow
and bone of life: they do not abide in the will nor remain in one's
being. Therefore, those things that enter from without, finding no host
within, do not abide: those things that issue from within, not being
responsive to the outward, fail to operate. Hence even an uninstructed
person may be pleased on hearing good words for guidance, and a
worthless character may also esteem an account of noble deeds and
perfect conduct. Many approve, but few are those who carry these good
things out: the many approve, but few there are who act. The reason for
this is, that they are unable to recover the lost mind: they fail to
revert to the real nature. The inner and real nature fails to open out.
What is learnt is by way of compulsion: when this is the case, what is
heard by the ear is not impressed on the mind. The position is not
unlike to the deaf man singing and not hearing his own sounds. It is
made for (the gratification of) others, without any personal share in
the enjoyment. The sound issues from his mouth and passes away without
his hearing it.

   Now the heart is the govenor of life.<span
id="fr_82"></span>[82](tgln1.htm#1_note_82) It, therefore, controls all
the members and the circulation of the fluids of sensation, referring
everying, forthwith, to the moral <span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

|                                                           |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| **When the Tao governs the mind a monarchy is needless.** |

realm (of conscience): conscience, in turn, enters the avenues of every
action. Therefore, when the mind lacks the inner control, any pride of
authority in the art of governing men may be compared to a person who is
deaf trying to ring the bell and beat the drum, or to a blind person
trying to find pleasure in works of art. It is plain they are perfectly
incompetent to do so. So it is clear that the king's instruments of
government must not be artificial, (such as policy, schemes,
opportunism). An artifical creation would ruin the country, and he who
grasps power would lose it. In elucidation, the case of Hsü Yu might be
given, who thought little of the pomp of empire and would not change
places with Yao. His mind was not set on place and power. How may we
account for such a view of life? Because of empire and for empire.<span
id="fr_83"></span>[83](tgln1.htm#1_note_83) The essentials of empire are
not in pomp but in the individual, not in men but in myself: not in Yao
the monarch, but in Hsü Yu the individual representative: not in others,
but in each individual.<span id="fr_84"></span>[84](tgln1.htm#1_note_84)
To centre all in one is an artificial way. The natural way lies in each
following the law of nature. When the individual has got the Tao he
possesses everything. Thus clear on the principles of the mind, it will
be found that carnal desires, love and hate, are extraneous things, and
do not pertain to the mind.<span
id="fr_85"></span>[85](tgln1.htm#1_note_85) Hence there is no ground for
pleasure, for joy, for pain. The whole creation is in identity with
Heaven. There is no right or wrong.<span
id="fr_85a"></span>[85a](tgln1.htm#1_note_85a) Everything is as it
should be. All flux is under the light of Heaven: life is as death.

   Further the empire is possessed by the individual and the individual
is possessed by the empire. There can be no alienation between the
individual and empire. There is mutual identity. Thus, surely, there is
no necessity for the person who possesses the empire to exercise
authority or grasp at power or to have the prerogative of life and
death, the promulgation of edicts and so on. What I <span
id="page_25">p. 25</span> mean by "possessing the empire" is not such as
this: I mean that the person has found himself. When self is found, the
empire has also got a man. When there is this mutual possession, we each
exist together without a break. How can it be that there is any
alienation and that the empire cannot use me? The meaning of "finding
self" is that life is perfected—or the culture of the person is perfect.
When this is done, there is identity with the Tao.<span
id="fr_86"></span>[86](tgln1.htm#1_note_86)

   Now if a person were able to enjoy himself by promenading on
riverbanks and by the sea shore (i.e. the

|                                          |
|------------------------------------------|
| **Physical and spiritual joy compared.** |

emperor, who can go anywhere and do anything), by racing the great
hunter Niao, and decorating his umbrella with the turquoise feathers (a
great minister), by witnessing the great military dances and music (of
Wu), by listening to the strains of the Yao Lang, Ch‛i Lu, Chi Chen: by
the performance of the popular music of Cheng and Wei, by harmonizing
the high and low sounds, by shooting the high flying birds on the banks
of the Chao, by hunting wild beasts in the Imperial park of Yuan Yu,
well and good. Why those are the very sports that the multitude delights
in and gets intoxicated with. The Sage man, placed amongst these, does
not find that they are any enticements to his spiritual life or
allurements to seduce his will and purpose, moving his heart by sudden
passion and leading him to lose his true nature. Rather he would prefer
to live in a secluded and poor village or to crouch within the recess of
some dark gully or in the retirement of some jungle, cribbed within a
small hut, which has fresh grass for thatch, a grass-made postern and an
old crock for window, the hinges of the gate formed of wisps of thc
mulberry. The hut may leak above and be dank below, the north-facing
booth may be filled with dampness. After snow and sleet have made slush
of the ground, he plants his own melons and *chiang* (grain only eaten
by the poorest); he takes his walks abroad through the wide <span
id="page_26">p. 26</span> morass and tramps back and fore in the gorge
of the mountain. Were the generality of people faced with this sort of
life they would wrinkle their faces, blink their eyes and be full of
distress at the disagreeable prospect. The sage placed in such a
situation, would not feel sad, downcast, envious or misanthropic, nor
would he, for the world, lose the grounds of his own inward joy by such
hardship. And the reason? Because within he is in touch with the
spiritual realm: he does not lose his will to virtue because of a high
or lowly station,<span id="fr_87"></span>[87](tgln1.htm#1_note_87) of
wealth or poverty, of ease or labour of body. Just like the crow's "ya
ya," and the

|                                            |
|--------------------------------------------|
| **Outward change does not move the mind.** |

magpies "tsie, tsieh;"—these sounds do not change with every changed
condition of the weather. The man of *tao* has his mind fixed, nor does
he depend on compulsion of circumstances in the flux of things: his mind
does not await any single chance of fortune to determine the ground of
his self possession (tzû tê). So what I mean by "possession" is that the
nature of his life is established in that which gives peace. Now the
soul and body issue from the central source. When the body functions
perfectly, (moral) then nature and life are completed. When these are
completed, then the affections, such as love and hatred, are begotten (a
point of danger). Thus scholars have fixed principle of morality in
intercourse: and women have an unchanging rule of action as to marrying
again. These can never be changed.<span
id="fr_88"></span>[88](tgln1.htm#1_note_88) The eternity of Heaven and
earth, the height of Chiu mountain is not changed by one ascending a
high hill or descending into a depth; nor is a low location counted
near. Therefore, the man who has the Tao is not perturbed by poverty nor
exhilarated by success. Being placed on a giddy height gives him no
feeling of danger; though holding a full cup, it will not be upset. He
is not polished at one time and rough at another time: he does not
change colour with time, he is not burnished when new and tarnished when
old. He can undergo trial<span
id="fr_89"></span>[89](tgln1.htm#1_note_89) without wear <span
id="page_27">p. 27</span>

|                                   |
|-----------------------------------|
| **The** *tao-man* **wears well.** |

and tear. He does not depend on power to be esteemed, nor on riches to
be honoured, nor on force to be strong. Agreeably he moves forward in
harmony with the fluctuating movements of the Cosmic Spirit. Thus he is
naturally like the metal hidden in the hills or the pearl in the deep.
He does not look on affluence as the source of joy nor lust for the
symbols of power. Therefore he does not look on success as ease of mind,
nor on ingloriousness as a thing to be dreaded. He does not consider a
high position as peace nor a low position as danger. Body, soul, spirit
and will are each in the Heaven-appointed place.

   Now the body is life's tenement, the breath (passion nature)<span
id="fr_90"></span>[90](tgln1.htm#1_note_90) is life's fulness: the soul
is life's regulator. The three suffer by the aberration of anyone from
its function. The Sage-King gives to each man his proper office where
each will do his own work without interference of one with the other.
Therefore, to place the body in that which does not bring contentment is
to waste energies: to exercise the spirit in a sphere which is not
suitable to it is to scatter power: to employ the soul in operations
that are unfitting is to becloud clarity. It is essential that strict
attention be paid to the proper exercise of each of these three
factors—body, breath, soul.

   Now let us consider such insignificant creatures as creeping worms
and zoophytes in their wriggling movements or crawling actions; they
have their likes and dislikes; they know what is helpful or harmful by
reason of the instincts they possess; these they follow. Should they
suddenly lose these, flesh and bones would be of no value to them.

   Now what is that power in man which enables him to gaze clearly and
hear distinctly, enables the body to stand erect and the limbs to bend
and stretch at will; what are those faculties that help him to
distinguish white and black, to appreciate the ugly and beautiful: what
is that knowledge by which he differentiates similarities and
dissimilarities <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> and which enlighten him
in right and wrong? It is a fulness of spirit (ch‛i),<span
id="fr_90"></span>[90](tgln1.htm#1_note_90) the passion-nature that
supplies the person with capacity; and the soul gives it direction. How
may it be known that such is so? Men who have their wills bent on some
object and their minds concentrated solely on that, become oblivious to
all else, so that in walking they fall into a pit: the head may hit a
post without their being conscious of it: call him, and he does not
hear. It is not because he has given away eyes and ears that he is
unable to respond. And the reason? The mind or soul has let go that
which it holds, i.e., the body. And so when it is centred on the
particular; it is dead to the general: centred in the inner, it is dead
to the outer: centred on the high, it is dead to the low: centred on the
right, it is dead to the left.<span
id="fr_91"></span>[91](tgln1.htm#1_note_91) When the soul is
all-pervading, then it is omnipresent. Therefore, the tao-man prizes the
pure spirit uncontaminated by desire, and his thoughts dwell in the
spiritual.

   Now consider an imbecile. He does not know to avoid the hazards of
fire or water; he goes all unheeding into deep waters that are
dangerous. It is not that he, too, has not got a body, soul, spirit,
will, but that he uses these differently from other men. He has lost the
proper use of these faculties and fails in the correct exercise of them.
For this reason his actions are erratic, his movements not being under
control. He acts, through life, like a tottering person, staggering in
passing through an uneven gate, falling into miry drains or into the
midst of pits and holes. Though endowed as others with the motors of
life, he cannot help being an object of merriment to men. And the
reason? Body and spirit do not act in mutual harmony. Thus, we may
deduce that where the soul is the dominant force, the body follows to
purpose. But where the soul follows the motions of the body, disaster
ensues.

   Men of a covetous and ambitious nature, and of many passions, are
allured insatiably by power and ensnared by <span id="page_29">p.
29</span> the lust of position. They aspire to stand in the high places
of the world, by reason of superior abilities which implies a daily
expenditure of their spirit. The longer this goes on, the farther is the
distance between spirit and body: steeped in these excesses, return to
normality is less likely. The body being closed up by these desires, the
heart opposes the entrance of higher influences. Thus the pure spirit of
the natural endowment has no freedom of action. Thus it constantly
happens in the world that disasters befall men who fail to see the right
and who act contrary to justice and who have the lost mind. Such people
are of the "tallow candle" class. This means that fire that burns
quickly will die out all the sooner.

   The soul and spirit that are in repose are daily at the full and make
for strength. The impetuous spirit wears itself out early, leading to
senility (weakness). Therefore, the Sage-man nourishes his soul and
moulds his spirit in yieldingness and keeps the body in repose
(equanimity): up and down in the height and in the depth, he oscillates
with the Tao. Serenely he yields to it: compelled to take office, he
makes use of it. He yields to it as to the robe he puts on himself: he
uses it as it were a swift arrow. Thus in all the fluxes of nature there
is nothing he fails to respond to: in the changing affairs of life there
is nothing he does not answer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tgl2)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
