[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](tgl3) [Next](tgl5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### NATURAL LAW

   "Medieval thought regarded the universe as an articulated whole, and
everything in it as both a part and a whole. The world is cosmos, a
divinely instituted harmony. And, in accordance with the Neoplatonic
philosophy, the higher principle is not divided up when it 'comes down'
in its creative power to give life and order to the lower ranks of
being. It is present everywhere in its entirety, though enfeebled to a
greater or less degree in its operation, from its admixture with lower
existences. Therefore, every institution and even every individual is a
microcosm or minor mundus (hsiao tien). God, the Absolute One, is above
the plurality of the world, the source and also the goal of every living
being. Hence the *lex eterna*, the eternal law of God, permeates all the
apparent multiplicity of the world. 'All multitude', it was said, 'is
derived from the One, and is brought back to the One': in other words,
all order consists in the subordination of plurality to unity. The
heavenly bodies have their unity in the primum mobile. So, in societies,
there must be a *unum regens* in every whole."

   "The State Invisible is the kingdom of absolute values, the kingdom
of eternal life."

W. R. I<span class="small">NGE</span>, D.D. 

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span id="dis"></span>IV  
DISSERTATION ON  
NATURAL LAW

{[notes](tgln1.htm#4)\|[elucidations and analyses](tgln2.htm#4)}

   

The origin and processes of all creation issue from the Cosmic Spirit.
The causes of Natural Law and anarchy, the winning of power and the loss
of it proceed on constant lines.

Chinese Editor.

   The rule of the T‛ai Ch‛ing<span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](tgln1.htm#4_note_1) was in accord with Heaven, and
beneficial to creation. Nature (hsing) was constant, the spirit simple
and centred, (i.e. not scattered over a multitude of things). The mind
had no appetites, (desire): it was quiescent: it was active, not
stagnant. Mental activities were inwardly consonant with the Tao, and
outward activities were in agreement with right. The activities of the
mind worked artistically; action was correct with benefit to things.
Words were prized and in accord with reason. Actions were simple and
direct, in accordance with nature. The mind was contented and without
cunning.

|                                                 |
|-------------------------------------------------|
| **Felicity of all order in the Cosmic Spirit.** |

Actions were simple and without ostentation. So there was no recourse to
horoscopy and divination of the eight signs<span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](tgln1.htm#4_note_2) and the tortoise. There was no
thought of where to begin and how to end. (There was no such thing as
scheming policy). Action took place when it was demanded. Principles
were embodied: the spirit of Yin and Yang were envisaged. All was in
conformity with the four seasons. All was bright and clear as the sun
and moon: man was a fit mate of the Creator. Hence Heaven overshadowed
them with grace, and Earth sustained them with life. The four seasons
did not lose their order, nor did the wind and rain fall with violence.
The sun and moon were limpid and lucent, shining in their brightness,
and the five planets moved in their orbits without error.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

   During these periods the primal fluid was surpassingly glowing (in
men of the period) and transmitted its brilliancy. The phoenix and the
Lin nestled on the land; the divining grass and tortoise were found. The
fattening dews descended; the flowering bamboo came to ripeness; the
yellow jade appeared; the vermillion grass showed itself in the palace
precincts. Portents of good omen were all these. Men's hearts were free
from secret craftiness and the smartness of cunning.

   When we arrive at the decadent age, we find that men dug into the
mountains for precious stones. They

|                            |
|----------------------------|
| **Decadent age marked by** |

wrought metal and jade into cunning vessels and broke open oysters in
search of pearls: they melted brass and iron; the whole of nature
withered under the exploitation. They ripped open the pregnant and slew
the young, untimely (in order to get skins and furs). The Chilin, as a
result, did not visit the land. They broke down nests and despoiled the
birds that had not lain, so that the phoenix no longer hovered around.
They drilled wood for fire: they piled

|                         |
|-------------------------|
| **Luxury and poverty.** |

up timber to make verandahs and balustrades: they burnt forests to drive
out game and drained the waters for fish. In spite of this, the
furniture at the service of the people was not enough for their use,
whilst the luxuries of the rulers were abundant. Thus, the world of life
partially failed and things miscarried so that the larger half of
creation failed of fruition.

   The classes made mounds and built on high grounds: they fertilized
their land and sowed their corn: they dug the land for wells, to drink
from, and opened up irrigation channels, for their enrichment. They laid
foundations for

|                                       |
|---------------------------------------|
| **Rapacity of man disturbed Nature.** |

their cities, so that they were munitioned. Captured wild beasts were
domesticated: thus, there was grievous rupture of the Yin and Yang, and
the succession of the four seasons failed. Thunder-bolts wrought havoc,
and hail-stones <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> fell with violence.
Noxious miasma and untimely hoarfrosts fell unceasingly, resulting in
atrophy and the failure of nature to bear abundantly. Luxuriant grass
and thick brushwood were cut down in order to get land. They cut down
the jungle in order to grow ears of corn. The plants and trees that died
before germination, flowering and bearing fruit, were innumerable.

   Next we see the building of great palaces and houses with their great
erections of rafters and door pillars, the short rafters of the eaves
and the smaller ones that support the tiles of the eaves. These were
elaborately decorated and carved: one was dove-tailed into the other and
all decorated with the lotus and calthrops. One colour vied with the
other, and their harmonious blending in a whole was artistic and
elegant. Rooms were decorated with pictures of every kind of plant and
bird. The decorations were such as the cunning of craftsmen and skill of
artisans, of the type of Kung Shu and Wang Erh, who plied the chisel and
saw, producing the most perfect carvings and filigree work and every
kind of fretwork, could not do. Nevertheless, all this lavish
ornamentation seemed as though insufficient to satisfy the desires of
the rulers. The cypress, the pine and the flowering bamboo, that bloom
the year round, died even in summer (because the intrinsic nature of Yin
and Yang was offended): the rivers and streams, too, dried up and ceased
flowing,

|                           |
|---------------------------|
| **Nature became savage.** |

in consequence. The spectre of the Lares<span
id="fr_3"></span>[{3}](tgln1.htm#4_note_3) appeared in some rural parts.
The flying locusts filled the land. The drought was great, the very soil
cracking and yawning. The Phoenix did not come. Eagles, bears, wild
bulls and horned creatures became ferocious. The cottages of the people
were built of reeds, rude and poor: travellers and guests could not be
entertained. The frozen and hungry perished in great numbers, lying on
the roads, shoulder to shoulder.

   In the course of time, the mountains and streams <span
id="page_83">p. 83</span> were divided into boundaries and frontiers:
censuses of the

|                     |
|---------------------|
| **Social fission.** |

people were taken in order to know the population of this place and
that: cities were built and moats and dykes dug: barriers were erected
and weapons forged, for defensive purposes: officials were created for
the departments with various robes and badges and with laws: they
differentiated classes and masses and distinguished the worthy from the
vulgar: they organized a system of reprimands and approbations, of
rewards and punishments. Following these, there arose soldiers; and
firearms were made, which gave birth to wars and strifes. The untimely
death and annihilation of the oppressed people ensued. There was
arbitrary murder of the guiltless, and the punishment and death of the
innocent. These inquities all sprang up at these times and on such
occasions.

   The harmonious cooperation of Heaven and Earth, the evolution of
creation by the Yin and Yang depends on

|                                            |
|--------------------------------------------|
| **Cosmic order deranged by human enmity.** |

the spirit of man. Hence, when there is an estrangement between the
classes and masses or rulers and the people, the very air of Heaven
becomes noxious and disorganised: when prince and minister are not in
harmony, the crops in the fields fail to ripen.

   For forty-six days before the winter solstice, the firmament retains
its own aura, which does not descend: the Earth embosoms hers, which
does not ascend; that is to say the operations of the Yin and Yang are
in abeyance.<span id="fr_4"></span>[4](tgln1.htm#4_note_4) At this
period, the forces of Yin and Yang are in suspense, as though
undetermined what to do. Their abundant and wide inspiration and
expiration embrace and bathe all the aura of the universe. They plan and
determine the myriad varieties which are mutually connected, each to
each, and endowing every thing with what each should possess.

   It is by this inspiration of every matter, each influencing the other
and thus fermenting with life, the host of species is organized and
sustained. This is the order. But when Spring is cold and Autumn hot,
when there is <span id="page_84">p. 84</span> hail in Winter and
hoar-frost in Summer, the reason is that the proper fluids are short and
evil humours have entered. Hence, we may say that this universe is of a
similar nature to the human body and the spaces within the six cardinal
points similar to its internal economy.

   We may say that he who is of an intelligent nature is not alarmed at
any of the operations of Nature:

|                                      |
|--------------------------------------|
| **The sage confident in the Unity.** |

he who is wise, by experience, is not disturbed by any unusual
phenomena. The sage thus deduced the far from the near and concluded
that the myriad varieties were based on an unity.

   The ancients were one in spirit with Nature and identified with the
spirit of the age. At this period there were no guerdons or largesse and
congratulations, nor was there the dread of disciplinary punishment.
Ceremonies, duty, honesty, (the pillars of society) had not been
recognised: nor had the practice of ridicule, compliments, and

|                        |
|------------------------|
| **Bathed in the Tao.** |

niggardliness hegun. Thus the people never thought of deceiving, of
oppressing, of victimising or of preying on each other. It was as though
they were bathed in the great climate of the Tao.

   If we consider, on the contrary, the decadent age of the world, we
find that men were many and wealth little: even laborious work failed to
bring in the means of subsistence. So there sprang up strifes and
struggles. Thus it came about that benevolence, *jen*, came to find a
high place (in the philosophy of life). Benevolence and niggardliness
are inconsistent with each other. The men of narrow mind and those of
catholic views both formed parties and factions. Schemes of cunning
appeared; expediency and sophism

|                               |
|-------------------------------|
| **Rise of petty moralities.** |

were cherished. The simplicity and purity of man's nature died out with
the development of this ingenuity of mind. Hence we see how duty and
petty virtues came to be honoured.

   The nature of the Yin and Yang elements is never <span
id="page_85">p. 85</span> uninfluenced by sexual feelings.<span
id="fr_5"></span>[5](tgln1.htm#4_note_5) Men and women congregating
together in their houses and mustering in cities, without segregation,
gave rise to ceremonies.<span id="fr_6"></span>[6](tgln1.htm#4_note_6)
Passions of life, being exuberant and compulsive, there arose,
involuntarily, want of harmony and lack of cordiality, from which issues
sprang the value of music to soothe and cordialize man.

   Thus, we see that whilst benevolence, ceremony, duty, music have the
power to deliver men from degeneration,

|                                |
|--------------------------------|
| **Partly due to sex feeling.** |

they are not the most perfect instruments in the art of government.
*Benevolence* is the means for saving men from war: *duty* that of
saving men from loss of nature: *ceremony* that of saving men from
lewdness of life: and *music* that of saving men from sorrow and trouble
of mind.

   When the spirit which is ordained by heaven is centred on spiritual
things and is free from passion, and when this

|                                       |
|---------------------------------------|
| **Virtuous Nature is the essential.** |

spirit of *wu wei* is prevalent, the people will be good.<span
id="fr_7"></span>[7](tgln1.htm#4_note_7) People's nature being virtuous,
Nature and the Auras are favourable and afford protection. Thus, then,
wealth will be enough, and men will be contented; neither cupidity,
avarice, strife nor war will arise. It is clear that, under such
conditions, benevolence and duty have no place in the economy. When
ethics and moral nature are predominant in the world and the people are
simple and unaffected, then it will follow that the eye will not be
influenced by beauty nor the ear be ravished by lascivious strains.
Amusements, theatricals, merrymaking and jollity, even if they were the
allurements of the beauties, Mao Ch‛iang and Hsi Shih, will stir up no
desire. Neither will classical music, and dance of Piao Yu and Wu Hsiang
give rise to mirth. Being unaffected by lewdness, it is clear that
ceremony and music have no place under such a condition.

   Therefore it was that virtue having deteriorated, benevolence came to
birth. The failure of human conduct caused the rise of duty. Concord
being lost, there arose music; <span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

|                              |
|------------------------------|
| **See the root is healthy.** |

and an extravagant ceremonial induced a regulated ettiquette. From this
we gather that the spiritual or divine made men aware of the
insufficiency of the ethical: a knowledge of the ethical led men to
apprehend that benevolence and duty were insufficient for practical
life; a knowledge of benevolence and duty led men to see that rites and
music were not sufficiently comprehensive.<span
id="fr_8"></span>[8](tgln1.htm#4_note_8)

   Men, to-day, have turned their backs on the root, and gone in search
of the branch. They have abandoned fundamental principles and paid
attention to mere details, so that it is impossible to arrive at real
truth.<span id="fr_9"></span>[9](tgln1.htm#4_note_9)

   The greatness of Heaven and Earth can be shown and be known by
measurement: the motions of the heavenly bodies can be calculated by
science: the reverberating sound of thunder can be estimated by striking
the drum: the change of wind and weather can be gauged by the twelve
laws of sound. Hence, the visible, vast though it be, can be measured:
the luminaries that can be seen can be investigated; sound that can be
heard can be harmonised: colour that can be observed can be
differentiated. Notwithstanding, the greatest thing of all, (the Tao),
cannot be contained by Heaven and Earth: and, being so fine and tenuous,
the human mind cannot classify it.

   Now, with regard to the creation of laws and instruments for
differentiating the five colours, for

|                       |
|-----------------------|
| **Rites artificial.** |

distinguishing the high and low notes and the five flavours, there is an
implication that the original nature has been changed into an artificial
application: the creation of benevolence and duty, the establishment of
rites and of music imply that natural virtue has been replaced by an
artificial one. Once the artificial came into operation, clever people
overawed the simple and cunning schemes were used to deceive superiors.
But remember that what the skill of one can do will be matched by
somebody else's skill. Only the man who abides in the *real nature* can
rule.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

   In ancient times, Tsang Chueh invented the art of writing, and (in
alarm) Heaven rained corn; the demons cried the night through (fearing
the rise of skill and craft). When Pei I bored for the first well, the
dragon ascended the sable cloud and made its spiritual roosting place in
the K‛un-Lun mountain. Thus, the more the display of ability, the less
becomes the power of virtue. Therefore, the maker of the Chou Ting
(Urn), cast the figure of Ts‛ui, a man biting his finger, on the surface
of an urn, in token of his opinion that cunning works of skill should
not be the creation of human skill, but great art comes from *Wu-Wei*,
not from craft, *Yu-Wei*.<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](tgln1.htm#4_note_10)

   With regard to government by the Perfect Man, it is thus: his mind
and spirit function together: his body

|                           |
|---------------------------|
| **Govern in the spirit.** |

blends with his nature. With this tranquillity he embodies the virtue
(tê); in movement he is permeated with reason; his nature conforms
spontaneously and follows automatically the flux of nature; he is
permeated with the spirit of *Wu-Wei*, and the empire spontaneously is
at peace: he is unruffled by desire, and so the people, as a
consequence, are simple in their habits: he is not interested in omens
or myths, and so the people meet with no untimely fates: there is no
strife, and so plenty exists.<span
id="fr_11"></span>[11](tgln1.htm#4_note_11) Equally the whole world and
generations to come share these advantages. But it was not known to whom
to ascribe these operations,<span
id="fr_12"></span>[12](tgln1.htm#4_note_12) or how they could be
described. Therefore, he has no honours, during his life-time nor
ascriptions of praise after death. He accumulates no wealth, and no
monument of adulation is raised to him. It is all the work and merit of
the *tao*.

   The giver does not reckon his gifts to be charity, nor does the
recipient look on it with anything but sincerity. What is given and
received is a matter of course. Virtue fills every act and there is
nothing done without it. Hence that which is unified by tê, virtue, is
not such as can be injured by Tao—i.e. they are indentical in spirit.
What the understanding does not comprehend cannot be explicated <span
id="page_88">p. 88</span> by a gifted speaker. The *tao* is
inexplicable. The tao that cannot be expressed is embosomed in the very
Heaven of Truth. This Tao can be used without exhaustion, and it yields
its treasures without ever being the poorer. Its source is unknown: let
us call it the Yao Kuang, the north constellation. Yao Kuang is the
treasury and granary of creation.

   To save the needy and supply the deficient gave rise to the name
*jen*, benevolence: to advance the interests of men and eliminate the
sources of misfortune, arrest anarchy and stop violence is the work of
the soldier. Were the world without plagues and evils, even an angel
would find no room for the exercise of charity. Were the classes and
masses living in amity, even the most worthy would find no channel for
the dispensation of good works and the establishment of merit.

   In olden times, when Yung Ch‛eng<span
id="fr_13"></span>[13](tgln1.htm#4_note_13) was king, old and young
observed the precedence of the road like geese:

|                              |
|------------------------------|
| **Historical observations.** |

an infant could be placed in a bird's nest; surplus corn could be left
in the open fields for anyone to share in; the tail of the tiger and
leopard could be played with; the viper could be stepped upon.
Nevertheless, none knew the cause of such a state, but simply said it
was natural.

   Coming to the times of Yao, ten suns once appeared together,
scorching the crops, killing trees and plants, so that the people had
nothing to eat: ferocious dragon-like beasts, baboons with long teeth,
monsters of the deep, gorillas or bears, great boars and pythons are
hurtful to people. So Yao employed I to slay the baboons in the wastes
of Ch‛ou Hua and killed the monsters on the shore of the evil waters (of
the barbarian north); he bound the evil beast that creates hurricanes in
the marshes of the Ch‛ing Chiu; he shot the ten suns above and destroyed
the dragon-like beast below; he cut down the python in T‛ung Ting lake
and captured the wild boars in the Mulberry forest. The people were
delighted and placed <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> Yao on the pedestal
of the Son of Heaven.<span id="fr_14"></span>[14](tgln1.htm#4_note_14)

   It was then, for the first time, that the empire had any cartography.
The country was divided into nine divisions, with specifications of
mountains and plains, and distances were mapped out. During the time of
Shun, the engineers mismanaged the floods and the obstreperous waves
beat in violence against the land. The Lung Men was not then opened, nor
the Lu Liang mountain tunnelled: the Yangtse and Hui rivers were still
one, and the sea filled all the plains below. The people sought the high
grounds and dwelt in the trees. So Shun employed Yü to drain the Three
Rivers and the Five Lakes, to tunnel the I Ch‛üeh mountain and lead
forth the waters of the Ch‛an and Chien. Channels and drains were made
to lead all the waters to the Eastern Sea: the great flood flowed away
and the continent dried up. The people found repose and ascribed Yao and
Shun to be sages.<span id="fr_15"></span>[15](tgln1.htm#4_note_15)

   At a later age, the emperors Chieh and Chou<span
id="fr_16"></span>[16](tgln1.htm#4_note_16) built marble houses and
jasper terraces, porches of ivory and beds of jade. Chou had a forest of
meats and game hanging for his tables, and a lake of wine. He exhausted
all the natural resources of the country and wasted the energies of the
people: he extracted the heart of his minister (who ventured to
reprimand him) and ripped open a pregnant woman in order to examine the
embryo. He put the empire into confusion and oppressed the people. At
this juncture, T‛ang, accordingly, with 300 chariots of war, overthrew
Chieh at Nan Ts‛ao and imprisoned him in a great tower. Wu Wang, too,
with 3000 armoured soldiers, destroyed Chou in Mou Yeh, slaying him at
Hsüan Shih. Whereupon the empire was settled in peace, and concord
multiplied. These were, therefore, named the worthies of Tang and Wu.

   From this we may gather that to gain the ascription of a Worthy or
Sage it was essential to fall on the troublous times of anarchy. Today
how many perfect men, born in an age of turmoil, full of virtue, and
cherishing the <span id="page_90">p. 90</span> *Tao*, possessing
inexhaustible knowledge, yet keeping silence, putting a muzzle on their
own mouths and a gag on their lips, have died without the age knowing
how to esteem their silence.<span
id="fr_17"></span>[17](tgln1.htm#4_note_17) Hence the *Tao* that can be
explained and spoken is not the eternal *Tao*. The name that can be
defined is not the eternal name. Such as can be inscribed on bamboo,
carved and cut in metal and stone and transmitted, are only secondary
and inferior goods. The Five Emperors and Three Kings differed in their
achievements; but all had a common purpose. They went by different
roads, but reached the same end. Later scholars have been ignorant of
that which formed the Unity of the Tao and the essential and important
points of the embodiment of virtue. They appropriated ready-made
opinions and adopted old fashions. Stiffly seated opposite each other,
they discussed these ready-made theories and beat the drum and shouted
for joy and danced in their pleasure or joined in animated and lively
argument. Thus, savants hear much, but are filled with many doubts,<span
id="fr_17"></span>[17](tgln1.htm#4_note_17) a condition aptly described
by the words of the Ode 11. 6 Bkv. Pt. 2.

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">THEY DARE NOT, WITHOUT WEAPONS, ATTACK A TIGER;<br />
THEY DARE NOT CROSS THE HO, WITHOUT A BOAT.<br />
THEY KNOW ONE THING;<br />
BUT THEY ONLY KNOW THAT ONE.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   The Sage-Emperor embodies the principle of *wu-wei*. The King
imitates the Yin and Yang. The Autocrat copies the Four Seasons. The
Prince uses the Six Laws.<span
id="fr_18"></span>[18](tgln1.htm#4_note_18)

   The Supreme (God) holds sway over Heaven and Earth and keeps in
subjection the mountains and rivers.<span
id="fr_19"></span>[19](tgln1.htm#4_note_19)

|                                      |
|--------------------------------------|
| **Emperor, King, Autocrat, Prince.** |

He sends forth and calls in the Yin and Yang, and lengthen out, as well
as draws in, the Four Seasons. He stretches out the Heavens and holds
together the six quarters of the globe: he supports and covers all
things, sending dew, giving light, affording guidance. His mercy
overflows without selfish partiality. He is impartial in His love and
dislike; all flying insects or creeping things <span id="page_91">p.
91</span> (all creation) depend on His energy for birth.

   Yin and Yang, with harmonious endowments from Heaven and Earth, give
bodily form to myriad varieties: possessing the tempered fluids, the
flux of matter proceeds to the end, so that the embryos of species may
be produced. The expansion and contractions, the impalpableness and
tenuity cannot be fathomed. The beginnings and the endings, the
unformed, with its later maturity, proceed in their paths in unceasing
march.

   Of the Four Seasons the Spring begets, the Summer fructifies, the
Autumn gathers, the Winter conserves. There is method in the reception
and bestowment: there are times for ingress and egress. The pullulating
arid withering seasons, the expansion and suspension of life have their
timely order: there is no mistake in the process. Spring (joy), Autumn
(anger) (asperity), Summer (strength), Winter (weakness), never depart
from their appointed courses.

   The Six Laws<span id="fr_20"></span>[20](tgln1.htm#4_note_20) may be
thus expressed. They concern the granting of life or sentence of death,
rewards and punishments, bestowment or alienation of lands. Anything not
administered according to these harmonies would be without principle.
Therefore, such a man is careful of the weights and measures,<span
id="fr_21"></span>[21](tgln1.htm#4_note_21) of the standards and
measuring lines, (or is equitable, just and true), sees to it that (even
small things) are correct, so that his country may be governed properly.

   We may also conclude that the man in sympathy with T‛ai I (the
Supreme) is enlightened as to the facts of

|                                        |
|----------------------------------------|
| **The Characteristics of their rule.** |

Heaven and Earth and animated with the obligations due to *tao* and
*te:* his intelligence is clear as the noontide; his spirit is
identified with creation: his activity and rest synchonize with Yin and
Yang: his joy and anger act in cordiality with the Four Seasons. His
virtuous charity reaches the most distant parts, and his name is
transmitted to later generations. This is the man, the Emperor, who
embodies <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> the principles of the T‛ai I.

   The King imitates Yin and Yang; his virtue stands on a par with
Heaven and Earth; his intelligence is comparable with the sun and moon;
his spiritual character is like the divinities. He is similar to Heaven
and Earth (they are the round and square); he maintains the principles
of right, justice and truth. Able to govern himself, he obtains the
adhesion of men. So there are none in the empire who do not follow and
give general assent to laws and commands, as they are issued and
promulgated.

   The Autocrat copies the Four Seasons and acts flexibly, but not with
impatience, firmly, but not with harshness, generously, but not with
excess, eagerly, but not refractorily. Leisurely, flexibly,
deliberately, persistently he acts so as to nourish the various things
and affairs of life. His goodness tolerates the simple, and suffers the
reprobates. There is no trace of a baleful partiality.

   The Princes use the Six Laws, suppress anarchy, arrest the violent,
advance the worthy and degrade the unfit: they brush away the
incompetent and forcibly correct them: they straighten out the rough and
awkward and bend the crooked to make him straight. These know what to
prohibit and permit, what to encourage and what to discourage. Following
the spirit of the times and popular ideas, they act so as to command the
allegiance of men.

   Now, when he who is *emperor* acts in sympathy with Yin and Yang (and
not with God, as he should) he will

|                                                 |
|-------------------------------------------------|
| **Abuse of the proper order leads to failure.** |

suffer from the aggression of others. When the *king* imitates the Four
Seasons, he will have his territories sliced away. When the *autocrat*
uses the six laws, he will suffer shame at the hands of his neighbours.
When the *prince* loses his square and line i.e. righteousness and
justice, he will see the defection of his people.

   Thus we may conclude that when a man of minor gifts attempts deeds
beyond his abilities, he will act in a very defective manner, lacking
all the marks of a finesse of <span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

|                                   |
|-----------------------------------|
| **A Square peg in a round hole.** |

detail which is the characteristic of the first-rate man, so the people
are estranged. When the man in a superior station deals with second-rate
affairs, it will follow that his government will be narrow and his plans
skinny. His plans will offer no room for development of great things.
When the classes and masses attend to their own businesses, each to
each, the empire will be properly ruled.

   Heaven is careful of its own powers and Earth of its own elements:
men guard their own natures. The powers of Heaven are sun, moon, planet,
thunder, lightening, wind and rain. The elements of Earth are fire,
water, metal, wood, soil. The nature of man consists of feeling,
thought, meditation, intelligence, joy and anger. And so, when the four
senses are closed up and the "five extravagances"<span
id="fr_22"></span>[{22}](tgln1.htm#4_note_22) are suspended, the being
or individual will be immersed in the *tao*. Hence the spiritual
faculties will be hidden in the invisible world, and the spirit will
return to the Perfect Body (or the Perfect Realm).<span
id="fr_23"></span>[{23}](tgln1.htm#4_note_23) In such a state the eye
will be clear, but not occupied with seeing; the ear will be quick, but
not given to hearing; the mind will be exquisitely intelligent, directly
intuitive, but not occupied with thinking. There will be an abandon and
no energetic activity: harmonious concord will prevail, without giving
rise to pride of self (or boastfulness). The appetites, the passions,
will be in a state of calm, and there will be no employment of human
wisdom and clevernesses. The spirit fills the eye, so he sees clearly;
it is present in the ear, so he hears acutely; it abides in the mouth,
and so the person's words are with wisdom; it accummulates in the mind,
so his thoughts are penetrative. Hence the closing down of the Four
Senses gives the body rest from troubles, and the individual parts have
no sickness. There is no death, no life, no void, no excess: in such a
condition of spirit, like the diamond, it will not wear away: such are
the characteristics of the Perfect Man.<span
id="fr_24"></span>[24](tgln1.htm#4_note_24) All anarchy springs from
excess: the causes of excess may be traced <span id="page_94">p.
94</span> to the extravagant use made of the five elements. Let us take
these in order.<span id="fr_25"></span>[25](tgln1.htm#4_note_25)

   *Extravagant and Luxurious Use of Wood.*—A lavish use of timber in
building, with rafter and post interlacing

|                                              |
|----------------------------------------------|
| **Waste and excesses the cause of anarchy.** |

each the other, in the creation of palaces and residences, lofty storeys
are built, with high passages connecting the one with the other:
spacious basements, rafters, poles, pillars, planks and boards, of every
description, are used, each and all mutually connected and affording
mutual support, one being clamped and dovetailed into the other. Cunning
workmanship is used to engrave the floating dragon and crouching tiger
on these, or in decoration of the rooms. The most dazzling colours are
used to depict pictures of water and flowers, wreathing and encircling
in tortuous lines the pillars and walls, elaborate designs of luxuriant
scenes of grass and water, one following on the other, in great
profusion.

   *Extravagant and Luxurious Use of Water.*—Long and deep channels are
dug through the ground, stretching right to the far distance. Waters are
led into these from the hills. Ornamental and zigzag ways are created,
slabs of stone are piled up; squares of marble are built into ornamental
banks or jetties and landing places; obstacles are placed in the water
to create artificial waves and fountains, the waters being lashed into
angry waves. The water is bent in its path, being deviated hither and
thither,—now straight, now oblique, here turning sharply round, there
moving in a curving channel, in imitation of the waters of Yü, Ou, and
Wu. The lotus and the chestnut plants are grown in abundant luxuriance
in these waters, to feed the tortoises and fishes. Great herons, the
turquoise kingfishers<span id="fr_26"></span>[26](tgln1.htm#4_note_26)
fly about; paddy rice and millet abound. The dragon boats, with the
fabulous bird painted on the prow, sail along, to the sound of gala
music.

   *Extravagant and Luxurious Use of Soil.*—High walls are built round
the cities for defence: trees are planted <span id="page_95">p.
95</span> for bulwarks:<span id="fr_27"></span>[27](tgln1.htm#4_note_27)
parapets of earth and timber of surpassing height are admired and sought
after: extensive walled and unwalled gardens for housing the rarest
animals; portals and houses of giddy heights are erected, touching the
very clouds and rivalling the Kun-Iun mountain itself in height. Men
erect walls and parapets and build thoroughfares over giddy heights.
Elevations are lowered and depressions raised: earth is piled on earth,
mountain high. To pass quickly from one place to another and in order to
reach distant parts, roads are straightened, and obstructions and
dangers removed. There is constant riding to the hunt, but no accidents
through horses stumbling.

   *The Extravagant and Luxurious Use of Metal.*—Great bells and
tripods, beautiful vessels, works of art are manufactured. The
decorations cast on these have been superb. The mountain dragon, or
pheasant, and all animals of variegated plumage, the aquatic grass,
flamboyants and grains of cereals were engraven on them, one symbol
interwoven with another. The sleeping rhinoceros and crouching tiger,
the dragon, wreathed in coils, were wrought. These figures shone with
the brilliancy of the sun, dazzling the eyes: the decorations and the
engravings in metal shone with different rays and variegated hues: there
were zigzag lines, dovetailing traceries. Roughness was smoothed out;
every flaw was eliminated; the lines were exceedingly fine, like those
of the bamboo and water reeds with the whiteness of snow. They were
close together and yet each apart, distinct and clear. Though carved,
the lines could not be felt, so smooth and even was the work.

   *The Extravagant and Luxurious Use of Fire.*—By roasting, frying,
broiling and stewing, they sought to perfect the cooking of foods and to
give the viands flavour, rivalling the sweet and acid tastes of Ching
and Wu, in their variety, by sauces made from the salt of Ch‛i.

   Forests were burnt for the chase, great timbers being scorched and
charred. Bellows blew the fires of the stoves, so that the very iron and
brass of these were melted by <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> the
roaring heat. So it went on, day by day. There were no big trees left on
the mountains nor wild mulberry in the fields: wood was burnt into
charcoal; grass was scorched and burnt into ashes; the grasses of the
fields, betimes, were scorched white, so that nothing found its
seasonable ripeness. The sky, above, was hidden by the smoke, and the
wealth of the land, below, was exhausted by the extravagance.

   One, alone, of these five extravagant wastes would be enough to bring
the empire to ruin! Consider the simplicity of the ancient court of the
Ming Tang<span id="fr_28"></span>[28](tgln1.htm#4_note_28) in ancient
times. They were simply built to ensure that no damp should arise from
the ground, nor rain and fog enter from above, and that they might be
shielded from the winds that blow from the four quarters. This was
thought enough. The walls were not ornamented: the woodwork was not
carved (or even sawn or planed too fine). The metal vessels were not
engraved; clothes were not cut out with any elaboration (i.e. the
corners were not cut off, but shaped much in the way of a kimono). Hats
were not shaped with elaborate corners,<span
id="fr_29"></span>[29](tgln1.htm#4_note_29) but in a simple style. The
Ming Tang was built just large enough for people to move about
comfortably in attendance on their duty: it was kept so quiet and clean
as to be fit for the worship of God and for the ceremonies of 'All
Souls.'<span id="fr_30"></span>[30](tgln1.htm#4_note_30) The people were
thus taught to practise economy in expenditure.

   But music, painting and the five flavours, the rare delicacies and
curios of distant countries, wonderful and

|                                   |
|-----------------------------------|
| **Luxury inflames the passions.** |

curious articles are enough to agitate the mind and give inconstancy to
the will, to stir the soul and inflame the passions in an indescribable
way.

   The production of wealth by Nature consists really of no more than
the five elements. The sage king, by the economical use of these,<span
id="fr_31"></span>[31](tgln1.htm#4_note_31) governed without excesses.

   All people whose natures and minds are blended in harmony, without
anger or joy, and whose desires are <span id="page_97">p. 97</span>
simple, are animated with the feeling of pleasure. Pleasure seeks to
express itself in movement: movement gives rise to motion, the tripping
of the feet: this again leads to song and dance. When song and dance are
spontaneous, wild animals come in and join in the dance.<span
id="fr_31a"></span>[31a](tgln1.htm#4_note_31a)

   When people's minds and natures are in sorrow, by reason of death,
there arises grief; and with grief comes mourning. Weeping excites the
nerves, and excitement leads to passion. Passion, on the other hand,
wants to express itself in physical movements; so there ensues the
gesture of hand and foot. Anger gets hold of a person who sees his land
pillaged and raided. Anger rises in this way: the blood, coursing fast
in the veins, gives rise to temper, and violence of spirit issues in the
ebullition of anger. Once anger has been vented, the hatred of the mind
has been released.

   Thus, bells, drums, flutes, whistles, shields and feather flags are
the symbolic embellishments of joy. Garments of frayed edges, caps of
hemp, rough hemp clothes and mourning staff<span
id="fr_32"></span>[32](tgln1.htm#4_note_32) are the symbolic ornaments
of a mourning spirit. The pangs of sorrow have their regulations,
whereby grief is restrained within bounds. Arms, wands, metal drums,
battle-axes and halberds symbolise anger. There is the fact; and the
symbolic representation of it is shown. In ancient times, the sage sat
in the seat of honour administrating and instructing impartially: and
the feeling of kindness and goodwill blended: high and low were of the
same mind, prince and minister were in concord. The necessaries of life
were enough and to spare. Families and individuals had enough. Fathers
were sympathetic; sons were filial, elder brothers kind and the younger
ones cooperative. There was no grumbling at life nor regrets at
death.<span id="fr_33"></span>[33](tgln1.htm#4_note_33) The empire was
permeated with the spirit of concord and everyone was satisfied. As the
joy and goodwill that filled the heart of everybody needed some means of
expressing itself, the Sages created music for the people, in order that
they might possess an instrument <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> for
this self-expression.

   In the government of these modern days, the taxes on agriculture and
fisheries are heavy: the octrois and local

|                                 |
|---------------------------------|
| **Heavy taxes lead to despair** |

taxes are collected harshly: prohibitions against fishing and the use of
weirs make it impossible to use the nets. It is useless to plough the
fields. The strength of the people is spent in attending to the demands
of the official minions, and their wealth is used up in paying the poll
taxes. There is no food at home; there is no corn for those who go
forth:<span id="fr_34"></span>[34](tgln1.htm#4_note_34) the aged are not
fed nor the dead buried. Wives are sold and children are disposed of, in
order to meet the demands of the authorities. Even these desperate
measures fail to meet every claim. Rustic people and simple women,
homeless and wandering, have lost their spirit, and their minds are
filled with despair. It would be an entire misuse of the essential idea
of music to strike the great bell, to tap the resonant drum, to blow the
pipe and flutes and play on the organ to people under such distressing
and unhappy circumstances.

   In ancient times the authorities imposed light taxes and the people
had enough. The prince exercised his goodness; the minister discharged
his loyalties; the father dispensed his kindness; the son consummated
his filial duty. All were moved by the feelings of love, and there was
no room for any unfriendly spirit.

   The three years mourning is not to be observed as matter of
compulsion (but of real feeling); at such a time, music has no pleasure;
good food has no taste: the mind can't leave off thinking of the
departed.

   But the manners and customs of these modern times have deteriorated:
extravagant desires have multiplied:

|                               |
|-------------------------------|
| **and deterioration of life** |

rites have degenerated. Prince and minister are given to mutual
deception: father and son are suspicious of one another; the spirit of
antipathy and aversion fills every breast; thoughts of true filiality
are dead in the mind. A feeling <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> of
hilarity and levity exists in those who are clad in the mourning dress
and who wear the white cap: and though there is a full three years
observance of mourning rites, the real feelings of mourning are wanting.

   In olden times, the king's demesne of a 1,000 square *li* and the
land of the feudal lords of a 100 *li* were sufficient

|                                   |
|-----------------------------------|
| **Unworthy ruler to be removed.** |

for the needs of each; there was no need of mutual aggression; each
attended to his own possessions. Should it happen that a recalcitrant
appeared who did not act in this princely spirit, but oppressed the
people, quarrelled over territory, plundered land, created anarchy in
government, violated prohibitions, who neither responded to summonses,
nor obeyed commands,—a person whom no laws could keep in check nor
admonitions change, there was nothing for it but to move troops against
him for punishment, take him captive and disperse his supporters, wall
up his cemetery and substitute a party to sacrifice at the hearth in his
place. One of his sons or grandsons was selected by lot to continue the
reign.

   In these later times, on the contrary, kings plan to enlarge their
dominions and snatch frontiers, by

|                                |
|--------------------------------|
| **The right use of Soldiers.** |

appropriating the land of others and increasing their possessions
unceasingly. Their use of soldiers is without just grounds: they punish
innocent countries, slay guiltless people and exterminate the
descendants of the holy kings of old. Other great countries follow their
example of aggrandisement, and rulers, committing the cares of their own
country to petty allies, rush forth to rob people of their cattle and
make slaves of their children. They destroy the ancestral temples and
move away the precious inheritance; they fill the land with rivers of
blood and create desolation by their ferocity. All this is done to
satisfy the desires of lustful lords. Soldiers were never meant to be
used in this way.<span id="fr_35"></span>[35](tgln1.htm#4_note_35)

   The 'raison d'être' of the soldiers is to suppress oppression, not to
be oppressors, Similarly, music was created <span id="page_100">p.
100</span>

|                         |
|-------------------------|
| **And decay of music.** |

for the consummation of concord in human nature, not to be the cause of
voluptuousness. Mourning is a rite expressive of the feeling of grief,
and not meant to be merely an artificial act.

   There are, therefore, principles in the service of parents, love
being the predominant element. There are demeanours and miens observed
in the Court, with the feeling of reverence as the chief factor. There
are ceremonies in the observances of mourning, but the dominating idea
is grief. There is an art for the use of the military, and justice
should be the ruling idea in their employment.

   Build on the foundation, and the Tao will operate: when the
foundation is neglected, the Tao will fail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tgl5)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
