[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](tgl8) [Next](tgln2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

## NOTES AND ANNOTATIONS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="1"></span>**THE COSMIC SPIRIT. [DISSERTATION
I](tgl1.htm#dis).—Pp. 1-30.**

   This is the lst Essay in the series. The Chinese title is Yuan Tao
Hsun, (\#\#\#). The **Tao** is discussed in a separate article. It needs
here only to say that an innovation has been made in the translation of
the word Tao by **Cosmic Spirit.** To anticipate perfectly just
criticism to which the translation is open that there is a lack of
consistency in the use, it is well to say that Cosmic Spirit is
sometimes used, and sometimes the transliterated sound Tao is used. This
is a compromise. The Cosmic Spirit really indicates and expresses
comprehensively the idea of the Tao in Chinese. The Chinese word is
retained because it is being adopted into English partly; and in many
cases it is a simpler form for use.

<span id="1_note_1"></span>[1](tgl1.htm#fr_1). Fu tao cho \#\#\#. The
chô follows the theme indicating the matter discussed. It also implies
personality, but not so here.

<span id="1_note_2"></span>[2](tgl1.htm#fr_2). **Yin** and **Yang.** The
negative and positive principles conceived of as existing in nature
universally: male and female: light and darkness.

<span id="1_note_3"></span>[3](tgl1.htm#fr_3). There are no surprising
calamities, because all is natural and well-ordered. It may refer more
to ill-starred signs than actual physical disturbance.

<span id="1_note_4"></span>[4](tgl1.htm#fr_4). The rainbow is a bad
sign: no one dares to point the finger at it.

<span id="1_note_5"></span>[5](tgl1.htm#fr_5). The introduction of such
persons here and elsewhere with the exaggerated description of their
powers may have contributed to the Taoist degeneration of later days. If
such passages were introduced by the original writer, it was done to
denote the great power of the Tao, in rhetorical terms.

<span id="1_note_6"></span>[6](tgl1.htm#fr_6). The Creator, i.e., the
Tao. There may be here a personification of natural forces under the
sway of the Tao.

<span id="1_note_7"></span>[7](tgl1.htm#fr_7). **Central organ.** The
authority of the mind under the sway of the Tao.

<span id="1_note_8"></span>[8](tgl1.htm#fr_8). **No fatigue,** etc: One
of the great themes of the work is that there is no diminution of
powers, where the Tao is the dominant force. But a reliance on the
senses leads to early exhaustion. This is a fundamental teaching.

<span id="1_note_9"></span>[9](tgl1.htm#fr_9). **Legal interference.**
One of the Liberal principles is that the State should interfere as
little as possible by legal enactments. Things have a power of settling
themselves without the meddling of opportunist policies and cleverness
of the politician.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

<span id="1_note_10"></span>[10](tgl1.htm#fr_10). **Quiescent.** One of
the great words of the ancient Taoist philosophers. It implies a perfect
equilibrium in human nature, when undisturbed by the entrance of the
disturbing forces of passion, desire and all the inventions of the
tinkers that crowd the human stage, people who have invented many
methods to aid virtue,—the **te** that results from tao. This refers to
the Confucianist theories of **jen,** love, and **i,** justice. It
should be remembered that there was a great controversy between the
Taoist and the Confucianist on the origin of being and on the doctrine
of human nature.

<span id="1_note_11"></span>[11](tgl1.htm#fr_11). Do not change the
tao-nature for the human, not the spiritual for the sensual.

<span id="1_note_12"></span>[12](tgl1.htm#fr_12). Cp: Mencius Book vi.
I: 8, 4.

<span id="1_note_13"></span>[13](tgl1.htm#fr_13). Tan Ho. For **Tan**
read **chan.** A famous angler.

<span id="1_note_14"></span>[14](tgl1.htm#fr_14). For Yuan Huan read
Chüan Huan.

<span id="1_note_15"></span>[15](tgl1.htm#fr_15). For Wu Nao read Hu
Hao. The story of how the branches of the mulberry tree came to be used
for the most famous bow is that the crows used to rest in the branches.
But when springing off, there was such reaction in the branch that the
crows got frightened and refused to fly away and so cried in the tree.
Another story is that when Huang Ti was flying away to be a genii from
the people who loved him, that they shot at the dragon on which he was
flying to bring him back, but missed the object; and so the people
wailed and the bow came to be known as the "crying bow."

<span id="1_note_16"></span>[16](tgl1.htm#fr_16). For Seng Meng Tzu read
**Peng Meng Tzu.**

<span id="1_note_17"></span>[17](tgl1.htm#fr_17). The original is rather
difficult to render; but the idea is "Be guided by great principles and
not by temporary policies."

<span id="1_note_18"></span>[18](tgl1.htm#fr_18). **T‛u Shan.** There
are 4 places of this name. The one in the text was in Anhui, 8 li S. E.
of Huai Yuan. There was a hill, river and place of the same name. The
concord is that between the great Yü and Feudal Lords.

<span id="1_note_19"></span>[19](tgl1.htm#fr_19). Yin I. A famous Prime
Minister of T‛ang who kept his emperor prisoner until **he amended** his
ways.

<span id="1_note_20"></span>[20](tgl1.htm#fr_20). **Li Chu.** A minister
of Huang Ti. (2698 B.C.), noted for keenness of eyesight. Mencius
mentions him in Book IV Li Lou, Pt. 1. Chap. 1.

<span id="1_note_21"></span>[21](tgl1.htm#fr_21). Shih Kuang. Great
musician. He blinded his eyes for concentration on music.

<span id="1_note_22"></span>[22](tgl1.htm#fr_22). A small domain, lit: a
terrain of 3 li.

<span id="1_note_23"></span>[23](tgl1.htm#fr_23). Another slap at the
Confucian 'sage'. Here the writer touches on a vital Taoist view. It is
something akin to the modern view partly expounded by Tolstoy. When men
are properly self-governing and taught by the inward monitor, there is
no <span id="page_246">p. 246</span> need for the enactment of law or
for human government. This is implied in the common saying "The law is
only for bad men." The underlying idea is of a natural scheme of life
contrary to the Confucian theory of life which is entirely artificial.
Weight and measure. The yard and foot-rule came into existence after the
loss of the natural state, through strife and cunning and ambition and
greed. These standards gave an occasion for dishonesty and injustice.
The doctrine of **jen, i,** benevolence and justice are an artificial
creation which has led the world away from the fundamental truths of
life and principles of action. Old Mause in "Old Mortality" gives vent
to the idea when he says:—"Your leddyship and the steward has been
pleased to propose that my son Cuddie suld work in the barn wi a
new-fangled machine for dighting the corn frae th' chaff, thus impiously
thwarting the will o' Divine Providence by raising wind for your
leddyship's ain particular use by human art, instead of soliciting it by
prayer."

<span id="1_note_24"></span>[24](tgl1.htm#fr_24). These items are
mentioned, in detail, to show the adaptations of nature and to emphasise
its naturalness.

<span id="1_note_25"></span>[25](tgl1.htm#fr_25). **Wu wei.** Lit., **No
action, not doing.** This, of course, is not correct. **Wu** has not its
usual meaning of **not;** but of invisible existence. **Yu Wu** comes
from **Wu yu;** the existent comes from the non-existent. It is the
invisible state from which all visible things come. Thus it is a synonym
of Tao. Hence **wu wei** means **tao** action. The same idea is seen in
the words of thc Psalm. "There is no voice nor sound: their language is
not heard."

<span id="1_note_26"></span>[26](tgl1.htm#fr_26). The gate of Heaven.
This is explained by the next paragraph.

<span id="1_note_27"></span>[27](tgl1.htm#fr_27). Cosmic Soul. The
original is Tao. Tao has been translated by many words, such as Nature,
First Cause, Primum mobile, etc.

<span id="1_note_28"></span>[28](tgl1.htm#fr_28). Kung Kung. One of the
two ancient engineers. {Kung Kung is also the mythological figure who
knocked down one of the four mountains supporting the heavens, thus
accounting for the apparent tilt of the sky.}

<span id="1_note_29"></span>[29](tgl1.htm#fr_29). I, king of Kuang Tung
mentioned in other essays too. He is the subject of one of the most
popular plays in the country.

<span id="1_note_30"></span>[30](tgl1.htm#fr_30). **Sage** here refers
to Confucius himself. His systems of ethics are man-made moralities and
not emanating from the Tao. Hence the contention.

<span id="1_note_31"></span>[31](tgl1.htm#fr_31). Naturalness is sure in
its ways. There may be a veiled attack on ambitious politicians and
statesmen who force the course of things. **Giddy height** Cp. Richard
III. "Who raised me to this giddy height."

<span id="1_note_32"></span>[32](tgl1.htm#fr_32). **Wu wei,** Translate
by no-action, for antithesis.

<span id="1_note_33"></span>[33](tgl1.htm#fr_33). Affairs settle
themselves. Time is a healer.

<span id="1_note_33a"></span>[33a](tgl1.htm#fr_33a). Knows how to guard
its roots. It knows when to pullulate <span id="page_247">p. 247</span>
and when to close up flowering etc.

<span id="1_note_34"></span>[34](tgl1.htm#fr_34). The passage is
obscure; but the general meaning is there can be no wrenching of the
natural.

<span id="1_note_35"></span>[35](tgl1.htm#fr_35). **Symbols of
unworthiness.** Princes, dukes, lords use depreciatory terms in speaking
of themselves, such as **orphans,** the **lonely one** and so on.

<span id="1_note_36"></span>[36](tgl1.htm#fr_36). The Unity. May not
mean Tao here, but rather to have a commanding control, mental or
physical of any situation or thing.

<span id="1_note_37"></span>[37](tgl1.htm#fr_37). Just as one general
governs the army.

<span id="1_note_38"></span>[38](tgl1.htm#fr_38). Mainstay. The word is
\#\#\# i.e. the trunk of a tree.

<span id="1_note_39"></span>[39](tgl1.htm#fr_39). Pioneers. May there be
a reference to ambitious persons?

<span id="1_note_40"></span>[40](tgl1.htm#fr_40). Ch‛ü Pei-yü. A
minister of Wei.

<span id="1_note_41"></span>[41](tgl1.htm#fr_41). The meaning is
according to the official commentator, "The Taoist discusses affairs
from the **tao** point of view, and hence is certain in judgment. The
**tao** is before the advent of any affair and so can control it. It
also governs the end and issue.

<span id="1_note_42"></span>[42](tgl1.htm#fr_42). A critical business.
Any situation fraught with tense issues.

<span id="1_note_43"></span>[43](tgl1.htm#fr_43). **Sage.** The Taoist
sage.

<span id="1_note_44"></span>[44](tgl1.htm#fr_44). Yü,—the great emperor.

<span id="1_note_45"></span>[45](tgl1.htm#fr_45). This passage throws
some light on **wu wei,** viz. that it does not mean laissez faire. He
strove: he is prompt in every act: instantaneous to the call of duty.

<span id="1_note_46"></span>[46](tgl1.htm#fr_46). Cp: Book of History.
Bk II. Chap. 2. Sect. 14.

<span id="1_note_47"></span>[47](tgl1.htm#fr_47). **Gain repose.** Not
ease and leisure, but the freedom from sense agitation aroused by any
anti-tao state.

<span id="1_note_48"></span>[48](tgl1.htm#fr_48). Distance. The word is
**Hsiu** \#\#\# which usually means salary, but here length of time or
distance.

<span id="1_note_49"></span>[49](tgl1.htm#fr_49). The action of **wu
wei.** The reference is to the **Tao Te Ching** Chap. 43. This is a
magificent description of water and its power. It worthily shows the
exhaustless and beneficial operations of **tao.**

<span id="1_note_50"></span>[50](tgl1.htm#fr_50). Light bears a nearer
relation to the Formless Spirit than water does, because it has no
substance. Water is the grandson, because it has form and substance.

<span id="1_note_51"></span>[51](tgl1.htm#fr_51). The passage of
anything from the immaterial to the material means deterioration. Plato
says "Generation leads to corruption". In Christian theology there is
the question of the sinfulness of the flesh. The view is also in
Buddhism.

<span id="1_note_52"></span>[52](tgl1.htm#fr_52). **The Supremacy
power.** The stability given by an inward repose arising from
identification with **tao.** There are no accretions from the flesh.

<span id="1_note_53"></span>[53](tgl1.htm#fr_53), <span
id="1_note_54"></span>[54](tgl1.htm#fr_54). **Immaterial, Formless.**
Great terms in Taoism. The political conditions of the time is ever
hovering over the thought of the writer. He was himself in difficult
positions. Indirectly <span id="page_248">p. 248</span> he may be
referring to the emperor, his grandfather, and implying that were he
living in fellowship with **tao,** there would be freedom from the
complexities of passion and he would have at his service all the powers
of the spirit and nature.

<span id="1_note_55"></span>[55](tgl1.htm#fr_55). Unity. A commentator
says unity is the foundation of the Tao.

<span id="1_note_56"></span>[56](tgl1.htm#fr_56). It is difficult to say
whether he intends to attribute personality to the Unity. It is evident
he would give it a separate existence from all else. But as Martineau
says, "It is certain that in ancient philosophy words expressive of
mental life and action were employed where no proper idea of personality
was present." "Types of Ethical Theory," Vol. I. p. 87.

<span id="1_note_57"></span>[57](tgl1.htm#fr_57). Includes the centre
and circumference of the universe.

<span id="1_note_58"></span>[58](tgl1.htm#fr_58). No circle etc. It
can't be measured nor fathomed.

<span id="1_note_59"></span>[59](tgl1.htm#fr_59). Unity opens the
entrance or is the gate of Tao. The idea is the entrance through narrow
defile to empire.

<span id="1_note_60"></span>[60](tgl1.htm#fr_60). Five tones. Kung,
shang, chüeh, chi (cheng), yu.

<span id="1_note_61"></span>[61](tgl1.htm#fr_61). Sweet, acid, saline,
acrid, bitter.

<span id="1_note_62"></span>[62](tgl1.htm#fr_62). The unity here may
mean the point of transition from the immaterial into the material and
vice versa. **Unity covers** the deep, i.e., everywhere. The point when
the invisible passes into the visible, and is all pervasive.

<span id="1_note_63"></span>[63](tgl1.htm#fr_63). Cp., Cowper's lines,

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"Like the cerulean arc we see<br />
Majestic in its own simplicity."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="1_note_64"></span>[64](tgl1.htm#fr_64). Lao Tan referring to
the everlasting, natural **tao,** said \#\#\# but **tao** is used only
conventionally for the nameless. It is not easy to give a name to it.
**One portal.** The portal of generation of matter: passing from the
invisible to the visible, from spirit to matter, so entering corruption.

<span id="1_note_65"></span>[65](tgl1.htm#fr_65). Follows law. All is
law. The invisible law of the nature of things. In tune with this there
can be no erratic ways.

<span id="1_note_66"></span>[66](tgl1.htm#fr_66). Corruption of tao. Joy
and anger are excesses of the equanimity of the **tao.**

<span id="1_note_67"></span>[67](tgl1.htm#fr_67). **Repose, purity.**
Great names in the system, **Ching, hsü.**

<span id="1_note_68"></span>[68](tgl1.htm#fr_68). Shen Ming, Spiritual
and Spirit.

<span id="1_note_69"></span>[69](tgl1.htm#fr_69). **Autocrat of the
Universe.** Triumphant confidence in the **tao.**

<span id="1_note_70"></span>[70](tgl1.htm#fr_70). **He returns within.**
The **tao** is within and without. Cp. this with the idea of Plato.

   "Are we sharers in that divine Reason which informs and organises the
universe? We must recognise and welcome it everywhere, and follow it out
as it ramifies through the world of sense. There is nothing inconsistent
in this double view, which regards the material system, now as the
opaque veil to hide, and now as the transparent medium to reveal, the
inner thought which is the divine essence of all: and seeks at one <span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> time to ascend into the intellectual glory
by escape from detaining appearances: at another, to descend with that
glory as it streams into the remotest recesses of the phenomenal world."
Martineau. "Types of Ethical Theory," Vol. I. p. 67.

<span id="1_note_71"></span>[71](tgl1.htm#fr_71). This passage seems to
imply that if the seeker knocks, he will find. The Tao will respond to
human pressure: in other words, prayer is effective. Also it implies the
personality of the Tao. The words used are Hsuan fu, \#\#\# the hidden
secret and profundity.

<span id="1_note_72"></span>[72](tgl1.htm#fr_72). The **Tao-man** finds
his work expeditious, when guided by Tao.

<span id="1_note_73"></span>[73](tgl1.htm#fr_73). **Highest
excellence,** tê, the **tao** in action.

<span id="1_note_74"></span>[74](tgl1.htm#fr_74). Possibly a reference
to his own disturbed times. One reason for writing the 21 essays was the
hope to assuage the anarchy of the day, by the application of the
**tao.**

<span id="1_note_75"></span>[75](tgl1.htm#fr_75). Nobility of life: true
nobility.

<span id="1_note_76"></span>[76](tgl1.htm#fr_76). There were famous
historical palaces in Ts‛u, also famous lakes in the country. This was
the prominent kingdom of the age.

<span id="1_note_77"></span>[77](tgl1.htm#fr_77). **Chiu Shao** \#\#\#.
Music composed by Shun, the emperor. **Liu Ying** \#\#\# the music
composed by Chuen Shu, minister of Shun.

<span id="1_note_78"></span>[78](tgl1.htm#fr_78). The individual under
the true order of eternal law, not swayed by the senses and passions.

<span id="1_note_79"></span>[79](tgl1.htm#fr_79). The satisfaction of
life does not come from without but from within,—the reconciliation and
harmony of the spirit with naturalness.

<span id="1_note_80"></span>[80](tgl1.htm#fr_80). **Spiritual joy.** Wu
loh, (\#\#\#) **Wu** not to be read as negative but as implying freedom
from sense and passion's contamination.

<span id="1_note_81"></span>[81](tgl1.htm#fr_81). To the mind. That is
the true self spoken of before.

<span id="1_note_82"></span>[82](tgl1.htm#fr_82). **Governor of life.**
In the text the 5 viscera.

<span id="1_note_83"></span>[83](tgl1.htm#fr_83). **Hsü Yu.** A hermit
of Ch‛i Shan. For his sanctity Yao, the emperor, desired him to take the
throne which he refused. Cp., Mencius Bk IV Chap. 9. 1. Also Analects
XXII Chap. 2. 2.

<span id="1_note_84"></span>[84](tgl1.htm#fr_84). Each is an empire in
himself. There is no need for organised monarchy when the **tao** rules
each. Cp. what Mencius says, **"Wan wu chieh pei yü wo \#\#\#."** "I am
a miniature cosmos."

<span id="1_note_85"></span>[85](tgl1.htm#fr_85). With this compare what
Mencius says, BK VII. 4. 1.

<span id="1_note_85a"></span>[85a](tgl1.htm#fr_85a). That is when
external impressions are eliminated.

<span id="1_note_86"></span>[86](tgl1.htm#fr_86). Pp. 24-28 may have
some spurious sentences as a later addition. It does not seem probable
that the same writer wrote all.

<span id="1_note_87"></span>[87](tgl1.htm#fr_87). This has been said
before in the essay. The recipient is governed by the **tao** within,
which no outward circumstance can change.

<span id="1_note_88"></span>[88](tgl1.htm#fr_88). The compass and square
cannot each be both round and square: **kou sheng pu neng ch‛üeh chih
(\#\#\#).** The plumb <span id="page_250">p. 250</span> and line cannot
be crooked and straight. Eternal principles are not to be made to suit
conventional life and temporal expedients.

<span id="1_note_89"></span>[89](tgl1.htm#fr_89). He is not scorched by
fire nor soaked by water. Figurative language to describe a firm spirit.

<span id="1_note_90"></span>[90](tgl1.htm#fr_90). Fulness of spirit.
Ch‛i \#\#\# is not air. It always has a special meaning in this
philosophy. It is something spiritual not physical. Vitalism. Cp.
Analects VII Chap. 10. 1.

<span id="1_note_91"></span>[91](tgl1.htm#fr_91). Cp. Great Learning
Chap VIII 1. 2. 3. An example. Duke Pei of Tsu was lost in constant
thought how to overthrow the king and get his throne. He was leaning on
his lance which pierced his jaw of which he was unconscious.

   **Concluding remark.** It is evident from certain passages in this
essay, especially in the latter parts, that the circle of writers were
seeking the consolations of philosophy and religion against the anarchy
and warring ambitions of the times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="2"></span>**REALITY. [DISSERTATION II](tgl2.htm#dis).—Pp.
31-58.**

   *This is the 2nd essay in the Chinese text. The exordium is
difficult. As a supplementary explanation and analysis is given later,
it is not necessary to say more here, than that the author tries to
describe the various steps in the evolution of the cosmos. As a rule,
Confucianism is satisfied with describing material phenomena and so
starts with Heaven. The Taoists go further back and think of Naturalness
and Tao.*

<span id="2_note_1"></span>[1](tgl2.htm#fr_1). The author tries to see
and to describe not only the phenomena of the cosmos but also what is
beyond—the various steps in the eternities of time and space. He pushes
the thought back to that which is behind all phenomena. Heaven is the
ultimate of the Confucian School; but to the Taoist philosopher there is
the tao and naturalism.

<span id="2_note_2"></span>[2](tgl2.htm#fr_2). **Ultimate depths.**
These are in the beginnings and shrouded in profound mystery.

<span id="2_note_3"></span>[3](tgl2.htm#fr_3). **In death.** Chuang Tzu
says: Life is the time of movement, death of rest.

<span id="2_note_4"></span>[4](tgl2.htm#fr_4). All things change, but
nothing is lost.

<span id="2_note_5"></span>[5](tgl2.htm#fr_5). The illustration of a man
moving a mountain in the night is a common proverb implying something
sudden and miraculous. The use of it here is to show the inadequacy of a
man-made doctrine divorced from the **tao.** So Confucianism and Meiism
may disappear and lose their sway, because they are not <span
id="page_251">p. 251</span> founded on tao. What comes from tao cannot
disappear, because it is coextensive with the cosmos.

<span id="2_note_6"></span>[6](tgl2.htm#fr_6). **Kung Yu-ai.** A
mythical case.

<span id="2_note_7"></span>[7](tgl2.htm#fr_7). The world is a mystery
and all events a riddle beyond human solution. For man himself is a part
of created things. The Taoist insists that there is a purpose in the
cosmos, but only known to the Unknown One.

<span id="2_note_8"></span>[8](tgl2.htm#fr_8). The Taoists hold that the
**tao-man** has no **kuei** (ghost) after death. He may have a **shen,**
spirit.

<span id="2_note_9"></span>[9](tgl2.htm#fr_9). The Taoists preserve
their bodies and spirits well, so end their lives naturally; and the
personality of the spirit enters and is lost in the Cosmic Spirit. They
leave no ghost. But those who die prematurely and unnaturally leave a
ghost.

<span id="2_note_10"></span>[10](tgl2.htm#fr_10). As the Taoists let the
**tao** rule the heart, so no worldly desires clamour within. Hence,
they have no cares or worry: their thoughts are tranquil and serene in
simplicity. So in sleep the mind rests and there are no dreams.

<span id="2_note_11"></span>[11](tgl2.htm#fr_11). The Chinese have an
account of the Utopian State which is much admired, but more for its
style of writing rather than for the nature of the state.

<span id="2_note_12"></span>[12](tgl2.htm#fr_12). The Confucian
moralities, benevolence, justice, **jen, i,** etc., are artificial
because not connected with the real source of all things (tao). They
were false standards and confuse human nature.

<span id="2_note_13"></span>[13](tgl2.htm#fr_13). Cp. Mencius Bk. VII
Pt. 1. Chap. 7. Also 1 Cor. 3, 22. The whole passage beginning with "As
the fish forgets, etc.," deals with the freedom of life. The fishes
forget the existence of others. No mutual interference. See separate
elucidation.

<span id="2_note_14"></span>[14](tgl2.htm#fr_14). **Jasper ring.** The
jasper is a rare jade \#\#\# produced in a distant land and difficult to
get, implying that the **tao** is rare and hard to get.

<span id="2_note_15"></span>[15](tgl2.htm#fr_15). **Abandon eye and
ear** etc. Perfect altruism.

<span id="2_note_16"></span>[16](tgl2.htm#fr_16). **Spiritual
frontiers.** The formless, **wu hsing.**

<span id="2_note_17"></span>[17](tgl2.htm#fr_17). Jade Coach. Imperial
coach.

<span id="2_note_18"></span>[18](tgl2.htm#fr_18). **T‛ai hang** etc.,
Precipitous heights: mountains.

<span id="2_note_19"></span>[19](tgl2.htm#fr_19). A hair of the leg.
Strong: will not entertain the idea.

<span id="2_note_20"></span>[20](tgl2.htm#fr_20). Action of dragon &
snake. Transformation of the dragon is invisible. The snake changes its
skin naturally.

<span id="2_note_21"></span>[21](tgl2.htm#fr_21). One fountain. The
Unity.

<span id="2_note_22"></span>[22](tgl2.htm#fr_22). Earth has nine
continents, and heaven has nine corresponding realms.

<span id="2_note_23"></span>[23](tgl2.htm#fr_23). Six avenues. The six
directions of space.

<span id="2_note_24"></span>[24](tgl2.htm#fr_24). **One father and
mother.** The positive and negative.

<span id="2_note_25"></span>[25](tgl2.htm#fr_25). **San Wei.**
Aborigines.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<span id="2_note_26"></span>[26](tgl2.htm#fr_26). **Mei** or **Mu Ti**
the founder of the doctrine of universal altruism. 4th-5th century B.C.
**Yang.** Died 338 B.C. He made many agrarian reforms and reformed the
civil and military administrations. Ennobled as the Prince of Shang.
Shen. A contemporary of Yang. He advocated the authority of law as
against the arbitrary authority of individuals.

<span id="2_note_27"></span>[27](tgl2.htm#fr_27). **Nine-Tripod
Vessel.** The casting was of rough mould. Who had the tripod must be the
monarch. The schools that did not issue from the **tao** were
artificial. They did not issue from the unity, the stock, as the myriad
branches do from the trunk.

<span id="2_note_28"></span>[28](tgl2.htm#fr_28). **Peng Meng.** An
expert with the bow. **Tsao Fu-an** expert driver of horses. **Pei Lo.**
A fine judge of horses.

<span id="2_note_29"></span>[29](tgl2.htm#fr_29). The idea contained in
this difficult passage is that the Confucianist and other schools have
corrupted the **tao** by their own philosophies. In so doing, they have
interrupted its free play. The **transformations** of cloud and
moisture. Moisture implies change and generation. Generation enters into
corruption.

<span id="2_note_30"></span>[30](tgl2.htm#fr_30). Cp. Mencius Bk I. Pt.
I. Chap 7. Sec 10.

<span id="2_note_31"></span>[31](tgl2.htm#fr_31). The original is \#\#\#
Like a potter he can shape as he likes.

<span id="2_note_32"></span>[32](tgl2.htm#fr_32). May this mean, "A
heart free from human accretions: i.e., the impressions of the senses
and the accretions that come from mere human knowledge, and so on? He
lives in the spiritual realm, with its pristine purity.

<span id="2_note_33"></span>[33](tgl2.htm#fr_33). **Voiceless regions.**
The realm of meditation and prayer (?) He is blind to the world of
sense, but alight with the spiritual illuminations.

<span id="2_note_34"></span>[34](tgl2.htm#fr_34). He can use it because
he does not use it, etc.: He does not lean on the work of the senses as
the main thing. He does not use directly and foremost the mental
functions, but he has something higher which gives an inward direction
and so with this inward direction he can use to more and better effect
all the functions of the mind. Similarly **non-knowledge** leads to
**knowledge.** By not depending on the knowledge gained through the
senses, he comes, by first depending on the illumination of the **tao,**
to a truer and better knowledge. More correct and more judicial because
untainted by mental prejudice and the errors of bias. A paradoxical
statement. The whole idea is the principle of **wu wei.** This is the
chief instruction of these passages. Knowledge is artificial:
non-knowledge is real.

<span id="2_note_35"></span>[35](tgl2.htm#fr_35). No form. Before the
body is constituted, there can be no standard for judging right and
wrong. Morality can't exist <span id="page_253">p. 253</span> without
body (?)

<span id="2_note_36"></span>[36](tgl2.htm#fr_36). True knowledge. Man
without falsity gives true knowledge. The word is \#\#\# **chen,** same
as the specific true man.

<span id="2_note_37"></span>[37](tgl2.htm#fr_37). These two passages
describe Confucian morality and politics. The Confucian **jen** and
**i,** benevolence and justice, is a travesty of the real, because they
do not issue from the true source. The following paragraphs describe the
real **tê** virtue which is a quality of the **tao.** The Confucian
virtue is a mongrel.

<span id="2_note_38"></span>[38](tgl2.htm#fr_38). {There is no 38 in the
text. See [note 37](#2_note_37) (?).}

<span id="2_note_39"></span>[39](tgl2.htm#fr_39). The 'senator of the
forest' (Keats).

<span id="2_note_40"></span>[40](tgl2.htm#fr_40). One of the words is
crooked, **chüch.** Crooked lines made into artistic design.

<span id="2_note_41"></span>[41](tgl2.htm#fr_41). The sage-man, i.e.,
the Taoist sage.

<span id="2_note_42"></span>[42](tgl2.htm#fr_42). **Three fountains.**
The very depths of the earth.

<span id="2_note_43"></span>[43](tgl2.htm#fr_43). **Chen jen.** The true
man. There are three grades.

<span id="2_note_44"></span>[44](tgl2.htm#fr_44). **Fei lien.** A kind
of animal in antiquity with long hair and large wings.

<span id="2_note_45"></span>[45](tgl2.htm#fr_45). **Kua Fu.** One of the
genii.

<span id="2_note_46"></span>[46](tgl2.htm#fr_46). **Mi Fei.** Daughter
of Fu Hsi. She drowned herself in the river Lo because of the genii of
the river.

<span id="2_note_47"></span>[47](tgl2.htm#fr_47). Extravagantly
imaginative.

<span id="2_note_48"></span>[48](tgl2.htm#fr_48). An attack on
Confucianism for wrong methods of reform. Diseased Society. Let well
alone.

<span id="2_note_49"></span>[49](tgl2.htm#fr_49). **Pristine nature.**
The commentary explains this as "The Eastern wilds: the Orient, whence
the sun comes forth, natural movement."

<span id="2_note_50"></span>[50](tgl2.htm#fr_50). I. A mythical person
of great powers.

<span id="2_note_51"></span>[51](tgl2.htm#fr_51). Fu Hsi. Supposed the
first emperor of China or the first man to civilize the world. His
behaviour harmonised with the creation. So he is likened to the sun and
moon. He taught men to fish and cook. He taught men to use domestic
animals. He invented the **eight diagrams** \#\#\# for divination. He
had a name Pao Hsing \#\#\#: Pao means, "cooking."

<span id="2_note_52"></span>[52](tgl2.htm#fr_52). **Shen Nung.** 838
B.C. {sic, Shen Nung should be much earlier} A legendary ruler.

<span id="2_note_53"></span>[53](tgl2.htm#fr_53). **Huang Ti.** One of
the 6 Rulers. 2698 B.C. Some writers attribute the teaching of the Tao
Tê Ching to him and others.

<span id="2_note_54"></span>[54](tgl2.htm#fr_54). **Yang Chu.** 4th
century B.C. The founder of the school of Egoism and selfishness: the
direct antithesis of Meiism-altruism. Each advanced his theory for the
organisation of the state. Mei Tzu promised a golden age, if his
principles were adopted. Mencius opposed his teaching. Yang founded his
school in opposition to Mei's. Of Yang Mencius says, he would not part
with a hair of his leg to save the world, but Mei Tzu would have
sacrificed his all.

<span id="2_note_55"></span>[55](tgl2.htm#fr_55). The sage. Confucius.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span id="2_note_56"></span>[56](tgl2.htm#fr_56). **Losing the soul.**
It must not be concluded that the author was hostile to education, nor
that he advocated the Arcadian simplicity of prehistoric times. So to
understand his attitude we must recall the political conditions of the
times. His narrative is a veiled attack on the rulers of the age. He
wrote soon after the death of Ch‛in Shih Huang who had stirred the time
most impressively. But in many respects his rule was destructive. It had
been disturbing and inquisitive. The era was such. So he veiled his
attack in honeyed words descriptive of a state of society the very
opposite of that of the time-arrogant authority.

<span id="2_note_57"></span>[57](tgl2.htm#fr_57). **Soul. Hsing ming,**
life

<span id="2_note_58"></span>[58](tgl2.htm#fr_58). **Non-desire.** Hsing
\#\#\# is naturally good but ch‛ing \#\#\# passions hurts it. So desire
must be abolished.

<span id="2_note_59"></span>[59](tgl2.htm#fr_59). **Schoolmen. Ta jen
chih hsueh (\#\#\#).** Learned School.

<span id="2_note_60"></span>[60](tgl2.htm#fr_60). This is the misuse of
eye and ear. Laborious effort of fighting against human nature when not
properly cultivated.

<span id="2_note_61"></span>[61](tgl2.htm#fr_61). **Being and
non-being.** The view of being (\#\#\#) which means **gains** and
non-being (\#\#\#) **loss** of the minor philosophies is a false one. A
true standard is essential and should be thoroughly appreciated.

<span id="2_note_62"></span>[62](tgl2.htm#fr_62). Since the heart and
mind are occupied with the **tao,** passion and desire will find no
place. So there can be no pain and cares, therefore, blessings come to
rest there.

<span id="2_note_63"></span>[63](tgl2.htm#fr_63). A soul that is pure
shows that the spirit is keeping a keen watch over the intruding
appetites so there is no chance left for any disturbing force.

<span id="2_note_64"></span>[64](tgl2.htm#fr_64). Not extravagant in
frills and embroideries. Just enough to keep the body warm.

<span id="2_note_65"></span>[65](tgl2.htm#fr_65). The foundation is
**tao** and its practice is **te \#\#\#,** behaviour. One of its
branches is jen and i, love and justice. To take these as the foundation
is a Confucian error and far from reality.

<span id="2_note_66"></span>[66](tgl2.htm#fr_66). Hsu Yu. A contemporary
of Yao. A man of **wu wei,** that is action by the tao.

<span id="2_note_67"></span>[67](tgl2.htm#fr_67). While the **tao** is
embraced all other things become of no importance. The world cannot move
the heart.

<span id="2_note_68"></span>[68](tgl2.htm#fr_68). This is Heaven; the
transformer is **te** virtue from the **tao.**

<span id="2_note_69"></span>[69](tgl2.htm#fr_69). The spirit, **shen?
Shen,** the spirit: **ching,** crosses. Li not Lu.

<span id="2_note_70"></span>[70](tgl2.htm#fr_70). **Nine rivers.** Four
seas and nine rivers, i.e., the empire.

<span id="2_note_71"></span>[71](tgl2.htm#fr_71). **Yen Shui.** Yang Ah
Yen Shui, Name of ancient dances.

<span id="2_note_72"></span>[72](tgl2.htm#fr_72). Juggle with words. The
original are words used for a puzzle.

<span id="2_note_73"></span>[73](tgl2.htm#fr_73). To pass through life.
Attend to the duties of life.

<span id="2_note_74"></span>[74](tgl2.htm#fr_74). That is, without a
proper environment.

<span id="2_note_75"></span>[75](tgl2.htm#fr_75). **Golden age.** Cp.
with this the golden age of Hesiod and the <span id="page_255">p.
255</span> Stoic. v. Hastings, "Dictionary of Ethics," under **Ages of
the World.**

<span id="2_note_76"></span>[76](tgl2.htm#fr_76). **Nine tripods.**
Symbol of the nine virtues. The tripods increased or decreased in weight
according to the quality of government.

<span id="2_note_77"></span>[77](tgl2.htm#fr_77). **Red book.** A book
about **tao** written by **Huang Ti.** Mythology says it was delivered
from Heaven by a red bird.

<span id="2_note_78"></span>[78](tgl2.htm#fr_78). **Green plan.**
Attributed to **Huang Ti** who got it from the river, The writing was
green.

<span id="2_note_79"></span>[79](tgl2.htm#fr_79). **The three worthies.
Fang Hui** is straightforward (\#\#\# **fang**) and humble (\#\#\#
**hui**). **Shan chuan.** Concentrated the mind (\#\#\#) on reading.
**Péi I.** The meaning of his name is "To throw the cloak over the
shoulder without taking the trouble to button it." That is to pay no
attention to worldly things. These 3 men were the contemporaries of Yao,
the emperor, whose names were unknown so their characters became names
for them.

<span id="2_note_80"></span><span id="2_note_81"></span><span
id="2_note_82"></span><span id="2_note_83"></span><span
id="2_note_84"></span>[80](tgl2.htm#fr_80)-84. {These notes are not
printed in the book.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="3"></span>**LIFE AND SOUL. [DISSERTATION
III](tgl3.htm#dis).—Pp. 58-78.**

   *Essay 7 in the Chinese text. The theme may be translated also by
Spirit and Consciousness. The word Spirit comes from 3 values, Ching
\#\#\# Ch‛i \#\#\# and Shen \#\#\#. Ching and shen may be termed Ling.
Spirit. Ch‛i \#\#\# has more of a physical meaning and may denote the
body.*

<span id="3_note_1"></span>[1](tgl3.htm#fr_1). **Repose \#\#\#.** The
state of being undisturbed by passions. It gains the unity by purity.
This and the following word tranquillity are leading words in the
system.

<span id="3_note_2"></span>[2](tgl3.htm#fr_2). **Tranquillity \#\#\#.**
Earth gains stability by tranquillity. Unity gives life and the absence
of it is death.

<span id="3_note_3"></span>[3](tgl3.htm#fr_3). **Unconditioned.** That
is unlimited by the material.

<span id="3_note_4"></span>[4](tgl3.htm#fr_4). The true factors of life
are inward not outward so not to be obtained from the physical and
outward but from the inward operation of the spirit. The Cosmic Spirit
is omnipresent and simply a derivative in the mind. Root is the life
principle within: the branches are the life without activity. Thought
and act are intimately connected.

<span id="3_note_5"></span>[5](tgl3.htm#fr_5). One interpretation is
that **One** is the **tao: two** is **reason** or spirit: **three** is
the spiritual **harmony.** Another is, **One** is the original **ch‛i**
or spirit, breath: this gives birth to **two,** i.e. heaven and earth.
**Two** begets three, **creation. Yin** and **yang** flow through all
and creation is at birth. Still another <span id="page_256">p.
256</span> explanation. One is the tao: two is the spirit (shen ming
\#\#\#): three is the harmony. And again, One is the primal aura and
begets two, heaven and earth, and two begets three heaven and creation.
When heaven and earth are established yin and yang circulate and all
things come to birth.

<span id="3_note_6"></span>[6](tgl3.htm#fr_6). The **Five Viscera.**

|           |               |     |       |        |
|-----------|---------------|-----|-------|--------|
| The heart | corresponding | to  | fire  | \#\#\# |
| lungs     | "             | "   | metal | \#\#\# |
| kidneys   | "             | "   | water | \#\#\# |
| stomach   | "             | "   | earth | \#\#\# |
| liver     | "             | "   | wood  | \#\#\# |

The opening and closing, expansion and contraction etc.: the function of
inhaling and exhaling etc.

<span id="3_note_7"></span>[7](tgl3.htm#fr_7). Gall, tan, has
correspondence in vapour. Metal and stone come under water so the
correspondence.

<span id="3_note_8"></span>[8](tgl3.htm#fr_8). Sinister powers of
nature.

<span id="3_note_9"></span>[9](tgl3.htm#fr_9). Five planets are \#\#\#,
\#\#\#, \#\#\#, \#\#\#, \#\#\#.  
They are now called Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, Saturn.

<span id="3_note_10"></span>[10](tgl3.htm#fr_10). Great and boundless. A
Chinese idiom: most expansive by its vastness. It implies a power to
expand according to need.

<span id="3_note_11"></span>[11](tgl3.htm#fr_11). Variegated lights is
the literal translation. Its brilliant powers. When there is no waste
the chest will be normal and its energies at the full.

<span id="3_note_12"></span>[12](tgl3.htm#fr_12). The idea is the
centrality of thought in the spirit within gives the greatest knowledge
and power: wandering desires weaken the powers.

<span id="3_note_13"></span>[13](tgl3.htm#fr_13). Excess of lust and
passion prevent spiritual culture.

<span id="3_note_14"></span>[14](tgl3.htm#fr_14). Past known . . .
future seen. Cp: Chung Yung Chap 24. Sincerity is able to foreknow.

<span id="3_note_15"></span>[15](tgl3.htm#fr_15). Cp: Math. 10. 39.

<span id="3_note_16"></span>[16](tgl3.htm#fr_16). The first unity is tao
and the 2nd is unity of wu, things. The relative worth of life's parts
can only be truly valued by the tao. The tao is head and source of all
and ignorance of it implies that one knows nothing.

<span id="3_note_17"></span>[17](tgl3.htm#fr_17). The cultured man
should not dislike death since it means only a return to original nature
by dissolution. Here there is another insight into the trend of thought
under stress of danger and anarchy.

<span id="3_note_18"></span>[18](tgl3.htm#fr_18). Seat of Hsia Hou. A
precious jade, of half a circle, of the Hsia dynasty. Half circle
implies winter: in winter earth is in lethargy: so heaven only active.

<span id="3_note_19"></span>[19](tgl3.htm#fr_19). This is different from
the **nil admirari** state of mind. For there is an admiration of the
**tao** which is seen from the next sentence "he cherishes virtue and
warms himself," etc.

<span id="3_note_20"></span>[20](tgl3.htm#fr_20). Happiness is not the
aim of his life.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span id="3_note_21"></span>[21](tgl3.htm#fr_21). True Man \#\#\#. Such
was Fu Hsi \#\#\#. B.C. 2953-2838. The 1st of the Five Emperors of the
legendary period. Taught the people to hunt, fish and keep flocks. Huang
Ti \#\#\# 2698 B.C. Said to be inventer of wheeled vehicles, armour,
ships, pottery. Phoenix and Chilin appeared in his reign. Lao Tan \#\#\#
b. 604 B.C.

They are the reputed founders of Taoism and some maintain that the Tao
Te Ching originated with the first two and not with Lao Tan. But for
this there is no sufficient evidence.

<span id="3_note_22"></span>[22](tgl3.htm#fr_22). **Like** and
**dislike.** The inner life is under perfect control. Love and hate do
not move him.

<span id="3_note_23"></span>[23](tgl3.htm#fr_23). Cp: Analects. Bk. 8 C.
19. 1.

<span id="3_note_24"></span>[24](tgl3.htm#fr_24). To use a modern phrase
now much in vogue, 'there is guidance' and his emptiness is filled. The
following sentences describe a person whose mind is completely under the
spirit and not concerned with worldliness.

<span id="3_note_25"></span>[25](tgl3.htm#fr_25). He gives the
impression of possessing the divine power.

<span id="3_note_26"></span>[26](tgl3.htm#fr_26). The true Taoist does
not indulge in these physical gymnastics. He is concerned with the body
only as the medium of the spirit.

<span id="3_note_27"></span>[27](tgl3.htm#fr_27). The spirit is the true
source of all power.

<span id="3_note_28"></span>[28](tgl3.htm#fr_28). In the original the
suggestion is that Shun should offer the sacrifices

<span id="3_note_29"></span>[29](tgl3.htm#fr_29). The 'perfect man'
\#\#\#. There are 3 kinds of men named according to their attainments in
the **tao.** They are \#\#\#, The sage: \#\#\#, The true man: \#\#\#,
The Perfect man.

<span id="3_note_30"></span>[30](tgl3.htm#fr_30). There are no closed
avenues to the spiritual man.

<span id="3_note_31"></span>[31](tgl3.htm#fr_31). **No death.** There
are two deaths. One of the body one of the soul. No death of the body is
used to lead men on to think of the eternal life of the soul. When a man
has the two his spirit preserves the unity after death and is not
dispersed into 7 parts as is commonly said. No death, refers to this.
Unity is preserved.

<span id="3_note_32"></span>[32](tgl3.htm#fr_32). **Yen Tzu:** a
minister of the State of Ch‛i.

<span id="3_note_33"></span>[33](tgl3.htm#fr_33). **Ts‛ui Chu.** It was
he who slew Duke Chuang.

<span id="3_note_34"></span>[34](tgl3.htm#fr_34). Cp: Mencius Bk. VI.
Pt. 2. VI. 5.

<span id="3_note_35"></span>[35](tgl3.htm#fr_35). These men just
mentioned are great men—but they are men of the school of artificial
virtue created by sages and not men of the wu wei standard of life.

<span id="3_note_36"></span>[36](tgl3.htm#fr_36). **Wu Kuang.** T‛ang,
the emperor, ceded the throne to him and he refused it. He finally hung
a stone round his neck and jumped into a river.

<span id="3_note_37"></span>[37](tgl3.htm#fr_37). **AO granary.** In
Yung yang a city of Honan. Famous in history.

<span id="3_note_38"></span>[38](tgl3.htm#fr_38). Plato said that the
generation of matter implies entering a <span id="page_258">p.
258</span> state of corruption. The wall mentioned in the section refers
to the body. Its life is short and temporal it would be better if it had
remained in the spiritual stage and not have been born.

<span id="3_note_39"></span>[39](tgl3.htm#fr_39). "Man when perfected is
the best of animals: but when isolated he is the worst of all: for
injustice is more dangerous when armed: and man is equipped at birth
with intelligence and with qualities of character which he may use for
the vilest ends. Wherefore if he have not virtue, he is the most unholy
and savage of all animals, full of gluttony and lust." Aristotle.

<span id="3_note_40"></span>[40](tgl3.htm#fr_40). {This note is not
printed in the book.}

<span id="3_note_41"></span>[41](tgl3.htm#fr_41). A fresh attack on
Confucianism and its ideals of life.

<span id="3_note_42"></span>[42](tgl3.htm#fr_42). **Chou Yu.** An
ancient kingdom outside Shansi.

<span id="3_note_43"></span>[43](tgl3.htm#fr_43). His 5 sons in the
struggle for power after the death of their father neglected to coffin
him and to attend to the funeral arrangements.

<span id="3_note_44"></span><span id="3_note_45"></span><span
id="3_note_46"></span>[44](tgl3.htm#fr_44)-46. {These notes are not
printed in the book.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="4"></span>**NATURAL LAW. [DISSERTATION IV](tgl4.htm#dis).—Pp.
79-101.**

<span id="4_note_1"></span>[1](tgl4.htm#fr_1). This is the 8th essay in
the text. **T‛ai Ch‛ing:** Lit., Most pure. It also means the beginning
of **wu wei, not doing,** by human intelligence which is corrupt. Here
possibly used historically referring to the happy period before the
Three Emperors, The Utopian age. T‛ai Chi is the beginning of creation
and born of the **tao.**

<span id="4_note_2"></span>[2](tgl4.htm#fr_2). **Eight Signs, the pa
kua.** The diagram of divination. A most mysterious code. It originated
from Fu Hsi who attempted to reveal the **tao** and its significance in
creation, by 8 signs. Later, Wen Wang altered the combination into 64
signs and arranged it for finding the destiny and the cyclic changes of
the universe and human beings. The system is the I Ching, but, since
Confucius, the key to it is lost. The use made of it by fortune tellers
is only to deceive the people.

<span id="4_note_3"></span>[3](tgl4.htm#fr_3). The appearance of the
**T‛u ti shen**—the spirit of the soil, was a warning of national decay.
The verbal description in the original is noteworthy.

<span id="4_note_4"></span>[4](tgl4.htm#fr_4). **Therefore the land
etc.:** Building operations are entirely tabooed at the time. The reason
may be gathered from the sentences following. The cosmology of the
Chinese is extensive.

<span id="4_note_5"></span>[5](tgl4.htm#fr_5) Lit.: flesh and blood:
eroticism: sexual feelings.

<span id="4_note_6"></span>[6](tgl4.htm#fr_6). **Gave rise to
ceremonies.** Here directly connected with sex passion which is to be
controlled by ceremonies.

<span id="4_note_7"></span>[7](tgl4.htm#fr_7). In the text we have the
mind reverting to the beginning, that is to the time before the rise of
desire and lust.

<span id="4_note_8"></span>[8](tgl4.htm#fr_8). **Tao te** is the root,
and **Jen i** the branch. **Jen i,** benevolence and <span
id="page_259">p. 259</span> duty are greater than **li yoh,** ceremony
and music.

<span id="4_note_9"></span>[9](tgl4.htm#fr_9). {This note is not printed
in the book.}

<span id="4_note_10"></span>[10](tgl4.htm#fr_10). Art is from **wu
wei,** or as we should say, the inspired genius.

<span id="4_note_11"></span>[11](tgl4.htm#fr_11). Cp: Analects VIII, 19.
1.

<span id="4_note_12"></span>[12](tgl4.htm#fr_12). Because they were the
work of **Tao** and wu wei.

<span id="4_note_13"></span>[13](tgl4.htm#fr_13). **Yung Cheng.** An
officer in the service of Huang Ti who founded the calendar and the
reckoning of time.

<span id="4_note_14"></span>[14](tgl4.htm#fr_14). Made him emperor, son
of Heaven.

<span id="4_note_15"></span>[15](tgl4.htm#fr_15). Conservancy work of
ancient time. See article by M. Von Heiderstam, N.C.B.R.A.S. Journal.
Vol. 53. p. 21.

<span id="4_note_16"></span>[16](tgl4.htm#fr_16). **Chou and Chieh,**
the two most notorious and evil emperors in the whole history of China.

<span id="4_note_17"></span>[17](tgl4.htm#fr_17). The silence prepares
for the logical consequence which follows in next sentence. These men
had the inspiration of the Tao, different from the **tao** of those who
only theorise. "Professing to profess," as Wordsworth says. Another
explanation of the passage is: When a man knows of a danger he will be
careful: but there are invisible dangers much more insidious. The unseen
dangers are many.

<span id="4_note_18"></span>[18](tgl4.htm#fr_18). Here we have the 3
types of the superior men, as thought of by Taoists. (1). The Emperor is
their **sheng jen** or sage, who acts on the principle of **wu wei,**
spiritual action. (2). The King carries on government on principles of
right and law, and (3) the Autocrat who governs by might and military.

<span id="4_note_19"></span>[19](tgl4.htm#fr_19). Compels them to
collect clouds and rain.

<span id="4_note_20"></span>[20](tgl4.htm#fr_20). This refers to the
harmony existing amongst men, and the correspondence of the six laws
(\#\#\#). (The six laws of music are Hwang chung \#\#\#, Tai chu \#\#\#,
Ku Hsi \#\#\#, Sen pin \#\#\#, I Tsê \#\#\#, Wang she \#\#\#), and the
Four Seasons. Here we may see a clew to much of Chinese thought. The
great man deals in great principles. The smaller man deals with careful
exactness and details. This principle has been a ruling principle in the
past history of China.

<span id="4_note_21"></span>[21](tgl4.htm#fr_21). Cp: Analects Bk. {?}
Chap I. 6.

<span id="4_note_22"></span>[22](tgl4.htm#fr_22). The **Five
Extravagances.** Wu Tun (\#\#\#). The word *tun* seems to imply a person
immersed in and intoxicated with a subject, like a gambler or a man
giving his mind to luxury. The meaning here is the garish world of
things which seduces men and betrays their best nature.

<span id="4_note_23"></span>[23](tgl4.htm#fr_23). Perfect body or realm
may mean the realm of the spiritual abode—'walking in the spirit.' When
the body is not imprisoned by the senses, it becomes the abode of the
spirit.

<span id="4_note_24"></span>[24](tgl4.htm#fr_24). Perfect body and
perfect man. Perfect has the same words in the original.

<span id="4_note_25"></span>[25](tgl4.htm#fr_25). The description of the
five extravagances are superb in <span id="page_260">p. 260</span>
Chinese. The 5 elements are symbolic of an idea which may be expressed
by **worldliness.**

<span id="4_note_26"></span>[26](tgl4.htm#fr_26). This is the name in
Giles' Dictionary. The Chinese, however, say it is of the goose kind.

<span id="4_note_27"></span>[27](tgl4.htm#fr_27). The native commentary
says, 'make it difficult of attack and easy of defence.'

<span id="4_note_28"></span>[28](tgl4.htm#fr_28). **Ming T‛ang.** One of
the great names. The fane of empire where God was worshipped and
ancestors honoured and where Feudal Lords had audience of the emperor.

<span id="4_note_29"></span>[29](tgl4.htm#fr_29). Like the blinkers of a
horse.

<span id="4_note_30"></span>[30](tgl4.htm#fr_30). "All Souls." Lit.:
**kuei shen** \#\#\#.

<span id="4_note_31"></span>[31](tgl4.htm#fr_31). Viz.: Water, fire,
wood, metal, earth.  
Water is under Yin \#\#\#: Fire under Yang \#\#\#: Wood under heat,
Metal under cold, Earth under wind. These 5 aura are in constant
operation and hence called **wu hsing** \#\#\#.

<span id="4_note_31a"></span>[31a](tgl4.htm#fr_31a). A favourite topic
with the ancients Cp: Isaiah 11. 6-10.

<span id="4_note_32"></span>[32](tgl4.htm#fr_32). The staff is made of
(\#\#\#) bamboo which dies naturally. So it was carried to show that the
deceased died a natural death. Wang's comment is that the staff is used
to drive away the ghosts along the way of the funeral cortege.

<span id="4_note_33"></span>[33](tgl4.htm#fr_33). The people had the
**tao** and spent a full life and died in peace.

<span id="4_note_34"></span>[34](tgl4.htm#fr_34). There were few inns,
and travellers carried their own food.

<span id="4_note_35"></span>[35](tgl4.htm#fr_35). These latter passages
may have been prompted by the distressing circumstances of the times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="5"></span>**RESPONSE OF MATTER. [DISSERTATION
V](tgl5.htm#dis).—Pp. 102-141**

   

Essay 12, in Chinese text. These impressive historical instances are
given to illustrate and confirm the truth of some of Lao Tzû's recondite
sayings. The instances may be crude, but they help to elucidate the
theme.

   Please note that paragraphs in this Dissertation have no
cut-in-heads, and the omission is balalaced by headings in italics.
These are not in the original.

   References to chapters from Lao Tzû are from the Tao Tê Ching. The
order in the different editions are not always the same, so there may be
a discrepancy.

<span id="5_note_1"></span>[1](tgl5.htm#fr_1). **Great Purity** is the
essence of the primal fluid. **Exhaustless** is the **Formless** and may
refer to the **tao.** There are other personifications in this essay of
abstract names.

<span id="5_note_2"></span>[2](tgl5.htm#fr_2). **Wu wei.** See [special
article](tgl008) on this term. Knowledge has shape and form. It is the
**phenomena** as opposed to **noumena,** <span id="page_261">p.
261</span> body as the opposite of soul. Therefore, as it has form, it
knows. Knowledge is of form, and therefore has entered the sphere of
corruption. An appreciation of this view will help the understanding of
these passages and many others similar, in these essays. Plato also held
that all movement from the spiritual into the physical was an entrance
into corruption.

<span id="5_note_3"></span>[3](tgl5.htm#fr_3). **Without-beginning.**
The aura existing before the beginning of created matter.

<span id="5_note_4"></span>[4](tgl5.htm#fr_4). The quotations are from
the Tao Tê Ching. The meaning of the classic term is The classic of the
Cosmic Spirit (Tao) and its works of (te). This **te** is different from
the ordinary te of Confucianism, which is virtue and work of an
artificial kind, since it is man-made and therefore smells of
corruption.

<span id="5_note_5"></span>[5](tgl5.htm#fr_5). **Duke Pei.** Son of Tai
Tzu-ch‛ien and grandson of king P‛ing of Ts‛u. Ping had slain his son,
Tai, and the son of the latter now sought to avenge his father's death
by slaying his grandfather. He wanted to know whether he could make dark
hints on his meditated deed.

<span id="5_note_6"></span>[6](tgl5.htm#fr_6) The language of the heart
is best understood and needs no words.

<span id="5_note_7"></span>[7](tgl5.htm#fr_7). Perfect language of the
heart.

<span id="5_note_8"></span>[8](tgl5.htm#fr_8). **My words.** Pei
Lo-tien, the Tang poet, wrote a skit on the words of Lao Tzû, reminding
us of Carlyle who wrote of the doctrine of silence in 40 volumes. His
words are:—

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"Who speaks much little knowledge has indeed:<br />
The wise is silent, thus is Lao Tzû's creed.<br />
If Lao Chun ranks among the men who know,<br />
Why does he make one thousand words to flow?</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="5_note_9"></span>[9](tgl5.htm#fr_9). Dr. N. D. Hillis
says:—"Some of our schools are open to criticism because the teachers
emphasise facts to be known rather than the vision that sees the fact.
The teacher should teach how to see."

<span id="5_note_10"></span>[10](tgl5.htm#fr_10). The owl loves its
young: but, when grown up, the young eats the mother.

<span id="5_note_11"></span>[11](tgl5.htm#fr_11). A small country can be
carried by the Cosmic Spirit equally well with a large one.

<span id="5_note_12"></span>[12](tgl5.htm#fr_12). **Li Ke.** Prime
Minister of Wu Hou.

<span id="5_note_13"></span>[13](tgl5.htm#fr_13). This is the classic
story for children in China.

<span id="5_note_14"></span>[14](tgl5.htm#fr_14). Cp: Odes Pt. 2 Bk. 8
Ode 6. 1.

<span id="5_note_15"></span>[15](tgl5.htm#fr_15). This implies that the
king has and can sustain great responsibility.

<span id="5_note_16"></span>[16](tgl5.htm#fr_16). **Tan Fu.** The
progenitor of the House of Chou, 14th century B.C.

<span id="5_note_17"></span>[17](tgl5.htm#fr_17). **T‛ai Wang.**
Translate by **great ancestor.**

<span id="5_note_18"></span>[18](tgl5.htm#fr_18). Legge's translation is
not the same. See The Texts of Taoism Pt. 1. p. 99. See also Medhurst's
Tao Tê Ching, Chap. 55.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

<span id="5_note_19"></span>[19](tgl5.htm#fr_19). i.e., the Throne.

<span id="5_note_20"></span>[20](tgl5.htm#fr_20). An appeal to all to be
endued with the Cosmic spirit, and so have the bloom of life.

<span id="5_note_21"></span>[21](tgl5.htm#fr_21). A truly humane view
and a democratic principle.

<span id="5_note_22"></span>[22](tgl5.htm#fr_22). Ch‛eng hsing chih t‛u.
The meaning is that the calamity has already taken form in persons.

<span id="5_note_23"></span>[23](tgl5.htm#fr_23). There is an intimate
relation between the Royal House and the starry heavens.

<span id="5_note_24"></span>[24](tgl5.htm#fr_24). Ch‛ang, the personal
name? Chou, the name of country and Pei, the rank. The posthumous name
is Wen Wang, the founder of the Chou dynasty.

<span id="5_note_25"></span>[25](tgl5.htm#fr_25). The persecuted had to
clasp this iron man when hot.

<span id="5_note_26"></span>[26](tgl5.htm#fr_26). Cp: Analects Bk. I
Chap. 16. The people had to give from 1 to 3 years service to
government, according to the good and bad years.

<span id="5_note_27"></span>[27](tgl5.htm#fr_27). In the interval
between Fu Hsi and Shen Nung, Kung Kung, a Feudal Lord, got power and
became the autocrat of empire.

<span id="5_note_28"></span>[28](tgl5.htm#fr_28). **Hui** is used to
avoid the use of **I.** Chung Ni, the personal name of Confucius. Yen
Hui was his favourite disciple. Etiquette, music, benevolence, justice,
knowledge or wisdom, all these are acquired, and so artificial and
consequently are inferior in quality. **Wisdom** = cleverness of seeing
and hearing. **Physical body** = the Corpse of life. **Sentiency** =
feelings.

<span id="5_note_29"></span>[29](tgl5.htm#fr_29). **Chicanery.** Lit.:
disease.

<span id="5_note_30"></span>[30](tgl5.htm#fr_30). **Lu Ao.** A Peking
man commanded by the Emperor Ch‛in Shih Huang to find out the Fang
kingdom of the East and to seek the Shen Hsia arhat. Description of the
head implies great intellectual powers.

<span id="5_note_31"></span>[31](tgl5.htm#fr_31). A name of some
mythical deity unknown. A fine piece of imaginative writing. Cp., the
opening of Essay 2.

<span id="5_note_32"></span>[32](tgl5.htm#fr_32). "The world is only on
the threshold of knowledge" (H. G. Wells.)

<span id="5_note_33"></span>[33](tgl5.htm#fr_33). Fu Sang (\#\#\#).
There is a wood of this name in the Orient, and this name became the
name of Japan.

<span id="5_note_34"></span>[34](tgl5.htm#fr_34). Brilliancy (\#\#\#).

<span id="5_note_35"></span>[35](tgl5.htm#fr_35). This deals with the
problem of existence. Form is begotten of the formless. How can matter
be begotten? is the question. "He hangeth the world on nothing."

<span id="5_note_36"></span>[36](tgl5.htm#fr_36). Alternate translation.
"I can know that of which the form or idea, but not the substance (wu
\#\#\#), exists: but I cannot know that of which the idea, even, does
not exist." Also it may mean, "But how did this nothing come to be the
state of nothing?"

<span id="5_note_37"></span>[37](tgl5.htm#fr_37). The people of Cheng
were the enemies of Pei Kung-sheng.

<span id="5_note_38"></span>[38](tgl5.htm#fr_38). Ch‛in Shih Huang. B.C.
259-210. For detail of his life see Giles' Biographical Dictionary No.
1712. He ascended the <span id="page_263">p. 263</span> throne of Ch‛in
when 13 years old. He fought the States still loyal to the House of
Chou. In B.C. 221 he was master of the whole of China, from Chihli to
Chinkiang and from Hunan to the Eastern Sea. He made a clean slate of
China's past history and began as First Emperor with the understanding
that his successors would be Second, Third and so on. Everything was to
begin from his reign, literature and everything: so he burnt the books.
He built the the famous mansion which could seat 10,000 people. He made
coinage. He died in Chihli and had a famous grave: the workmen who have
made the passages were buried within, so that no one would know the
internal labyrinth. In spite of such precaution and power, his dynasty
only lasted about 45 years. This is one of the great proofs used that
militarism is not the true system of government. This paragraph helps to
fix the date of this dissertation.

<span id="5_note_39"></span>[39](tgl5.htm#fr_39). **Most easily,** Lit.:
as easily as turning the spinning wheel.

<span id="5_note_40"></span>[40](tgl5.htm#fr_40). Ch‛i Tzu died in Korea
12th century B.C. One of the foremost nobles under Chou Hsin, the last
Emperor of the Yin dynasty. For protesting against the evil life of his
master, he was thrown into prison and released thence by Wu Wang, in
1122. He would not serve under Wu, since he looked on him as an usurper
and has remained as a great example of loyalty.

<span id="5_note_41"></span>[41](tgl5.htm#fr_41). **The Ivory tablet.**
The symbol of peace and harmony.

<span id="5_note_42"></span>[42](tgl5.htm#fr_42). **Alternate
reading:**—Striving for the state of emptiness (i.e. uncontaminated by
passion and desire) to the utmost: and guarding with unwearying vigour
the quiesence of spirit (i.e. not disturbed by the motions of the
flesh), the myriad movements of creation will then be seen in their true
nature. (When the senses govern there is an arificiality in viewing the
nature of things and even the names given partake of this.)

<span id="5_note_43"></span>[43](tgl5.htm#fr_43). Imperialism. The word
used is \#\#\# or \#\#\#.

<span id="5_note_44"></span>[44](tgl5.htm#fr_44). See and compare Essay
8.

<span id="5_note_45"></span>[45](tgl5.htm#fr_45). **Hsu Hsiang.** A
clairvoyant.

<span id="5_note_46"></span>[46](tgl5.htm#fr_46). **Yu chih** \#\#\# A
vessel fixed on the right side in the temple of the Sages, to teach
humility.

<span id="5_note_47"></span>[47](tgl5.htm#fr_47). Education an evil. Cp:
Anal. XIV Chap., 18. 2. People should follow a path without
understanding its import. The view expressed all through is the view of
T‛ai Kung, the Prime Minister.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="6"></span>**INFLUENCE, ETC. [DISSERTATION
VI](tgl6.htm#dis).—Pp. 142-180.**

   *Essay 13 in the Chinese text. Certain remarks may be made on the
attitude of the writers towards progress. Usually it is concluded* <span
id="page_264">p. 264</span> *that the Chinese have been a most
conservative race; and, in a sense, that is generally true. But we must
also remember that they have had a broad outlook on things. For example,
in this Essay, there are very illuminating passages showing that the
writer was most liberal in his thought and not obstinately conservative
in his attitude towards government and Society. It is shown that change
was welcomed and often necessary. There are the fundamental principles
of right and morality on which no change can be permitted: but, in other
respects, change is a healthy and welcome symptom. Alteration in
practices may be incumbent, for the sake of the times, and so on:*

<span id="6_note_1"></span>[1](tgl6.htm#fr_1). **Ancient** Kings. Kings
before and including the Three Emperors. Amongst them were supposed to
be the true founders of the taoist system. There were no symbols of pomp
and power and royalty. Their kingliness was seen in good and perfect
government.  
To govern the empire: 'to king' the world. 'To king' always implied
government by right and not by might. Stress was laid on the character
of the individual ruler.

<span id="6_note_2"></span>[2](tgl6.htm#fr_2). Cp. Isaiah Chap. II.

<span id="6_note_3"></span>[3](tgl6.htm#fr_3). **Hsia Family.** Dynasty
founded by the great Yü, a man great ability. His father was executed by
Emperor Yao, for his failure to stem the flood. Yü took up the work thus
arrested and put his whole soul in it. He spent 8 laborious years at it,
refusing even to drop in at his own home, when near by, for fear of
delaying his exacting work. The task completed won him renown, and
Emperor Shun appointed Yü his successor. The Hsia family held the
sovereignty for 422 years, B.C. 2205-1786.

<span id="6_note_4"></span>[4](tgl6.htm#fr_4). Five Emperors. They are:
Yao \#\#\# of T‛ang \#\#\# dynasty 2357 B.C., Shun \#\#\# of Yu \#\#\#
2255 B.C., Great Yü \#\#\# of Hsia \#\#\# 2205 B.C., Ch‛eng T‛ang \#\#\#
of Shang \#\#\# 1766 B.C., Wu Wong \#\#\# of Chou \#\#\# 1122 B.C.

<span id="6_note_5"></span>[5](tgl6.htm#fr_5). In ancient times it was
the custom for the host duke to pour out the wine into the cups of his
guests and the hostess to hold the wine jug.

<span id="6_note_6"></span>[6](tgl6.htm#fr_6). See Tao Tê Ching, Chap.
I.

<span id="6_note_7"></span>[7](tgl6.htm#fr_7). Kuan and Ts‛ai. They were
ambitious for first places of power and accused their brother of aiming
at the throne, and, on this ground, started a rebellion. See The
author's "A New Mind And Other Essays." Duke of Chou.

<span id="6_note_8"></span>[8](tgl6.htm#fr_8). The king always faces
South.

<span id="6_note_9"></span>[9](tgl6.htm#fr_9). He took full
responsibility. V. "A New Mind And Other Essays," p. 68, for a full life
of the Duke.

<span id="6_note_9a"></span>[9a](tgl6.htm#fr_9a). {This note is not
printed in the book.}

<span id="6_note_10"></span>[10](tgl6.htm#fr_10). **Shen Nung** \#\#\#
B.C. 2838. Said to be the 2nd emperor of <span id="page_265">p.
265</span> China formally recorded in history. He introduced agriculture
and taught the people to grow cereals. Removed his capital from Honan to
Shantung. Tested all plants for medicine.

<span id="6_note_11"></span>[11](tgl6.htm#fr_11). A carriage with swords
stuck to the sides, for mowing down the enemy.

<span id="6_note_12"></span>[12](tgl6.htm#fr_12). Principles of Wen
\#\#\# and Wu \#\#\# were anti-egoism and the advancement of the people.
They abolished the goal system: substituted a kind of parole, leaving it
to the man's honour not to go beyond the bounds allotted. They started
coöperation in work. They established a formal marriage, instead of the
old free love. To love the old and train the young, not only of your own
house but of one's neighbours, also became the new social system: mutual
love, service, and sacrifice.

<span id="6_note_13"></span>[13](tgl6.htm#fr_13). So that people could
give and get judgments.

<span id="6_note_14"></span>[14](tgl6.htm#fr_14). **Heard the affairs:**
by the help of the 5 musical tones.  
The drum harmonizes all tones in music, as the **tao** regulates dualism
of **yin** and **yang.** So the sound of drum indicates that some one is
going to discuss **tao** with the emperor. Likewise the sound of the
bell is a sign of warning to keep to right and justice: the clapper is
the shape of the mouth with a tongue insides indicating discussion of
affairs: the sonorous stone has a tone of urgency betokening sad and
critical affairs: the flat drum, rattle etc: indicate things to be
argued before the Court.

<span id="6_note_15"></span>[15](tgl6.htm#fr_15). The Duke of Chou was
noted for his promptness in responding to any call. He left his food
unfinished and his hair undressed, to hasten to public affairs. He was a
devoted servant of the State.

<span id="6_note_16"></span>[16](tgl6.htm#fr_16). **Ch‛in** \#\#\#, the
successor to the Chou \#\#\# dynasty. The 1st emperor was called Shih
Huang Ti. Made a drastic reformation by sweeping away all duchies and
the nobility and controlling all with an iron hand—the great dictator.
Famous for his tyranny, building the Great Wall, burning the books and
burying alive the obstructive scholars.

<span id="6_note_17"></span>[17](tgl6.htm#fr_17). **Great Coach and the
symbolic crown.** The emperor went in the great jade coach to great
functions of State. One of the most solemn was the sacrifice in the
South Suburb. He started before dawn: lamps lit the way. A full account
may be found in Ma Tuan Lin's "T‛ung Wen K‛ao."

<span id="6_note_18"></span>[18](tgl6.htm#fr_18). Yao had not a 100
families when he began.

<span id="6_note_19"></span>[19](tgl6.htm#fr_19). **The kingly way.**
Wang Tao \#\#\#. The Principles of this is right as opposed to might. It
is a pure civil form. The opposite of this was the **pa tao** (\#\#\#)
or (\#\#\#) the military way which holds that might is right.

<span id="6_note_20"></span>[20](tgl6.htm#fr_20). See [Note
3](#6_note_3).

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span id="6_note_21"></span>[21](tgl6.htm#fr_21). Ming t‛iao (\#\#\#). A
popular wilderness in ancient Shansi. Here it was that T‛ang defeated
Ch‛ieh, the last of the Hsia family, and captured him. (B.C. 1784) Chia
Tzu \#\#\#. The date when Wu Wang defeated emperor, Tsou, the last of
Shang dynasty. (B.C. 1133).

   The translation should be amended and read, "the wilderness of Ming
T‛iao and the date of Chia Tzu."

<span id="6_note_22"></span>[22](tgl6.htm#fr_22). {Note 22 in the book
should be 22a. The actual note 22 is not printed.}

<span id="6_note_22a"></span>[22a](tgl6.htm#fr_22a). Ode. **Yin** \#\#\#
was on the East and Chou \#\#\# on the West. {This note is printed as
note 22 in the book.}

<span id="6_note_23"></span>[23](tgl6.htm#fr_23). T‛ang, a prisoner of
Chieh.

<span id="6_note_24"></span>[24](tgl6.htm#fr_24). Killed Wen Wang. Note
the noble humanity and grand ideals of the whole passage.

<span id="6_note_25"></span>[25](tgl6.htm#fr_25). The king's name is
always taboo.

<span id="6_note_26"></span>[26](tgl6.htm#fr_26). Ape. A different type
of ape from the African etc. It was common in the N. & S. of China. When
caught, people made it work and taught it to talk. Tradition states that
this ape-man knew the names of all people, after meeting them once.

   It is good luck to have the magpie cheep to one in the early morning.
It implies good news. The bird takes no thought of the destruction of
its nest in the past: it seems to forget it and tries to make a new one
in the same place.

<span id="6_note_27"></span>[27](tgl6.htm#fr_27). **Kuan Chung.**
Considered to be the most intelligent and learned man of antiquity and
one of the greatest generals of all time, as well as a great
administrator. He assisted Huan \#\#\#, the duke of Chi \#\#\#, to win
the hegemony of the duchies.

<span id="6_note_28"></span>[28](tgl6.htm#fr_28). **Five autocracies.**
Five leaders of the dukes, viz: Huan \#\#\# of Chi \#\#\# Hsiang \#\#\#
of Sung \#\#\# Wen \#\#\# of Tsin \#\#\# Mu \#\#\# of Tsin \#\#\# and
Chuang \#\#\# of Ts‛u \#\#\#.

<span id="6_note_29"></span>[29](tgl6.htm#fr_29). Fox cuirass. \#\#\#
may be a misprint. It should be \#\#\#, the nail of the claw, meaning a
small bit of a thing. The son of Chu Yang could estimate the quality of
a sword by a mere glance of a small bit (chua chia) of it.

<span id="6_note_30"></span>[30](tgl6.htm#fr_30). Hsiao Yang \#\#\#. The
owl, the sprite of the mountain, is described as "It is the essence of
the mountain: it has a man's body, long and big, a black face covered
with hair: the feet have the heels turned back. It laughs, on seeing
men.  
**Yin Hsiang.** The sprite of the water. Dragon-like in appearance. **Pi
Fang.** The sprite of the wood. A hamadry. It has a bird-like
appearance: red claws: does not eat grain.  
**Fen Yang.** The sprite of the soil. Rain naiad.

<span id="6_note_31"></span>[31](tgl6.htm#fr_31). The title for Shen
Nung \#\#\# Emperor. The Chinese Characters are \#\#\# not the Yen Ti
mentioned in the beginning of the essay.

<span id="6_note_32"></span>[32](tgl6.htm#fr_32). Hou Chi \#\#\#
Disliked at birth by his mother who threw him away, hence the name of
(**ch‛i** \#\#\#), thrown away. Under emperor Yao he was instructor in
agriculture and Minister of <span id="page_267">p. 267</span>
Agriculture under emperor Shun. Hou Ch‛i the title of the Ministry was
given to the holder for his merits and he was known by that name ever
after.

<span id="6_note_33"></span>[33](tgl6.htm#fr_33). **T‛ai Miao.** The
family temple where Emperors worship ancestors. Ming Tang,—Grand hall
built in a palace where grand ceremonies were to be held,—offerings to
Heaven, worshipping of ancestors, interviewing dukes, honoring worthy
persons and aged people, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="7"></span>**GENERALSHIP. [DISSERTATION VII](tgl7.htm#dis).—Pp.
181-218.**

   *The law of naturalness should be followed. An efficient army is not
the chief factor in winning victory. The chief factor is a spiritual
one. Essay 75.*

<span id="7_note_1"></span>[1](tgl7.htm#fr_1). All these examples are
famous episodes in ancient history.

<span id="7_note_2"></span>[2](tgl7.htm#fr_2). Duke Hunan \#\#\# of Ch‛i
\#\#\# d. B.C. 643, the most celebrated of the 5 chieftains in the 7th
century B.C.

<span id="7_note_3"></span>[3](tgl7.htm#fr_3). May the Tao mean the
movements of the mind in this essay? The definition immediately
following gives a clue.

<span id="7_note_4"></span>[4](tgl7.htm#fr_4). That is, the principles
underlying all. Round and square imply wholeness and measureless.

<span id="7_note_5"></span>[5](tgl7.htm#fr_5). **Whole creation.**
Perhaps limitless.

<span id="7_note_6"></span>[6](tgl7.htm#fr_6). **Enlightenment. Shen
ming.** \#\#\# means **Tao,** God. It has other meanings. Shen \#\#\#
the spirit of a man, the soul: **ming** \#\#\# enlightened. The soul
that has been in contact with the **tao** is, therefore, enlightened.

<span id="7_note_7"></span>[7](tgl7.htm#fr_7). The war drum played an
important part in the army. Used for carrying out commands, direct a
charge, etc. It was not used except in war and to sound victory.

<span id="7_note_8"></span>[8](tgl7.htm#fr_8). Imbued with the Tao. This
implies that the country walk in the way of the Tao, in righteousness
and justice.

<span id="7_note_9"></span>[9](tgl7.htm#fr_9). **Temple.** In ancient
times Heaven represented the unseen God. The emperor represented Heaven,
so son of Heaven. The temple and Ming Tang were most sacred and solemn
places for dealing with great events, political, military and
educational, etc., and showed that the emperor did all in the sight of
Heaven.

<span id="7_note_10"></span>[10](tgl7.htm#fr_10). Officers of works.

<span id="7_note_11"></span>[11](tgl7.htm#fr_11). The son of the great
Ch‛in Shih Huang.

<span id="7_note_12"></span>[12](tgl7.htm#fr_12). **Ah Fang.** Most
famous palace of antiquity, built by Ch‛in <span id="page_268">p.
268</span> Shih Huang, but burnt down by the revolutionists, a few years
later.

<span id="7_note_13"></span>[13](tgl7.htm#fr_13). **Hu Hai.** Second son
of Ch‛in Shih Huang. 209-206 B.C.

<span id="7_note_14"></span>[14](tgl7.htm#fr_14). **Chou** \#\#\#. The
notoriously wicked emperor, the last of the Shang dynasty. 1154 B.C.

<span id="7_note_15"></span>[15](tgl7.htm#fr_15). Geomantic references:
right land lucky days: may have moral references.

<span id="7_note_16"></span>[16](tgl7.htm#fr_16). The army must be
trained in moral efficiency.

<span id="7_note_17"></span>[17](tgl7.htm#fr_17). **Ancestral temple.**
Sacred spot of empire for cultivation of high principles, and the spot
for thinking out things.

<span id="7_note_18"></span>[18](tgl7.htm#fr_18). **High morale.** The
army that is touched with the **tao** is just and righteous. It cannot
be tricked and deceived. Men are strong when they have the **tao.**

<span id="7_note_19"></span>[19](tgl7.htm#fr_19). **Sustain T‛aishan.**
The great power against evil. The mountain is in Shantung.

<span id="7_note_20"></span>[20](tgl7.htm#fr_20). The mind the
invisible. The word is wu \#\#\#; not, i.e., it is not material.

<span id="7_note_21"></span>[21](tgl7.htm#fr_21). Underground, \#\#\#,
yellow grave, the upper layer of hell, deepest layer of earth.

<span id="7_note_22"></span>[22](tgl7.htm#fr_22). **Ch‛iu** is simply
hill here and not the Ch‛iu hill.

<span id="7_note_22a"></span>[22a](tgl7.htm#fr_22a). **Star of
destiny.** \#\#\# divination. Calculate the future. Fate uncertain.

<span id="7_note_23"></span>[23](tgl7.htm#fr_23). The text is **taoli**
not **tao.** Tao li may mean right principles or read as two words.

<span id="7_note_24"></span>[24](tgl7.htm#fr_24). Deer refers to, and
are similar to, an army without art and method; fish and lobster
symbolise the army scattered; swan and heron show the army is on high
ground, without cover.

<span id="7_note_25"></span>[25](tgl7.htm#fr_25). **No source.** wu
yuen, i.e., before pullulating into visibility.

<span id="7_note_26"></span>[26](tgl7.htm#fr_26). Geomancy. To harmonise
the plan with nature.

<span id="7_note_27"></span>[27](tgl7.htm#fr_27). Ming Tang. The Ming
should be omitted. Tang a grand hall, always open, and so the light of
sun and moon always to be seen there.

<span class="small">{The following four notes are not referenced in the
text.}</span>

<span id="7_note_28"></span>[28](tgl7.htm#fr_28). A general of king Wu.

<span id="7_note_29"></span>[29](tgl7.htm#fr_29). Possibly means that
the general, commander and king are one and the same.

<span id="7_note_30"></span>[30](tgl7.htm#fr_30). Muddled by deep plans.

<span id="7_note_31"></span>[31](tgl7.htm#fr_31). **The great hammer.**
Shows the army unbeaten, and, in being.

<span id="7_note_32"></span>[32](tgl7.htm#fr_32). Absolute power is
given to the Commander.

<span id="7_note_33"></span>[33](tgl7.htm#fr_33). **Pare the nails.**
Done only for the dead. Conquer or die is the idea.

<span id="7_note_34"></span>[34](tgl7.htm#fr_34). The door through which
the dead are carried out.

<span id="7_note_35"></span>[35](tgl7.htm#fr_35). Calico, the sign of
mourning. The implication is not defeat but that injustice may have
happened in the war. But some imply the passage means defeat.

<span id="7_note_36"></span>[36](tgl7.htm#fr_36). {This note is not
printed in the book.}

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="8"></span>**ENDEAVOUR AND DUTY. [DISSERTATION
VIII](tgl8.htm#dis).—Pp. 219-242**

   *This is Essay 19 in the Chinese text. You, will note the great
liberality of thought that is here revealed. There is no die-hard
rigidity in sticking to tradition. They looked with open minds on the
world and were prepared to accommodate institutions to the times.*

<span id="8_note_1"></span>[1](tgl8.htm#fr_1). These five are **Shen
Nung** \#\#\# 2838. B.C. Yao of T‛ang \#\#\# 2357 B.C. Shun of Yü \#\#\#
2255 B.C. Great Yu of Hsia \#\#\# 2205 B.C. T‛ang of Shang \#\#\# 1766
B.C.

{<span id="8_note_2a"></span>[2a](tgl8.htm#fr_2a).} In the 4th paragraph
there is (a) **People of the black teeth,** they of Formosa, Japan,
Annam (b) **Cloven footed:** so called because of the local
pronounciation, the foot and name of place being similar in sound. They
are the Annamese.

<span id="8_note_2"></span>[2](tgl8.htm#fr_2). **Chi Kun.** Read,
**Transported** (chi). Chi is not a part of name. Kun father of Yü who
was executed by Yao at Yu m't.

<span id="8_note_3"></span>[3](tgl8.htm#fr_3). See article in Journal
R.A.S. by Rev. G. G. Warren. Vol. 46. P. 77.

<span id="8_note_4"></span>[4](tgl8.htm#fr_4). Yi-Yin was a prominent
minister of Emperor T‛ang, of Shang dynasty who administered all
national affairs on the principles of the Tao.

<span id="8_note_5"></span>[5](tgl8.htm#fr_5). **Lü Wang.** His first
name Chiang (\#\#\#) who utilised the principles of the **tao,** in
carrying out his military and political plans, to unite the empire for
the emperor Wu Wang. It is said that he was 83 years of age when power
was delegated to him to act. His work, **Six Principles** (\#\#\#) are
looked upon as classical up to this day, though they are hard to be
understood.

<span id="8_note_6"></span>[6](tgl8.htm#fr_6). **Pei Li-hsi,** a man of
great ability: almost a sage. He had been most unlucky before he fell
into the hands of Duke Ch‛in (\#\#\#), who bought him for 5 pieces of
goat skin, while he was a slave in the duchy of Ts‛u (\#\#\#). The
ascendency of Emperor Shih Huang Ti owed much of its success to the
administrative work of this minister. N. B. Mencius should be consulted
on these illustrations. Bk. V: Pt. 1. C. 8, IX, 2.

<span id="8_note_7"></span>[7](tgl8.htm#fr_7). **Kuan Chung.** He was
criticised for not dying with his prince and defended his action that he
was worth more alive than dead to his country.

<span id="8_note_8"></span>[8](tgl8.htm#fr_8). Referring to Great Yü who
dealt with the flood and Hou Chi who devised a system of agriculture,
and herbs for medicine.

<span id="8_note_9"></span>[9](tgl8.htm#fr_9). V. Notes [2](#8_note_2)
and [3](#8_note_3).

<span id="8_note_9a"></span>[9a](tgl8.htm#fr_9a). {This note is not
printed in the book. See [note 2](#8_note_2)(?).}

<span id="8_note_12"></span>[12](tgl8.htm#fr_12). So education would be
useless.

<span id="8_note_13"></span>[13](tgl8.htm#fr_13). Famous founder of the
Chou dynasty, Hero of Confucius.

<span id="8_note_14"></span>[14](tgl8.htm#fr_14). **Kan chiang** and
**Mo Yeh** (hsieh). Two famous swords.

<span id="8_note_14a"></span>[14a](tgl8.htm#fr_14a). Lit. the zenith of
the 9th heaven, and, the bottom of the yellow spring—the nether world.
The two extremities.

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span id="8_note_15"></span>[15](tgl8.htm#fr_15). The ancient yüeh
\#\#\# people: covers chiefly Chekiang, also Fukien; Annam, Canton,
etc., were barbarous then.

<span id="8_note_16"></span>[16](tgl8.htm#fr_16). **Kao Yao.** The Gaol
warden of Emperor Shun. 2204 B.C.

<span id="8_note_17"></span>[17](tgl8.htm#fr_17). **Shih Huang** or
**Chieh Hang** named Ch‛ang Chieh \#\#\# the initiator of Chinese
handwriting. Suggested by the footprints of birds on mud. Some say
discovered from the marks on the back of tortoise.

<span id="8_note_18"></span>[18](tgl8.htm#fr_18). {This note is not
printed in the book.}

<span id="8_note_19"></span>[19](tgl8.htm#fr_19). **Yung Ch‛eng**
\#\#\#. Ancient astronomer who had charge of the Calendar under Huang Ti
(Yellow emperor). 2698 B.C.

<span id="8_note_20"></span>[20](tgl8.htm#fr_20). **Hu Ts‛ao** \#\#\#.
Court officer of Huang Ti. Invented the mode of clothes.

<span id="8_note_21"></span>[21](tgl8.htm#fr_21). **I Ti** \#\#\#. A man
of the time of Great Yü. Yü's daughter told him to make wine. After
tasting it, Yü discharged the maker by way of punishment, saying, it
would be the cause of distress to the world.

<span id="8_note_22"></span>[22](tgl8.htm#fr_22). **Hsi Chung** \#\#\#,
Officer of Great Yü, the inventor of carpentry.

<span id="8_note_23"></span>[23](tgl8.htm#fr_23). **Li Chu** \#\#\#. Of
the time of Huang Ti. Had the keenest sight.

<span id="8_note_24"></span>[24](tgl8.htm#fr_24). Nan Yung Chou \#\#\#.
Double surname. A zealous Taoist of Shantung.

<span id="8_note_25"></span>[25](tgl8.htm#fr_25). **Ta Hsin** \#\#\#. A
brave young general of Ch‛u \#\#\#, by name Te Ch‛en \#\#\#.

<span id="8_note_26"></span>[26](tgl8.htm#fr_26). **Shen Pao Hsü**
\#\#\#. A loyal minister of Ch‛u.

<span id="8_note_27"></span>[27](tgl8.htm#fr_27). **Wen Tzû-fa.** The
Wellington of China.

<span id="8_note_28"></span>[28](tgl8.htm#fr_28). Odes Pt. 2 Bk. 1 Ode
3.

<span id="8_note_29"></span>[29](tgl8.htm#fr_29). Plausible speaker.
Better perhaps, Faithful followers of Tao.

<span id="8_note_30"></span>[30](tgl8.htm#fr_30). Chant them, without
understanding their import.

<span id="8_note_31"></span>[31](tgl8.htm#fr_31). {This note is not
printed in the book.}

<span id="8_note_32"></span>[32](tgl8.htm#fr_32). **Luh Pan** \#\#\#. A
skilful carpenter in Shantung. Hence name Luh.

<span id="8_note_33"></span>[33](tgl8.htm#fr_33). Chung Tzu-chi \#\#\#.
A chopper of wood by profession, but became the sage in music. He could
divine the author's mind from hearing his music. His friend **Pei ya,**
another expert in music. These men attached to Tao through their gifts
in music.

<span id="8_note_34"></span>[34](tgl8.htm#fr_34). {This note is not
printed in the book.}

<span id="8_note_35"></span>[35](tgl8.htm#fr_35). Chuang Tzû \#\#\#
named Chou \#\#\#. 3rd & 4th cent. B.C. A native of Meng, Anhui. He
devoted his life to the glorification of Lao Tzû. A most distinguished
Taoist and a great scholar. He refused to accept post of Prime Minister
of the Ch‛u State, on the ground that he had no wish to be the fattened
ox for sacrifice. He wished to be buried under the open sky and not
under ground. To be eaten by kites was better than by ants etc:

<span id="8_note_36"></span><span id="8_note_37"></span><span
id="8_note_38"></span>[36](tgl8.htm#fr_36)-38. The text contains all
that is known of them.

<span id="8_note_39"></span>[39](tgl8.htm#fr_39). Li Ch‛i \#\#\# a
prominent musician in ancient Peking.

<span id="8_note_40"></span>[40](tgl8.htm#fr_40). **Hung Fan** \#\#\#
Written by Chi Tzû containing the principles or laws of Heaven for the
world and presented to Wu Wang. V. Book of History. **Shang Sung**
\#\#\#. Songs of praise used in the worship of past emperors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tgln2)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
