[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl301)  [Next](wl303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### LIFE OF DEMONAX

IT was in the book of Fate that even this age of ours should not be
destitute entirely of noteworthy and memorable men, but produce a body
of extraordinary power, and a mind of surpassing wisdom. My allusions
are to Sostratus the Boeotian, whom the Greeks called, and believed to
be, Heracles; and more particularly to the philosopher Demonax. I saw
and marvelled at both of them, and with the latter I long consorted. I
have written of Sostratus elsewhere <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0),
and described his stature and enormous strength, his open-air life on
Parnassus, sleeping on the grass and eating what the mountain afforded,
the exploits that bore out his surname--robbers exterminated, rough
places made smooth, and deep waters bridged.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2">2</span></span>This time I am to
write of Demonax, with two sufficient ends in view: first, to keep his
memory green among good men, as far as in me lies; and secondly, to
provide the most earnest of our rising generation, who aspire to
philosophy, with a contemporary pattern, that they may not be forced
back upon the ancients for worthy models, but imitate this best--if I am
any judge--of all philosophers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:3">3</span></span>He came of a
Cyprian family which enjoyed considerable property and political
influence. But his views soared above such things as these; he claimed
nothing less than the highest, and devoted himself to philosophy. This
was not due to any exhortations of Agathobulus, his predecessor
Demetrius, or Epictetus. He did indeed enjoy the converse of all these,
as well as of Timocrates of Heraclea, that wise man whose gifts of

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

expression and of understanding were equal. It was not, however, to the
exhortations of any of these, but to a natural impulse towards the good,
an innate yearning for philosophy which manifested itself in childish
years, that he owed his superiority to all the things that ordinary men
pursue. He took independence and candour for his guiding principles,
lived himself an upright, wholesome, irreproachable life, and exhibited
to all who saw or heard him the model of his own disposition and
philosophic sincerity.

He was no half-baked enthusiast either; he had lived with<span
class="margnote"><span id="2:4">4</span></span> the poets, and knew most
of them by heart; he was a practised speaker; he had a knowledge of
philosophic principles not of the superficial skin-deep order; he had
developed and hardened his body by exercise and toil, and, in short, had
been at the pains to make himself every man's equal at every point. He
was consistent enough, when he found that he could no longer suffice to
himself, to depart voluntarily from life, leaving a great reputation
behind him among the true nobility of Greece.

Instead of confining himself to a single philosophic school,<span
class="margnote"><span id="2:5">5</span></span> he laid them all under
contribution, without showing clearly which of them he preferred; but
perhaps he was nearest akin to Socrates; for, though he had leanings as
regards externals and plain living to Diogenes, he never studied effect
or lived for the applause and admiration of the multitude; his ways were
like other people's; he mounted no high horse; he was just a man and a
citizen. He indulged in no Socratic irony;<span class="margnote"><span
id="2:6">6</span></span> but his discourse was full of Attic grace;
those who heard it went away neither disgusted by servility nor repelled
by ill-tempered censure, but on the contrary lifted out of themselves by
charity, and encouraged to more orderly, contented, hopeful lives.

He was never known to shout or be over vehement or angry,<span
class="margnote"><span id="2:7">7</span></span> even when he had to
correct; he touched offences, but pardoned

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

offenders, saying that the doctors' was the right model, who treat
sickness but are not angry with the sick. It is human, he thought, to
err, but divine (whether in God or man) to put the error right.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:8">8</span></span>A life of this sort
left him without wants of his own; but he was always ready to render any
proper service to his friends--including reminders to those among them
who passed for fortunate, how brief was their tenure of what they so
prided themselves upon. To all, on the other hand, who repined at
poverty, resented exile, or complained of old age or bad health, he
administered laughing consolation, and bade them not forget how soon
their troubles would be over, the distinction between good and bad be
obsolete, and long freedom succeed to short-lived distress.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:9">9</span></span>He was fond of
playing peace-maker between brothers at variance, or presiding over the
restoration of marital harmony. He could say a word in season, too,
before an agitated political assembly, which would turn the scale in
favour of patriotic duty. Such was the temper that philosophy produced
in him, kindly, mild, and cheerful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:10">10</span></span>Nothing ever
grieved him except the illness or death of a friend, friendship being
the one among blessings that he put highest; and indeed he was every
man's friend, counting among his kindred whatever had human shape. Not
that there were no degrees in the pleasure different people's society
gave him; but he avoided none, except those who seemed so far astray
that they could get no good from him. And every word or act in which
these principles took shape might have been dictated by the Graces and
Aphrodite; for 'on his lips Persuasion sat,' as the play has it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:11">11</span></span>Accordingly he
was regarded with reverence at Athens, both by the collective assembly
and by the officials; he always continued to be a person of great
consequence in their eyes. And

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

this though most of them had been at first offended with him, and hated
him as heartily as their ancestors had Socrates. Besides his candour and
independence, there had been found Anytuses and Meletuses to repeat the
historic charges: *he had never been known to sacrifice, and he made
himself singular by avoiding initiation at Eleusis*. On this occasion he
showed his courage by appearing in a garland and festal attire, and then
pleading his cause before the people with a dash of unwonted asperity
infused into his ordinary moderate tone. On the count of never having
sacrificed to Athene, 'Men of Athens,' he said, 'there is nothing
wonderful in this; it was only that I gave the Goddess credit for being
able to do very well without sacrifices from me.' And in the matter of
the Mysteries, his reason for not following the usual practice was this:
if the Mysteries turned out to be bad, he would never be able to keep
quiet about it to the uninitiated, but must dissuade them from the
ceremony; while, if they were good, humanity would tempt him to divulge
them. The Athenians, stone in hand already, were at once disarmed, and
from that time onwards paid him honour and respect, which ultimately
rose to reverence. Yet he had opened his case with a bitter enough
reproof: 'Men of Athens, you see me ready garlanded; proceed to
sacrifice me, then; your former offering <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) was deficient in this formality.'

I will now give some specimens of his pointed and witty<span
class="margnote"><span id="4:12">12</span></span> sayings, which may
begin with his answers to Favorinus. The latter had heard that he made
fun of his lectures, and in particular of the sentimental verses with
which they were garnished, and which Demonax thought contemptible,
womanish, and quite unsuited to philosophy. So he came and asked him:
'Who, pray, are you, that you should pour scorn upon me?' 'I am the
possessor of a critical pair of ears,' was the answer. The sophist had
not had enough; '*You* are no infant,' he went on,

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'but a
philosopher, it seems; may one ask what marks the transformation?' 'The
marks of manhood,' said Demonax.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:13">13</span></span>Another time the
same person came up and asked him what school of philosophy he belonged
to. 'Who told you I was a philosopher?' was all he said. But as he left
him, he had a good laugh to himself, which Favorinus observing, demanded
what he was laughing at; 'I was only amused by your taking a man for a
philosopher because he wears a beard, when you have none yourself.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:14">14</span></span>When Sidonius,
who had a great reputation at Athens as a teacher, was boasting that he
was conversant with all the philosophic systems--but I had better quote
his words. 'Let Aristotle call, and I follow to the Lyceum; Plato, and I
hurry to the Academy; Zeno, and I make my home in the Porch; Pythagoras,
and I keep the rule of silence.' Then rose Demonax from among the
audience: 'Sidonius, Pythagoras calls.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:15">15</span></span>A pretty girlish
young man called Python, son of some Macedonian grandee, once by way of
quizzing him asked a riddling question and invited him to show his
acumen over it. 'I only see one thing, dear child,' he said, 'and that
is, that you are a *fair* logician.' The other lost his temper at this
equivoque, and threatened him: 'You shall see in a minute what a man can
do.' 'Oh, you keep a man, do you?' was Demonax's smiling retort.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:16">16</span></span>He once, for
daring to laugh at an athlete who displayed himself in gay clothes
because he had won an Olympic victory, received a blow on the head with
a stone, which drew blood. The bystanders were all as angry as if they
had themselves been the victims, and set up a shout--'The Proconsul! the
Proconsul!' 'Thank you, gentlemen,' said Demonax, 'but I should prefer
the doctor.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:17">17</span></span>He once picked up
a little gold charm in the road as he walked, and posted a notice in the
market-place stating that the loser

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

could recover his property, if he would call upon Demonax and give
particulars of the weight, material, and workmanship. A handsome young
exquisite came, professing to have lost it. The philosopher soon saw
that it was a got-up story; 'Ah, my boy,' he said, 'you will do very
well, if you lose your other charms as little as you have lost this
one.'

A Roman senator at Athens once presented his son, who had<span
class="margnote"><span id="6:18">18</span></span> great beauty of a soft
womanish type. 'My son salutes you, sir,' he said. To which Demonax
answered, 'A pretty lad, worthy of his father, and extremely like his
mother.'

A cynic who emphasized his principles by wearing a bear's<span
class="margnote"><span id="6:19">19</span></span> skin he insisted on
addressing not by his name of Honoratus, but as Bruin.

Asked for a definition of Happiness, he said that only the free<span
class="margnote"><span id="6:20">20</span></span> was happy. 'Well,'
said the questioner, 'there is no lack of free men.'--'I count no man
free who is subject to hopes and fears.'--'You ask impossibilities; of
these two we are all very much the slaves.' 'Once grasp the nature of
human affairs,' said Demonax, 'and you will find that they justify
neither hope nor fear, since both pain and pleasure are to have an end.'

Peregrine Proteus was shocked at his taking things so lightly, and
treating mankind as a subject for humour: 'You have no<span
class="margnote"><span id="6:21">21</span></span> teeth, Demonax.' 'And
you, Peregrine, have no bowels.'

A physical philosopher was discoursing about the antipodes;<span
class="margnote"><span id="6:22">22</span></span> Demonax took his hand,
and led him to a well, in which he showed him his own reflection: 'Do
you want us to believe that the antipodes are like *that*?'

A man once boasted that he was a wizard, and possessed of<span
class="margnote"><span id="6:23">23</span></span> mighty charms whereby
he could get what he chose out of anybody. 'Will it surprise you to
learn that I am a fellow-craftsman?' asked Demonax; 'pray come with me
to the baker's, and you shall see a single charm, just one wave of my
magic wand,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

induce him to bestow several loaves upon me.' Current coin, he meant, is
as good a magician as most.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:24">24</span></span>The great
Herodes, mourning the untimely death of Pollux, used to have the
carriage and horses got ready, and the place at table, as though the
dead were going to drive and eat. To him came Demonax, saying that he
brought a message from Pollux. Herodes, delighted with the idea that
Demonax was humouring his whim like other people, asked what it was that
Pollux required of him. 'He cannot think why you are so long coming to
him.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:25">25</span></span>When another
person kept himself shut up in the dark, mourning his son, Demonax
represented himself to him as a magician: he would call up the son's
ghost, the only condition being that he should be given the names of
three people who had never had to mourn. The father hum’d and ha’d,
unable, doubtless, to produce any such person, till Demonax broke in:
'And have you, then, a monopoly of the unendurable, when you cannot name
a man who has not some grief to endure?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:26">26</span></span>He often
ridiculed the people who use obsolete and uncommon words in their
lectures. One of these produced a bit of Attic purism in answer to some
question he had put. 'My dear sir,' he said, 'the date of my question is
to-day; that of your answer is *temp*. *Bell*. *Troj*.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:27">27</span></span>A friend asking
him to come to the temple of Asclepius, there to make prayer for his
son, 'Poor deaf Asclepius!' he exclaimed; 'can he not hear at this
distance?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:28">28</span></span>He once saw two
philosophers engaged in a very unedifying game of cross questions and
crooked answers. 'Gentlemen,' said he, 'here is one man milking a
billy-goat, and another catching the proceeds in a sieve.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:29">29</span></span>When Agathocles
the Peripatetic vaunted himself as the first and only dialectician, he
asked him how he could be the first, if he was the only, or the only, if
he was the first.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

The consular Cethegus, on his way to serve under his<span
class="margnote"><span id="8:30">30</span></span> father in Asia, said
and did many foolish things. A friend describing him as a great ass,
'Not even a *great* ass,' said Demonax.

When Apollonius was appointed professor of philosophy in<span
class="margnote"><span id="8:31">31</span></span> the Imperial
household, Demonax witnessed his departure, attended by a great number
of his pupils. 'Why, here is Apollonius with all his Argonauts,' he
cried.

Asked whether he held the soul to be immortal, 'Dear me,<span
class="margnote"><span id="8:32">32</span></span> yes,' he said;
'everything is.'

He remarked a propos of Herodes that Plato was quite right<span
class="margnote"><span id="8:33">33</span></span> about our having more
than one soul; the same soul could not possibly compose those splendid
declamations, and have places laid for Regilla and Pollux after their
death.

He was once bold enough to ask the assembled people, when<span
class="margnote"><span id="8:34">34</span></span> he heard the sacred
proclamation, why they excluded barbarians from the Mysteries, seeing
that Eumolpus, the founder of them, was a barbarian from Thrace.

When he once had a winter voyage to make, a friend asked<span
class="margnote"><span id="8:35">35</span></span> how he liked the
thought of being capsized and becoming food for fishes. 'I should be
very unreasonable to mind giving them a meal, considering how many they
have given me.'

To a rhetorician who had given a very poor declamation he<span
class="margnote"><span id="8:36">36</span></span> recommended constant
practice. 'Why, I am always practising to myself,' says the man. 'Ah,
that accounts for it; you are accustomed to such a foolish audience.'

Observing a soothsayer one day officiating for pay, he said:<span
class="margnote"><span id="8:37">37</span></span> 'I cannot see how you
can ask pay. If it is because you can change the course of Fate, you
cannot possibly put the figure high enough: if everything is settled by
Heaven, and not by you, what is the good of your soothsaying?'

A hale old Roman once gave him a little exhibition of his<span
class="margnote"><span id="8:38">38</span></span> skill in fence, taking
a clothes-peg for his mark. 'What do

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

you think of my play, Demonax?' he said. 'Excellent, so long as you have
a wooden man to play with.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:39">39</span></span>Even for
questions meant to be insoluble he generally had a shrewd answer at
command. Some one tried to make a fool of him by asking, If I burn a
hundred pounds of wood, how many pounds of smoke shall I get? 'Weigh the
ashes; the difference is all smoke.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:40">40</span></span>One Polybius, an
uneducated man whose grammar was very defective, once informed him that
he had received Roman citizenship from the Emperor. 'Why did he not make
you a Greek instead?' asked Demonax.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:41">41</span></span>Seeing a
decorated person very proud of his broad stripe, he whispered in his
ear, while he took hold of and drew attention to the cloth, 'This attire
did not make its original wearer anything but a sheep.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:42">42</span></span>Once at the bath
the water was at boiling point, and some one called him a coward for
hesitating to get in. 'What,' said he, 'is my country expecting me to do
my duty?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:43">43</span></span>Some one asked
him what he took the next world to be like. 'Wait a bit, and I will send
you the information.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:44">44</span></span>A minor poet
called Admetus told him he had inserted a clause in his will for the
inscribing on his tomb of a monostich, which I will give:

Admetus' husk earth holds, and Heaven himself.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'What a beautiful
epitaph, Admetus!' said Demonax, 'and what a pity it is not up yet!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:45">45</span></span>The shrunk shanks
of old age are a commonplace; but when his reached this state, some one
asked him what was the matter with them. 'Ah,' he said with a smile,
'Charon has been having a bite at them.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:46">46</span></span>He interrupted a
Spartan who was scourging his servant with, 'Why confer on your slave
the privilege of Spartans <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) like
yourself?'

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

He observed to one Danae, who was bringing a suit against<span
class="margnote"><span id="10:47">47</span></span> her brother, 'Have
the law of him by all means; it was another Danae whose father was
called the Lawless <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3).'

He waged constant warfare against all whose philosophy was<span
class="margnote"><span id="10:48">48</span></span> not practical, but
for show. So when he saw a cynic, with threadbare cloak and wallet, but
a braying-pestle instead of a staff, proclaiming himself loudly as a
follower of Antisthenes, Crates, and Diogenes, he said: 'Tell us no
lies; your master is the professor of braying.'

Noticing how foul play was growing among the athletes,<span
class="margnote"><span id="10:49">49</span></span> who often
supplemented the resources of boxing and wrestling with their teeth, he
said it was no wonder that the champions' partisans had taken to
describing them as lions.

There was both wit and sting in what he said to the proconsul.<span
class="margnote"><span id="10:50">50</span></span> The latter was one of
the people who take all the hair off their bodies with pitch-plaster. A
cynic mounted a block of stone and cast this practice in his teeth,
suggesting that it was for immoral purposes. The proconsul in a rage had
the man pulled down, and was on the point of condemning him to be beaten
or banished, when Demonax, who was present, pleaded for him on the
ground that he was only exercising the traditional cynic licence.
'Well,' said the proconsul, 'I pardon him this time at your request; but
if he offends again, what shall I do to him?' 'Have him depilated,' said
Demonax.

Another person, entrusted by the Emperor with the command<span
class="margnote"><span id="10:51">51</span></span> of legions and the
charge of a great province, asked him what was the way to govern well.
'Keep your temper, say little, and hear much.'

Asked whether he ate honey-cakes, 'Do you suppose,' he said,<span
class="margnote"><span id="10:52">52</span></span> 'that bees only make
honey for fools?'

Noticing near the Poecile a statue minus a hand, he said it<span
class="margnote"><span id="10:53">53</span></span> had taken Athens a
long time to get up a bronze to Cynaegirus.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:54">54</span></span>Alluding to the
lame Cyprian Rufinus, who was a Peripatetic and spent much time in the
Lyceum walks, 'What presumption,' he exclaimed, 'for a cripple to call
himself a Walking Philosopher!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:55">55</span></span>Epictetus once
urged him, with a touch of reproof, to take a wife and raise a
family--for it beseemed a philosopher to leave some one to represent him
after the flesh. But he received the home thrust: 'Very well, Epictetus;
give me one of your daughters.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:56">56</span></span>His remark to
Herminus the Aristotelian is equally worth recording. He was aware that
this man's character was vile and his misdeeds innumerable, and yet his
mouth was always full of Aristotle and his ten predicaments. 'Certainly,
Herminus,' he said, 'no predicament is too bad for you.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:57">57</span></span>When the
Athenians were thinking, in their rivalry with Corinth, of starting
gladiatorial shows, he came forward and said: 'Men of Athens, before you
pass this motion, do not forget to destroy the altar of Pity.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:58">58</span></span>On the occasion
of his visiting Olympia, the Eleans voted a bronze statue to him. But he
remonstrated: 'It will imply a reproach to your ancestors, men of Elis,
who set up no statue to Socrates or Diogenes.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:59">59</span></span>I once heard him
observe to a learned lawyer that laws were not of much use, whether
meant for the good or for the bad; the first do not need them, and upon
the second they have no effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:60">60</span></span>There was one
line of Homer always on his tongue:

Idle or busy, death takes all alike.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:61">61</span></span>He had a good
word for Thersites, as a cynic and a leveller.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:62">62</span></span>Asked which of
the philosophers was most to his taste, he said: 'I admire them all;
Socrates I revere, Diogenes I admire, Aristippus I love.'

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

He lived to nearly a hundred, free from disease and pain,<span
class="margnote"><span id="12:63">63</span></span> burdening no man,
asking no man's favour, serving his friends, and having no enemies. Not
Athens only, but all Greece was so in love with him that as he passed
the great would give him place and there would be a general hush.
Towards the end of his long life he would go uninvited into the first
house that offered, and there get his dinner and his bed, the household
regarding it as the visit of some heavenly being which brought them a
blessing. When they saw him go by, the baker-wives would contend for the
honour of supplying him, and a happy woman was the actual donor.
Children too used to call him father, and bring him offerings of fruit.

Party spirit was once running high at Athens; he came into<span
class="margnote"><span id="12:64">64</span></span> the assembly, and his
mere appearance was enough to still the storm. When he saw that they
were ashamed, he departed again without having uttered a word.

When he found that he was no longer able to take care of<span
class="margnote"><span id="12:65">65</span></span> himself, he repeated
to his friends the tag with which the heralds close the festival:

The games are done,  
The crowns all won;  
No more delay,  
But haste away,

and from that moment abstaining from food, left life as cheerfully as he
had lived it.

When the end was near, he was asked his wishes about burial.<span
class="margnote"><span id="12:66">66</span></span> 'Oh, do not trouble;
scent will summon my undertakers.' Well, but it would be indecent for
the body of so great a man to feed birds and dogs. 'Oh, no harm in
making oneself useful in death to anything that lives.'

However, the Athenians gave him a magnificent public<span
class="margnote"><span id="12:67">67</span></span> funeral, long
lamented him, worshipped and garlanded the stone seat on which he had
been wont to rest when tired, accounting

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

the mere stone sanctified by him who had sat upon it. No one would miss
the funeral ceremony, least of all any of the philosophers. It was these
who bore him to the grave.

I have made but a small selection of the material available; but it may
serve to give readers some idea of this great man's character.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](wl302.htm#fr_0) The life of Sostratus is
not extant.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:1](wl302.htm#fr_1) i.e., Socrates.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[9:1](wl302.htm#fr_2) See *Spartans* in Notes.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[10:1](wl302.htm#fr_3) See *Danae* in Notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Portrait-study](wl303)
