[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl306)  [Next](wl308) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ZEUS TRAGOEDUS

*Hermes. Hera. Colossus. Heracles. Athene. Posidon. Momus.  
Hermagoras. Zeus. Aphrodite. Apollo, Timocles. Damis*

*Herm*. Wherefore thus brooding, Zeus? wherefore apart,  
And palely pacing, as Earth's sages use?  
Let me thy counsel know, thy cares partake;  
And find thy comfort in a faithful fool.

*Ath*. Cronides, lord of lords, and all our sire,  
I clasp thy knees; grant thou what I require;  
A boon the lightning-eyed Tritonia asks:  
Speak, rend the veil thy secret thought that masks;  
Reveal what care thy mind within thee gnaws,  
Blanches thy cheek, and this deep moaning draws.

*Zeus*. Speech hath no utterance of surpassing fear,  
Tragedy holds no misery or woe,  
But our divinest essence soon shall taste.

*Ath*. Alas, how dire a prelude to thy tale!

*Zeus*. O brood maleficent, teemed from Earth's dark womb!  
And thou, Prometheus, how hast thou wrought me woe!

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

*Ath*. Possess us; are not we thine own familiars?

*Zeus*. With a whirr and a crash  
Let the levin-bolt dash--  
Ah, whither?

*Hera*. A truce to your passion, Zeus. *We* have not these good people's
gift for farce or recitation; *we* have not swallowed <span
class="margnote"><span id="81:2">2</span></span>Euripides whole, and
cannot play up to you. Do you suppose we do not know how to account for
your annoyance?

*Zeus*. Thou knowst not; else thy waitings had been loud.

*Hera*. Don't tell me; it's a love affair; that's what's the matter with
you. However, you won't have any 'wailings' from me; I am too much
hardened to neglect. I suppose you have discovered some new Danae or
Semele or Europa whose charms are troubling you; and so you are
meditating a transformation into a bull or satyr, or a descent through
the roof into your beloved's bosom as a shower of gold; all the
symptoms--your groans and your tears and your white face--point to love
and nothing else.

*Zeus*. Happy ignorance, that sees not what perils now forbid love and
such toys!

*Hera*. Is your name Zeus, or not? and, if so, what else can possibly
annoy you but love?

<span class="margnote"><span id="81:3">3</span></span>*Zeus*. Hera, our
condition is most precarious; it is touch-and-go, as they call it,
whether we are still to enjoy reverence and honour from the earth, or be
utterly neglected and become of no account.

*Hera*. Has Earth produced a new brood of giants? Have the Titans broken
their chains, overpowered their guards, and taken up arms against us
once more?

*Zeus*. Nay, fear not that; Hell threatens not the Gods.

*Hera*. What can the matter be, then? To hear you, one

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

might think it was Polus or Aristodemus, not Zeus; and why, pray, if
something of that sort is not bothering you?

*Zeus*. My dear, a discussion somehow arose yesterday between<span
class="margnote"><span id="82:4">4</span></span> Timocles the Stoic and
Damis the Epicurean; there was a numerous and respectable audience
(which particularly annoyed me), and they had an argument on the subject
of Providence. Damis questioned the existence of the Gods, and utterly
denied their interest in or government of events, while Timocles, good
man, did his best to champion our cause. A great crowd gathered round;
but no conclusion was reached. They broke up with an understanding that
the inquiry should be completed another day; and now they are all agog
to see which will win and prove his case. You all see how parlous and
precarious is our position, depending on a single mortal. These are the
alternatives for us: to be dismissed as mere empty names, or (if
Timocles prevails) to enjoy our customary honours.

*Hera*. This is really a serious matter; your ranting was not<span
class="margnote"><span id="82:5">5</span></span> so uncalled-for, Zeus.

*Zeus*. You fancied me thinking of some Danae or Antiope; and this was
the dread reality. Now, Hermes, Hera, Athene, what is our course? We
await your contribution to our plans.

*Herm*. My opinion is that an assembly be summoned and the community
taken into counsel.

*Hera*. And I concur.

*Ath*. Sire, I dissent entirely; you should not fill Heaven with
apprehensions, nor let your own uneasiness be visible, but take private
measures to assure Timocles's victory and Damis's being laughed out of
court.

*Herm*. It cannot be kept quiet, Zeus; the philosophers' debate is
public, and you will be accused of despotic methods, if you maintain
reserve on a matter of so great and general interest.

*Zeus*. Make proclamation and summon all, then. I approve<span
class="margnote"><span id="82:6">6</span></span> your judgement.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

*Herm*. Here, assemble, all ye Gods; don't waste time, come along, here
you are; we are going to have an important meeting.

*Zeus*. What, Hermes? so bald, so plain, so prosy an announcement--on
this momentous occasion?

*Herm*. Why, how would you like it done?

*Zeus*. Some metre, a little poetic sonority, would make the style
impressive, and they would be more likely to come.

*Herm*. Ah, Zeus, that is work for epic poets or reciters, and I am no
good at poetry. I should be sure to put in too many feet, or leave out
some, and spoil the thing; they would only laugh at my rude verses. Why,
I've known Apollo himself laughed at for some of his oracles; and
prophecy has the advantage of obscurity, which gives the hearers
something better to do than scanning verses.

*Zeus*. Well, well, Hermes, you can make lines from Homer the chief
ingredient of your composition; summon us in his words; you remember
them, of course.

*Herm*. I cannot say they are exactly on the tip of my tongue; however,
I'll do my best:

Let ne’er a God (tum, tum), nor eke a Goddess,  
Nor yet of Ocean's rivers one be wanting,  
Nor nymphs; but gather to great Zeus's council;  
And all that feast on glorious hecatombs,  
Yea, middle and lower classes of Divinity,  
Or nameless ones that snuff fat altar-fumes

<span class="margnote"><span id="83:7">7</span></span>*Zeus*. Good,
Hermes; that is an excellent proclamation: see, here they come
pell-mell; now receive and place them in correct precedence, according
to their material or workmanship; gold in the front row, silver next,
then the ivory ones, then those of stone or bronze. A cross-division
will give precedence to the creations of Phidias, Alcamenes, Myron,
Euphranor, and artists of that calibre, while the common inartistic jobs
can be huddled

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

together in the far corner, hold their tongues, and just make up the
rank and file of our assembly.

*Herm*. All right; they shall have their proper places. But here is a
point: suppose one of them is gold, and heavy at that, but not finely
finished, quite amateurish and ill proportioned, in fact--is he to take
precedence of Myron's and Polyclitus's bronze, or Phidias's and
Alcamenes's marble? or is workmanship to count most?

*Zeus*. It should by rights. Never mind, put the gold first.

*Herm*. I see; property qualification, comparative wealth, is the test,
not merit.--Gold to the front row, please.--Zeus, the front<span
class="margnote"><span id="84:8">8</span></span> row will be exclusively
barbarian, I observe. You see the peculiarity of the Greek contingent:
they have grace and beauty and artistic workmanship, but they are all
marble or bronze--the most costly of them only ivory with just an
occasional gleam of gold, the merest surface-plating; and even those are
wood inside, harbouring whole colonies of mice. Whereas Bendis here,
Anubis there, Attis next door, and Mithras and Men, are all of solid
gold, heavy and intrinsically precious.

*Pos*. Hermes, is it in order that this dog-faced Egyptian<span
class="margnote"><span id="84:9">9</span></span> person should sit in
front of me, Posidon?

*Herm*. Certainly. You see, Earth-shaker, the Corinthians had no gold at
the time, so Lysippus made you of paltry bronze; Dog-face is a whole
gold-mine richer than you. You must put up with being moved back, and
not object to the owner of such a golden snout being preferred.

*Aph*. Then, Hermes, find me a place in the front row; I am golden.

*Herm*. Not so, Aphrodite, if I can trust my eyes; I am<span
class="margnote"><span id="84:10">10</span></span> purblind, or you are
white marble; you were quarried, I take it, from Pentelicus, turned by
Praxiteles's fancy into Aphrodite, and handed over to the Cnidians.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

*Aph*. Wait; my witness is unexceptionable--Homer. 'The Golden
Aphrodite' he calls me, up and down his poems.

*Herm*. Oh, yes, no doubt; *he* called Apollo rich, 'rolling in gold';
but now where will you find Apollo? Somewhere in the third-class seats;
his crown has been taken off and his harp pegs stolen by the pirates,
you see. So *you* may think yourself lucky with a place above the
fourth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="85:11">11</span></span>*Col*. Well, who
will dare dispute *my* claim? Am I not the Sun? and look at my height.
If the Rhodians had not decided on such grandiose dimensions for me, the
same outlay would have furnished forth a round dozen of your golden
Gods; I ought to be valued proportionally. And then, besides the size,
there is the workmanship and careful finish.

*Herm*. What shall I do, Zeus? Here is a difficulty again--too much for
me. Going by material, he is bronze; but, reckoning the talents his
bronze cost, he would be above the first class.

*Zeus*. What business has he here dwarfing the rest and blocking up all
the bench?--Why, my excellent Rhodian, you may be as superior to the
golden ones as you will; but how can you possibly go in the front row?
Every one would have to get up, to let you sit; half that broad beam of
yours would fill the whole House. I must ask you to assist our
deliberations standing; you can bend down your head to the meeting.

<span class="margnote"><span id="85:12">12</span></span>*Herm*. Now here
is another problem. Both bronze, equal aesthetically, being both from
Lysippus's studio, and, to crown all, nothing to choose between them for
birth--two sons of yours, Zeus--Dionysus and Heracles. Which is to be
first? You can see for yourself, they mean to stand upon their order.

*Zeus*. We are wasting time, Hermes; the debate should have been in full
swing by now. Tell them to sit anyhow, according to taste; we will have
an *ad hoc* meeting another day, and then I shall know how to settle the
question of precedence.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

*Herm*. My goodness, what a noise! what low vulgar bawling! <span
class="margnote"><span id="86:13">13</span></span> listen--'Hurry up
with that carving!' 'Do pass the nectar!' 'Why no more ambrosia?' 'When
are those hecatombs coming?' 'Here, shares in that victim!'

*Zeus*. Call them to order, Hermes; this nonsense must cease, before I
can give them the order of the day.

*Herm*. They do not all know Greek; and I haven't the gift of tongues,
to make myself understood by Scythians and Persians and Thracians and
Celts. Perhaps I had better hold up my hand and signal for silence.

*Zeus*. Do.

*Herm*. Good; they are as quiet as if they were so many teachers<span
class="margnote"><span id="86:14">14</span></span> of elocution. Now is
the time for your speech; see, they are all hanging on your lips.

*Zeus*. Why--there is something wrong with me--Hermes, my boy--I will be
frank with you. You know how confident and impressive I always was as a
public speaker?

*Herm*. I know; I used to be in such a fright; you threatened sometimes
to let down your golden cord and heave up earth and sea from their
foundations, Gods included.

*Zeus*. But to-day, my child--it may be this terrible crisis--it may be
the size of the audience--there is a vast number of Gods here, isn't
there--anyhow, my thoughts are all mixed, I shiver, my tongue seems
tied. What is most absurd of all, my exordium is gone clean out of my
head; and I had prepared it on purpose to produce a good impression at
the start.

*Herm*. You have spoiled everything, Zeus. They cannot make out your
silence; they are expecting to hear of some terrible disaster, to
account for your delay.

*Zeus*. What do you think? Reel off the exordium in Homer?

*Herm*. Which one?

*Zeus*. Lend me your ears, Gods all and Goddesses.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

*Herm*. Rubbish! you made quite exhibition enough of yourself in that
vein in our cabinet council. However, you might, if you like, drop your
metrical fustian, and adapt any one of Demosthenes's Philippics with a
few alterations. That is the fashionable method with speakers nowadays.

*Zeus*. Ah, that is a royal road to eloquence--simplifies matters very
much for a man in difficulties.

<span class="margnote"><span id="87:15">15</span></span>*Herm*. Go
ahead, then.

*Zeus*. Men of--Heaven, I presume that you would be willing to pay a
great price, if you could know what in the world has occasioned the
present summons. Which being so, it is fitting that you should give a
ready hearing to my words. Now, whereas the present crisis, Heavenians,
may almost be said to lift up a voice and bid us take vigorous hold on
opportunity, it seems to me that we are letting it slip from our
nerveless grasp. And I wish now (I can't remember any more) to exhibit
clearly to you the apprehensions which have led to my summoning you.

As you are all aware, Mnesitheus the ship's-captain yesterday made his
votive offering for the narrow escape of his vessel off Caphereus, and
those of us whom he had invited attended the banquet in Piraeus. After
the libations you went your several ways. I myself, as it was not very
late, walked up to town for an afternoon stroll in Ceramicus, reflecting
as I went on the parsimony of Mnesitheus. When the ship was driving
against the cliff, and already inside the circle of reef, he had vowed
whole hecatombs: what he offered in fact, with sixteen Gods to
entertain, was a single cock--an old bird afflicted with catarrh--and
half a dozen grains of frankincense; these were all mildewed, so that
they at once fizzled out on the embers, <span class="margnote"><span
id="87:16">16</span></span>hardly giving enough smoke to tickle the
olfactories. Engaged in these thoughts I reached the Poecile, and there
found a great crowd gathered; there were some inside the Portico, a
large number outside, and a few seated on the benches vociferating

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

as loud as they could. Guessing correctly that these were philosophers
of the militant variety, I had a mind to stop and hear what they were
saying. I was enveloped in a good thick cloud, under cover of which I
assumed their habit, lengthened my beard, and so made a passable
philosopher; then I elbowed my way through the crowd and got in
undetected. I found an accomplished scoundrel and a pattern of human
virtue at daggers drawn; they were Damis the Epicurean and Timocles the
Stoic. The latter was bathed in perspiration, and his voice showed signs
of wear, while Damis goaded him on to further exertions with mocking
laughter.

The bone of contention was ourselves. Damis--the reptile<span
class="margnote"><span id="88:17">17</span></span>!--maintained that we
did not concern ourselves in thought or act with human affairs, and
practically denied our existence; that was what it came to. And he found
some support. Timocles was on our side, and loyally, passionately,
unshrinkingly did he champion the cause; he extolled our Providence, and
illustrated the orderly discerning character of our influence and
government. He too had his party; but he was exhausted and quite husky;
and the majority were inclining to Damis. I saw how much was at stake,
and ordered Night to come on and break up the meeting. They accordingly
dispersed, agreeing to conclude the inquiry next day. I kept among the
crowd on its way home, heard its commendations of Damis, and found that
his views were far the more popular, though some still protested against
condemning Timocles out of hand, and preferred to see what he would say
for himself to-morrow.

You now know the occasion of this meeting--no light one<span
class="margnote"><span id="88:18">18</span></span>, ye Gods, if you
reflect how entirely our dignity, our revenue, our honour, depend on
mankind. If they should accept as true either our absolute non-existence
or, short of that, our indifference to them, farewell to our earthly
sacrifices, attributes,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

honours; we shall sit starving and ineffectual in Heaven; our beloved
feasts and assemblies, games and sacrifices, vigils and processions--all
will be no more. So mighty is the issue; believe me, it behoves us all
to search out salvation; and where lies salvation? In the victory and
acceptance of Timocles, in laughter that shall drown the voice of Damis.
For I doubt the unaided powers of Timocles, if our help be not accorded
him.

Hermes, make formal proclamation, and let the debate commence.

*Herm*. Hear, keep silence, clamour not. Of full and qualified Gods,
speak who will. Why, what means this? Doth none rise? Cower ye
confounded at these momentous tidings?

<span class="margnote"><span id="89:19">19</span></span>*Mo*.

Away, ye dull as earth, as water weak!

But *I* could find plenty to say, Zeus, if free speech were granted me.

*Zeus*. Speak, Momus, and fear not. You will use your freedom, surely,
for the common good.

*Mo*. Hear, then, ye Gods; for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh. You must know, I foresaw all this clearly--our
difficulty--the growth of these agitators; it is ourselves who are
responsible for their impudence; I swear to you, we need not blame
Epicurus nor his friends and successors, for the prevalence of these
ideas. Why, what can one expect men to think, when they see all life
topsy-turvy--the good neglected, pining in poverty, disease, and
slavery, detestable scoundrels honoured, rolling in wealth, and ordering
their betters about, temple-robbers undetected and unpunished, the
innocent constantly crucified and bastinadoed? With this evidence before
them, it is only natural they should conclude against our existence<span
class="margnote"><span id="89:20">20</span></span>. All the more when
they hear the oracles saying that some one

The Halys crossed, o’erthrows a mighty realm, <span id="page_90">p.
90</span>  
but not specifying whether that realm is his own or his enemy's;

or again

O sacred Salamis, thou shalt slay  
  Full many a mother's son.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Greeks were
mothers' sons as well as the Persians, I suppose. Or again, when they
hear the ballads about our loves, our wounds, captivities, thraldoms,
quarrels, and endless vicissitudes (mark you, we claim all the while to
be blissful and serene), are they not justified in ridiculing and
belittling us? And then we say it is outrageous if a few people who are
not quite fools expose the absurdity and reject Providence; why, we
ought to be glad enough that a few still go on sacrificing to blunderers
like us.

And at this point, Zeus--this meeting is private; the human<span
class="margnote"><span id="90:21">21</span></span> element is not
represented among us (except by Heracles, Dionysus, Ganymede, and
Asclepius, and they are naturalized)--at this point, answer me a
question frankly: did your interest in mankind ever carry you so far as
to sift the good from the bad? The answer is in the negative, I know.
Very well, then; had not a Theseus, on his way from Troezen to Athens,
exterminated the malefactors as an incidental amusement, Sciron and
Pityocamptes and Cercyon and the rest of them might have gone on
battening on the slaughter of travellers, for all you and your
Providence would have done. Had not an old-fashioned thoughtful
Eurystheus, benevolently collecting information of local troubles, sent
this energetic enterprising servant of his about, the mighty Zeus would
never have given a thought to the Hydra or the Stymphalian birds, the
Thracian horses and the drunken insolence of Centaurs.

If the truth must out, we sit here with a single eye to one<span
class="margnote"><span id="90:22">22</span></span> thing--does a man
sacrifice and feed the altars fat? Everything else drifts as it may. We
get our deserts, and shall continue to get them, when men open their
eyes by degrees and find that sacrifices and processions bring them no
profit. Before

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

long you will find we are the laughing-stock of people like Epicurus,
Metrodorus, Damis, who will have mastered and muzzled our advocates.
With whom does it lie to check and remedy this state of things? Why,
with you, who have brought it on. As for Momus, what is dishonour to
him? He was never among the recipients of honour, while you were still
prosperous; your banquetings were too exclusive.

<span class="margnote"><span id="91:23">23</span></span>*Zeus*. He was
ever a cross-grained censor; we need not mind his maundering, Gods. We
have it from the admirable Demosthenes: imputations, blame, criticism,
these are easy things; they tax no one's capacity: what calls for a
statesman is the suggesting of a better course; and that is what I rely
upon the rest of you for; let us do our best without his help.

<span class="margnote"><span id="91:24">24</span></span>*Pos*. As for
me, I live ordinarily under water, as you know, and follow an
independent policy in the depths; that policy is to save sailors, set
ships on their way, and keep the winds quiet, as best I may. However, I
do take an interest in your politics too, and my opinion is that this
Damis should be got rid of before the debate; the thunderbolt would do
it, or some means could be found; else he might win--you say he is a
plausible fellow, Zeus. It would teach them that there is a reckoning
for telling such tales about us, too.

<span class="margnote"><span id="91:25">25</span></span>*Zeus*. You must
be jesting, Posidon; you cannot have forgotten that we have no say in
the matter? It is the Fates that spin a man's thread, whether he be
destined to the thunderbolt or the sword, to fever or consumption. If it
had depended on me, do you suppose I should have let those
temple-robbers get off unblasted from Pisa the other day?--two of my
curls shorn off, weighing half a dozen pounds apiece. Would *you* have
stood it, when that fisherman from Oreus stole your trident at
Geraestus? Moreover, they will think we are sensitive and angry; they
will suspect that the reason why we get the man out of the way without
waiting to see him matched with Timocles

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

is that we are afraid of his arguments; they will say we are just
securing judgement by default.

*Pos*. Dear, dear! I thought I had hit upon a good short cut to our
object.

*Zeus*. Nonsense, there is something fishy about it, Posidon; and it is
a dull notion too, to destroy your adversary beforehand; he dies
unvanquished, and leaves his argument behind him still debatable and
undecided.

*Pos*. Then the rest of you must think of something better, if 'fishy'
is the best word you have for me.

*Apol*. If we beardless juniors were competent to address the<span
class="margnote"><span id="92:26">26</span></span> meeting, *I* might
perhaps have contributed usefully to the discussion.

*Mo*. Oh, Apollo, the inquiry is so important that seniority may be
waived, and any one allowed his say; a pretty thing to split hairs about
legal competence at a supreme crisis! But *you* are surely qualified by
this time; your minority is prehistoric, your name is on the
Privy-Council roll, your senatorial rank dates back almost to Cronus.
Pray spare us these juvenile airs, and give us your views freely; you
need not be bashful about your smooth chin; you have a father's rights
in Asclepius's great bush of a beard. Moreover, you never had a better
opportunity of showing your wisdom, if your philosophic *séances* with
the Muses on Helicon have not been thrown away.

*Apol*. Why, it does not lie with you to give me leave, Momus; Zeus must
do that; and if he bids, I may find words that shall be not all
uncultured, but worthy of my Heliconian studies.

*Zeus*. Speak, son; thou hast my leave.

*Apol*. This Timocles is a good pious man, and an excellent<span
class="margnote"><span id="92:27">27</span></span> Stoic scholar; his
learning has gained him a wide and paying connexion among young men; in
private lessons his manner is indeed very convincing. But in public
speaking he is timid, cannot produce his voice, and has a provincial
accent; the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

consequence is, he gets laughed at in company, lacks fluency, stammers
and loses his thread--especially when he emphasizes these defects by an
attempt at flowers of speech. As far as intelligence goes, he is
extremely acute and subtle, so the Stoic experts say; but he spoils it
all by the feebleness of his oral explanations; he is confused and
unintelligible, deals in paradoxes, and when he is interrogated,
explains *ignotum per ignotius*; his audience does not grasp his
meaning, and therefore laughs at him. I think lucidity a most important
point; there is nothing one should be so careful about as to be
comprehensible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="93:28">28</span></span>*Mo*. You praise
lucidity, Apollo; your theory is excellent, though your practice does
not quite conform; your oracles are crooked and enigmatic, and generally
rely upon a safe ambiguity; a second prophet is required to say what
they mean. But what is your solution of the problem? How are we to cure
Timocles of the impediment in his speech?

<span class="margnote"><span id="93:29">29</span></span>*Apol*. If
possible, we should provide him with an able counsel (there are plenty
such) to be inspired by him and give adequate expression to his ideas.

*Mo*. Your sapience is beardless indeed--*in statu pupillari*, one may
say. A learned gathering: Timocles with counsel by his side to interpret
his ideas. Damis speaking *in propria persona* with his own tongue, his
opponent employing a go-between into whose ears he privately pours
inspiration, and the go-between producing ornate periods, without, I
dare say, understanding what he is told--most entertaining for the
listeners! We shall get nothing out of that device.

<span class="margnote"><span id="93:30">30</span></span>But, reverend
sir, you claim the gift of prophecy, and it has brought you in good
pay--golden ingots on one occasion?--why not seize this opportunity of
exhibiting your art? You might tell us which of the disputants will win;
a prophet knows the future, of course.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

*Apol*. I have no tripod or incense here; no substitute for the
divining-well of Castaly.

*Mo*. Aha! you are caught! you will not come to the scratch.

*Zeus*. Speak, my son, in spite of all; give not this enemy occasion to
blaspheme; let him not flout thy powers with tripod and water and
frankincense, as though thine art were lost without them.

*Apol*. Father, it were better done at Delphi or at Colophon, with all
the customary instruments to hand. Yet, bare and unprovided as I am, I
will essay to tell whether of them twain shall prevail.--If the metre is
a little rough, you must make allowances.

*Mo*. Go on, then; but remember, Apollo: lucidity; no 'able counsel,' no
solutions that want solving themselves. It is not a question of lamb and
tortoise boiling <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) in Lydia now; you
know what we want to get at.

*Zeus*. What will thine utterance be? How dread, even now, is the making
ready! The altered hue, the rolling eyes, the floating locks, the
frenzied gesture--all is possession, horror, mystery.

*Apol*.

Who lists may hear Apollo's soothfast rede<span class="margnote"><span
id="94:31">31</span></span>  
Of stiff debate, heroic challenge ringing  
Shrill, and each headpiece lined with fence of proof.  
Alternate clack the strokes in whirling strife;  
Sore buffeted, quakes and shivers heart of oak.  
But when grasshopper feels the vulture's talons,  
Then the storm-boding ravens croak their last,  
Prevail the mules, butts his swift foals the ass.

*Zeus*. Why that ribald laughter, Momus? It is no laughing matter. Stop,
stop, fool; you'll choke yourself.

*Mo*. Well, such a clear simple oracle puts one in spirits.

*Zeus*. Indeed? Then perhaps you will kindly expound it.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

*Mo*. No need of a Themistocles this time; it is absolutely plain. The
oracle just says in so many words that he is a quack, and we pack-asses
(quite true) and mules to believe in him; we have not as much sense, it
adds, as a grasshopper.

<span class="margnote"><span id="95:32">32</span></span>*Herac*. Father,
I am only an alien, but I am not afraid to give my opinion. Let them
begin their debate. Then, if Timocles gets the best of it, we can let
the meeting go on, in our own interest; on the other hand, if things
look bad, I will give the Portico a shake, if you like, and bring it
down on Damis; a confounded fellow like that is not to insult us.

*Zeus*. Now by Heracles--I can swear by you, I certainly cannot swear by
your plan--what a crude--what a shockingly philistine suggestion! What!
destroy all those people for one man's wickedness? and the Portico
thrown in, with the Miltiades and Cynaegirus on the field of Marathon?
Why, if these were ruined, how could the orators ever make another
speech, with the best of their stock-in-trade taken from them? Besides,
while you were alive, you might possibly have done a thing like that;
but now that you are a God, you surely understand that only the Fates
are competent, and we cannot interfere?

*Herac*. Then when I slew the lion or the Hydra, was I only the Fates'
instrument?

*Zeus*. Of course you were.

*Herac*. And now, suppose any one insults me, or robs my temple, or
upsets an image of me, am I not to pulverize him, just because the Fates
have not decreed it long ago?

*Zeus*. Certainly not.

*Herac*. Then allow me to speak my mind;

I'm a blunt man; I call a spade a spade.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If this is the
state of things with you, good-bye for me to your honours and
altar-steam and fat of victims; I shall be off to Hades. There, if I
show my bow ready for action, the ghosts of the monsters I have slain
will be frightened, at least.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

*Zeus*. Oh, splendid! 'Thine own lips testify against thee,' says the
book; you would have saved Damis some trouble by putting this in his
mouth.

But who is this breathless messenger? Bronze--a nice clean<span
class="margnote"><span id="96:33">33</span></span> figure and
outline--*chevelure* rather out of date. Ah, he must be your brother,
Hermes, who stands in the Market by the Poecile; I see he is all over
pitch; that is what comes of having casts taken of you every day. My
son, why this haste? Have you important news from Earth?

*Hermag*. Momentous news, calling for infinite energy.

*Zeus*. Speak, tarry not, if any peril else hath escaped our vigilance.

*Hermag*.

It chanced of late that by the statuaries  
My breast and back were plastered o'er with pitch;  
A mock cuirass tight-clinging hung, to ape  
My bronze, and take the seal of its impression.  
When lo, a crowd! therein a pallid pair  
Sparring amain, vociferating logic;  
’Twas Damis and--

*Zeus*. Truce to your iambics, my excellent Hermagoras; I know the pair.
But tell me whether the fight has been going on long.

*Hermag*. Not yet; they were still skirmishing--slinging invective at
long range.

*Zeus*. Then we have only, Gods, to look over and listen. Let the Hours
unbar, draw back the clouds, and open the doors of Heaven.

Upon my word, what a vast gathering! And I do not quite<span
class="margnote"><span id="96:34">34</span></span> like the looks of
Timocles; he is trembling; he has lost his head; he will spoil
everything; it is perfectly plain, he will not be able to stand up to
Damis. Well, there is one thing left us: we can pray for him

Inwardly, silently, lest Damis hear.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="97:35">35</span></span>*Ti. What, you
miscreant, no Gods? no Providence?*

*Da. No, no; you answer my question first; what makes you believe in
them?*

*Ti. None of that, now; the* onus probandi *is with you, scoundrel.*

*Da. None of that, now; it is with you.*

*Zeus*. At this game ours is much the better man--louder-voiced,
rougher-tempered. Good, Timocles; stick to invective; that is your
strong point; once you get off that, he will hook and hold you up like a
fish.

*Ti. I solemnly swear I will not answer first.*

*Da. Well, put your questions, then; so much you score by your oath. But
no abuse, please.*

<span class="margnote"><span id="97:36">36</span></span>*Ti. Done. Tell
me, then, and be damned to you, do you deny that the Gods exercise
providence?*

*Da. I do.*

*Ti. What, are all the events we see uncontrolled, then?*

*Da. Yes.*

*Ti. And the regulation of the universe is not under any God's care?*

*Da. No.*

*Ti. And everything moves casually, by blind tendency?*

*Da. Yes.*

*Ti. Gentlemen, can you tolerate such sentiments? Stone the blasphemer.*

*Da. What do you mean by hounding them against me? Who are you, that you
should protest in the Gods' name? They do not even protest in their own;
they have sent no judgement on me, and they have had time enough to hear
me, if they have ears.*

*Ti. They do hear you; they do; and some day their vengeance will find
you out.*

<span class="margnote"><span id="97:37">37</span></span>*Da. Pray when
are they likely to have time to spare for me? They are far too busy,
according to you, with all the infinite concerns of the universe on
their hands. That is why they have never*

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

*punished you for your perjuries and--well, for the rest of your
performances, let me say, not to break our compact about abuse. And yet
I am at a loss to conceive any more convincing proof they could have
given of their Providence, than if they had trounced you as you deserve.
But no doubt they are from home--t’other side of Oceanus, possibly, on a
visit to 'the blameless Ethiopians.' We know they have a way of going
there to dinner, self-invited sometimes.*

*Ti. What answer is possible to such ribaldry*<span
class="margnote"><span id="98:38">38</span></span>*?*

*Da. The answer I have been waiting for all this time; you can tell me
what made you believe in divine Providence.*

*Ti. Firstly, the order of nature--the sun running his regular course,
the moon the same, the circling seasons, the growth of plants, the
generation of living things, the ingenious adaptations in these latter
for nutrition, thought, movement, locomotion; look at a carpenter or a
shoemaker, for instance; and the thing is infinite. All these effects,
and no effecting Providence?*

*Da. You beg the question; whether the effects are produced by
Providence is just what is not yet proved. Your description of nature I
accept; it does not follow that there is definite design in it; it is
not impossible that things now similar and homogeneous have developed
from widely different origins. But you give the name 'order' to mere
blind tendency. And you will be very angry if one follows your
appreciative catalogue of nature in all its variety, but stops short of
accepting it as a proof of detailed Providence. So, as the play says,*

*  Here lurks a fallacy; bring me sounder proof.*

*Ti. I cannot admit that further proof is required; nevertheless*<span
class="margnote"><span id="98:39">39</span></span>*, I will give you
one. Will you allow Homer to have been an admirable poet?*

*Da. Surely.*

*Ti. Well,* he *maintains Providence, and warrants my belief.*

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

*Da. Magnificent! why, every one will grant you Homer's poetic
excellence; but not that he, or any other poet for that matter, is good
authority on questions of this sort.* Their *object, of course, is not
truth, but fascination; they call in the charms of metre, they take
tales for the vehicle of what instruction they give, and in short all
their efforts are directed to pleasure.*

<span class="margnote"><span id="99:40">40</span></span>*But I should be
glad to hear which parts of Homer you pin your faith to. Where he tells
how the daughter, the brother, and the wife of Zeus conspired to
imprison him? If Thetis had not been moved to compassion and called
Briareus, you remember, our excellent Zeus would have been seized and
manacled; and his gratitude to her induced him to delude Agamemnon with
a lying dream, and bring about the deaths of a number of Greeks. Do you
see? The reason was that, if he had struck and blasted Agamemnon's self
with a thunderbolt, his double dealing would have come to light. Or
perhaps you found the Diomede story most convincing?--Diomede wounded
Aphrodite, and afterwards Ares himself, at Athene's instigation; and
then the Gods actually fell to blows and went a-tilting--without
distinction of sex; Athene overthrew Ares, exhausted no doubt with his
previous wound from Diomede; and*

Hermes the stark and stanch ’gainst Leto stood.

*Or did you put your trust in Artemis? She was a sensitive lady, who
resented not being invited to Oeneus's banquet, and by way of vengeance
sent a monstrous irresistible boar to ravage his country. Is it with
tales like these that Homer has prevailed on you?*

<span class="margnote"><span id="99:41">41</span></span>*Zeus*. Goodness
me, what a shout, Gods! they are all cheering Damis. And our man seems
posed; he is frightened and trembles; he is going to throw up the
sponge, I am certain of it; he looks round for a gap to get away
through.

*Ti. And will you scout Euripides too, then? Again and again he brings
Gods on the stage, and shows them upholding virtue in the Heroes, but
chastising wickedness and impiety (like yours).*

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

*Da. My noble philosopher, if that is how the tragedians have convinced
you, you have only two alternatives: you must suppose that divinity is
temporarily lodged either in the actor--a Polus, an Aristodemus, a
Satyrus--, or else in the actual masks, buskins, long tunics, cloaks,
gloves, stomachers, padding, and ornamental paraphernalia in general of
tragedy--a manifest absurdity; for when Euripides can speak his own
sentiments unfettered by dramatic necessity, observe the freedom of his
remarks:*

*Dost see this aether stretching infinite,  
And girdling earth with close yet soft embrace?  
That reckon thou thy Zeus, that name thy God.*

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *And again,*

*Zeus, whatever Zeus may be (for, save by hearsay,  
I know not)--;*

*and there is more of the same sort.*

*Ti. Well, but all men--ay, all nations--have acknowledged and*<span
class="margnote"><span id="100:42">42</span></span> *fêted Gods; was it
all delusion?*

*Da. Thank you; a timely reminder; national observances show better than
anything else how vague religious theory is. Confusion is endless, and
beliefs as many as believers. Scythia makes offerings to a scimetar,
Thrace to the Samian runaway Zamolxis, Phrygia to a Month-God, Ethiopia
to a Day-Goddess, Cyllene to Phales, Assyria to a dove, Persia to fire,
Egypt to water. In Egypt, though, besides the universal worship of
water, Memphis has a private cult of the ox, Pelusium of the onion,
other cities of the ibis or the crocodile, others again of baboon, cat,
or monkey. Nay, the very villages have their specialities: one deifies
the right shoulder, and another across the river the left; one a half
skull, another an earthenware bowl or platter. Come, my fine fellow, is
it not all ridiculous?*

*Mo*. What did I tell you, Gods? All this was sure to come out and be
carefully overhauled.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

*Zeus*. You did, Momus, and your strictures were justified; if once we
come safe out of this present peril, I will try to introduce reforms.

<span class="margnote"><span id="101:43">43</span></span>*Ti. Infidel!
where do you find the source of oracles and prophecies, if not in the
Gods and their Providence?*

*Da. About oracles, friend, the less said the better; I shall ask you to
choose your instances, you see. Will Apollo's answer to the Lydian suit
you? That was as symmetrical as a double-edged knife; or say, it faced
both ways, like those Hermae which are made double, alike whether you
look at front or back. Consider; will Croesus's passage of the Halys
destroy his own realm, or Cyrus's? Yet the wretched Sardian paid a long
price for his ambidextrous hexameter.*

*Mo*. The man is realizing just my worst apprehensions. Where is our
handsome musician now? Ah, there you are; go down and plead your own
cause against him.

*Zeus*. Hush, Momus; you are murdering our feelings; it is no time for
recrimination.

<span class="margnote"><span id="101:44">44</span></span>*Ti. Have a
care, Damis; this is sacrilege, no less; what you say amounts to razing
the temples and upsetting the altars.*

*Da. Oh, not* all *the altars; what harm do they do, so long as incense
and perfume is the worst of it? As for Artemis's altar at Tauri, though,
and her hideous feasts, I should like it overturned from base to
cornice.*

*Zeus*. Whence comes this resistless plague among us? There is none of
us he spares; he is as free with his tongue as a tub orator,

And grips by turns the innocent and guilty.

*Mo*. The innocent? You will not find many of those among us, Zeus. He
will soon come to laying hands upon some of the great and eminent, I
dare say.

<span class="margnote"><span id="101:45">45</span></span>*Ti. Do you
close your ears even to Zeus's thunder, atheist?*

*Da. I clearly cannot shut out the thunder; whether it* *is*

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Zeus's thunder,
you know better than I perhaps; you may have interviewed the Gods.
Travellers from Crete tell another story: there is a tomb there with an
inscribed pillar, stating that Zeus is long dead, and not going to
thunder any more.*

*Mo*. I could have told you that was coming long ago. What, Zeus? pale?
and your teeth chattering? What is the matter? You should cheer up, and
treat such manikins with lofty contempt.

*Zeus*. Contempt? See what a number of them there is--how set against us
they are already--and he has them fast by the ears.

*Mo*. Well, but you have only to choose, and you can let down your
golden cord, and then every man of them

With earth and sky and all thou canst draw up.

*Ti. Blasphemer, have you ever been a voyage*<span
class="margnote"><span id="102:46">46</span></span>*?*

*Da. Many.*

*Ti. Well, then, the wind struck the canvas and filled the sails, and it
or the oars gave you way, but there was a person responsible for
steering and for the safety of the ship?*

*Da. Certainly.*

*Ti. Now that ship would not have sailed, without a steersman; and do
you suppose that this great universe drifts unsteered and uncontrolled?*

*Zeus*. Good, this time, Timocles; a cogent illustration, that.

*Da. But, you pattern of piety, the earthly navigator makes his plans,
takes his*<span class="margnote"><span id="102:47">47</span></span>
*measures, gives his orders, with a single eye to efficiency; there is
nothing useless or purposeless on board; everything is to make
navigation easy or possible; but as for the navigator for whom you claim
the management of this vast ship, he and his crew show no reason or
appropriateness in any of their arrangements; the forestays, as likely
as not, are made fast to the stern, and both sheets to the bows; the
anchor will be gold, the beak lead, decoration below the water-line, and
unsightliness above.*

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="103:48">48</span></span>*As for the
men, you will find some lazy awkward coward in second or third command,
or a fine swimmer, active as a cat aloft, and a handy man generally,
chosen out of all the rest to--pump. It is just the same with the
passengers: here is a gaolbird accommodated with a seat next the captain
and treated with reverence, there a debauchee or parricide or
temple-robber in honourable possession of the best place, while crowds
of respectable people are packed together in a corner and hustled by
their real inferiors. Consider what sort of a voyage Socrates and
Aristides and Phocion had of it, on short rations, not venturing, for
the filth, to stretch out their legs on the bare deck; and on the other
hand what a comfortable, luxurious, contemptuous life it was for Callias
or Midias or Sardanapalus.*

<span class="margnote"><span id="103:49">49</span></span>*That is how
things go on board your ship, sir wiseacre; and who shall count the
wrecks? If there had been a captain supervising and directing, in the
first place he would have known the difference between good and bad
passengers, and in the second he would have given them their deserts;
the better would have had the better accommodation above by his side,
and the worse gone below; with some of the better he would have shared
his meals and his counsels. So too for the crew: the keen sailor would
have been made look-out man or captain of the watch, or given some sort
of precedence, and the lazy shirker have tasted the rope's end half a
dozen times a day. The metaphorical ship, your worship, is likely to be
capsized by its captain's incompetence.*

<span class="margnote"><span id="103:50">50</span></span>*Mo*. He is
sweeping on to victory, with wind and tide.

*Zeus*. Too probable, Momus. And Timocles never gets hold of an
effective idea; he can only ladle out trite commonplaces
higgledy-piggledy--no sooner heard than refuted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="103:51">51</span></span>*Ti. Well,
well; my ship leaves you unconvinced; I must drop my sheet-anchor, then;
that at least is unbreakable.*

*Zeus*. I wonder what it is.

*Ti. See whether this is a sound syllogism; can you upset it?--*

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *If there are
altars, there are Gods: there* are *altars; therefore, there are Gods.
Now then.*

*Da. Ha, ha, ha! I will answer as soon as I can get done with laughing.*

*Ti. Will you never stop? At least tell me what the joke is.*

*Da. Why, you don't see that your anchor (sheet-anchor, too) hangs by a
mere thread. You defend on connexion between the existence of Gods and
the existence of altars, and fancy yourself safe at anchor! As you admit
that this was your sheet-anchor, there is nothing further to detain us.*

*Ti. You retire; you confess yourself beaten, then?* <span
class="margnote"><span id="104:52">52</span></span>

*Da. Yes; we have seen you take sanctuary at the altars under
persecution. At those altars I am ready (the sheet-anchor be my witness)
to swear peace and cease from strife.*

*Ti. Tou are playing with me, are you, you vile body-snatcher, you
loathsome well-whipped scum! As if we didn't know who your father was,
how your mother was a harlot! You strangled your own brother, you live
in fornication, you debauch the young, you unabashed lecher! Don't be in
such a hurry; here is something for you to take with you; this broken
pot will serve me to cut your foul throat.*

*Zeus*. Damis makes off with a laugh, and the other after him<span
class="margnote"><span id="104:53">53</span></span>, calling him names,
mad at his insolence. He will get him on the head with that pottery, I
know. And now, what are we to do?

*Herm*. Why, the man in the comedy was not far out:

  Put a good face on 't, and thou hast no harm.

It is no such terrible disaster, if a few people go away infected. There
are plenty who take the other view--a majority of Greeks, the body and
dregs of the people, and the barbarians to a man.

*Zeus*. Ah, Hermes, but there is a great deal in Darius's remark about
Zopyrus--I would rather have had one ally like Damis than be the lord of
a thousand Babylons.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[94:1](wl307.htm#fr_11) See *Croesus* in Notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cock](wl308)
