[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl302)  [Next](wl304.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A PORTRAIT-STUDY

*Lycinus. Polystratus*

*Ly*. Polystratus, I know now what men must have felt like when they saw
the Gorgon's head. I have just experienced the same sensation, at the
sight of a most lovely woman. A little more, and I should have realized
the legend, by being turned to stone; I am benumbed with admiration.

*Poly*. Wonderful indeed must have been the beauty, and terrible the
power of the woman who could produce such an impression on Lycinus. Tell
me of this petrifying Medusa. Who is she, and whence? I would see her
myself. You will not grudge me that privilege? Your jealousy will not
take alarm at the prospect of a rival petrifaction at your side?

*Ly*. Well, I give you fair warning: one distant glimpse of her, and you
are speechless, motionless as any statue. Nay, that is a light
affliction: the mortal wound is not dealt till *her* glance has fallen
on *you*. What can save you then? She will lead you in chains, hither
and thither, as the magnet draws the steel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13:2">2</span></span>*Poly*. Enough!
You would make her more than human. And now tell me who she is.

*Ly*. You think I am exaggerating: I fear you will have but a poor
opinion of my eloquence when you see her as she is--so far above my
praise. *Who* she is, I cannot say: but to judge

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

from the splendour of her surroundings, her retinue, her host of eunuchs
and maids, she must be of no ordinary rank.

*Poly*. And you never even asked her name?

*Ly*. Why no; but she is from Ionia; because, as she passed, I heard one
of the bystanders speak aside to his neighbour: 'See, he exclaimed,
'what Smyrna can produce! And what wonder, if the fairest of Ionian
cities has given birth to the fairest of women?' I thought he must come
from Smyrna himself, he was so proud of her.

*Poly*. There you acted your stony part to perfection. As you<span
class="margnote"><span id="14:3">3</span></span> could neither follow
her, nor make inquiries of the Smyrnaean, it only remains for you to
describe her as best you can, on the chance of my recognizing her.

*Ly*. You know not what you ask. It is not in the power of
words--certainly not of *my* words--to portray such wondrous beauty;
scarcely could an Apelles, a Zeuxis, a Parrhasius,--a Phidias or an
Alcamenes, do justice to it; as for my flimsy workmanship, it will but
insult the original.

*Poly*. Well, never mind; what was she like? There can be no harm in
trying your hand. What if the portrait be somewhat out of drawing?--the
critic is your good friend.

*Ly*. I think my best way out of it will be to call in the aid of some
of the old masters I have named: let them fashion the likeness for me.

*Poly*. Well, but--will they come? They have been dead so long.

*Ly*. That is easily managed: but you must not mind answering me a few
questions.

*Poly*. You have but to ask.

*Ly*. Were you ever at Cnidus? <span class="margnote"><span
id="14:4">4</span></span>

*Poly*. I was.

*Ly*. Then you have seen the *Aphrodite*, of course?

*Poly*. That masterpiece of Praxiteles's art! I have.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

*Ly*. And heard the story they tell there,--of the man who fell in love
with the statue, and contrived to get shut into the temple alone, and
there enjoyed such favours as a statue is able to bestow.--But that is
neither here nor there.--You have seen the Cnidian *Aphrodite*, anyhow;
now I want to know whether you have also seen our own *Aphrodite of the
Gardens*,--the Alcamenes.

*Poly*. I must be a dullard of dullards, if that most exquisite of
Alcamenes's works had escaped my notice.

*Ly*. I forbear to ask whether in the course of your many visits to the
Acropolis you ever observed the *Sosandra* of Calamis <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md).

*Poly*. Frequently.

*Ly*. That is really enough for my purpose. But I should just like to
know what you consider to be Phidias's best work.

*Poly*. Can you ask?--The Lemnian *Athene*, which bears the artist's own
signature; oh, and of course the *Amazon* leaning on her spear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="15:5">5</span></span>*Ly*. I approve
your judgement. We shall have no need of other artists: I am now to cull
from each of these its own peculiar beauty, and combine all in a single
portrait.

*Poly*. And how are you going to do that?

*Ly*. It is quite simple. All we have to do is to hand over our several
types to Reason, whose care it must be to unite them in the most
harmonious fashion, with due regard to the consistency, as to the
variety, of the result.

*Poly*. To be sure; let Reason take her materials and begin.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What will she make
of it, I wonder? Will she contrive to put all these different types
together without their clashing?

*Ly*. Well, look; she is at work already. Observe her procedure<span
class="margnote"><span id="16:6">6</span></span>. She begins with our
Cnidian importation, from which she takes only the head; with the rest
she is not concerned, as the statue is nude. The hair, the forehead, the
exquisite eyebrows, she will keep as Praxiteles has rendered them; the
eyes, too, those soft, yet bright-glancing eyes, she leaves unaltered.
But the cheeks and the front of the face are taken from the 'Garden'
Goddess; and so are the lines of the hands, the shapely wrists, the
delicately-tapering fingers. Phidias and the Lemnian *Athene* will give
the outline of the face, and the well-proportioned nose, and lend new
softness to the cheeks; and the same artist may shape her neck and
closed lips, to resemble those of his *Amazon*. Calamis adorns her with
Sosandra's modesty, Sosandra's grave half-smile; the decent seemly dress
is Sosandra's too, save that the head must not be veiled. For her
stature, let it be that of Cnidian *Aphrodite*; once more we have
recourse to Praxiteles.--What think you, Polystratus? Is it a lovely
portrait?

*Poly*. Assuredly it will be, when it is perfected. At present<span
class="margnote"><span id="16:7">7</span></span>, my paragon of
sculptors, one element of loveliness has escaped your comprehensive
grasp.

*Ly*. What is that?

*Poly*. A most important one. You will agree with me that colour and
tone have a good deal to do with beauty? that black should *be* black,
white be white, and red play its blushing part? It looks to me as if the
most important thing of all were still lacking.

*Ly*. Well, how shall we manage? Call in the painters, perhaps,
selecting those who were noted for their skill in mixing and laying on
their colours? Be it so: we will have Polygnotus, Euphranor of course,
Apelles and Aëtion; they can

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

divide the work between them. Euphranor shall colour the hair like his
*Hera's*; Polygnotus the comely brow and faintly blushing cheek, after
his *Cassandra* in the Assembly-room at Delphi. Polygnotus shall also
paint her robe,--of the finest texture, part duly gathered in, but most
of it floating in the breeze. For the flesh-tints, which must be neither
too pale nor too high-coloured, Apelles shall copy his own *Campaspe*.
<span class="margnote"><span id="17:8">8</span></span>And lastly, Aëtion
shall give her *Roxana's* lips. Nay, we can do better: have we not
Homer, best of painters, though a Euphranor and an Apelles be present?
Let him colour all like the limbs of Menelaus, which he says were 'ivory
tinged with red.' He too shall paint her calm 'ox-eyes,' and the Theban
poet shall help him to give them their 'violet' hue. Homer shall add her
smile, her white arms, her rosy finger-tips, and so complete the
resemblance to golden Aphrodite, to whom <span class="margnote"><span
id="17:9">9</span></span>he has compared Brises' daughter with far less
reason. So far we may trust our sculptors and painters and poets: but
for her crowning glory, for the grace--nay, the choir of Graces and
Loves that encircle her--who shall portray them?

*Poly*. This was no earthly vision, Lycinus; surely she must have
dropped from the clouds.--And what was she doing?

*Ly*. In her hands was an open scroll; half read (so I surmised) and
half to be read. As she passed, she was making some remark to one of her
company; what it was I did not catch. But when she smiled, ah! then,
Polystratus, I beheld teeth whose whiteness, whose unbroken regularity,
who shall describe? Imagine a lovely necklace of gleaming pearls, all of
a size; and imagine those dazzling rows set off by ruby lips. In that
glimpse, I realized what Homer meant by his 'carven ivory.' Other
women's teeth differ in size; or they project; or there are gaps: here,
all was equality and evenness; pearl joined to pearl in unbroken line.
Oh, ’twas a wondrous sight, of beauty more than human.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

*Poly*. Stay. I know now whom you mean, as well from your description as
from her nationality. You said that there were eunuchs in her train?

*Ly*. Yes; and soldiers too.

*Poly*. My simple friend, the lady you have been describing is a
celebrity, and possesses the affections of an Emperor.

*Ly*. And her name?

*Poly*. Adds one more to the list of her charms; for it is the same as
that of Abradatas's wife <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md).You know
Xenophon's enthusiastic account of that beautiful and virtuous
woman?--you have read it a dozen times.

*Ly*. Yes; and every time I read it, it is as if she stood before me. I
almost hear her uttering the words the historian has put into her mouth,
and see her arming her husband and sending him forth to battle.

*Poly*. Ah, my dear Lycinus, *this* lady has passed you but<span
class="margnote"><span id="18:11">11</span></span> once, like a
lightning flash; and your praises, I perceive, are all for those
external charms that strike the eye. You are yet a stranger to her
nobility of soul; you know not that higher, more god-like beauty. *I* am
her fellow-countryman, I know her, and have conversed with her many
times. You are aware that gentleness, humanity, magnanimity, modesty,
culture, are things that I prize more than beauty--and rightly; to do
otherwise would be as absurd as to value raiment above the body. Where
physical perfection goes hand-in-hand with spiritual excellence, there
alone (as I maintain) is true beauty. I could show you many a woman
whose outward loveliness is marred by what is within; who has but to
open her lips, and beauty stands confessed a faded, withered thing, the
mean, unlovely handmaid of that odious mistress, her soul. Such women
are like Egyptian temples: the shrine is fair and stately, wrought of
costly marble, decked out with gilding and painting: but

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

seek the God within, and you find an ape--an ibis--a goat--a cat. Of how
many women is the same thing true! Beauty unadorned is not enough: and
her true adornments are not purple and jewels, but those others that I
have mentioned, modesty, courtesy, humanity, virtue and all that waits
on virtue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="19:12">12</span></span>*Ly*. Why then,
Polystratus, you shall give me story for story, good measure, shaken
together, out of your abundance: paint me the portrait of her soul, that
I may be no more her half-admirer.

*Poly*. This will be no light task, my friend. It is one thing to
commend what all the world can see, and quite another to reveal what is
hidden. I too shall want help with my portrait. Nor will sculptors and
painters suffice me: I must have philosophers; it is by their canons
that I must adjust the proportions of the figure, if I am to attain to
the perfection of ancient models.

<span class="margnote"><span id="19:13">13</span></span>To begin then.
Of her clear, liquid voice Homer might have said, with far more truth
than of aged Nestor's, that

honey from those lips distilled.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The pitch,
exquisitely soft, as far removed from masculine bass as from
ultra-feminine treble, is that of a boy before his voice breaks; sweet,
seductive, suavely penetrating; it ceases, and still vibrating murmurs
play, echo-like, about the listener's ears, and Persuasion leaves her
honeyed track upon his mind. But oh! the joy, to hear her sing, and sing
to the lyre's accompaniment. Let swans and halcyons and cicalas then be
mute. There is no music like hers; Philomela's self, 'full-throated
<span class="margnote"><span id="19:14">14</span></span>songstress'
though she be, is all unskilled beside her. Methinks Orpheus and
Amphion, whose spell drew even lifeless things to hear them, would have
dropped their lyres and stood listening in silence to that voice. What
should Thracian Orpheus, what should Amphion, whose days upon Cithaeron
were divided

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

betwixt his lyre and his herd,--what should they know of true concord,
of accurate rhythm, of accentuation and time, of the harmonious
adaptation of lyre and voice, of easy and graceful execution? Yes; once
hear her sing, Lycinus, and you will know something of Sirens as well as
of Gorgons: you have experienced petrifaction; you will next learn what
it is to stand entranced, forgetting country and kindred. Wax will not
avail you: her song will penetrate through all; for therein is every
grace that Terpsichore, Melpomene, Calliope herself, could inspire. In a
word, imagine that you hear such notes as should issue from those lips,
those teeth that you have seen. Her perfect intonation, her pure Ionic
accent, her ready Attic<span class="margnote"><span
id="20:15">15</span></span> eloquence, need not surprise you; these are
her birthright; for is not Smyrna Athens' daughter? And what more
natural than that she should love poetry, and make it her chief study?
Homer is her fellow citizen.--There you have my first portrait; the
portrait of a sweet-voiced songstress, though it fall far short of its
original. And now for others. For I do not propose to make one of many,
as you did. I aim higher: the complex picture of so many beauties
wrought into one, however artful be the composition, cannot escape
inconsistency: with me, each separate virtue of her soul shall sit for
its own portrait.

*Ly*. What a banquet awaits me! Here, assuredly, is good measure. Mete
it out; I ask for nothing better.

*Poly*. I proceed then to the delineation of Culture, the confessed<span
class="margnote"><span id="20:16">16</span></span> mistress of all
mental excellences, particularly of all acquired ones: I must render her
features in all their manifold variety; not even here shall my
portraiture be inferior to your own. I paint her, then, with every grace
that Helicon can give. Each of the Muses has but her single
accomplishment, be it tragedy or history or hymn: all these Culture
shall have, and with them the gifts of Hermes and of Apollo. The poet's
graceful numbers, the orator's persuasive power, the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

historian's learning, the sage's counsel, all these shall be her
adornments; the colours shall be imperishable, and laid on with no
niggardly brush. It is not my fault, if I am unable to point to any
classical model for the portrait: the records of antiquity afford no
precedent for a culture so highly developed.--May I hang this beside the
other? I think it is a passable likeness.

*Ly*. Passable! My dear Polystratus, it is sublime; exquisitely finished
in every line.

<span class="margnote"><span id="21:17">17</span></span>*Poly*. Next I
have to depict Wisdom; and here I shall have occasion for many models,
most of them ancient; one comes, like the lady herself, from Ionia. The
artists shall be Aeschines and Socrates his master, most realistic of
painters, for their heart was in their work. We could choose no better
model of wisdom than Milesian Aspasia, the admired of the admirable
'Olympian' <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md); her political knowledge
and insight, her shrewdness and penetration, shall all be transferred to
our canvas in their perfect measure. Aspasia, however, is only preserved
to us in miniature: *our* proportions must be those of a colossus.

*Ly*. Explain.

*Poly*. The portraits will be alike, but not on the same scale. There is
a difference between the little republic of ancient Athens, and the
Roman Empire of to-day; and there will be the same difference in *scale*
(however close the resemblance in other respects) between our huge
canvas and that miniature. <span class="margnote"><span
id="21:18">18</span></span>A second and a third model may be found in
Theano, and in the poetess of Lesbos; nay, we may add Diotima too.
Theano shall give grandeur to the picture, Sappho elegance; and Diotima
shall be represented as well by her wisdom and sagacity, as by the
qualities for which Socrates commended her. The portrait is complete.
Let it be hung.

<span class="margnote"><span id="21:19">19</span></span>*Ly*. ’Tis a
fine piece of work. Proceed.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

*Poly*. Courtesy, benevolence: that is now my subject. I have to show
forth her gentle disposition, her graciousness to suppliants. She shall
appear in the likeness of Theano--Antenor's Theano this time--, of Arete
and her daughter Nausicaa, and of every other who in her high station
has borne herself with constancy. Next comes constancy of another
kind<span class="margnote"><span id="22:20">20</span></span>,--constancy
in love; its original, the daughter of Icarius, 'constant' and 'wise,'
as Homer draws her; am I doing more than justice to his Penelope? And
there is another: our lady's namesake, Abradatas's wife; of her we have
already spoken.

*Ly*. Once more, noble work, Polystratus. And now your task must be
drawing to a close: here is a whole soul depicted; its every virtue
praised.

*Poly*. Not yet: the highest praise remains. Born to magnificence<span
class="margnote"><span id="22:21">21</span></span>, she clothes not
herself in the pride of wealth; listens not to Fortune's flattering
tale, who tells her she is more than human; but walks upon the common
ground, far removed from all thought of arrogance and ostentation. Every
man is her equal; her greeting, her smile are for all who approach her;
and how acceptable is the kindness of a superior, when it is free from
every touch of condescension! When the power of the great turns not to
insolence but to beneficence, we feel that Fortune has bestowed her
gifts aright. Here alone Envy has no place. For how should one man
grudge another his prosperity when he sees him using it with moderation,
not, like the Homeric Ate, an oppressor of the weak, trampling on men's
necks? It is otherwise with those meaner souls--victims of their own
ignoble vanity--, who, when Fortune has raised them suddenly beyond
their hopes into her winged aerial car, know no rest, can never look
behind them, but must ever press upwards. To such the end soon comes:
Icarus-like, with melted wax and moulting feathers, they fall headlong
into the billows, a derision to mankind. The Daedaluses use their waxen
wings

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

with moderation: they are but men; they husband their strength
accordingly, and are content to fly a little higher than the waves,--so
little that the sun never finds them dry; and that prudence is their
salvation.

Therein lies this lady's highest praise. She has her reward: all men
pray that her wings may never droop, and that blessings may increase
upon her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="23:22">22</span></span>*Ly*. And may
the prayer be granted! She deserves every blessing: she is not outwardly
fair alone, like Helen, but has a soul within more fair, more lovely
than her body. It is a fitting crown to the happiness of our benevolent
and gracious Emperor, that in his day such a woman should be born;
should be his, and her affections his. It is blessedness indeed, to
possess one of whom we may say with Homer that she contends with golden
Aphrodite in beauty, and in works is the equal of Athene. Who of
womankind shall be compared to her

In comeliness, in wit, in goodly works?

<span class="margnote"><span id="23:23">23</span></span>*Poly*. Who
indeed?--Lycinus, I have a proposal to make. Let us combine our
portraits, yours of the body and mine of the soul, and throw them into a
literary form, for the enjoyment of our generation and of all posterity.
Such a work will be more enduring than those of Apelles and Parrhasius
and Polygnotus; it will be far removed from creations of wood and wax
and colour, being inspired by the Muses, in whom alone is that true
portraiture that shows forth in one likeness a lovely body and a
virtuous soul.

There is no § 10 marked in the copytext--JBH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[15:1](wl303.htm#fr_4.md) This statue is usually
identified with one of Aphrodite by the same sculptor, mentioned in
Pausanias. Soteira ('saviour') is known as an epithet of Aphrodite: but
Sosandra ('man-saving') is explained as a nickname of the particular
statue, in playful allusion to Callias, the donor, who was apparently
indebted to Aphrodite for his success with a certain Elpinice.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[18:1](wl303.htm#fr_5.md) See *Panthea* in Notes.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[21:1](wl303.htm#fr_6.md) See *Pericles* in Notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Defence of the 'Portrait-Study'](wl304.md)
