[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp002)  [Next](vp004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Form of the Puráńas

The invariable form of the Puráńas is that of a dialogue, in which some
person relates its contents in reply to the inquiries of another. This
dialogue is interwoven with others, which are repeated as having been
held on other occasions between different individuals, in consequence of
similar questions having been asked. The immediate narrator is commonly,
though not constantly, Lomaharshańa or Romaharshańa, the disciple of
Vyása, who is supposed to communicate what was imparted to him by his
preceptor, as he had heard it from some other sage. Vyása, as will be
seen in the body of the work <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18), is a
generic title, meaning an 'arranger' or 'compiler.' It is in this age
applied to Krishńa Dwaipáyana,

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

the son of Paráśara, who is said to have taught the Vedas and Puráńas to
various disciples, but who appears to have been the head of a college or
school, under whom various learned men gave to the sacred literature of
the Hindus the form in which it now presents itself. In this task the
disciples, as they are termed, of Vyása were rather his colleagues and
coadjutors, for they were already conversant with what he is fabled to
have taught them <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19); and amongst them,
Lomaharshańa represents the class of persons who were especially charged
with the record of political and temporal events. He is called Súta, as
if it was a proper name; but it is more correctly a title; and
Lomaharshańa was 'a Súta,' that is, a bard or panegyrist, who was
created, according to our text <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20), to
celebrate the exploits of princes; and who, according to the Váyu and
Padma Puráńas, has a right by birth and profession to narrate the
Puráńas, in preference even to the Brahmans <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21). It is not unlikely therefore that we are
to understand, by his being represented as the disciple of Vyása, the
institution of some attempt, made under the direction of the latter, to
collect from the heralds and annalists of his day the scattered
traditions which they had imperfectly preserved; and hence the
consequent appropriation of the Puráńas, in a great measure, to the
genealogies of regal dynasties, and descriptions of the universe.
However this may be, the machinery has been but loosely adhered to, and
many of the Patinas, like the Vishńu, are referred to a different
narrator.

An account is given in the following work <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) of a series of Pauráńik compilations, of
which in their present form no vestige appears. Lomaharshańa is said to
have had six disciples, three of whom composed as many fundamental
Sanhitás, whilst he himself compiled a fourth. By a Sanhitá is generally
understood a 'collection' or 'compilation.' The Sanhitás of the Vedas
are collections of hymns and prayers belonging to them, arranged
according to the judgment of some individual sage, who is therefore
looked upon as the originator and teacher of each. The Sanhitás of the
Puráńas, then, should be analogous compilations, attributed respectively
to Mitrayu, Śánśapáyana, Akritavrańa, and Romaharshańa: no such Pauráńik
Sanhitás are now known, The

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

substance of the four is said to be collected in the Vishńu Puráńa,
which is also, in another place <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23),
itself called a Sanhitá: but such compilations have not, as far as
inquiry has yet proceeded, been discovered. The specification may be
accepted as an indication of the Puráńas having existed in some other
form, in which they are no longer met with; although it does not appear
that the arrangement was incompatible with their existence as separate
works, for the Vishńu Puráńa, which is our authority for the four
Sanhitás, gives us also the usual enumeration of the several Puráńas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[x:19](vp003.htm#fr_18) [p.
272](vp077.htm#page_272).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xi:20](vp003.htm#fr_19) See P.
[276](vp078.htm#page_276).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xi:21](vp003.htm#fr_20) P.
[102](vp048.htm#page_102).

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xi:22](vp003.htm#fr_21) Journ, Royal As. Soc.
vol. V. p. 281.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xi:23](vp003.htm#fr_22) P.
[283](vp080.htm#page_283).

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xii:24](vp003.htm#fr_23) P.
[5](vp035.htm#page_5).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Classification of the Puráńas](vp004)
