[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp012)  [Next](vp014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

9\. The Bhavishya Puráńa

9\. Bhavishya Puráńa. "The Puráńa in which Brahmá, having described the
greatness of the sun, explained to Manu the existence of the world, and
the characters of all created things, in the course of the Aghora Kalpa;
that, is called the Bhavishya, the stories being for the most part the
events of a future period. It contains fourteen thousand five hundred
stanzas <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)." This Puráńa, as the name
implies, should be a book of prophecies, foretelling what will be
(bhavishyati), as the Matsya Puráńa intimates. Whether such a work
exists is doubtful. The copies, which appear to be entire, and of which
there are three in the library of the East India Company, agreeing in
their contents with two in my possession, contain about seven thousand
stanzas. There is another work, entitled the Bhavishyottara, as if it
was a continuation or supplement of the former, containing also about
seven thousand verses; but the subjects of .both these works are but to
a very imperfect degree analogous to those to which the Matsya
alludes <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62).

The Bhavishya Puráńa, as I have it, is a work in a hundred and

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

twenty-six short chapters, repeated by Sumantu to Śatáníka, a king of
the Pańd́u family. He notices, however, its having originated with
Swayambhu or Brahmá; and describes it as consisting of five parts; four
dedicated, it should seem, to as many deities, as they are termed,
Brahmá, Vaishńava, Śaiva, and Twásht́ra; whilst the fifth is the
Pratisarga, or repeated creation. Possibly the first part only may have
come into my hands, although it does not so appear by the manuscript.

Whatever it may be, the work in question is not a Puráńa. The first
portion, indeed, treats of creation; but it is little else than a
transcript of the words of the first chapter of Manu. The rest is
entirely a manual of religious rites and ceremonies. It explains the ten
Sanskáras, or initiatory rites; the performance of the Sandhya; the
reverence to be shewn to a Guru; the duties of the different Ásramas and
castes; and enjoins a number of Vratas, or observances of fasting and
the like, appropriate to different lunar days. A few legends enliven the
series of precepts. That of the sage Chyavana is told at considerable
length, taken chiefly from the Mahábhárata. The Nága Panchami, or fifth
lunation, sacred to the serpent-gods, gives rise to a description of
different sorts of snakes. After these, which occupy about one-third of
the chapters, the remainder of them conform in subject to one of the
topics referred to by the Matsya. They chiefly represent conversations
between Krishńa, his son Śámba, who had become a leper by the curse of
Durvásas, Vaśisht́ha, Nárada, and Vyása, upon the power and glory of the
sun, and the manner in which he is to be worshipped. There is some
curious matter in the last chapters, relating to the Magas, silent
worshippers of the sun, from Sákadwípa, as if the compiler had adopted
the Persian term Magh, and connected the fire-worshippers of Iran with
those of India. This is a subject, however, that requires farther
investigation.

The Bhavishyottara is, equally with the preceding, a sort of manual of
religious offices, the greater portion being appropriated to Vratas, and
the remainder to the forms and circumstances with which gifts are to be
presented. Many of the ceremonies are obsolete, or are observed in a
different manner, as the Rath-yátrá, or car festival; and the
Madanotsava, or festival of spring. The descriptions of these throw some
light

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

upon the public condition of the Hindu religion at a period probably
prior to the Mohammedan conquest. The different ceremonies are
illustrated by legends, which are sometimes ancient, as, for instance,
the destruction of the god of love by Śiva, and his thence becoming
Ananga, the disembodied lord of hearts. The work is supposed to be
communicated by Krishńa to Yudhisht́hira, at a great assemblage of holy
persons at the coronation of the latter, after the conclusion of the
great war.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xxxix:62](vp013.htm#fr_61) <span
id="img__03900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/_03900.jpg)</span>

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xxxix:63](vp013.htm#fr_62) Col. Vans Kennedy
states that he had not been able to procure the Bhavishya P., nor even
ever to obtain any account of its contents: Anc. and Hindu Mythology,
p.153, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. The Brahma-vaivartta Puráńa](vp014)
