[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp023)  [Next](vp025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Synopsis of the Vishńu Puráńa

From the sketch thus offered of the subjects of the Puráńas, and which,
although admitting of correction, is believed to be in the main a candid
and accurate summary, it will be evident that in their present condition
they must be received with caution as authorities for the mythological
religion of the Hindus at any remote period. They preserve, no doubt,
many ancient notions and traditions; but these have been so much mixed
up with foreign matter, intended to favour the popularity of particular
forms of worship or articles of faith, that they cannot be unreservedly
recognised as genuine representations of what we have reason to believe
the Puráńas originally were.

The safest sources for the ancient legends of the Hindus, after the
Vedas, are no doubt the two great poems, the Rámáyańa and Mahábhárata.
The first offers only a few, but they are of a primitive character. The
Mahábhárata is more fertile in fiction, but it is more miscellaneous,
and much that it contains is of equivocal authenticity, and uncertain
date. Still it affords many materials that are genuine, and it is
evidently the great fountain from which most, if not all, of the Puráńas
have drawn; as it intimates itself, when it declares that there is no
legend current in the world which has not its origin in the
Mahábhárata <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md).

A work of some extent professing to be part of the Mahábhárata may more
accurately be ranked with the Pauráńik compilations of least
authenticity, and latest origin. The Hari Vanśa is chiefly occupied with
the adventures of Krishńa, but, as introductory to his era, it records
particulars of the creation of the world, and of the patriarchal and
regal

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

dynasties. This is done with much carelessness and inaccuracy of
compilation, as I have had occasion frequently to notice in the
following pages. The work has been very industriously translated by M.
Langlois.

A comparison of the subjects of the following pages with those of the
other Puráńas will sufficiently shew that of the whole series the Vishńu
most closely conforms to the definition of a Pancha-lakshańa Puráńa, or
one which treats of five specified topics. It comprehends them all; and
although it has infused a portion of extraneous and sectarial matter, it
has done so with sobriety and with judgment, and has not suffered the
fervour of its religious zeal to transport it into very wide deviations
from the prescribed path. The legendary tales which it has inserted are
few, and are conveniently arranged, so that they do not distract the
attention of the compiler from objects of more permanent interest and
importance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[lviii:84](vp024.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="img__05800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/_05800.jpg.md)</span> 'Unconnected with this narrative,
no story is known upon earth.' Vol. I. p. 11. l. 307.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book One](vp025.md)
