[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp034)  [Next](vp036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# VISHŃU PURÁŃA.

# BOOK I.

### CHAP. I.

Invocation. Maitreya inquires of his teacher, Paráśara, the origin and
nature of the universe. Paráśara performs a rite to destroy the demons:
reproved by Vaśisht́ha, he desists: Pulastya appears, and bestows upon
him divine knowledge: he repeats the Vishńu Puráńa. Vishńu the origin,
existence, and end of all things.

OM! GLORY TO VÁSUDEVA <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98).--Victory be
to thee, Puńd́aríkáksha;

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

adoration be to thee, Víswabhávana; glory be to thee, Hrishikeśa,
Mahápurusha, and Púrvaja <span id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99).

May that Vishńu, who is the existent, imperishable, Brahma, who is
Íśwara <span id="fr_100"></span>[3](#fn_100), who is spirit <span
id="fr_101"></span>[4](#fn_101); who with the three qualities <span
id="fr_102"></span>[5](#fn_102) is the cause of creation, preservation,
and destruction; who is the parent of nature, intellect, and the other
ingredients of the universe <span id="fr_103"></span>[6](#fn_103); be to
us the bestower of understanding, wealth, and final emancipation.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

Having adored Vishńu <span id="fr_104"></span>[7](#fn_104), the lord of
all, and paid reverence to Brahmá and the rest <span
id="fr_105"></span>[8](#fn_105); having also saluted the spiritual
preceptor <span id="fr_106"></span>[9](#fn_106); I will narrate a Puráńa
equal in sanctity to the Vedas.

Maitreya <span id="fr_107"></span>[10](#fn_107), having saluted him
reverentially, thus addressed Paráśara, the excellent sage, the grandson
of Vaśisht́ha, who was versed in traditional history, and the Puráńas;
who was acquainted with the Vedas, and the branches of science dependent
upon them; and skilled in law and philosophy; and who had performed the
morning rites of devotion.

Maitreya said, Master! I have been instructed by you in the whole of the
Vedas, and in the institutes of law and of sacred science: through your
favour, other men, even though they be my foes, cannot accuse me of
having been remiss in the acquirement of knowledge. I am now desirous,
oh thou who art profound in piety! to hear from thee, how this world
was, and how in future it will be? what is its substance, oh Brahman,
and whence proceeded animate and inanimate things? into what has it been
resolved, and into what will its dissolution again occur? how were the
elements manifested? whence proceeded the gods and other beings? what
are the situation and extent of the oceans and the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

mountains, the earth, the sun, and the planets? what are the families of
the gods and others, the Menus, the periods called Manwantaras, those
termed Kalpas, and their subdivisions, and the four ages: the events
that happen at the close of a Kalpa, and the terminations of the several
ages <span id="fr_108"></span>[11](#fn_108): the histories, oh great
Muni, of the gods, the sages, and kings; and how the Vedas were divided
into branches (or schools), after they had been arranged by Vyása: the
duties of the Brahmans, and the other tribes, as well as of those who
pass through the different orders of life? All these things I wish to
hear from you, grandson of Vaśisht́ha. Incline thy thoughts benevolently
towards me, that I may, through thy favour, be informed of all I desire
to know.

Paráśara replied, Well inquired, pious Maitreya. You recall to my
recollection that which was of old narrated by my father's father,
Vaśisht́ha. I had heard that my father had been devoured by a Rákshas
employed by Viswámitra: violent anger seized me, and I commenced a
sacrifice for the destruction of the Rákshasas: hundreds of them were
reduced to ashes by the rite, when, as they were about to be entirely
extirpated, my grandfather Vaśisht́ha thus spake to me: Enough, my child;
let thy wrath be appeased: the Rákshasas are not culpable: thy father's
death was the work of destiny. Anger is the passion of fools; it
becometh not a wise man. By whom, it may be asked, is any one killed?
Every man reaps the consequences of his own acts. Anger, my son, is the
destruction of all that man obtains by arduous exertions, of fame, and
of devout austerities; and prevents the attainment of heaven or of
emancipation. The chief sages always shun wrath: he not thou, my child,
subject to its influence. Let no more of these unoffending spirits of
darkness be consumed. Mercy is the might of the righteous <span
id="fr_109"></span>[12](#fn_109).

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Being thus admonished by my venerable grandsire, I immediately desisted
from the rite, in obedience to his injunctions, and Vaśisht́ha, the most
excellent of sages, was content with me. Then arrived Pulastya, the son
of Brahmá <span id="fr_110"></span>[13](#fn_110), who was received by my
grandfather with the customary marks of respect. The illustrious brother
of Pulaha said to me; Since, in the violence of animosity, you have
listened to the words of your progenitor, and have exercised clemency,
therefore you shall become learned in every science: since you have
forborne, even though incensed, to destroy my posterity, I will bestow
upon you another boon, and, you shall become the author of a summary of
the Puráńas <span id="fr_111"></span>[14](#fn_111); you shall know

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the true nature of the deities, as it really is; and, whether engaged in
religious rites, or abstaining from their performance <span
id="fr_112"></span>[15](#fn_112), your understanding, through my favour,
shall be perfect, and exempt from). doubts. Then my grandsire Vaśisht́ha
added; Whatever has been said to thee by Pulastya, shall assuredly come
to pass.

Now truly all that was told me formerly by Vaśisht́ha, and by the wise
Palastya, has been brought to my recollection by your questions, and I
will relate to you the whole, even all you have asked. Listen to the
complete compendium of the Pur pas, according to its tenour. The world
was produced from Vishńu: it exists in him: he is the cause of its
continuance and cessation: he is the world <span
id="fr_113"></span>[16](#fn_113).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[1:1](vp035.htm#fr_98) An address of this kind,
to one or other Hindu divinity, usually introduces Sanscrit
compositions, especially those considered sacred. The first term of this
mantra or brief prayer, Om or Omkára, is well known as a combination of
letters invested by Hindu mysticism with peculiar sanctity. In the Vedas
it is said to comprehend all the gods; and in the Puráńas it is directed
to be prefixed to all such formulæ as that of the text. Thus in the
Uttara Khańd́a of the Pádma Puráńa: 'The syllable Om, the mysterious
name, or Brahma, is the leader of all prayers: let it therefore, O
lovely-faced, (Śiva addresses Durgá,) be employed in the beginning of
all prayers:' According to the same authority, one of the mystical
imports of the term is the collective enunciation of Vishńu expressed by
A, of Srí his bride intimated by U, and of their joint worshipper
designated by M. A whole chapter of the Váyu Puráńa is devoted to this
term. A text of the Vedas is there cited: 'Om, the monosyllable Brahma;'
the latter meaning either the Supreme Being or the Vedas collectively,
of which this monosyllable is the type. It is also said to typify the
three spheres of the world, the three holy fires, the three steps of
Vishńu, &c.--Frequent meditation upon it, and repetition of it, ensure
release from worldly existence. See also Manu, II. 76. Vásudeva, a name
of Vishńu or Krishńa, is, according to its grammatical etymology, a
patronymic derivative implying son of Vasudeva. The Vaishńava Puráńas,
however, devise other explanations: see the next chapter, and again, b.
VI. c. 5.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[2:2](vp035.htm#fr_99) In this stanza occurs a
series of the appellations of Vishńu: 1. Puńd́aríkáksha, having eyes like
a lotus, or heart-pervading; or Puńd́aríka is explained supreme glory,
and Aksha imperishable: the first is the most usual etymon. 2.
Víswabhávana, the creator of the universe, or the cause of the existence
of all things. 3. Hrishíkeśa, lord of the senses. 4. Mahá purusha, great
or supreme spirit; purusha meaning that which abides or is quiescent in
body (puri sété), 5. Púrvaja, produced or appearing before creation; the
Orphic πρωτογόνος. In the fifth book, c. 18, Vishńu is described by five
appellations, which are considered analogous to these; or, 1. Bhútátmá,
one with created things, or Puńd́aríkáksha; 2. Pradhánátmá, one with
crude nature, or Viśwabhávana; 3. Indriyátmá, one with the senses, or
Hrishikeśa; 4. Paramátmá, supreme spirit, or Mahápurusha; and Átmá,
soul; living soul, animating nature and existing before it, or Púrvaja.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[2:3](vp035.htm#fr_100) Brahma, in the neuter
form, is abstract supreme spirit; and Íśwara is the Deity in his active
nature, he who is able to do or leave undone, or to do any thing in any
other manner than that in which it is done.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[2:4](vp035.htm#fr_101) Pumán which is the same
with Purusha, incorporated spirit. By this and the two preceding terms
also the commentator understands the text to signify that Vishńu is any
form of spiritual being that is acknowledged by different philosophical
systems, or that he is the Brahma of the Vedánta, the Íśwara of the
Pátanjala, and the Purusha of the Sánkhya school.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[2:5](vp035.htm#fr_102) The three qualities, to
which we shall have further occasion to advert, are, Satya, goodness or
purity, knowledge, quiescence; Rajas, foulness, passion, activity; and
Tamas, darkness, ignorance, inertia.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[2:6](vp035.htm#fr_103) Pradhánabuddhyádisú.
This predicate of the Deity distinguishes most of the Puráńas from
several of the philosophical systems, which maintain, as did the
earliest Grecian systems of cosmogony, the eternal and independent
existence of the first principle of things, as nature, matter, or chaos.
Accordingly, the commentator notices the objection. Pradhána being
without beginning, it is said how can Vishńu be its parent? To which he
replies, that this is not so, for in a period of worldly destruction
(Pralaya), when the Creator desists from creating, nothing is generated
by virtue of any other energy or parent. Or, if this be not
satisfactory, then the text may be understood to imply that intellect
(Buddhi) &c. are formed through the materiality of crude nature, or
Pradhána.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[3:7](vp035.htm#fr_104) Vishńu is commonly
derived in the Puráńas from the root Vis, to enter, entering into, or
pervading the universe, agreeably to the text of the Vedas, 'Having
created that (world), he then afterwards enters into it;' being, as our
comment observes, undistinguished by place, time, or property. According
to the Mátsya P. the name alludes to his entering into the mundane egg:
according to the Padma P., to his entering into or combining with
Prakriti, as Purusha or spirit. In the Moksha Dharma of the Mahábhárata,
s. 165, the word is derived from the root ví, signifying motion,
pervasion, production, radiance; or, irregularly, from krama, to go with
the particle vi, implying, variously, prefixed.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[3:8](vp035.htm#fr_105) Brahmá and the rest is
said to apply to the series of teachers through whom this Puráńa was
transmitted from its first reputed author, Brahmá, to its actual
narrator, the sage Paráśara. See also b. VI. c. 8.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[3:9](vp035.htm#fr_106) The Guru, or spiritual
preceptor, is said to be Kapila or Sáraswata; the latter is included in
the series of teachers of the Puráńa. Paráśara must be considered also
as a disciple of Kapila, as a teacher of the Sánkhya philosophy.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[3:10](vp035.htm#fr_107) Maitreya is the
disciple of Paráśara, who relates the Vishńu Puráńa to him; he is also
one of the chief interlocutors in the Bhágavata, and is introduced in
the Mahábhárata (Vana Parva, s. 10.) as a great Rishi, or sage, who
denounces Duryodhana's death. In the Bhágavata he is also termed
Kausháravi, or the son of Kusharava.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[4:11](vp035.htm#fr_108) One copy reads Yuga
dherma, the duties peculiar to the four ages, or their characteristic
properties, instead of Yugánta.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[4:12](vp035.htm#fr_109) Sacrifice of Paráśara.
The story of Paráśara's birth is narrated in detail in the Mahábhárata
(Ádi Parva, s. 176). King Kalmáshapáda meeting with Sakti, the son of
Vaśisht́ha, in a narrow path in a thicket, desired him to stand out of
his way. The sage refused: on which the Rája beat him with his whip, and
Sakti cursed him to become a Rákshas, a man-devouring spirit. The Rája
in this transformation killed and ate its author, or Sakti, together
with all the other sons of Vaśisht́ha. Sakti left his wife Adriśyantí
pregnant, and she gave birth to Paráśara, who was brought up by <span
id="page_5">p. 5</span> his grandfather. When he grew up, and was
informed of his father's death, he instituted a sacrifice for the
destruction of all the Rákshasas; but was dissuaded from its completion
by Vaśisht́ha and other sages or Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu. The
Mahábhárata adds, that when he desisted from the rite, he scattered the
remaining sacrificial fire upon the northern face of the Himálaya
mountain, where it still blazes forth at the phases of the moon,
consuming Rákshasas, forests, and mountains. The legend alludes possibly
to some transhimalayan volcano. The transformation of Kalmáshapáda is
ascribed in other places to a different cause; but he is every where
regarded as the devourer of Sakti or Saktri, as the name also occurs.
The story is told in the Linga Puráńa (Púrvárddha, s. 64) in the same
manner, with the addition, conformably to the Saiva tendency of that
work, that Paráśara begins his sacrifice by propitiating Mahádeva.
Vaśisht́ha's dissuasion, and Pulastya's appearance, are given in the very
words of our text; and the story concludes, 'thus through the favour of
Pulastya and of the wise Vaśisht́ha, Paráśara composed the Vaishńava
(Vishńu) Puráńa, containing ten thousand stanzas, and being the third of
the Puráńa compilations' (Puráńasanhitá). The Bhágavata (b. III. s. 8)
also alludes, though obscurely, to this legend. In recapitulating the
succession of the narrators of part of the Bhágavata, Maitreya states
that this first Puráńa was communicated to him by his Guru Paráśara, as
he had been desired by Pulastya: i. e. according to the commentator,
agreeably to the boon given by Pulastya to Paráśara, saying, You shall
be a narrator of Puráńas;. The Mahábhárata makes no mention of the
communication of this faculty to Paráśara by Pulastya; and as the
Bhágavata could not derive this particular from that source, it here
most probably refers unavowedly, as the Linga does avowedly, to the
Vishńu Puráńa.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[5:13](vp035.htm#fr_110) Pulastya, as will be
presently seen, is one of the Rishis, who were the mind-born sons of
Brahmá. Pulaha, who is here also named, is another. Pulastya is
considered as the ancestor of the Rákshasas, as he is the father of
Visravas, the father of Rávana and his brethren. Uttara Rámáyańa.
Mahábhárata, Vana Parva, s. 272. Pádma Pur. Linga Pur. s. 63.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[5:14](vp035.htm#fr_111) Puráńa sanhitá kerttá
Bhaván bha <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> vishyati. You shall be a maker
of the Sanhitá, or compendium of the Puráńas, or of the Vishńu Puráńa,
considered as a summary or compendium of Pauranic traditions. In either
sense it is incompatible with the general attribution of all the Puráńas
to Vyása.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[6:15](vp035.htm#fr_112) Whether performing the
usual ceremonies of the Brahmans, or leading a life of devotion and
penance, which supersedes the necessity of rites and sacrifices.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[6:16](vp035.htm#fr_113) These are, in fact,
the brief replies to Maitreya's six questions (p. 3), or, How was the
world created? By Vishńu. How will it be? At the periods of dissolution
it will be in Vishńu. Whence proceeded animate and inanimate things?
From Vishńu. Of what is the substance of the world? Vishńu. Into what
has it been, and will it again he, resolved? Vishńu. He is therefore
both the instrumental and material cause of the universe. 'The answer to
the "whence" replies to the query as to the instrumental cause: "He is
the world" replies to the inquiry as to the material cause.' 'And by
this explanation of the agency of the materiality, &c. of Vishńu, as
regards the universe, (it follows that) all will be produced from, and
all will repose in him.' We have here precisely the τὸ πᾶν of the Orphic
doctrines, and we might fancy that Brucker was translating a passage
from a Puráńa when he describes them in these words: "Continuisse Jovem
(lege Vishnum) sive summum ortum in se omnia, omnibus ortum ex se
dedisse, omnia ex se genuisse, et ex sua produxisse essentia. Spiritum
esse universi qui omnia regit vivificat estque; ex quibus necessario
sequitur omnia in eum reditura." Hist. Philos. I. 388. Jamblichus and
Proclus also testify that the Pythagorean doctrines of the origin of the
material world from the Deity, and its identity with him, were much the
same. Cudworth, l. c. p. 348.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](vp036)
