[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp038)  [Next](vp040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

### CHAP. V.

Vishńu as Brahmá creates the world. General characteristics of creation.
Brahmá meditates, and gives origin to, immovable things, animals, gods,
men. Specific creation of nine kinds; Mahat, Tanmátra, Aindríya,
inanimate objects, animals, gods, men, Anugraha, and Kaumára. More
particular account of creation. Origin of different orders of beings
from Brahmá's body under different conditions; and of the Vedas from his
mouths. All things created again as they existed in a former Kalpa.

MAITREYA.--Now unfold to me, Brahman, how this deity created the gods,
sages, progenitors, demons, men, animals, trees, and the rest, that
abide on earth, in heaven, or in the waters: how Brahmá at creation made
the world with the qualities, the characteristics, and the forms of
things <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167).

PARÁŚARA.--I will explain to you, Maitreya, listen attentively, how this
deity, the lord of all, created the gods and other beings.

Whilst he (Brahmá) formerly, in the beginning of the Kalpas, was.
meditating on creation, there appeared a creation beginning with
ignorance, and consisting of darkness. From that great being appeared
fivefold Ignorance, consisting of obscurity, illusion, extreme illusion,
gloom, utter darkness <span id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_168). The
creation of the creator thus plunged in

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

abstraction, was the fivefold (immovable) world, without intellect or
reflection, void of perception or sensation, incapable of feeling, and
destitute of motion <span id="fr_169"></span>[3](#fn_169). Since
immovable things were first created, this is called the first creation.
Brahmá, beholding that it was defective, designed another; and whilst he
thus meditated, the animal creation was manifested, to the products of
which the term Tiryaksrotas is applied, from their nutriment following a
winding course <span id="fr_170"></span>[4](#fn_170). These were called
beasts, &c., and their characteristic was the quality of darkness, they
being destitute of knowledge, uncontrolled in their conduct, and
mistaking error for wisdom; being formed of egotism and self-esteem,
labouring under the twenty-eight kinds of imperfection <span
id="fr_171"></span>[5](#fn_171), manifesting inward sensations, and
associating with each other (according to their kinds).

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

Beholding this creation also imperfect, Brahmá again meditated, and a
third creation appeared, abounding with the quality of goodness, termed
Úrddhasrotas <span id="fr_172"></span>[6](#fn_172). The beings thus
produced in the Úrddhasrotas creation were endowed with pleasure and
enjoyment, unencumbered internally or externally, and luminous within
and without. This, termed the creation of immortals, was the third
performance of Brahmá, who, although well pleased with it, still found
it incompetent to fulfil his end. Continuing therefore his meditations,
there sprang, in consequence of his infallible purpose, the creation
termed Arváksrotas, from indiscrete nature. The products of this are
termed Arváksrotasas <span id="fr_173"></span>[7](#fn_173), from the
downward current (of their nutriment). They abound with the light of
knowledge, but the qualities of darkness and of foulness predominate.
Hence they are afflicted by evil, and are repeatedly impelled to action.
They have knowledge both externally and internally, and are the
instruments (of accomplishing the object of creation, the liberation of
soul). These creatures were mankind.

I have thus explained to you, excellent Muni, six <span
id="fr_174"></span>[8](#fn_174) creations. The first creation was that
of Mahat or Intellect, which is also called the creation of Brahmá <span
id="fr_175"></span>[9](#fn_175). The second was that of the rudimental
principles (Tanmátras), thence termed the elemental creation (Bhúta
serga). The third was the modified form of egotism, termed the organic
creation, or creation of the senses (Aindríyaka). These three were the
Prákrita creations, the developements of indiscrete nature, preceded by
the indiscrete

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

principle <span id="fr_176"></span>[10](#fn_176). The fourth or
fundamental creation (of perceptible things) was that of inanimate
bodies. The fifth, the Tairyag yonya creation, was that of animals. The
sixth was the Úrddhasrotas creation, or that of the divinities. The
creation of the Arváksrotas beings was the seventh, and was that of man.
There is an eighth creation, termed Anugraha, which possesses both the
qualities of goodness and darkness <span
id="fr_177"></span>[11](#fn_177). Of these creations, five are
secondary, and three are primary <span id="fr_178"></span>[12](#fn_178).
But there is a ninth,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

the Kaumára creation, which is both primary and secondary <span
id="fr_179"></span>[13](#fn_179). These are the nine creations of the
great progenitor of all, and, both as primary

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

and secondary, are the radical causes of the world, proceeding from the
sovereign creator. What else dost thou desire to hear?

MAITREYA. Thou hast briefly related to me, Muni, the creation of the
gods and other beings: I am desirous, chief of sages, to hear from thee
a more ample account of their creation.

PARÁŚARA.--Created beings, although they are destroyed (in their
individual forms) at the periods of dissolution, yet, being affected by
the good or evil acts of former existence, they are never exempted from
their consequences; and when Brahmá creates the world anew, they are the
progeny of his will, in the fourfold condition of gods, men, animals, or
inanimate things. Brahmá then, being desirous of creating the four
orders of beings, termed gods, demons, progenitors, and men, collected
his mind into itself <span id="fr_180"></span>[14](#fn_180). Whilst thus
concentrated, the quality of darkness

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

pervaded his body; and thence the demons (the Asuras) were first born,
issuing from his thigh. Brahmá then abandoned that form which was,
composed of the rudiment of darkness, and which, being deserted by him,
became night. Continuing to create, but assuming a different. shape, he
experienced pleasure; and thence from his mouth proceeded the gods,
endowed with the quality of goodness. The form abandoned by him, became
day, in which the good quality predominates; and hence by day the gods
are most powerful, and by night the demons. He next adopted another
person, in which the rudiment of goodness also prevailed; and thinking
of himself, as the father of the world, the progenitors (the Pitris)
were born from his side. The body, when he abandoned, it, became the
Sandhyá (or evening twilight), the interval between day and night.
Brahmá then assumed another person, pervaded by the quality of foulness;
and from this, men, in whom foulness (or passion) predominates, were
produced. Quickly abandoning that body, it became morning twilight, or
the dawn. At the appearance of this light of day, men feel most vigour;
while the progenitors are most powerful in the evening season. In this
manner, Maitreya, Jyotsná (dawn), Rátri (night), Ahar (day), and Sandhyá
(evening), are the four bodies of Brahmá invested by the three
qualities <span id="fr_181"></span>[15](#fn_181).

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Next from Brahmá, in a form composed of the quality of foulness, was
produced hunger, of whom anger was born: and the god put forth in
darkness beings emaciate with hunger, of hideous aspects, and with long
beards. Those beings hastened to the deity. Such of them as exclaimed,
Oh preserve us! were thence called Rákshasas <span
id="fr_182"></span>[16](#fn_182): others, who cried out, Let us eat,
were denominated from that expression Yakshas <span
id="fr_183"></span>[17](#fn_183). Beholding them so disgusting, the
hairs of Brahmá were shrivelled up, and first falling from his head,
were again renewed upon it: from their falling they became serpents,
called Sarpa from their creeping, and Ahi because they had deserted the
head <span id="fr_184"></span>[18](#fn_184). The creator of the world,
being incensed, then created fierce beings, who were denominated
goblins, Bhútas, malignant fiends and eaters of flesh. The Gandharbas
were next born, imbibing melody: drinking of the goddess of speech, they
were born, and thence their appellation <span
id="fr_185"></span>[19](#fn_185).

The divine Brahmá, influenced by their material energies, having created
these beings, made others of his own will. Birds he formed from his
vital vigour; sheep from his breast; goats from his mouth; kine from his
belly and sides; and horses, elephants, Sarabhas, Gayals, deer, camels,
mules, antelopes, and other animals, from his feet: whilst from the
hairs of his body sprang herbs, roots, and fruits.

Brahmá having created, in the commencement of the Kalpa, various plants,
employed them in sacrifices, in the beginning of the Tretá age. Animals
were distinguished into two classes, domestic (village) and wild
(forest): the first class contained the cow, the goat, the hog, the
sheep, the horse, the ass, the mule: the latter, all beasts of prey, and
many animals with cloven hoofs, the elephant, and the monkey. The fifth
order were the birds; the sixth, aquatic animals; and the seventh,
reptiles and insects <span id="fr_186"></span>[20](#fn_186).

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

From his eastern mouth Brahmá then created the Gayatrí metre, the Rig
veda, the collection of hymns termed Trivrit, the Rathantara portion of
the Sáma veda, and the Agnisht́oma sacrifice: from his southern mouth he
created the Yajur veda, the Trisht́ubh metre, the collection of hymns
called Panchadaśa, the Vrihat Sáma, and the portion of the Sáma veda
termed Uktha: from his western mouth he created the Sáma veda, the
Jayati metre, the collection of hymns termed Saptadaśa, the portion of
the Sáma called Vairúpa, and the Atirátra sacrifice: and from his
northern mouth he created the Ekavinsa collection of hymns, the At́harva
veda, the Áptoryámá rite, the Anusht́ubh metre, and the Vairája portion
of the Sáma veda <span id="fr_187"></span>[21](#fn_187).

In this manner all creatures, great or small, proceeded from his limbs.
The great progenitor of the world having formed the gods, demons, and
Pitris, created, in the commencement of the Kalpa, the Yakshas, Pisáchas
(goblins), Gandharbas and the troops of Apsarasas the nymphs of heaven,
Naras (centaurs, or beings with the limbs of horses and human

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

bodies) and Kinnaras (beings with the heads of horses), Rákshasas,
birds, beasts, deer, serpents, and all things permanent or transitory,
movable or immovable. This did the divine Brahmá, the first creator and
lord of all: and these things being created, discharged the same
functions as they had fulfilled in a previous creation, whether
malignant or benign, gentle or cruel, good or evil, true or false; and
accordingly as they are actuated by such propensities will be their
conduct.

And the creator displayed infinite variety in the objects of sense, in
the properties of living things, and in the forms of bodies: he
determined in the beginning, by the authority of the Vedas, the names
and forms and functions of all creatures, and of the gods; and the names
and appropriate offices of the Rishis, as they also are read in the
Vedas. In like manner as the products of the seasons designate in
periodical revolution the return of the same season, so do the same
circumstances indicate the recurrence of the same Yuga, or age; and
thus, in the beginning of each Kalpa, does Brahmá repeatedly create the
world, possessing the power that is derived from the will to create, and
assisted by the natural and essential faculty of the object to be
created.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_167"></span>[34:1](vp039.htm#fr_167) The terms here
employed are for qualities, Gunas; which, as we have already noticed,
are those of goodness, foulness, and darkness. The characteristics, or
Swabhávas, are the inherent properties of the qualities, by which they
act, as, soothing, terrific, or stupifying: and the forms, Swarúpas, are
the distinctions of biped, quadruped, brute, bird, fish, and the like.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[34:2](vp039.htm#fr_168) Or Tamas, Moha,
Mahámoha, Tamisra, Andhatamisra; they are the five kinds of obstruction,
viparyyaya, of soul's liberation, according to the Sánkhya: they are
explained to be, 1. The belief of material substance being the same with
spirit; 2. Notion of property or possession, and consequent attachment
to objects, as children and the like, as being one's own; 3. Addiction
to the enjoyments of sense; 4. Impatience or wrath; and 5. Fear of
privation or death. They are called in the Pátanjala philosophy, the
five afflictions, Kleśa, but are similarly explained by Avidyá,
'ignorance;' Asmitá, 'selfishness,' literally 'I-am-ness;' Rága 'love;'
Dwesha, 'hatred;' and Abhiniveśa, 'dread of temporal suffering.' Sánkhya
Káriká, p. 148-150. This creation by Brahmá <span id="page_35">p.
35</span> in the Váráha Kalpa begins in the same way, and in the same
words, in most of the Puráńas. The Bhágavata reverses the order of these
five products, and gives them, Andhatamisra, Tamisra, Mahámoha, Moha,
and Tamas; a variation obviously more immethodical than the usual
reading of the text, and adopted, no doubt, merely for the sake of
giving the passage an air of originality.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[35:3](vp039.htm#fr_169) This is not to be
confounded with elementary creation, although the description would very
well apply to that of crude nature, or Pradhána; but, as will be seen
presently, we have here to do with final productions, or the forms in
which the previously created elements and faculties are more or less
perfectly aggregated. The first class of these forms is here said to be
immovable things; that is, the mineral and vegetable kingdoms; for the
solid earth, with its mountains and rivers and seas, was already
prepared for their reception. The 'fivefold' immovable creation is
indeed, according to the comment, restricted to vegetables, five orders
of which are enumerated, or, 1. trees; 2. shrubs; 3. climbing plants; 4.
creepers; and 5. grasses.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[35:4](vp039.htm#fr_170) Tiryak, 'crooked;' and
Srotas, 'a canal.'

<span id="fn_171"></span>[35:5](vp039.htm#fr_171) Twenty-eight kinds of
Badhas, which in the Sánkhya system mean disabilities, as defects of the
senses, blindness, deafness, &c.; and defects of intellect, discontent,
ignorance, and the like. S. Káriká, p. 148, 151. In place of Badha,
however, the more usual reading, as in the Bhágavata, Váráha, and
Márkańd́eya Puráńas, is Vidha, 'kind,' 'sort,' as \#\#\#, implying
twenty-eight sorts of animals. These are thus specified in the
Bhágavata, III. 10: Six kinds have single hoofs, nine have double or
cloven hoofs, and thirteen have five claws or nails instead of hoofs.
The first are the horse, the mule, the ass, the yak, the sarabha, and
the gaura, or white deer. The second are the cow, the goat, the buffalo,
the hog, the gayal, the black deer, the antelope, the camel, and the
sheep. The last are the dog, shacal, wolf, tiger, cat, hare, porcupine,
lion, monkey, elephant, tortoise, lizard, and alligator.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[36:6](vp039.htm#fr_172) Úrddha, 'above,' and
Srotas, as before; their nourishment being derived from the exterior,
not from the interior of the body: according to the commentator; \#\#\#
as a text of the Vedas has it; 'Through satiety derived from even
beholding ambrosia.'

<span id="fn_173"></span>[36:7](vp039.htm#fr_173) Arvák, 'downwards,'
and Srotas, 'canal.'

<span id="fn_174"></span>[36:8](vp039.htm#fr_174) This reckoning is not
very easily reconciled with the creations described; for, as presently
enumerated, the stages of creation are seven. The commentator, however,
considers the Úrddhasrotas creation, or that of the superhuman beings,
to be the same with that of the Indriyas, or senses over which they
preside; by which the number is reduced to six.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[36:9](vp039.htm#fr_175) This creation being
the work of the supreme spirit, \#\#\# according to the commentator; or
it might have been understood to mean, that Brahmá was then created,
being, as we have seen, identified with Mahat, 'active intelligence,' or
the operating will of the Supreme. See [p. 15](vp036.htm#page_15), note
[23](vp036.htm#fn_136).

<span id="fn_176"></span>[37:10](vp039.htm#fr_176) The text is, \#\#\#
which is, as rendered in the text, 'creation preceded by, or beginning
with Buddhi, intelligence.' The rules of euphony would however admit of
a mute negative being inserted, or 'preceded by ignorance;' that is, by
the chief principle, crude nature or Pradhána, which is one with
ignorance: but this seems to depend on notions of a later date, and more
partial adoption, than those generally prevailing in our authority; and
the first reading therefore has been preferred. It is also to be
observed, that the first unintellectual creation was that of immovable
objects (as in [p. 35](#page_35)), the original of which is, \#\#\# and
all ambiguity of construction is avoided. The reading is also
established by the text of the Linga Puráńa, which enumerates the
different series of creation in the words of the Vishńu, except in this
passage, which is there transposed, with a slight variation of the
reading. Instead of \#\#\# it is \#\#\# 'The first creation was that of
Mahat: Intellect being the first in manifestation.' The reading of the
Váyu P. is still more tautological, but confirms that here preferred:
See also n. [12](#fn_178).

<span id="fn_177"></span>[37:11](vp039.htm#fr_177) The Anugraha
creation, of which no notice has been found in the Mahábhárata, seems to
have been borrowed from the Sánkhya philosophy. It is more particularly
described in the Padma, Márkańd́eya, Linga, and Matsya Puráńas; as, 'The
fifth is the Anugraha creation, which is subdivided into four kinds; by
obstruction, disability, perfectness, and acquiescence.' This is the
Pratyaya sarga, or intellectual creation, of the Sánkhyas (S. Káriká, v.
46. p.146); the creation of which we have a notion, or to which we give
assent (Anugraha), in contradistinction to organic creation, or that
existence of which we have sensible perception. In its specific
subdivisions it is the notion of certain inseparable properties in the
four different orders of beings: obstruction or stolidity in inanimate
things; inability or imperfection in animals; perfectibility in man; and
acquiescence or tranquil enjoyment in gods. So also the Váyu P.: \#\#\#

<span id="fn_178"></span>[37:12](vp039.htm#fr_178) Or Vaikrita, derived
mediately from the first principle, through its Vikritis, 'productions'
or 'developements;' and Prákrita, derived more immediately from the
chief principle itself. Mahat and the two forms of Ahankára, or the
rudimental elements and the senses, constitute the latter class;
inanimate beings, &c. compose the former: or the latter are considered
as the work of <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> Brahmá, whilst the three
first are evolved from Pradhána. So the Váyu: 'The three creations
beginning with Intelligence are elemental; but the six creations which
proceed from the series of which Intellect is the first are the work of
Brahmá'.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[38:13](vp039.htm#fr_179) We must have recourse
here also to other Puráńas, for the elucidation of this term. The
Kaumára creation is the creation of Rudra or Nílalohita, a form of Śiva,
by Brahmá, which is subsequently described in our text, and of certain
other mind-born sons of Brahmá, of whose birth the Vishńu P. gives no
further account: they are elsewhere termed Sanatkumára, Sananda, Sanaka,
and Sanátana, with sometimes a fifth, Ribhu, added. These, declining to
create progeny, remained, as the name of the first implies, ever boys,
kumáras; that is, ever pure and innocent; whence their creation is
called the Kaumára. Thus the Váyu: \#\#\#. And the Linga has, 'Being
ever as he was born, he is here called a youth; and hence his name is
well known as Sanatkumára.' This authority makes Sanatkumára and Ribhu
the two first born of all, whilst the text of the Hari Vanśa limits the
primogeniture to Sanatkumára. In another place, however, it enumerates
apparently six, or the above four with Sana and either. Ribhu or another
Sanátana; for the passage is corrupt. The French translation ascribes a
share in creation to Sanatkumára: 'Les sept Prajapatis, Roudra, Scanda,
et Sanatkaumára, se mirent a produire les etres repandant partout
l’inepuisable energie de dieu.' The original is, Sankshipya is not
'repandant,' but 'restraining;' and Tisht́hatah being in the dual number,
relates of course to only two of the series. The correct rendering is,
'These seven (Prajápatis) created progeny, and so did Rudra; but Skanda
and Sanatkumára, restraining their power, abstained (from creation).' So
the commentator: \#\#\#. These sages, however, live as long as Brahmá,
and they are only created by him in the first Kalpa, although their
generation is very commonly, but inconsistently, introduced in the
Váráha or Pádma Kalpas. This creation, says the text, is both primary
(Prákrita) and secondary (Vaikrita). It is the latter, according to the
commentator, as regards the origin of these saints from Brahmá: it is
the former as affects Rudra, who, though proceeding from Brahmá, in a
certain form was in essence equally an immediate production of the first
principle. These notions, the birth of Rudra and the saints, seem to
have been borrowed from the Saivas, and to have been awkwardly engrafted
upon the Vaishńava system. Sanatkumára and his brethren are always
described in the Saiva Puráńas as Yogis: as the Kúrma, after enumerating
them, adds, 'These five, oh Brahmans, were Yogis, <span id="page_39">p.
39</span> who acquired entire exemption from passion:' and the Hari
Vanśa, although rather Vaishńava than Saiva, observes, that the Yogis
celebrate these six, along with Kapila, in Yoga works. The idea seems to
have been amplified also in the Saiva works; for the Linga P. describes
the repeated birth of Śiva, or Vámadeva, as a Kumára, or boy, from
Brahmá, in each Kalpa, who again becomes four. Thus in the twenty-ninth
Kalpa Swetalohita is the Kumára, and he becomes Sananda, Nandana,
Viswananda, Upanandana; all of a white complexion: in the thirtieth the
Kumára becomes Virajas, Viváhu, Visoka, Víswabhávana; all of a red
colour: in the thirty-first he becomes four youths of a yellow colour:
and in the thirty-second the four Kumáras were black. All these are, no
doubt, comparatively recent additions to the original notion of the
birth of Rudra and the Kumáras; itself obviously a sectarial innovation
upon the primitive doctrine of the birth of the Prajápatis, or will-born
sons of Brahmá.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[39:14](vp039.htm#fr_180) These reiterated, and
not always very congruous accounts of the creation are explained by the
Puráńas as referring to different Kalpas, or renovations of the world,
and therefore involving no incompatibility. A better reason for their
appearance is the probability that they have been borrowed from
different original authorities. The account that follows is evidently
modified by the Yogi Saivas, by its general mysticism, and by the
expressions with which it begins: 'Collecting his mind into itself,'
according to the comment, is the performance of the Yoga (Yúyuje). The
term Ambhánsi, lit. 'waters,' for the four orders of beings, gods,
demons, men, and Pitris, is also a peculiar, and probably mystic term.
The commentator says it occurs in the Vedas as a synonyme of gods. The
Váyu Puráńa derives it from 'to shine,' <span id="page_40">p. 40</span>
because the different orders of beings shine or flourish severally by
moonlight, night, day, and twilight: &c.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[40:15](vp039.htm#fr_181) This account is given
in several other Puráńas: in the Kúrma with more simplicity; in the
Padma, Linga, and Váyu with more detail. The Bhágavata, as usual,
amplifies still more copiously, and mixes up much absurdity with the
account. Thus the person of Sandhyá, 'evening twilight,' is thus
described: "She appeared with eyes rolling with passion, whilst her
lotus-like feet sounded with tinkling ornaments: a muslin vest depended
from her waist, secured by a golden zone: her breasts were protuberant,
and close together; her nose was elegant; her tongue beautiful; her face
was bright with smiles, and she modestly concealed it with the skirts of
her robe; whilst the dark curls clustered round her brow." The Asuras
address her, and win her to become their bride. To the four forms of our
text, the same work adds, Tandrí, 'sloth;' Jrimbhiká, 'yawning;' Nidrá,
'sleep;' Unmáda, 'insanity;' Antarddhána, 'disappearance;' Pratibimba,
'reflexion;' which become the property of Pisáchas, Kinnaras, Bhútas,
Gandherbas, Vidyádharas, Sádhyas, Pitris, and Menus. The notions of
night, day, twilight, and moonlight being derived from Brahmá, seem to
have originated with the Vedas. Thus the commentator on the Bhágavata
<span id="page_41">p. 41</span> observes, 'That which was his body, and
was left, was darkness: this is the Śruti.' All the authorities place
night before day, and the Asuras or Titans before the gods, in the order
of appearance; as did Hesiod and other ancient theogonists.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[41:16](vp039.htm#fr_182) From Raksha, 'to
preserve'

<span id="fn_183"></span>[41:17](vp039.htm#fr_183) From Yaksha, 'to eat'

<span id="fn_184"></span>[41:18](vp039.htm#fr_184) From Srip, serpo, 'to
creep,' and from Há, 'to abandon.'

<span id="fn_185"></span>[41:19](vp039.htm#fr_185) Gám dhayantah,
'drinking speech.'

<span id="fn_186"></span>[41:20](vp039.htm#fr_186) This and the
preceding enumeration <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> of the origin of
vegetables and animals occurs in several Puráńas, precisely in the same
words. The Linga adds a specification of the Aranya, or wild animals,
which are said to be the buffalo, gayal, bear, monkey, sarabha, wolf,
and lion.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[42:21](vp039.htm#fr_187) This specification of
the parts of the Vedas that proceed from Brahmá occurs, in the same
words, in the Váyu, Linga, Kúrma, Padma, and Márkańd́eya Puráńas. The
Bhágavata offers some important varieties: "From his eastern and other
mouths he created the Rich, Yajush, Sáma, and Atharvan vedas; the
Śastra, or 'the unuttered incantation;' Ijyá, 'oblation;' Stuti and
Stoma, 'prayers' and 'hymns;' and Práyaśchitta, 'expiation' or 'sacred
philosophy' (Bráhma): also the Vedas of medicine, arms, music, and
mechanics; and the Itihásas and Puráńas, which are a fifth Veda: also
the portions of the Vedas called Sorasi, Uktha, Puríshi, 'Agnisht́ut,
Áptoryámá, Atirátra, Vájapeya, Gosava; the four parts of virtue, purity,
liberality, piety, and truth; the orders of life, and their institutes
and different religious rites and professions; and the sciences of
logic, ethics, and polity. The mystic words and monosyllable proceeded
from his heart; the metre Ushnih from the hairs of his body; Gayatrí
from his skin; Trisht́ubh from his flesh; Anusht́ubh from his tendons;
Jagati from his bones; Pankti from his marrow; Vrihati from his breath.
The consonants were his life; the vowels his body; the sibilants his
senses; the semivowels his vigour." This mysticism, although perhaps
expanded and amplified by the Pauráńics, appears to originate with the
Vedas: as in the text, 'The metre was of the tendons.' The different
portions of the Vedas specified in the text are yet, for the most part,
uninvestigated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](vp040)
