[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp040)  [Next](vp042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

### CHAP. VII.

Creation continued. Production of the mind-born sons of Brahmá; of the
Prajápatis; of Sanandana and others; of Rudra and the eleven Rudras; of
the Manu Swáyambhuva, and his wife Śatarúpá; of their children. The
daughters of Daksha, and their marriage to Dharma and others. The
progeny of Disarms and Adharma. The perpetual succession of worlds, and
different modes of mundane dissolution.

PARÁŚARA.--From Brahmá, continuing to meditate, were born
mind-engendered progeny, with forms and faculties derived from his
corporeal nature; embodied spirits, produced from the person of that
all-wise deity. All these beings, front the gods to inanimate things,
appeared as I have related to you <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_199),
being the abode of the three qualities: but as they did not multiply
themselves, Brahmá created other mind-born sons, like himself; namely,
Bhrigu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Angiras, Maríchi, Daksha, Atri, and
Vaśisht́ha: these are the nine Brahmas (or Brahma rishis) celebrated in
the Puráńas <span id="fr_200"></span>[2](#fn_200). Sanandana and the
other sons of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahmá were
previously created by him, but they were without desire or passion,
inspired with holy wisdom, estranged from the universe, and undesirous
of progeny. This when Brahmá perceived, he was filled with wrath capable
of consuming the three worlds, the flame of which invested, like a
garland, heaven, earth, and hell. Then from his forehead,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

darkened with angry frowns, sprang Rudra <span
id="fr_201"></span>[3](#fn_201), radiant as the noon-tide sun, fierce,
and of vast bulk, and of a figure which was half male, half female.
Separate yourself, Brahmá said to him; and having so spoken,
disappeared. Obedient to which command, Rudra became twofold, disjoining
his male and female natures. His male being he again divided into eleven
persons, of whom some were agreeable, some hideous, some fierce, some
mild; and he multiplied his female nature manifold, of complexions black
or white <span id="fr_202"></span>[4](#fn_202).

Then Brahmá <span id="fr_203"></span>[5](#fn_203) created himself the
Manu Swáyambhuva, born of, and identical with, his original self, for
the protection of created beings; and the female portion of himself he
constituted Śatarúpá, whom austerity

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

purified from the sin (of forbidden nuptials), and whom the divine Manu
Swáyambhuva took to wife. From these two were born two sons, Priyavrata

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

and Uttánapáda <span id="fr_204"></span>[6](#fn_204), and two daughters,
named Prasúti and Ákúti,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

graced with loveliness and exalted merit <span
id="fr_205"></span>[7](#fn_205). Prasúti he gave to Daksha, after giving
Ákúti to the patriarch Ruchi <span id="fr_206"></span>[8](#fn_206), who
espoused her. Ákúti bore to Ruchi twins, Yajna and Dakshiná <span
id="fr_207"></span>[9](#fn_207), who afterwards became husband and wife,
and had twelve sons, the deities called Yámas <span
id="fr_208"></span>[10](#fn_208), in the Manwantara of Swáyambhuva.

The patriarch Daksha had by Prasúti twenty-four daughters <span
id="fr_209"></span>[11](#fn_209): hear from me their names: Sraddhá
(faith), Lakshmí (prosperity), Dhriti (steadiness), Tusht́i
(resignation), Pusht́i (thriving), Medhá (intelligence), Kríyá (action,
devotion), Buddhi (intellect), Lajjá (modesty), Vapu (body), Sánti
(expiation), Siddhi (perfection), Kírtti (fame): these thirteen
daughters of Daksha, Dharma (righteousness) took to wife. The other
eleven bright-eyed and younger daughters of the patriarch were, Khyáti
(celebrity), Sati (truth), Sambhúti (fitness), Smriti (memory), Príti
(affection), Kshamá (patience), Sannati (humility), Anasúyá (charity),
Úrjjá (energy), with Swáhá (offering), and Swadhá (oblation). These
maidens were respectively wedded to the Munis, Bhrigu, Bhava, Maríchi,
Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, and Vaśisht́ha; to Fire (Vahni),
and to the Pitris (progenitors) <span id="fr_210"></span>[12](#fn_210).

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

The progeny of Dharma by the daughters of Daksha were as follows: by
Sraddhá he had Káma (desire); by Lakshmí, Darpa (pride); by Dhriti,
Niyama (precept); by Tusht́i, Santosha (content); by Pusht́i, Lobha
(cupidity); by Medhá, Sruta (sacred tradition); by Kriyá, Dańd́a, Naya,
and Vinaya (correction, polity, and prudence); by Buddhi, Bodha
(understanding); by Lajjá, Vinaya (good behaviour); by Vapu, Vyavasaya
(perseverance). Sánti gave birth to Kshema (prosperity); Siddhi to Sukha
(enjoyment); and Kírtti to Yasas (reputation <span
id="fr_211"></span>[13](#fn_211)). These were the sons of Dharma; one of
whom, Káma, had Hersha (joy) by his wife Nandi (delight).

The wife of Adharma <span id="fr_212"></span>[14](#fn_212) (vice) was
Hinsá (violence), on whom he begot

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

a son Anrita (falsehood), and a daughter Nikriti (immorality): they
intermarried, and had two sons, Bhaya (fear) and Naraka (hell); and
twins to them, two daughters, Máyá (deceit) and Vedaná (torture), who
became their wives. The son of Bhaya and Máyá was the destroyer of
living creatures, or Mrityu (death); and Dukha (pain) was the offspring
of Naraka and Vedaná. The children of Mrityu were Vyádhi (disease), Jará
(decay), Soka (sorrow), Trishńa (greediness), and Krodha (wrath). These
are all called the inflictors of misery, and are characterised as the
progeny of Vice (Adharma). They are all without wives, without
posterity, without the faculty to procreate; they are the terrific forms
of Vishńu, and perpetually operate as causes of the destruction of this
world. On the contrary, Daksha and the other Rishis, the elders of
mankind, tend perpetually to influence its renovation: whilst the Manus
and their sons, the heroes endowed with mighty power, and treading in
the path of truth, as constantly contribute to its preservation.

MAITREYA.--Tell me, Bráhman, what is the essential nature of these
revolutions, perpetual preservation, perpetual creation, and perpetual
destruction.

PARÁŚARA.--Madhusúdana, whose essence is incomprehensible, in the forms
of these (patriarchs and Manus), is the author of the uninterrupted
vicissitudes of creation, preservation, and destruction. The dissolution
of all things is of four kinds; Naimittika, 'occasional;' Prákritika,
'elemental;' Atyantika, 'absolute;' Nitya, 'perpetual <span
id="fr_213"></span>[15](#fn_213): The first, also

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

termed the Bráhma dissolution, occurs when the sovereign of the world
reclines in sleep. In the second, the mundane egg resolves into the
primary element, from whence it was derived. Absolute non-existence of
the world is the absorption of the sage, through knowledge, into supreme
spirit. Perpetual destruction is the constant disappearance, day and
night, of all that are born. The productions of Prakriti form the
creation that is termed the elemental (Prákrita). That which ensues
after a (minor) dissolution is called ephemeral creation: and the daily
generation of living things is termed, by those who are versed in the
Puráńas, constant creation. In this manner the mighty Vishńu, whose
essence is the elements, abides in all bodies, and brings about
production, existence, and dissolution. The faculties of Vishńu to
create, to preserve, and to destroy, operate successively, Maitreya, in
all corporeal beings and at all seasons; and he who frees himself from
the influence of these three faculties, which are essentially composed
of the three qualities (goodness, foulness, and darkness), goes to the
supreme sphere, from whence he never again returns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[49:1](vp041.htm#fr_199) It is not clear which
of the previous narratives is here referred to, but it seems most
probable that the account in p. [35](vp039.htm#page_35),
[36](vp039.htm#page_36). is intended.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[49:2](vp041.htm#fr_200) Considerable variety
prevails in this list of Prajápatis, Brahmaputras, Bráhmanas, or
Brahmarshis; but the variations are of the nature of additions made to
an apparently original enumeration of but seven, whose names generally
recur. Thus in the Mahábhárata, Moksha Dharma, we have in one place,
Maríchi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vaśisht́ha, 'the
seven highminded sons of the self-born Brahmá.' In another place of the
same, however, we have Daksha substituted for Vaśisht́ha: 'Brahmá then
created mind-begotten sons, of whom Daksha was the seventh, with
Maríchi,' &c. These seven sons of Brahmá are also identified with the
seven Rishis as in the Váyu; although, with palpable inconsistency,
eight are immediately enumerated, or, Bhrigu, Maríchi, Atri, Angiras,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vaśisht́ha. The Uttara Khanda of the Padma
P. substitutes Kardama for Vaśisht́ha. The Bhágavata includes Daksha,
enumerating nine. The Matsya agrees with Manu in adding Nárada to the
list of our text. The Kúrma P. adds Dharma and Sankalpa. The Linga,
Brahmáńd́a, and Váyu P. also add them, and extend the list to Adharma and
Ruchi. The Hari Vanśa in one place inserts Gautama, and <span
id="page_50">p. 50</span> in another Manu. Altogether therefore we have
seventeen, instead of seven. But the accounts given of the origin of
several of these, shew that they were not originally included amongst
the Mánasa putras, or sons of Brahmá's mind; for even Daksha, who finds
a place in all the lists except one of those given in the Mahábhárata,
is uniformly said to have sprung from Brahmá's thumb: and the same
patriarch, as well as Dharma, is included in some accounts, as in the
Bhágavata and Matsya P., amongst a different series of Brahmá's progeny,
or virtues and vices; or, Daksha (dexterity), Dharma (virtue), Káma
(desire), Krodha (passion), Lobha (covetousness), Moha (infatuation),
Mada (insanity), Pramoda (pleasure), Mrityu (death), and Angaja (lust).
These are severally derived from different parts of Brahmá's body: and
the Bhagávata, adding Kardama (soil or sin) to this enumeration, makes
him spring from Brahmá's shadow. The simple statement, that the first
Prajápatis sprang from the mind or will of Brahmá, has not contented the
depraved taste of the mystics, and in some of the Puráńas, as the
Bhágavata, Linga, and Váyu, they also are derived from the body of their
progenitor; or, Bhrigu from his skin, Maríchi from his mind, Atri from
his eyes, Angiras from his mouth, Pulastya from his ear, Pulaha from his
navel, Kratu from his hand, Vaśisht́ha from his breath, Daksha from his
thumb, and Nárada from his hip. They do not exactly agree, however, in
the places whence these beings proceed; as for instance, according to
the Linga, Maríchi springs from Brahmá's eyes, not Atri, who there
proceeds, instead of Pulastya, from his ears. The Váyu has also another
account of their origin, and states them to have sprung from the fires
of a sacrifice offered by Brahmá; an allegorical mode of expressing
their probable original, considering them to be in some degree real
persons, from the Brahmanical ritual, of which they were the first
institutors and observers. The Váyu P. also states, that besides the
seven primitive Rishis, the Prajápatis are numerous, and specifies
Kardama, Kaśyapa, Śesha, Vikránta, Susravas, Bahuputra, Kumára,
Vivaswat, Suchisravas, Práchetasa (Daksha), Arisht́anemi, Bahula. These
and many others were Prajápatis. In the beginning of the Mahábhárata (A.
P.) we have again a different origin, and first Daksha, the son of
Prachetas, it is said, had seven sons, after whom the twenty-one
Prajápatis were born, or appeared. According to the commentator, the
seven sons of Daksha were the allegorical persons Krodha, Tamas, Dama,
Vikrita, Angiras, Kardama, and Aswa; and the twenty-one Prajápatis, the
seven usually specified Maríchi and the rest, and the fourteen Manus.
This looks like a blending of the earlier and later notions.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[51:3](vp041.htm#fr_201) Besides this general
notice of the origin of Rudra and his separate forms, we have in the
next chapter an entirely different set of beings so denominated; and the
eleven alluded to in the text are also more particularly enumerated in a
subsequent chapter. The origin of Rudra, as one of the agents in
creation, is described in most of the Puráńas. The Mahábhárata, indeed,
refers his origin to Vishńu, representing him as the personification of
his anger, whilst Brahmá is that of his kindness. The Kúrma P. makes him
proceed from Brahmá's mouth, whilst engaged in meditating on creation.
The Varáha P. makes this appearance of Rudra the consequence of a
promise made by Śiva to Brahmá, that he would become his son. In the
parallel passages in other Puráńas the progeny of the Rudra created by
Brahmá is not confined to the eleven, but comprehends infinite numbers
of beings in person and equipments like their parent; until Brahmá,
alarmed at their fierceness, numbers, and immortality, desires his son
Rudra, or, as the Matsya calls him, Vámadeva, to form creatures of a
different and mortal nature. Rudra refusing to do this, desists; whence
his name Sthánu, from Sthá, 'to stay.' Linga, Váyu P. &c.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[51:4](vp041.htm#fr_202) According to the Váyu,
the female became first twofold, or one half white, and the other black;
and each of these, again, becomes manifold, being the various energies,
or Śaktis, of Mahádeva, as stated by the Kúrma, after the words \#\#\#
which are those of our text: \#\#\#. The Linga and Váyu specify many of
their names. Those of the white complexion, or mild nature, include
Lakshmí, Saraswatí, Gaurí, Umá, &c. Those of the dark hue, and fierce
disposition, Durgá, Kálí, Chandí, Mahárátrí, and others.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[51:5](vp041.htm#fr_203) Brahmá, after
detaching from himself the property of anger, in the form of Rudra,
converted himself into two persons, the first male, or the Manu
Swáyambhuva, and the first woman, or Śatarúpá: so in the Vedas; 'So
himself was indeed (his) son.' The commencement of production through
sexual agency is here described with sufficient distinctness, but the
subject has been rendered <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> obscure by a
more complicated succession of agents, and especially by the
introduction of a person of a mythic or mystical character, Viráj. The
notion is thus expressed in Manu: "Having divided his own substance, the
mighty power Brahmá became half male and half female; and from that
female he produced Viráj. Know me to be that person whom the male Viráj
produced by himself." I. 32, 33. We have therefore a series of Brahmá,
Viráj, and Manu, instead of Brahmá and Manu only: also the generation of
progeny by Brahmá, begotten on Satarúpá, instead of her being, as in our
text, the wife of Manu. The idea seems to have originated with the
Vedas, as Kullúka Bhat́t́a quotes a text; 'Then (or thence) Virát was
born.' The procreation of progeny by Brahmá, however, is at variance
with the whole system, which almost invariably refers his creation to
the operation of his will: and the expression in Manu, 'he created Viráj
in her,' does not necessarily imply sexual intercourse. Viráj also
creates, not begets, Manu. And in neither instance does the name of
Śatarúpá occur. The commentator on Manu, however, understands the
expression asrijat to imply the procreation of Viráj; and the same
interpretation is given by the Matsya Puráńa, in which the incestuous
passion of Brahmá for Śatarúpa, his daughter in one sense, his sister in
another, is described; and by her he begets Viráj, who there is called,
not the progenitor of Manu, but Manu himself. This therefore agrees with
our text, as far as it makes Manu the son of Brahmá, though not as to
the nature of the connexion. The reading of the Agni and Padma P. is
that of the Vishńu; and the Bhágavata agrees with it in one place,
stating distinctly that the male half of Brahmá, was Manu, the other
half, Śatarúpá: \#\#\# Bhágav. III. 12. 35: and although the production
of Viráj is elsewhere described, it is neither as the son of Brahmá, nor
the father of Manu. The original and simple idea, therefore, appears to
be, the identity of Manu with the male half of Brahmá, and his being
thence regarded as his son. The Kúrma P. gives the same account as Manu,
and in the same words. The Linga P. and Váyu P. describe the origin of
Viráj and Śatarúpá from Brahmá; and they intimate the union of Śatarúpá
with Purusha or Viráj, the male portion of Brahmá, in the first
instance; and in the second, with Manu, who is termed Vairája, or the
son of Viráj. The Bráhma P., the words of which are repeated in the Hari
Vanśa, introduces a new element of perplexity in a new name, that of
Ápava. According to the commentator, this is a name of the Prajápati
Vaśisht́ha. As, however, he performs the office of Brahmá, he should be
regarded as that divinity: but this is not exactly the case, although it
has been so rendered by the French translator. Ápava becomes twofold,
and in the capacity of his male half begets offspring by the female.
Again, it is said Vishńu created <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> Viráj,
and Viráj created the male, which is Vairája or Manu; who was thus the
second interval (Antaram), or stage, in creation. That is, according to
the commentator, the first stage was the creation of Ápava, or
Vaśisht́ha, or Viráj, by Vishńu, through the agency of Hiranyagarbha or
Brahmá; and the next was that of the creation of Manu by Viráj. Śatarúpá
appears as first the bride of Ápava, and then as the wife of Manu. This
account therefore, although obscurely expressed, appears to be
essentially the same with that of Manu; and we have Brahmá, Viráj, Manu,
instead of Brahmá and Manu. It seems probable that this difference, and
the part assigned to Viráj, has originated in some measure from
confounding Brahmá with the male half of his individuality, and
considering as two beings that which was but one. If the Purusha or
Viráj be distinct from Brahmá, what becomes of Brahmá? The entire whole
and its two halves cannot coexist; although some of the Pauráńics and
the author of Manu seem to have imagined its possibility, by making
Viráj the son of Brahmá. The perplexity, however, is still more
ascribable to the personification of that which was only an allegory.
The division of Brahmá into two halves designates, as is very evident
from the passage in the Vedas given by Mr. Colebrooke, (As. R. VIII.
425,) the distinction of corporeal substance into two sexes; Viráj being
all male animals, Śatarúpá all female animals. So the commentator on the
Hari Vanśa explains the former to denote the horse, the bull, &c.; and
the latter, the mare, the cow, and the like. In the Bhágavata the term
Viráj implies, Body, collectively, as the commentator observes; 'As the
sun illuminates his own inner sphere, as well as the exterior regions,
so soul, shining in body (Virája), irradiates all without and within.'
All therefore that the birth of Viráj was intended to express, was the
creation of living body, of creatures of both sexes: and as in
consequence man was produced, he might be said to be the son of Viráj,
or bodily existence. Again, Śatarúpá, the bride of Brahmá, or of Viráj,
or of Manu, is nothing more than beings of varied or manifold forms,
from Sata, 'a hundred,' and 'form;' explained by the annotator on the
Hari Vanśa by Anantarúpá, 'of infinite,' and Vividharúpá, 'of
diversified shape;' being, as he states, the same as Máyá, 'illusion,'
or the power of multiform metamorphosis. The Matsya P. has a little
allegory of its own, on the subject of Brahmá's intercourse with
Śatarúpá; for it explains the former to mean the Vedas, and the latter
the Savitrí, or holy prayer, which is their chief text; and in their
cohabitation there is therefore no evil.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[53:6](vp041.htm#fr_204) The Bráhma P. has a
different order, and makes Víra the son of the first pair, who has
Uttánapáda, &c. by Kámyá. The commentator on the Hari Vanśa quotes the
Váyu for a confirmation of this account; but the passage there is,
'Śatarúpá bore to the male Vairája (Manu) two Víras,' i. e. heroes or
heroic sons, <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> Uttánpáda and Priyavrata.
It looks as if the compiler of the Bráhma P. had made some very
unaccountable blunder, and invented upon it a new couple, Víra and
Kámyá: no such person as the former occurs in any other Puráńa, nor does
Kámyá, as his wife.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[54:7](vp041.htm#fr_205) The Bhágavata adds a
third daughter, Devahúti; for the purpose apparently of introducing a
long legend of the Rishi Kardama, to whom she is married, and of their
son Kapila: a legend not met with any where else.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[54:8](vp041.htm#fr_206) Ruchi is reckoned
amongst the Prajápatis by the Linga and Váyu Puráńas.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[54:9](vp041.htm#fr_207) These descendants of
Swáyambhuva are all evidently allegorical: thus Yajna is 'sacrifice,'
and Dakshińá 'donation' to Brahmans.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[54:10](vp041.htm#fr_208) The Bhágavata (b. IV.
c. 1) says the Tushitas, but they are the divinities of the second, not
of the first Manwantara, as appears also in another part of the same,
where the Yámas are likewise referred to the Swáyambhuva Manwantara.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[54:11](vp041.htm#fr_209) These twenty-four
daughters are of much less universal occurrence in the Puráńas than the
more extensive series of fifty or sixty, which is subsequently
described, and which appears to be the more ancient legend.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[54:12](vp041.htm#fr_210) The twenty-four
daughters of Daksha are similarly named and disposed of in most of the
Puráńas which notice them. The Bhágavata, having introduced a third
daughter. of Swáyambhuva, has a rather different enumeration, in order
to assign some of them, the wives of the Prajápatis, to <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> Kardama and Devahúti. Daksha had therefore, it
is there said (b. IV. c. 1), sixteen daughters, thirteen of whom were
married to Dharma, named Sraddhá, Maitrí (friendship), Dayá (clemency),
Sánti Tusht́i, Pusht́i, Kriyá, Unnati (elevation), Buddhi, Medhá, Titikshá
(patience), Hrí (modesty), Múrtti (form); and three, Sati, Swáhá, and
Swadhá, married, as in our text. Some of the daughters of Devahúti
repeat these appellations, but that is of slight consideration. They
are, Kalá (a moment), married to Maríchi; Anasúyá to Atri; Sraddhá to
Angiras; Havirbhu (oblation-born) to Pulastya; Gati (movement) to
Pulaha; Kriyá to Kratu; Khyáti to Bhrigu; Arundhati to Vaśisht́ha; and
Sánti to Atharvan. In all these instances the persons are manifestly
allegorical, being personifications of intelligences and virtues and
religious rites, and being therefore appropriately wedded to the
probable authors of the Hindu code of religion and morals, or to the
equally allegorical representation of that code, Dharma, moral and
religious duty.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[55:13](vp041.htm#fr_211) The same remark
applies here. The Puráńas that give these details generally concur with
our text, but the Bhágavata specifies the progeny of Dharma in a
somewhat different manner; or, following the order observed in the list
of Dharma's wives, their children are, Rita (truth), Prasáda (favour),
Abhaya (fearlessness), Sukha, Muda (pleasure), Smaya (wonder), Yoga
(devotion), Darpa, Artha (meaning), Smriti (memory), Kshema, Prasraya
(affection), and the two saints Nara and Náráyańa, the sons of Dharma by
Múrtti. We have occasional varieties of nomenclature in other
authorities; as, instead of Śruta, Sama; Kúrma P.: instead of Dandanaya,
Samaya; and instead of Bodha, Apramáda; Linga P.: and Siddha in place of
Sukha; Kúrma P.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[55:14](vp041.htm#fr_212) The text rather
abruptly introduces Adharma and his family. He is said by the
commentator to be the son of Brahmá, and the Linga P. enumerates him
among the Prajápatis, as well as Dharma. According to the Bhágavata, he
is the husband of Mrishá (falsehood), and the father of Dambha
(hypocrisy) and Máyá (deceit), who were adopted by Nirritti. The series
<span id="page_56">p. 56</span> of their descendants is also somewhat
varied from our text; being in each descent, however, twins which
intermarry, or Lobha (covetousness) and Nikriti, who produce Krodha
(wrath) and Hinsá: their children are, Kali (wickedness) and Durukti
(evil speech): their progeny are, Mrityu and Bhí (fear); whose offspring
are, Niraya (hell) and Yátaná (torment).

<span id="fn_213"></span>[56:15](vp041.htm#fr_213) The three first of
these are more particularly described in the last book: the last, the
Nitya, or constant, is differently described by Col. Vans Kennedy
(Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p. 224, note). "In the 7th chapter," he
observes, "of the Vishńu Puráńa four kinds of Pralaya are described. The
Naimittika takes place when Brahmá slumbers: the Prákritika when this
universe returns to its original nature: Atyantika proceeds from divine
knowledge: and Nitya is the extinction of life, like the extinction of a
lamp, *in sleep* at night." For this last characteristic, however, our
text furnishes no warrant; nor can it be explained to signify, that the
Nitya Pralaya means no more <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> than "a
man's falling into a sound sleep at night." All the copies consulted on
the present occasion concur in reading \#\#\# as rendered above. The
commentator supplies the illustration, 'like the flame of a lamp;' but
he also writes, 'That which is the destruction of all that are born,
night and day, is the Nitya, or constant.' Again, in a verse presently
following we have the Nitya Sarga, 'constant or perpetual creation,' as
opposed to constant dissolution: 'That in which, oh excellent sages,
beings are daily born, is termed constant creation, by those learned in
the Puráńas.' The commentator explains this, 'The constant flow or
succession of the creation of ourselves and other creatures is the Nitya
or constant creation: this is the meaning of the text.' It is obvious,
therefore, that the alternation intended is that of life and death, not
of waking and sleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](vp042)
