[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp045)  [Next](vp047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

### CHAP. XI.

Legend of Dhruva, the son of Uttánapáda: he is unkindly treated by his
father's second wife: applies to his mother: her advice: he resolves to
engage in religious exercises: sees the seven Rishis, who recommend him
to propitiate Vishńu.

PARÁŚARA continued.--I mentioned to you, that the Manu Swáyambhuva had
two heroic and pious sons, Priyavrata and Uttánapáda. Of these two, the
latter had a son whom he dearly loved, Uttama, by his favourite wife
Suruchi. By his queen, named Suníti, to whom he was less attached, he
also had a son, called Dhruva <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_252).
Observing his brother Uttama on the lap of his father, as he was seated
upon his throne, Dhruva was desirous of ascending to the same place; but
as Suruchi was present, the Rája did not gratify the desire of his son,
respectfully wishing to be taken on his father's knee. Beholding the
child of her rival thus anxious to be placed on his father's lap, and
her own son already seated there, Suruchi thus addressed the boy: "Why,
child, do you vainly indulge in such presumptuous hopes? You are born
from a different mother, and are no son of mine, that you should aspire
inconsiderately to a station fit for the excellent Uttama alone. It is
true you are the son of the Rája, but I have not given you birth. This
regal throne, the seat of the king of kings, is suited to my son only;
why should you aspire to its occupation? why idly cherish such lofty
ambition, as if you were my son? do you forget that you are but the
offspring of Suníti."

The boy, having heard the speech of his step-mother, quitted his father,
and repaired in a passion to the apartment of his own mother; who,
beholding him vexed, took him upon her lap, and, gently smiling, asked
him what was the cause of his anger, who had displeased him, and if any
one, forgetting the respect due to his father, had behaved ill to

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

him. Dhruva, in reply, repeated to her all that the arrogant Suruchi had
said to him in the presence of the king. Deeply distressed by the
narrative of the boy, the humble Suníti, her eyes dimmed with tears,
sighed, and said, "Suruchi has rightly spoken; thine, child, is an
unhappy fate: those who are born to fortune are not liable to the
insults of their rivals. Yet be not afflicted, my child, for who shall
efface what thou hast formerly done, or shall assign to thee what thou
hast left undone. The regal throne, the umbrella of royalty, horses and
elephants, are his whose virtues have deserved them: remember this, my
son, and be consoled. That the king favours Suruchi is the reward of her
merits in a former existence. The name of wife alone belongs to such as
I, who have not equal merit. Her son is the progeny of accumulated
piety, and is born as Uttama: mine has been born as Dhruva, of inferior
moral worth. Therefore, my son, it is not proper for you to grieve; a
wise man will be contented with that degree which appertains to him: but
if you continue to feel hurt at the words of Suruchi, endeavour to
augment that religious merit which bestows all good; be amiable, be
pious, be friendly, be assiduous in benevolence to all living creatures;
for prosperity descends upon modest worth as water flows towards low
ground."

Dhruva answered; "Mother, the words that you have addressed to me for my
consolation find no place in a heart that contumely has broken. I will
exert myself to obtain such elevated rank, that it shall be revered by
the whole world. Though I be not born of Suruchi, the beloved of the
king, you shall behold my glory, who am your son. Let Uttama my brother,
her child, possess the throne given to him by my father; I wish for no
other honours than such as my own actions shall acquire, such as even my
father has not enjoyed."

Having thus spoken, Dhruva went forth from his mother's dwelling: he
quitted the city, and entered an adjoining thicket, where he beheld
seven Munis sitting upon hides of the black antelope, which they had
taken from off their persons, and spread over the holy kusa grass.
Saluting them reverentially, and bowing humbly before then, the prince
said, "Behold in me, venerable men, the son of Uttánapáda, born of

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Suníti.
Dissatisfied with the world, I appear before you." The Rishis replied;
"The son of a king, and but four or five years of age, there can be no
reason, child, why you should be dissatisfied with life; you cannot be
in want of any thing whilst the king your father reigns; we cannot
imagine that you suffer the pain of separation from the object of your
affections; nor do we observe in your person any sign of disease. What
is the cause of your discontent? Tell us, if it is known to yourself."

Dhruva then repeated to the Rishis what Suruchi had spoken to him; and
when they had heard his story, they said to one another, "How surprising
is the vehemence of the Kshetriya nature, that resentment is cherished
even by a child, and he cannot efface from his mind the harsh speeches
of a step-mother. Son of a Kshetriya, tell us, if it be agreeable to
thee, what thou hast proposed, through dissatisfaction with the world,
to accomplish. If thou wishest our aid in what thou hast to do, declare
it freely, for we perceive that thou art desirous to speak."

Dhruva said; "Excellent sages, I wish not for riches, neither do I want
dominion: I aspire to such a station as no one before me has attained.
Tell me what I must do to effect this object; how I may reach an
elevation superior to all other dignities." The Rishis severally thus
replied.--Maríchi said; "The best of stations is not within the reach of
men who fail to propitiate Govinda. Do thou, prince, worship the
undecaying (Achyuta)." Atri said; "He with whom the first of spirits,
Janárddana, is pleased, obtains imperishable dignity. I declare unto you
the truth." Angiras said; "If you desire an exalted station, worship
that Govinda in whom, immutable and undecaying, all that is, exists."
Pulastya said; "He who adores the divine Hari, the supreme soul, supreme
glory, who is the supreme Brahma, obtains what is difficult of
attainment, eternal liberation." "When that Janárddana," observed Kratu,
"who in sacrifices is the soul of sacrifice, and who in abstract
contemplation is supreme spirit, is pleased, there is nothing man may
not acquire." Pulaha said; "Indra, having worshipped" the lord of the
world, obtained the dignity of king of the celestials. Do thou adore,
pious youth, that Vishńu, the lord of sacrifice." "Any thing, child,
that the mind covets," exclaimed Vaśisht́ha, "may be obtained by
propitiating

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vishńu, even
though it he the station that is the most excellent in the three
worlds."

Dhruva replied to them; "You have told me, humbly bending before you,
what deity is to be propitiated: now inform me what prayer is to he
meditated by me, that will offer him gratification. May the great
Rishis, looking upon me with favour, instruct me how I am to propitiate
the god." The Rishis answered; "Prince, thou deservest to hear how the
adoration of Vishńu has been performed by those who have been devoted to
his service. The mind must first be made to forsake all external
impressions, and a man must then fix it steadily on that being in whom
the world is. By him whose thoughts are thus concentrated on one only
object, and wholly filled by it; whose spirit is firmly under control;
the prayer that we shall repeat to thee is to be inaudibly recited: 'Om!
glory to Vásudeva, whose essence is divine wisdom; whose form is
inscrutable, or is manifest as Brahmá, Vishńu, and Śiva <span
id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_253).' This prayer, which was formerly
uttered by your grandsire, the Manu Swáyambhuva, and propitiated by
which, Vishńu conferred upon him the prosperity he desired, and which
was unequalled in the three worlds, is to be recited by thee. Do thou
constantly repeat this prayer, for the gratification of Govinda."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_252"></span>[86:1](vp046.htm#fr_252) The Matsya, Bráhma,
and Váyu Puráńas speak of but one wife of Uttánapáda, and call her
Sunritá: they say also that she had four sons, Apaspati (or Vasu),
Ayushmanta, Kírttimat, and Dhruva. The Bhágavata, Padma, and Náradíya
have the same account as that of the text.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[89:2](vp046.htm#fr_253) The instructions of
the Rishis amount to the performance of the Yoga. External impressions
are first to be obviated by particular positions, modes of breathing,
&c.: the mind must then be fixed on the object of meditation; this is
Dhárana: next comes the meditation, or Dhyána; and then the Japa, or
inaudible repetition of a Mantra, or short prayer; as in the text. The
subject of the Yoga is more fully detailed in a subsequent book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](vp047)
