[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp046)  [Next](vp048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

### CHAP. XII.

Dhruva commences a course of religious austerities. Unsuccessful
attempts of Indra and his ministers to distract Dhruva's attention: they
appeal to Vishńu, who allays their fears, and appears to Dhruva. Dhruva
praises Vishńu, and is raised to the skies as the pole-star.

THE prince, having received these instructions, respectfully saluted the
sages, and departed from the forest, fully confiding in the
accomplishment of his purposes. He repaired to the holy place, on the
banks of the Yamuná, called Madhu or Madhuvana, the grove of Madhu,
after the demon of that name, who formerly abided there. Śatrughna (the
younger brother of Ráma) having slain the Rákshas Lavańa, the son of
Madhu, founded a city on the spot, which was named Mathurá. At this holy
shrine, the purifier from all sin, which enjoyed the presence of the
sanctifying god of gods, Dhruva performed penance, as enjoined by
Maríchi and the sages: he contemplated Vishńu, the sovereign of all the
gods, seated in himself. Whilst his mind was wholly absorbed in
meditation, the mighty Hari, identical with all beings and with all
natures, (took possession of his heart.) Vishńu being thus present in
his mind, the earth, the supporter of elemental life, could not sustain
the weight of the ascetic. As he stood upon his left foot, one
hemisphere bent beneath him; and when he stood upon his right, the other
half of the earth sank down. When he touched the earth with his toes, it
shook with all its mountains, and the rivers and the
[seas](errata.htm#4.md) were troubled, and the gods partook of the
universal agitation.

The celestials called Yámas, being excessively alarmed, then took
counsel with Indra how they should interrupt the devout exercises of
Dhruva; and the divine beings termed Kushmáńd́as, in company with their
king, commenced anxious efforts to distract his meditations. One,
assuming the semblance of his mother Suníti, stood weeping before him,
and calling in tender accents, "My son, my son, desist from destroying
thy strength by this fearful penance. I have gained thee, my son, after

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

much anxious hope: thou canst not have the cruelty to quit me, helpless,
alone, and unprotected, on account of the unkindness of my rival. Thou
art my only refuge; I have no hope but thou. What hast thou, a child but
five years old, to do with rigorous penance? Desist from such fearful
practices, that yield no beneficial fruit. First comes the season of
youthful pastime; and when that is over, it is the time for study: then
succeeds the period of worldly enjoyment; and lastly, that of austere
devotion. This is thy season of pastime, my child. Hast thou engaged in
these practices to put an end to thine existence? Thy chief duty is love
for me: duties are according to time of life. Lose not thyself in
bewildering error: desist from such unrighteous actions. If not, if thou
wilt not desist from these austerities, I will terminate my life before
thee."

But Dhruva, being wholly intent on seeing Vishńu, beheld not his mother
weeping in his presence, and calling upon him; and the illusion, crying
out, "Fly, fly, my child, the hideous spirits of ill are crowding into
this dreadful forest with uplifted weapons," quickly disappeared. Then
advanced frightful Rákshasas, wielding terrible arms, and with
countenances emitting fiery flame; and nocturnal fiends thronged around
the prince, uttering fearful noises, and whirling and tossing their
threatening weapons. Hundreds of jackals, from whose mouths gushed
flame <span id="fr_254"></span>[1](#fn_254.md) as they devoured their prey,
were howling aloud, to appal the boy, wholly engrossed by meditation.
The goblins called out, "Kill him, kill him; cut him to pieces; eat him,
eat him;" and monsters, with the faces of lions and camels and
crocodiles, roared and yelled with horrible cries, to terrify the
prince. But all these uncouth spectres, appalling cries, and threatening
weapons, made no impression upon his senses, whose mind was completely
intent on Govinda. The son of the monarch of the earth, engrossed by one
only idea, beheld uninterruptedly Vishńu seated in his soul, and saw no
other object.

All their delusive stratagems being thus foiled, the gods were more
perplexed than ever. Alarmed at their discomfiture, and afflicted by

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

the devotions of the boy, they assembled and repaired for succour to
Hari, the origin of the world, who is without beginning or end; and thus
addressed him: "God of gods, sovereign of the world, god supreme, and
infinite spirit, distressed by the austerities of Dhruva, we have come
to thee for protection. As the moon increases in his orb day by day, so
this youth advances incessantly towards superhuman power by his
devotions. Terrified by the ascetic practices of the son of Uttánapáda,
we have come to thee for succour. Do thou allay the fervour of his
meditations. We know not to what station he aspires: to the throne of
Indra, the regency of the solar or lunar sphere, or to the sovereignty
of riches or of the deep. Have compassion on us, lord; remove this
affliction from Our breasts; divert the son of Uttánapáda from
persevering in his penance." Vishńu replied to the gods; "The lad
desireth neither the rank of Indra, nor the solar orb, nor the
sovereignty of wealth or of the ocean: all that he solicits, I will
grant. Return therefore, deities, to your mansions as ye list, and be no
more alarmed: I will put an end to the penance of the boy, whose mind is
immersed in deep contemplation."

The gods, being thus pacified by the supreme, saluted him respectfully
and retired, and, preceded by Indra, returned to their habitations: but
Hari, who is all things, assuming a shape with four arms, proceeded to
Dhruva, being pleased with his identity of nature, and thus addressed
him: "Son of Uttánapáda, be prosperous. Contented with thy devotions, I,
the giver of boons, am present. Demand what boon thou desirest. In that
thou hast wholly disregarded external objects, and fixed thy thoughts on
me, I am well pleased with thee. Ask, therefore, a suitable reward." The
boy, hearing these words of the god of gods, opened his eyes, and
beholding that Hari whom he had before seen in his meditations actually
in his presence, bearing in his hands the shell, the discus, the mace,
the bow, and scimetar, and crowned with a diadem, the bowed his head
down to earth; the hair stood erect on his brow, and his heart was
depressed with awe. He reflected how best he should offer thanks to the
god of gods; what he could say in his adoration; what words were capable
of expressing his praise: and being overwhelmed with perplexity, he had
recourse for consolation to the deity. "If," he

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

exclaimed, "the lord is contented with my devotions, let this be my
reward, that I may know how to praise him as I wish. How can I, a child,
pronounce his praises, whose abode is unknown to Brahmá and to others
learned in the Vedas? My heart is overflowing with devotion to thee: oh
lord, grant me the faculty worthily to lay mine adorations at thy feet."

Whilst lowly bowing, with his hands uplifted to his forehead, Govinda,
the lord of the world, touched the son of Uttánapáda with the tip of his
conch-shell, and immediately the royal youth, with a countenance
sparkling with delight, praised respectfully the imperishable protector
of living beings. "I venerate," exclaimed Dhruva, "him whose forms are
earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect, the first element
(Ahankára), primeval nature, and the pure, subtile, all-pervading soul,
that surpasses nature. Salutation to that spirit that is void of
qualities; that is supreme over all the elements and all the objects of
sense, over intellect, over nature and spirit. I have taken refuge with
that pure form of thine, oh supreme, which is one with Brahma, which is
spirit, which transcends all the world. Salutation to that form which,
pervading and supporting all, is designated Brahma, unchangeable, and
contemplated by religious sages. Thou art the male with a thousand
heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet, who traversest the universe,
and passest ten inches beyond its contact <span
id="fr_255"></span>[2](#fn_255.md). Whatever has been, or is to be, that,
Purushottama, thou art. From thee sprang Virát, Swarát, Samrát, and
Adhipurusha <span id="fr_256"></span>[3](#fn_256.md). The lower, and upper,
and middle parts of the earth are not independent of thee: from thee is
all this universe, all that has been, and that shall be: and all this
world is in thee, assuming this universal form <span
id="fr_257"></span>[4](#fn_257.md). From thee is sacrifice

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

derived, and all oblations, and curds, and ghee, and animals of either
class (domestic or wild). From thee the Rig-Veda, the Sáma, the metres
of the Vedas, and the Yajur-Véda are born. Horses, and cows having teeth
in one jaw only <span id="fr_258"></span>[5](#fn_258.md), proceed from
thee; and from thee come goats, sheep, deer. Brahmans sprang from thy
mouth; warriors from thy arms; Vaisyas from thy thighs; and Śúdras from
thy feet. From thine eyes come the sun; from thine ears, the wind; and
from thy mind, the moon: the vital airs from thy central vein; and fire
from thy mouth: the sky from thy navel; and heaven from thy head: the
regions from thine ears; the earth from thy feet. All this world was
derived from thee. As the wide-spreading Nyagrodha (Indian fig) tree is
compressed in a small seed <span id="fr_259"></span>[6](#fn_259.md), so, at
the time of dissolution, the whole universe is comprehended in thee as
its germ. As the Nyagrodha germinates from the seed, and becomes first a
shoot, and then rises into loftiness, so the created world proceeds from
thee, and expands into magnitude. As the bark and leaves of the Plantain
tree are to be seen in its stem, so thou art the stem of the universe,
and all things are visible in thee. The faculties of the intellect, that
are the cause of pleasure and of pain, abide in thee as one with all
existence; but the sources of pleasure and of pain, singly or blended,
do not exist in thee, who art exempt from all qualities <span
id="fr_260"></span>[7](#fn_260.md). Salutation to thee, the subtile
rudiment, which, being single, becomes

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

manifold, Salutation to thee, soul of existent things, identical with
the great elements. Thou, imperishable, art beheld in spiritual
knowledge as perceptible objects, as nature, as spirit, as the world, as
Brahmá, as Manu, by internal contemplation. But thou art in all, the
element of all; thou art all, assuming every form; all is from thee, and
thou art from thyself. I salute thee, universal soul: glory be to thee.
Thou art one with all things: oh lord of all, thou art present in all
things. What can I say unto thee? thou knowest all that is in the heart,
oh soul of all, sovereign lord of all creatures, origin of all things.
Thou, who art all beings, knowest the desires of all creatures. The
desire that I cherished has been gratified, lord, by thee: my devotions
have been crowned with success, in that I have seen thee."

Vishńu said to Dhruva; "The object of thy devotions has in truth been
attained, in that thou hast seen me; for the sight of me, young prince,
is never unproductive. Ask therefore of me what boon thou desirest; for
men in whose sight I appear obtain all their wishes." To this, Dhruva
answered; "Lord god of all creatures, who abidest in the hearts of all,
how should the wish that I cherish be unknown to thee? I will confess
unto thee the hope that my presumptuous heart has entertained; a hope
that it would be difficult to gratify, but that nothing is difficult
when thou, creator of the world, art pleased. Through thy favour, Indra
reigns over the three worlds. The sister-queen of my mother has said to
me, loudly and arrogantly, 'The royal throne is not for one who is not
born of me;' and I now solicit of the support of the universe an exalted
station, superior to all others, and one that shall endure for ever."
Vishńu said to him; "The station that thou askest thou shalt obtain; for
I was satisfied with thee of old in a prior existence. Thou wast
formerly a Brahman, whose thoughts were ever devoted to me, ever dutiful
to thy parents, and observant of thy duties. In course of time a prince
became thy friend, who was in the period of youth, indulged in all
sensual pleasures, .and was of handsome appearance and elegant form.
Beholding, in consequence of associating with him, his affluence, you
formed the desire that you might be subsequently born as the son of a
king; and, according to your wish, you obtained a

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

princely birth in the illustrious mansion of Uttánapáda. But that which
would have been thought a great boon by others, birth in the race of
Swáyambhuva, you have not so considered, and therefore have propitiated
me. The man who worships me obtains speedy liberation from life. What is
heaven to one whose mind is fixed on me? A station shall be assigned to
thee, Dhruva, above the three worlds <span
id="fr_261"></span>[8](#fn_261.md); one in which thou shalt sustain the
stars and the planets; a station above those of the sun, the moon, Mars,
the son of Soma (Mercury), Venus, the son of Súrya (Saturn), and all the
other constellations; above the regions of the seven Rishis, and the
divinities who traverse the atmosphere <span
id="fr_262"></span>[9](#fn_262.md). Some celestial beings endure for four
ages; some for the reign of a Manu: to thee shall be granted the
duration of a Kalpa. Thy mother Suníti, in the orb of a bright star,
shall abide near thee for a similar term; and all those who, with minds
attentive, shall glorify thee at dawn or at eventide, shall acquire
exceeding religious merit.

Thus the sage Dhruva, having received a boon from Janárddana, the god of
gods, and lord of the world, resides in an exalted station. Beholding
his glory, Uśanas, the preceptor of the gods and demons, repeated these
verses: "Wonderful is the efficacy of this penance, marvellous is its
reward, that the seven Rishis should be preceded by Dhruva. This too is
the pious Suníti, his parent, who is called Súnritá <span
id="fr_263"></span>[10](#fn_263.md)." Who can

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

celebrate her greatness, who, having given birth to Dhruva, has become
the asylum of the three worlds, enjoying to all future time an elevated
station, a station eminent above all? He who shall worthily describe the
ascent into the sky of Dhruva, for ever shall be freed from all sin, and
enjoy the heaven of Indra. Whatever be his dignity, whether upon earth
or in heaven, he shall never fall from it, but shall long enjoy life,
possessed of every blessing <span id="fr_264"></span>[11](#fn_264.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_254"></span>[91:1](vp047.htm#fr_254.md) A marginal note by a
Bengali Pundit asserts it to be a fact, then when a jackal carries a
piece of meat in his mouth, it shews in the dark as if it was on fire.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[93:2](vp047.htm#fr_255.md) The commentator
understands this passage to imply merely that the supreme pervades both
substance and space, being infinitely vast, and without limit. 'Having a
thousand heads,' &c. denotes only infinite extension: and the 'ten
inches beyond the contact of the universe' expresses merely
non-restriction by its boundaries.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[93:3](vp047.htm#fr_256.md) Explained severally
the Brahmáńd́a, or material universe; Brahmá, the creator; Manu, the
ruler of the period; and supreme or presiding spirit.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[93:4](vp047.htm#fr_257.md) So the inscription
upon the temple of Sais: Ἐγὼ εἶμι πᾶν τὸ γεγονὸς, καὶ ὂν, καὶ ἐσόμενον.
So the Orphic verse, cited by Eusebius, beginning

Ἒν δὲ δέμας βασιλεῖον ἐν ᾦ τάδε πάντα κύκλειται, κ.τ.λ.

'One regal body in which all things are <span id="page_94">p. 94</span>
comprehended (viz. Virát), fire, and water, and earth, and air, and
night, and day, and Intelligence (viz. Mahat) the first generator, and
divine love; for all these does Jupiter include in his expansive form.'
It proceeds also, precisely in the Pauráńic strain, to describe the
members of this universal form: the heaven is his head, the stars his
hair, the sun and moon his eyes, &c.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[94:5](vp047.htm#fr_258.md) A piece of natural
history quite correct as applied to the front teeth, which in the genus
ox occur in the lower jaw only.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[94:6](vp047.htm#fr_259.md) This is also
conformable to the doctrine, that the rudiments of plants exist in their
cotyledons.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[94:7](vp047.htm#fr_260.md) In life, or living
beings, perception depends not, according to Hindu metaphysics, upon the
external senses, but the impressions made upon them are communicated to
the mental organ or sense, and by the mind to the understanding--Samvid
in the text--by which they are distinguished as pleasurable, painful, or
mixed. But pleasure depends upon the quality of goodness, pain on that
of darkness, and their mixture on that of foulness, inherent in the
understanding; properties belonging to Jíveśwara, or god, as one with
life, or to embodied spirit, but not as Parameśwara, or supreme spirit.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[96:8](vp047.htm#fr_261.md) The station or sphere
is that of the north pole, or of the polar star. In the former case, the
star is considered to be Suníti, the mother of Dhruva. The legend,
although as it is related in our text it differs in its circumstances
from the story told by Ovid of Callisto and her son Areas, whom Jove

Imposuit cælo vicinaque sidera fecit,

suggests some suspicion of an original identity. In neither of the
authorities have we, perhaps, the primitive fable. It is evident from
the quotation that presently follows in the text, of a stanza by Nanas,
that the Puráńa has not the oldest version of the legend; and Ovid's
representation of it is after a fashion of his own: all that has been
retained of the original is the conformity of the characters and of the
main incident, the translation of a mother and her son to the heavens as
constellations, in which the pole-star is the most conspicuous luminary.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[96:9](vp047.htm#fr_262.md) The Vaimánika devas,
the deities who travel in Vimánas, 'heavenly cars,' or rather 'moving
spheres.'

<span id="fn_263"></span>[96:10](vp047.htm#fr_263.md) The text says merely
\#\#\#; the commentator says, 'perhaps formerly so called;' \#\#\#. We
have already remarked that some Puráńas so denominate her.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[97:11](vp047.htm#fr_264.md) The legend of Dhruva
is narrated in the Bhágavata, Padma (Swerga Khańd́a), Agni, and Náradíya,
much to the same purport, and partly in the same words, as our text. The
Bráhma and its double the Hari Vanśa, the Matsya, and Váyu merely allude
to Dhruva's having been transferred by Brahmá to the skies, in reward of
his austerities. The story of his religious penance, and adoration of
Vishńu, seems to be an embellishment interpolated by the Vaishńava
Puráńas, Dhruva being adopted as a saint by their sect. The allusion to
Súnritá in our text concurs with the form of the story as it appears
elsewhere, to indicate the priority of the more simple legend.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](vp048.md)
