[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp042)  [Next](vp044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SACRIFICE OF DAKSHA <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221).

(From the Váyu Puráńa.)

"There was formerly a peak of Meru, named Sávitra, abounding with gems,
radiant as the sun, and celebrated throughout the three worlds;

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

of immense extent, and difficult of access, and an object of universal
veneration. Upon that glorious eminence, rich with mineral treasures, as
upon a splendid couch, the deity Śiva reclined, accompanied by the
daughter of the sovereign of mountains, and attended by the mighty
Ádityas, the powerful Vasus, and by the heavenly physicians, the sons of
Aswiní; by Kuvera, surrounded by his train of Guhyakas, the lord of the
Yakshas, who dwells on Kailása. There also was the great Muni Usanas:
there, were Rishis of the first order, with Sanatkumára at their head;
divine Rishis, preceded by Angiras; Viśwavasu, with his bands of
heavenly choristers; the sages Nárada and Párvata; and innumerable
troops of celestial nymphs. The breeze blew upon the mountain, bland,
pure, and fragrant; and the trees were decorated with flowers, that
blossomed in every season. The Vidyádharas and Siddhas, affluent in
devotion, waited upon Mahádeva, the lord of living creatures; and many
other beings, of various forms, did him homage. Rákshasas of terrific
semblance, and Pisáchas of great strength, of different shapes and
features, armed with various weapons, and blazing like fire, were
delighted to be present, as the followers of the god. There stood the
royal Nandí, high in the favour of his lord, armed with a fiery trident,
shining with inherent lustre; and there the best of rivers, Gangá, the
assemblage of all holy waters, stood adoring the mighty deity. Thus
worshipped by all the most excellent of sages and of gods, abode the
omnipotent and all-glorious Mahádeva.

"In former times, Daksha commenced a holy sacrifice on the side of
Himaván, at the sacred spot Gangadwára, frequented by the Rishis. The
gods, desirous of assisting at this solemn rite, came, with Indra at
their head, to Mahádeva, and intimated their purpose; and having
received his permission, departed in their splendid chariots to
Gangadwára, as tradition reports <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_222).
They found Daksha, the best of the devout,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

surrounded by the singers and nymphs of heaven, and by numerous sages,
beneath the shade of clustering trees and climbing plants; and all of
them, whether dwellers on earth, in air, or in the regions above the
skies, approached the patriarch with outward gestures of respect. The
Ádityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, all entitled to partake of the
oblations, together with Jishńu, were present. The four classes of
Pitris, Ushmapás, Somapás, Ájyapás, and Dhúmapás, or those who feed upon
the flame, the acid juice, the butter, or the smoke of offerings, the
Aswins and the progenitors, came along with Brahmá. Creatures of every
class, born from the womb, the egg, from vapour, or vegetation, came
upon their invocation; as did all the gods, with their brides, who in
their resplendent vehicles blazed like so many fires. Beholding them
thus assembled, the sage Dadhícha was filled with indignation, and
observed, 'The man who worships what ought not to be worshipped, or pays
not reverence where veneration is due, is guilty, most assuredly, of
heinous sin.' Then addressing Daksha, he said to him, 'Why do you not
offer homage to the god who is the lord of life (Paśubhartri)?' Daksha
spake; 'I have already many Rudras present, armed with tridents, wearing
braided hair, and existing in eleven forms: I recognise no other
Mahádeva.' Dadhícha spake; 'The invocation that is not addressed to Íśa,
is, for all, but a solitary (and imperfect) summons. Inasmuch as I
behold no other divinity who is superior to Śankara, this sacrifice of
Daksha will not be completed.' Daksha spake; I offer, in a golden cup,
this entire oblation, which has been consecrated by many prayers, as an
offering ever due to the unequalled Vishńu, the sovereign lord of
all <span id="fr_223"></span>[3](#fn_223).'

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

"In the meanwhile, the virtuous daughter of the mountain king, observing
the departure of the divinities, addressed her lord, the god of living
beings, and said--Umá spake--'Whither, oh lord, have the gods, preceded
by Indra, this day departed? Tell me truly, oh thou who knowest all
truth, for a great doubt perplexes me.' Maheśwara spake; Illustrious
goddess, the excellent patriarch Daksha celebrates the sacrifice of a
horse, and thither the gods repair.' Deví spake; Why then, most mighty
god, dost thou also not proceed to this solemnity? by what hinderance is
thy progress thither impeded?' Maheśwara spake; 'This is the
contrivance, mighty queen, of all the gods, that in all sacrifices no
portion should be assigned to me. In consequence of an arrangement
formerly devised, the gods allow me, of right, no participation of
[sacrificial](errata.htm#3) offerings.' Deví spake; 'The lord god lives
in all bodily forms, and his might is eminent through his superior
faculties; he is unsurpassable, he is unapproachable, in splendour and
glory and power. That such as he should be excluded from his share of
oblations, fills me with deep sorrow, and a trembling, oh sinless,
seizes upon my frame. Shall I now practise bounty, restraint, or
penance, so that my lord, who is inconceivable, may obtain a share, a
half or a third portion, of the sacrifice <span
id="fr_224"></span>[4](#fn_224)?'

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

"Then the mighty and incomprehensible deity, being pleased, said to his
bride, thus agitated; and speaking; 'Slender-waisted queen of the gods,
thou knowest not the purport of what thou sayest; but I know it, oh thou
with large eyes, for the holy declare all things by meditation. By thy
perplexity this day are all the gods, with Mahendra and all the three
worlds, utterly confounded. In my sacrifice, those who worship me,
repeat my praises, and chant the Rathantara song of the Sáma veda; my
priests worship me in the sacrifice of true wisdom, where no officiating
Brahman is needed; and in this they offer me my portion.' Deví spake;
'The lord is the root of all, and assuredly, in every assemblage of the
female world, praises or hides himself at will.' Mahádeva spake; 'Queen
of the gods, I praise not myself: approach, and behold whom I shall
create for the purpose of claiming my share of the rite.'

"Having thus spoken to his beloved spouse, the mighty Maheśwara created
from his mouth a being like the fire of fate; a divine being, with a
thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet; wielding a thousand
clubs, a thousand shafts; holding the shell, the discus, the mace, and
bearing a blazing bow and battle-axe; fierce and terrific, shining with
dreadful splendour, and decorated with the crescent moon; clothed in a
tiger's skin, dripping with blood; having a capacious stomach, and a
vast mouth, armed with formidable tusks: his ears were erect, his lips
were pendulous, his tongue was lightning; his hand brandished the
thunderbolt;

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

flames streamed from his hair; a necklace of pearls wound round his
neck; a garland of flame descended on his breast: radiant with lustre,
he looked like the final fire that consumes the world. Four tremendous
tusks projected from a mouth which extended from ear to ear: he was of
vast bulk, vast strength, a mighty male and lord, the destroyer of the
universe, and like a large fig-tree in circumference; shining like a
hundred moons at once; fierce as the fire of love; having four heads,
sharp white teeth, and of mighty fierceness, vigour, activity, and
courage; glowing with the blaze of a thousand fiery suns at the end of
the world; like a thousand undimmed moons: in bulk like Himádri,
Kailása, or Meru, or Mandara, with all its gleaming herbs; bright as the
sun of destruction at the end of ages; of irresistible prowess, and
beautiful aspect; irascible, with lowering eyes, and a countenance
burning like fire; clothed in the hide of the elephant and lion, and
girt round with snakes; wearing a turban on his head, a moon on his
brow; sometimes savage, sometimes mild; having a chaplet of many flowers
on his head, anointed with various unguents, and adorned with different
ornaments and many sorts of jewels; wearing a garland of heavenly
Karnikára flowers, and rolling his eyes with rage. Sometimes he danced;
sometimes he laughed aloud; sometimes he stood wrapt in meditation;
sometimes he trampled upon the earth; sometimes he sang; sometimes he
wept repeatedly: and he was endowed with the faculties of wisdom,
dispassion, power, penance, truth, endurance, fortitude, dominion, and
self-knowledge.

"This being, then, knelt down upon the ground, and raising his hands
respectfully to his head, said to Mahádeva, 'Sovereign of the gods,
command what it is that I must do for thee.' To which Maheśwara replied,
Spoil the sacrifice of Daksha.' Then the mighty Vírabhadra, having heard
the pleasure of his lord, bowed down his head to the feet of Prajápati;
and starting like a lion loosed from bonds, despoiled the sacrifice of
Daksha, knowing that the had been created by the displeasure of Deví.
She too in her wrath, as the fearful goddess Rudrakálí, accompanied him,
with all her train, to witness his deeds. Vírabhadra the fierce, abiding
in the region of ghosts, is the minister of the anger of

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Deví. And he then
created, from the pores of his skin, powerful demigods, the mighty
attendants upon Rudra, of equal valour and strength, who started by
hundreds and thousands into existence. Then a loud and confused clamour
filled all the expanse of ether, and inspired the denizens of heaven
with dread. The mountains tottered, and earth shook; the winds roared,
and the depths of the sea were disturbed; the fires lost their radiance,
and the sun grew pale; the planets of the firmament shone not, neither
did the stars give light; the Rishis ceased their hymns, and gods and
demons were mute; and thick darkness eclipsed the chariots of the
skies <span id="fr_225"></span>[5](#fn_225).

"Then from the gloom emerged fearful and numerous forms, shouting the
cry of battle; who instantly broke or overturned the sacrificial
columns, trampled upon the altars, and danced amidst the oblations.
Running wildly hither and thither, with the speed of wind, they tossed
about the implements and vessels of sacrifice, which looked like stars
precipitated from the heavens. The piles of food and beverage for the
gods, which had been heaped up like mountains; the rivers of milk; the
banks of curds and butter; the sands of honey and butter-milk and sugar;
the mounds of condiments and spices of every flavour; the undulating
knolls of flesh and other viands; the celestial liquors, pastes, and
confections, which had been prepared; these the spirits of wrath
devoured or defiled or scattered abroad. Then falling upon the host of
the gods, these vast and resistless Rudras beat or terrified them,
mocked and insulted the nymphs and goddesses, and quickly put an end to
the rite, although defended by all the gods; being the ministers of
Rudra's wrath, and similar to himself <span
id="fr_226"></span>[6](#fn_226). Some then made a hideous clamour,
whilst others fearfully shouted, when Yajna was decapitated. For the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

divine Yajna, the lord of sacrifice, then began to fly up to heaven, in
the shape of a deer; and Vírabhadra, of immeasurable spirit,
apprehending his power, cut off his vast head, after he had mounted into
the sky <span id="fr_227"></span>[7](#fn_227). Daksha the patriarch, his
sacrifice being destroyed, overcome with terror, and utterly broken in
spirit, fell then upon the ground, where his head was spurned by the
feet of the cruel Vírabhadra <span id="fr_228"></span>[8](#fn_228). The
thirty scores of sacred divinities were all presently bound, with a band
of fire, by their lion-like foe; and they all then addressed him,
crying, 'Oh Rudra, have mercy upon thy servants: oh lord, dismiss thine
anger.' Thus spake Brahmá and the other gods, and the patriarch Daksha;
and raising their hands, they said, 'Declare, mighty being, who thou
art.' Vírabhadra said, 'I am not a god, nor an Áditya; nor am I come
hither for enjoyment, nor curious to behold the chiefs of the
divinities: know that I am come to destroy the sacrifice of Daksha, and
that I am called Vírabhadra, the issue of the wrath of Rudra. Bhadrakálí
also, who has sprung from the anger of Deví, is sent here by the god of
gods to destroy this rite. Take refuge, king of kings, with him who is
the lord of Umá; for better is the anger of Rudra than the blessings of
other gods.'

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

"Having heard the words of Vírabhadra, the righteous Daksha propitiated
the mighty god, the holder of the trident, Maheśwara. The hearth of
sacrifice, deserted by the Brahmans, had been consumed; Yajna had been
metamorphosed to an antelope; the fires of Rudra's wrath had been
kindled; the attendants, wounded by the tridents of the servants of the
god, were groaning with pain; the pieces of the uprooted sacrificial
posts were scattered here and there; and the fragments of the
meat-offerings were carried off by flights of hungry vultures, and herds
of howling jackals. Suppressing his vital airs, and taking up a posture
of meditation, the many-sighted victor of his foes, Daksha fixed his
eyes every where upon his thoughts. Then the god of gods appeared from
the altar, resplendent as a thousand suns, and smiled upon him, and
said, 'Daksha, thy sacrifice has been destroyed through sacred
knowledge: I am well pleased with thee:' and then he smiled again, and
said, 'What shall I do for thee; declare, together with the preceptor of
the gods.'

"Then Daksha, frightened, alarmed, and agitated, his eyes suffused with
tears, raised his hands reverentially to his brow, and said, 'If, lord,
thou art pleased; if I have found favour in thy sight; if I am to be the
object of thy benevolence; if thou wilt confer upon me a boon, this is
the blessing I solicit, that all these provisions for the solemn
sacrifice, which have been collected with much trouble and during a long
time, and which have now been eaten, drunk, devoured, burnt, broken,
scattered abroad, may not have been prepared in vain.' 'So let it be,'
replied Hara, the subduer of Indra. And thereupon Daksha knelt down upon
the earth, and praised gratefully the author of righteousness, the
three-eyed god Mahádeva, repeating the eight thousand names of the deity
whose emblem is a bull."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_221"></span>[61:1](vp043.htm#fr_221) The sacrifice of
Daksha is a legend of some interest, from its historical and
archeological relations. It is obviously intended to intimate a struggle
between the worshippers of Śiva and of Vishńu, in which at first the
latter, but finally the former, acquired the ascendancy. It is also a
favourite subject of Hindu sculpture, at least with the Hindus of the
Śaiva division, and makes a conspicuous figure both at Elephanta and
Ellora. A representation of the dispersion and mutilation of the gods
and sages by Vírabhadra, at the former, is published in the Archæologia,
VII. 326, where it is described as the Judgment of Solomon! a figure of
Vírabhadra is given by Niebuhr, vol. II. tab. 10: and the entire group
in the Bombay Transactions, vol. I. p. 220. It is described, p. 229; but
Mr. Erskine has not verified the subject, although it cannot admit of
doubt. The groupe described, p. 224, probably represents the
introductory details given in our text. Of the Ellora sculptures, a
striking one occurs in what Sir C. Malet calls the Doomar Leyna cave,
where is "Veer Budder, with eight hands. In one is suspended the slain
Rajah Dutz." A. R. VI. 396. And there is also a representation of 'Ehr
Budr,' in one of the colonades of Kailas; being, in fact, the same
figure as that at Elephanta. Bombay Tr. III. 287. The legend of Daksha
therefore was popular when those cavern temples were excavated. The
story is told in much more detail in several other Puráńas, and with
some variations, which will be noticed: but the above has been selected
as a specimen of the style of the Váyu Puráńa, and as being a narration
which, from its [inartificial](errata.htm#2), obscure, tautological, and
uncircumstantial construction, is probably of an ancient date. The same
legend, in the same words, is given in the Bráhma P.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[62:2](vp043.htm#fr_222) Or this may he
understood to imply, that the original story is in the Vedas; the term
being, as usual in such a reference, \#\#\#. Gangadwára, the place where
the Ganges descends to the plains--or Haridwar, as it is more usually
termed--is usually specified as the scene of action, The Linga is more
precise, calling it Kanakhala, which is the village still called
Kankhal, near Haridwar (Megha Dúta, <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> p.
59). It rather inaccurately, however, describes this as upon Hansa peak,
a point of the Himalaya.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[63:3](vp043.htm#fr_223) The Kúrma P. gives
also this discussion between Dadhícha and Daksha, and their dialogue
contains some curious matter. Daksha, for instance, states that no
portion of a sacrifice is ever allotted to Śiva, and no prayers are
directed to be addressed to him, or to his bride. Dadhícha apparently
evades the objection, and claims a share for Rudra, consisting of the
triad of gods, as one with the sun, who is undoubtedly hymned by the
several ministering priests of the Vedas. Daksha replies, that the
twelve Ádityas receive special oblations; that they are all the suns;
and <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> that he knows of no other. The
Munis, who overhear the dispute, concur in his sentiments. These notions
seem to have been exchanged for others in the days of the Padma P. and
Bhágavata, as they place Daksha's neglect of Śiva to the latter's filthy
practices, his going naked, smearing himself with ashes, carrying a
skull, and behaving as if he were drunk or crazed: alluding, no doubt,
to the practices of Śaiva mendicants, who seem to have abounded in the
days of Śankara Áchárya, and since. There is no discussion in the
Bhágavata, but Rudra is described as present at a former assembly, when
his father-in-law censured him before the guests, and in consequence he
departed in a rage. His follower Nandí curses the company, and Bhrigu
retorts in language descriptive of the Vámácháris, or left hand
worshippers of Śiva. "May all those," he says, "who adopt the worship of
Bhava (Śiva), all those who follow the practices of his worshippers,
become heretics, and oppugners of holy doctrines; may they neglect the
observances of purification; may they be of infirm intellects, wearing
clotted hair, and ornamenting themselves with ashes and bones; and may
they enter the Śaiva initiation, in which spirituous liquor is the
libation."

<span id="fn_224"></span>[64:4](vp043.htm#fr_224) This simple account of
Sati's share in the transaction is considerably modified in <span
id="page_64">p. 64</span> other accounts. In the Kúrma, the quarrel
begins with Daksha the patriarch's being, as he thinks, treated by his
son-in-law with less respect than is his due. Upon his daughter Satí's
subsequently visiting him, he abuses her husband, and turns her out of
his house. She in spite destroys herself. Śiva, hearing of this, comes
to Daksha, and curses him to be born as a Kshetriya, the son of the
Prachetasas, and to beget a son on his own daughter. It is in this
subsequent birth that the sacrifice occurs. The Linga and Matsya allude
to the dispute between Daksha and Sati, and to the latter's putting an
end to herself by Yoga. The Padma, Bhágavata, and Skánda in the Kásí
Khanda, relate the dispute between father and daughter in a like manner,
and in more detail. The first refers the death of Sag, however, to a
prior period; and that and the Bhágavata both ascribe it to Yoga. The
Kásí Khanda, with an improvement indicative of a later age, makes Sati
throw herself into the fire prepared for the solemnity.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[67:5](vp043.htm#fr_225) The description of
Vírabhadra and his followers is given in other Puráńas in the same
strain, but with less detail.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[67:6](vp043.htm#fr_226) Their exploits, and
those of Vírabhadra, are more particularly specified elsewhere,
especially in the Linga, Kúrma, and Bhágavata Puráńas. Indra is knocked
down and trampled on; Yama has his staff broken; Saraswatí and the
Mátris have their noses cut off; Mitra or Bhaga has his eyes pulled out;
Pushá has his teeth knocked down his throat; Chandra is pummelled;
Vahni's hands are cut off; Bhrigu loses his beard; the Brahmans are
pelted with stones; the Prajápatis are beaten; and the gods and demigods
are run through with swords or stuck with arrows.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[68:7](vp043.htm#fr_227) This is also mentioned
in the Linga and in the Hari Vanśa: and the latter thus accounts for the
origin of the constellation Mrigasíras; Yajna, with the head of a deer,
being elevated to the planetary region, by Brahmá.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[68:8](vp043.htm#fr_228) As he prays to Śiva
presently, it could not well be meant here that Daksha was decapitated,
although that is the story in other places. The Linga and Bhágavata both
state that Vírabhadra cut off Daksha's head, and threw it into the fire.
After the fray therefore, when Śiva restored the dead to life, and the
mutilated to their limbs, Daksha's head was not forthcoming: it was
therefore replaced by the head of a goat, or, according to the Kásí
Khanda, that of a ram. No notice is taken in our text of the conflict
elsewhere described between Vírabhadra and Vishńu. In the Linga, the
latter is beheaded, and his head is blown by the wind into the fire. The
Kúrma, though a Śaiva Puráńa, is less irreverent towards Vishńu, and
after describing a contest in which both parties occasionally prevail,
makes Brahmá interpose, and separate the combatants. The Kásí Khanda of
the Skánda P. describes Vishńu as defeated, and at the mercy of
Vírabhadra, who is prohibited by a voice from heaven from destroying his
antagonist: whilst in the Hari Vanśa, Vishńu compels Śiva to fly, after
taking him by the throat and nearly strangling him. The blackness of
Śiva's neck arose from this throttling, and not, as elsewhere described,
from his drinking the poison produced at the churning of the ocean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](vp044)
