[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp057)  [Next](vp059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

# VISHŃU PURÁŃA.

# BOOK II.

### CHAP. I.

Descendants of Priyavrata, the eldest son of Swáyambhuva Manu: his ten
sons: three adopt a religious life; the others become kings of the seven
Dwípas, or isles, of the earth. Agnídhra, king of Jambu-dwípa, divides
it into nine portions, which he distributes amongst his sons. Nábhi,
king of the south, succeeded by Rishabha; and he by Bharata: India named
after him Bhárata: his descendants reign during the Swáyambhuva
Manwantara.

MAITREYA.--You have related to me, venerable preceptor, most fully, all
that I was curious to hear respecting the creation of the world; but
there is a part of the subject which I am desirous again to have
described. You stated that Priyavrata and Uttánapáda were the sons of
Swáyambhuva Manu, and you repeated the story of Dhruva, the son of
Uttánapáda: you made no mention of the descendants of Priyavrata, and it
is an account of his family that I beg you will kindly communicate to
me.

PARÁŚARA.--Priyavrata married Kámyá, the daughter of the patriarch
Kardama <span id="fr_364"></span>[1](#fn_364), and had by her two
daughters, Samrát and Kukshi, and ten

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

sons, wise, valiant, modest, and dutiful, named Agnídhra, Agnibáhu,
Vapushmat, Dyutimat, Medha, Medhatithi, Bhavya, Savala, Putra, and the
tenth was Jyotishmat <span id="fr_365"></span>[2](#fn_365), illustrious
by nature as by name. These were the sons of Priyavrata, famous for
strength and prowess. Of these, three, or Medha, Putra, and Agnibáhu,
adopted a religious life: remembering the occurrences of a prior
existence, they did not covet dominion, but diligently practised the
rites of devotion in due season, wholly disinterested, and looking for
no reward.

Priyavrata having divided the earth into seven continents, gave them
respectively to his other seven sons <span
id="fr_366"></span>[3](#fn_366). To Agnídhra he gave Jambu-dwípa; to
Medhatithi he gave Plaksha-dwípa: he installed Vapushmat in the
sovereignty over the Dwípa of Sálmali; and made Jyotishmat king of
Kuśa-dwípa: he appointed Dyutimat to rule over Krauncha-dwípa; Bhavya to
reign over Sáka-dwípa; and Savala he nominated the monarch of the Dwípa
of Pushkara.

Agnídhra, the king of Jambu-dwípa, had nine sons, equal in splendour to
the patriarchs: they were named Nábhi, Kimpurusha, Harivarsha, Ilávrita,
Ramya, Hirańvat, Kuru, Bhadráśwa, and Ketumála <span
id="fr_367"></span>[4](#fn_367), who was a prince ever active in the
practice of piety.

Hear next, Maitreya, in what manner Agnídhra apportioned Jambu-dwípa
amongst his nine sons. He gave to Nábhi the country called Hima, south
of the Himavat, or snowy mountains. The country of Hemakút́a he gave to
Kimpurusha; and to Harivarsha, the country of

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nishadha. The
region in the centre of which mount Meru is situated he conferred on
Ilávrita; and to Ramya, the countries lying between it and the Níla
mountain. To Hirańvat his father gave the country lying to the north of
it, called Śweta; and, on the north of the Śweta mountains, the country
bounded by the Śringaván range he gave to Kuru. The countries on the
east of Meru he assigned to Bhadráśwa; and Gandhamádana, which lay west
of it, he gave to Ketumála <span id="fr_368"></span>[5](#fn_368).'
Having installed his sons sovereigns in these several regions, the pious
king Agnídhra retired to a life of penance at the holy place of
pilgrimage, Śálagráma <span id="fr_369"></span>[6](#fn_369).

The eight Varshas, or countries, Kimpurusha and the rest, are places of
perfect enjoyment, where happiness is spontaneous and uninterrupted. In
them there is no vicissitude, nor the dread of decrepitude or death:
there is no distinction of virtue or vice, nor difference of degree as
better or worse, nor any of the effects produced in this region by the
revolutions of ages.

Nábhi, who had for his portion the country of Himáhwa, had by his queen
Meru the magnanimous Rishabha; and he had a hundred sons, the eldest of
whom was Bharata. Rishabha having ruled with equity and wisdom, and
celebrated many sacrificial rites, resigned the sovereignty of the earth
to the heroic Bharata, and, retiring to the hermitage of Pulastya,
adopted the life of an anchoret, practising religious penance, and
performing all prescribed ceremonies, until, emaciated by his
austerities, so as to be but a collection of skin and fibres, he put a
pebble in his mouth, and naked went the way of all flesh <span
id="fr_370"></span>[7](#fn_370). The country was

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

termed Bhárata from the time that it was relinquished to Bharata by his
father, on his retiring to the woods <span
id="fr_371"></span>[8](#fn_371).

Bharata, having religiously discharged the duties of his station,
consigned the kingdom to his son Sumati, a most virtuous prince; and,
engaging in devout practices, abandoned his life at the holy place,
Śálagráma: he was afterwards born again as a Brahman, in a distinguished
family of ascetics. I shall hereafter relate to you his history.

From the illustrious Sumati was born Indradyumna: his son was
Paramesht́hin: his son was Pratihára, who had a celebrated son, named

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pratiharttá: his
son was Bhava, who begot Udgítha, who begot Prastára; whose son was
Prithu. The son of Prithu was Nakta: his son was Gaya: his son was Nara;
whose son was Virát. The valiant son of Virát was Dhímat, who begot
Mahánta; whose son was Manasyu; whose son was Twasht́ri: his son was
Víraja: his son was Rája: his son was Śatajit, who had a hundred sons,
of whom Viswagjyotish was the eldest <span
id="fr_372"></span>[9](#fn_372). Under these princes, Bhárata-varsha
(India) was divided into nine portions (to be hereafter particularized);
and their descendants successively held possession of the country for
seventy-one periods of the aggregate of the four ages (or for the reign
of a Manu).

This was the creation of Swáyambhuva Manu, by which the earth was
peopled, when he presided over the first Manwantara, in the Kalpa of
Varáha <span id="fr_373"></span>[10](#fn_373)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_364"></span>[161:1](vp058.htm#fr_364) The text reads Kanyá;
and the commentator has, 'he married the daughter of Kardama, whose name
was Kanyá.' The copies agree in the reading, and the Váyu has the same
name, Kanyá; but the Márkańd́eya, which is the same in other respects as
our text, has Kámyá: Kámyá also is the name elsewhere given by the Váyu
to the daughter of Kardama ([p. 83](vp045.htm#page_83). n.
[6](vp045.htm#fn_245)). Kámyá, as has been noticed, appears in the
Bráhma and Hari V. ([p. 53](vp041.htm#page_53). n.
[6](vp041.htm#fn_204)) as the mother of Priyavrata, but erroneously; and
the same authorities specify a Kámyá as the wife of that sovereign. So
the commentator on the Hari V. states, 'another Kámyá is mentioned (in
the text), the daughter of Kardama, the wife of Priyavrata.' <span
id="page_162">p. 162</span> The name Kanyá is therefore most probably an
error of the copyists. The Bhágavata calls the wife of Priyavrata,
Varhishmatí, the daughter of Viśwakarman.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[162:2](vp058.htm#fr_365) These names nearly
agree in the authorities which specify the descendants of Priyavrata,
except in the Bhágavata: that has an almost entirely different series of
names, or Ágnidhra, Idhmajihwa, Yajnabáhu, Mahávíra, Hirańyaretas,
Medhatithi, Ghritaprisht́ha, Savana, Vitihotra, and Kavi; with one
daughter, Urjjaswatí. It also calls the Manus Uttama, Tamasa, and
Raivata the sons of Priyavrata by another wife.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[162:3](vp058.htm#fr_366) According to the
Bhágavata, he drove his chariot seven times round the earth, and the
ruts left by the wheels became the beds of the oceans, separating it
into seven Dwípas.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[162:4](vp058.htm#fr_367) Even the Bhágavata
concurs with the other Puráńas in this series of Priyavrata's grandsons.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[163:5](vp058.htm#fr_368) Of these divisions,
as well as of those of the earth, and of the minor divisions of the
Varshas, we have further particulars in the following chapter.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[163:6](vp058.htm#fr_369) This place of
pilgrimage has not been found elsewhere. The term is usually applied to
a stone, an ammonite, which is supposed to be a type of Vishńu, and of
which the worship is enjoined in the Uttara Khańd́a of the Padma P. and
in the Brahma Vaivartta, authorities of no great weight or antiquity. As
these stones are found chiefly in the Gandak river, the Sálagráma Tírtha
was probably at the source of that stream, or at its confluence with the
Ganges. Its sanctity, and that of the stone, are probably of
comparatively modern origin.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[163:7](vp058.htm#fr_370) 'The great road,' or
'road of heroes.' The pebble was intended either to compel perpetual
silence, or to prevent his eating. The Bhágavata <span id="page_164">p.
164</span> adverts to the same circumstance. That work enters much more
into detail on the subject of Rishabha's devotion, and particularizes
circumstances not found in any other Puráńa. The most interesting of
these are the scene of Rishabha's wanderings, which is said to be Konka,
Venkat́a, Kút́aka, and southern Karnátaka, or the western part of the
Peninsula; and the adoption of the Jain belief by the people of those
countries. Thus it is said, "A king of the Konkas, Venkat́as, and
Kút́akas, named Arhat, having heard the tradition of Rishabha's practices
(or his wandering about naked, and desisting from religious rites),
being infatuated by necessity, under the evil influence of the Kali age,
will become needlessly alarmed, and abandon his own religious duty, and
will foolishly enter upon an unrighteous and heretical path. Misled by
him, and bewildered by the iniquitous operation of the Kali age,
disturbed also by the delusions of the deity, wicked men will, in great
numbers, desert the institutes and purifications of their own ritual;
will observe vows injurious and disrespectful to the gods; will desist
from ablutions, mouth-washings, and purifications, and will pluck out
the hair of the head; and will revile the world, the deity, sacrifices,
Brahmans, and the Vedas." It is also said, that Sumati, the son of
Bharata, will be irreligiously worshipped by some infidels, as a
divinity. Besides the import of the term Arhat, or Jain, Rishabha is the
name of the first, and Sumati of the fifth Tírthakara, or Jain saint of
the present era. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the Bhágavata
intends this sect; and as the Jain system was not matured until a
comparatively modern date, this composition is determined to be also
recent. The allusions to the extension of the Jain faith in the western
parts of the Peninsula, may serve to fix the limit of its probable
antiquity to the 11th or 12th century, when the Jains seem to have been
flourishing in Guzerat and the Konkan. As. Res. XVII. 232.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[164:8](vp058.htm#fr_371) This etymology is
given in other Puráńas; but the Matsya and Váyu have a different one,
deriving it from the Manu, called Bharata, or the cherisher, one who
rears or cherishes progeny. The Váyu has, in another place, the more
common explanation also: \#\#\#.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[165:9](vp058.htm#fr_372) The Agni, Kúrma,
Márkańd́eya, Linga, and Váyu Puráńas agree with the Vishńu in these
genealogical details. The Bhágavata has some additions and variations of
nomenclature, but is not essentially different. It ends, however, with
Śatajit, and cites a stanza which would seem to make Viraja the last of
the descendants of Priyavrata.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[165:10](vp058.htm#fr_373) The descendants of
Priyavrata were the kings of the earth in the first or Swáyambhuva
Manwantara. Those of Uttánapáda, his brother, are placed rather
incongruously in the second or Swárochisha Manwantara: whilst, with
still more palpable inconsistency, Daksha, a descendant of Uttánapáda,
gives his daughter to Kaśyapa in the seventh or Vaivaswata Manwantara.
It seems probable that the patriarchal genealogies are older than the
chronological system of Manwantaras and Kalpas, and have been rather
clumsily distributed amongst the different periods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](vp059)
