[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp051)  [Next](vp053.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

### CHAP. XVII.

Legend of Prahláda. Hirańyakaśipu, the sovereign of the universe: the
gods dispersed or in servitude to him: Prahláda, his son, remains
devoted to Vishńu: questioned by his father, he praises Vishńu:
Hirańyakaśipu orders him to be put to death, but in vain: his repeated
deliverance: he teaches his companions to adore Vishńu.?

PARÁŚARA.--Listen, Maitreya, to the story of the wise and magnanimous
Prahláda, whose adventures are ever interesting and instructive.
Hirańyakaśipu, the son of Diti, had formerly brought the three worlds
under his authority, confiding in a boon bestowed upon him by
Brahmá <span id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_306.md). He had usurped the
sovereignty of Indra, and exercised of himself the functions of the sun,
of air, of the lord of waters, of fire, and of the moon. He himself was
the god of riches; he was the judge of the dead; and he appropriated to
himself, without reserve, all that was offered in sacrifice to the gods.
The deities therefore, flying from their seats in heaven, wandered,
through fear of the Daitya, upon the earth, disguised in mortal shapes.
Having conquered the three worlds, he was inflated with pride, and,
eulogized by the Gandharbas, enjoyed whatever he desired. The
Gandharbas, the Siddhas, and the snake-gods all attended upon the mighty
Hirańyakaśipu, as he sat at the banquet. The Siddhas delighted stood
before him, some playing on musical instruments, some singing songs in
his praise, and others shouting cries of victory; whilst the nymphs of
heaven danced gracefully in the crystal palace, where the Asura with
pleasure quaffed the inebriating cup.

The illustrious son of the Daitya king, Prahláda, being yet a boy,
resided in the dwelling of his preceptor, where he read such writings as
are studied in early years. On one occasion he came, accompanied by his
teacher, to the court of his father, and bowed before his feet as he was
drinking. Hirańyakaśipu desired his prostrate son to rise, and said

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

to him, "Repeat, boy, in substance, and agreeably, what during the
period of your studies you have acquired." "Hear, sire," replied
Prahláda, "what in obedience to your commands I will repeat, the
substance of all I have learned: listen attentively to that which wholly
occupies my thoughts. I have learned to adore him who is without
beginning, middle, or end, increase or diminution; the imperishable lord
of the world, the universal cause of causes." On hearing these words,
the sovereign of the Daityas, his eyes red with wrath, and lip swollen
with indignation, turned to the preceptor of his son, and said, "Vile
Brahman, what is this preposterous commendation of my foe, that, in
disrespect to me, you have taught this boy to utter?" "King of the
Daityas," replied the Guru, "it is not worthy of you to give way to
passion: that which your son has uttered, he has not been taught by me."
"By whom then," said Hirańyakaśipu to the lad, "by whom has this lesson,
boy, been taught you? your teacher denies that it proceeds from him."
"Vishńu, father," answered Prahláda, "is the instructor of the whole
world: what else should any one teach or learn, save him the supreme
spirit?" "Blockhead," exclaimed the king, "who is this Vishńu, whose
name you thus reiterate so impertinently before me, who am the sovereign
of the three worlds?" "The glory of Vishńu," replied Prahláda, "is to be
meditated upon by the devout; it cannot be described: he is the supreme
lord, who is all things, and from whom all things proceed." To this the
king rejoined, "Are you desirous of death, fool, that you give the title
of supreme lord to any one whilst I survive?" "Vishńu, who is Brahma,"
said Prahláda, "is the creator and protector, not of me alone, but of
all human beings, and even, father, of you: he is the supreme lord of
all. Why should you, sire, be offended?" Hirańyakaśipu then exclaimed,
"What evil spirit has entered into the breast of this silly boy, that
thus, like one possessed, he utters such profanity?" "Not into my heart
alone," said Prahláda, "has Vishńu entered, but he pervades all the
regions of the universe, and by his omnipresence influences the conduct
of all beings, mine, fattier, and thine <span
id="fr_307"></span>[2](#fn_307.md)." "Away with the wretch!" cried

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

the king; "take him to his preceptor's mansion. By whom could he have
been instigated to repeat the lying praises of my foe?"

According to the commands of his father, Prahláda was conducted by the
Daityas back to the house of his Guru; where, assiduous in attendance on
his preceptor, he constantly improved in wisdom. After a considerable
time had elapsed, the sovereign of the Asuras sent for him again; and on
his arrival in his presence, desired him to recite some poetical
composition. Prahláda immediately began, "May he from whom matter and
soul originate, from whom all that moves or is unconscious proceeds, he
who is the cause of all this creation, Vishńu, be favourable unto us!"
On hearing which, Hirańyakaśipu exclaimed, "Kill the wretch! he is not
fit to live, who is a traitor to his friends, a burning brand to his own
race!" and his attendants, obedient to his orders, snatched up their
weapons, and rushed in crowds upon Prahláda, to destroy him. The prince
calmly looked upon them, and said, "Daityas, as truly as Vishńu is
present in your weapons and in my body, so truly shall those weapons
fail to harm me:" and accordingly, although struck heavily and
repeatedly by hundreds of the Daityas, the prince felt not the least
pain, and his strength was ever renewed. His father then endeavoured to
persuade him to refrain from glorifying his enemy, and promised him
immunity if the would not be so foolish as to persevere but Prahláda
replied, that he felt no fear as long as his immortal guardian against
all dangers was present in his mind, the recollection of whom was alone
sufficient to dissipate all the perils consequent upon birth or human
infirmities.

Hirańyakaśipu, highly exasperated, commanded the serpents to fall upon
his disobedient and insane son, and bite him to death with their
envenomed fangs: and thereupon the great snakes Kuhaka, Takshaka,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

and Andhaka, charged with fatal poison, bit the prince in every part of
his body; but he, with thoughts immovably fixed on Krishńa, felt no pain
from their wounds, being immersed in rapturous recollections of that
divinity. Then the snakes cried to the king, and said, "Our fangs are
broken; our jewelled crests are burst; there is fever in our, hoods, and
fear in our hearts; but the skin of the youth is still unscathed: have
recourse, monarch of the Daityas, to some other expedient." "Ho,
elephants of the skies!" exclaimed the demon; "unite your tusks, and
destroy this deserter from his father, and conspirer with my foes. It is
thus that often our progeny are our destruction, as fire consumes the
wood from which it springs." The young prince was then assailed by the
elephants of the skies, as vast as mountain peaks; cast down upon the
earth, and trampled on, and gored by their tusks: but he continued to
call to mind Govinda, and the tusks of the elephants were blunted
against his breast. "Behold," he said to his father, "the tusks of the
elephants, as hard as adamant, are blunted; but this is not by any
strength of mine: calling upon Janárddana is my defence against such
fearful affliction."

Then said the king to his attendants, "Dismiss the elephants, and let
fire consume him; and do thou, deity of the winds, blow up the fire,
that this wicked wretch may be consumed." And the Dánavas piled a mighty
heap of wood around the prince, and kindled a fire, to burn him, as
their master had commanded. But Prahláda cried, "Father, this fire,
though blown up by the winds, burneth me not; and all around I behold
the face of the skies, cool and fragrant, with beds of lotus flowers."

Then the Brahmans who were the sons of Bhárgava, illustrious priests,
and reciters of the Sáma-Veda, said to the king of the Daityas, "Sire,
restrain your wrath against your own son. How should anger succeed in
finding a place in heavenly mansions? As for this lad, we will be his
instructors, and teach him obediently to labour for the destruction of
your foes. Youth is the season, king, of many errors; and you should not
therefore be relentlessly offended with a child. If he will not listen
to us, and abandon the cause of Hari, we will adopt infallible measures
to work his death." The king of the Daityas, thus solicited by the

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

priests, commanded the prince to be liberated from the midst of the
flames.

Again established in the dwelling of his preceptor, Prahláda gave
lessons himself to the sons of the demons, in the intervals of his
leisure. "Sons of the offspring of Diti," he was accustomed to say to
them, "hear from me the supreme truth; nothing else is fit to be
regarded; nothing, else here is an object to be coveted. Birth, infancy,
and youth are the portion of all creatures; and then succeeds gradual
and inevitable decay, terminating with all beings, children of the
Daityas, in death: this is manifestly visible to all; to you as it is to
me. That the dead are born again, and that it cannot be otherwise, the
sacred texts are warrant: but production cannot be without a material
cause; and as long as conception and parturition are the material causes
of repeated birth, so long, be sure, is pain inseparable from every
period of existence. The simpleton, in his inexperience, fancies that
the alleviation of hunger, thirst, cold, and the like is pleasure; but
of a truth it is pain; for suffering gives delight to those whose vision
is darkened by delusion, as fatigue would be enjoyment to limbs that are
incapable of motion <span id="fr_308"></span>[3](#fn_308.md). This vile
body is a compound of phlegm and other humours. Where are its beauty,
grace, fragrance, or other estimable qualities? The fool that is fond of
a body composed of flesh, blood, matter, ordure, urine, membrane,
marrow, and bones, will be enamoured of hell. The agreeableness of fire
is caused by cold; of water, by thirst; of food, by hunger: by other
circumstances their contraries are equally agreeable <span
id="fr_309"></span>[4](#fn_309.md). The child of the Daitya who

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

takes to himself a wife introduces only so much misery into his bosom;
for as many as are the cherished affections of a living creature, so
many are the thorns of anxiety implanted in his heart; and he who has
large possessions in his house is haunted, wherever he goes, with the
apprehension that they may be lost or burnt or stolen. Thus there is
great pain in being born: for the dying man there are the tortures of
the judge of the deceased, and of passing again into 'the womb. If you
conclude that there is little enjoyment in the embryo state, you must
then admit that the world is made up of pain. Verily I say unto you,
that in this ocean of the world, this sea of many sorrows, Vishńu is
your only hope. If ye say, you know nothing of this; 'we are children;
embodied spirit in bodies is eternal; birth, youth, decay, are the
properties of the body, not of the soul <span
id="fr_310"></span>[5](#fn_310.md).' But it is in this way that we deceive
ourselves. I am yet a child; but it is my purpose to exert myself when I
am a youth. I am yet a youth; but when I become old I will do what is
needful for the good of my soul. I am now old, and all my duties are to
be fulfilled. How shall I, now that my faculties fail me, do what was
left undone when my strength was unimpaired?' In this manner do men,
whilst their minds are distracted by sensual pleasures, ever propose,
and never attain final beatitude: they die thirsting <span
id="fr_311"></span>[6](#fn_311.md). Devoted in childhood to play, and in
youth to pleasure, ignorant and impotent they find that old age is come
upon them. Therefore even in childhood let the embodied soul acquire
discriminative wisdom, and, independent

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

of the conditions of infancy, youth, or age, strive incessantly to be
freed. This, then, is what I declare unto you; and since you know that
it is not untrue, do you, out of regard to me, call to your minds
Vishńu, the liberator from all bondage. What difficulty is there in
thinking upon him, who, when remembered, bestows prosperity; and by
recalling whom to memory, day and night, all sin is cleansed away? Let
all your thoughts and affections be fixed on him, who is present in all
beings, and you shall laugh at every care. The whole world is suffering
under a triple affliction <span id="fr_312"></span>[7](#fn_312.md). 'What
wise man would feel hatred towards beings who are objects of compassion?
If fortune be propitious to them, and I am unable to partake of the like
enjoyments, yet wherefore should I cherish malignity towards those who
are more prosperous than myself: I should rather sympathise with their
happiness; for the suppression of malignant feelings is of itself a
reward <span id="fr_313"></span>[8](#fn_313.md). If beings are hostile, and
indulge in hatred, they are objects of pity to the wise, as encompassed
by profound delusion. These are the reasons for repressing hate, which
are adapted to the capacities of those who see the deity distinct from
his creatures. Hear, briefly, what influences those who have approached
the truth. This whole world is but a manifestation of Vishńu, who is
identical with all things; and it is therefore to be regarded by the
wise as not differing from, but as the same with themselves. Let us
therefore lay aside the angry passions of our race, and so strive that
we obtain that perfect, pure, and eternal happiness, which shall be
beyond the power of the elements or their deities, of fire, of the sun,
of the moon, of wind, of Indra, of the regent of the sea; which shall be
unmolested by spirits of air or earth; by Yakshas, Daityas, or their
chiefs; by the serpent-gods or monstrous demigods of Swerga; which shall
be uninterrupted by men or beasts, or

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

by the infirmities of human nature; by bodily sickness and disease <span
id="fr_314"></span>[9](#fn_314.md), or hatred, envy, malice, passion, or
desire; which nothing shall molest, and which every one who fixes his
whole heart on Keśava shall enjoy. Verily I say unto you, that you shall
have no satisfaction in various revolutions through this treacherous
world, but that you will obtain placidity for ever by propitiating
Vishńu, whose adoration is perfect calm. What here is difficult of
attainment, when he is pleased? Wealth, pleasure, virtue, are things of
little moment. Precious is the fruit that you shall gather, be assured,
from the exhaustless store of the tree of true wisdom."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_306"></span>[126:1](vp052.htm#fr_306.md) The boon, according
to the Váyu Puráńa, was, that he should not be slain by any created
being: the Kúrma adds, except by Vishńu. The Bhágavata has a similar
boon as the Váyu, and therefore, says the commentator, Vishńu assumed
the form of the Nrisinha, as being that of neither a man nor an animal.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[127:2](vp052.htm#fr_307.md) The Puráńas teach
constantly incompatible doctrines. According to this passage, the
Supreme Being is not the inert cause of creation only, but exercises the
<span id="page_128">p. 128</span> functions of an active Providence. The
commentator quotes a text of the Veda in support of this view:
'Universal soul entering into men, governs their conduct.'
Incongruities, however, are as frequent in the Vedas as in the Puráńas;
but apparently the most ancient parts of the Hindu ritual recognised an
active ruler in the Creator of the universe; the notion of abstract
deity originating with the schools of philosophy.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[130:3](vp052.htm#fr_308.md) This is the purport
of the sentence apparently, and is that which the comment in part
confirms. Literally it is, 'A blow is the pleasure of those whose eyes
are darkened by ignorance, whose limbs, exceedingly benumbed, desire
pleasure by exercise: The commentator divides the sentence, however, and
reads it, 'As fatigue would be like pleasure to paralyzed limbs; and a
blow is enjoyment to those who are blinded by delusion; that is, by
love; for to them a slap, or even a kick, from a mistress would be a
favour.' It is not improbably an allusion to some such venerable pastime
as blindman's buff. This interpretation, however, leaves the
construction of the first half of the sentence imperfect, unless the
nominative and verb apply to both portions.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[130:4](vp052.htm#fr_309.md) They are so far from
being sources of pleasure in themselves, that, under different <span
id="page_131">p. 131</span> contrasts, they become sources of pain. Heat
is agreeable in cold weather: cold is agreeable in hot weather; heat
would then be disagreeable. Drink is pleasant to a thirsty man: thirst
is agreeable to one who has drunk too much; and more drink would be
painful. So of food, and of other contrasts.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[131:5](vp052.htm#fr_310.md) 'Divine knowledge is
the province only of those who can separate soul from body; that is, who
live independent of bodily infirmities and passions. We have not
overcome corporeal vicissitudes, and have therefore no concern with such
abstruse inquiries.' This is the commentator's explanation of the
passage.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[131:6](vp052.htm#fr_311.md) Alluding, says the
commentator, to the fable of a washerman, who, whilst washing his
clothes in the Ganges, proposed daily to drink of its waters, but forgot
his purpose in his occupation: or of a boy, who proposed the same as he
pursued fish after fish, and never accomplished his intention, being
engrossed by his sport: both died without drinking.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[132:7](vp052.htm#fr_312.md) The three kinds of
affliction of the Sánkhya philosophy: internal, as bodily or mental
distress; external, as injuries from men, animals, &c.; and superhuman,
or inflictions by gods or demons. See S. Káriká, ver. 1.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[132:8](vp052.htm#fr_313.md) The construction of
the text is elliptical and brief, but the sense is sufficiently clear.
The order of the last páda is thus transposed by the commentator:
'Whence (from feeling pleasure) the abandonment of enmity is verily the
consequence.'

<span id="fn_314"></span>[133:9](vp052.htm#fr_314.md) The original rather
unpoetically specifies some of these, or fever, ophthalmia, dysentery,
spleen, liver, &c. The whole of these defects are the individuals of the
three species of pain alluded to before.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](vp053.md)
