[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp058)  [Next](vp060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

### CHAP. II.

Description of the earth. The seven Dwípas and seven seas. Jambu-dwípa.
Mount Meru: its extent and boundaries. Extent of Ilávrita. Groves,
lakes, and branches of Meru. Cities of the gods. Rivers. The forms of
Vishńu worshipped in different Varshas.

MAITREYA.--You have related to me, Brahman, the creation of Swáyambhuva;
I am now desirous to hear from you a description of the earth: how many
are its oceans and islands, its kingdoms and its mountains, its forests
and rivers and the cities of the gods, its dimensions, its contents, its
nature, and its form.

PARÁŚARA.--You shall hear, Maitreya, a brief account of the earth from
me: a full detail I could not give you in a century.

The seven great insular continents are Jambu, Plaksha, Sálmali, Kuśa,
Krauncha, Śáka, and Pushkara: and they are surrounded severally by seven
great seas; the sea of salt water (Lavańa), of sugar-cane juice (Ikshu),
of wine (Surá), of clarified butter (Sarpi), of curds (Dadhi), of milk
(Dugdha), and of fresh water (Jala) <span
id="fr_374"></span>[1](#fn_374).

Jambu-dwípa is in the centre of all these: and in the centre of this
continent is the golden mountain Meru. The height of Meru is eighty-four
thousand Yojanas; and its depth below the surface of the earth is

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

sixteen thousand. Its diameter at the summit is thirty-two thousand
Yojanas; and at its base, sixteen thousand: so that this mountain is
like the seed-cup of the lotus of the earth <span
id="fr_375"></span>[2](#fn_375).

The boundary mountains (of the earth) are Himaván, Hemakút́a, and
Nishadha, which lie south of Meru; and Níla, Śweta, and Śringí, which
are situated to the north of it. The two central ranges (those next to
Meru, or Nishadha and Níla) extend for a hundred thousand (Yojanas,
running east and west). Each of the others diminishes ten thousand
Yojanas, as it lies more remote from the centre. They are two thousand
Yojanas in height, and as many in breadth <span
id="fr_376"></span>[3](#fn_376). The Varshas or countries between these
ranges are Bhárata (India), south of the Himaván mountains;

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

next Kimpurusha, between Himaván and Hemakút́a; north of the latter, and
south of Nishadha, is Hariversha; north of Meru is Ramyaka, extending
from the Níla or blue mountains to the Śweta (or white) mountains;
Hirańmaya lies between the Śweta and Śringí ranges; and Uttarakuru is
beyond the latter, following the same direction as Bhárata <span
id="fr_377"></span>[4](#fn_377). Each of these is nine thousand Yojanas
in extent. Ilávrita is of similar dimensions, but in the centre of it is
the golden mountain Meru, and the country extends nine thousand Yojanas
in each direction from the four sides of the mountain <span
id="fr_378"></span>[5](#fn_378). There are four mountains in this
Varsha, formed as buttresses to Meru, each ten thousand Yojanas in
elevation: that on the east is called Mandara; that on the south,
Gandhamádana; that on the west, Vipula; and that on the north,
Supárśwa <span id="fr_379"></span>[6](#fn_379): on each of these stands
severally a Kadamba-tree, a Jambu-tree, a Pípal, and a Vat́a <span
id="fr_380"></span>[7](#fn_380); each spreading over eleven hundred
Yojanas, and towering aloft like banners on the mountains. From the
Jambu-tree the insular continent Jambu-dwípa derives its appellations.
The apples of that tree are as large as elephants: when they are rotten,
they fall upon the crest of the mountain, and from their expressed juice
is formed the Jambu river, the waters of which are drunk by the
inhabitants; and in consequence of drinking of that stream, they pass
their days in content and health, being subject neither to perspiration,
to foul odours, to decrepitude, nor organic decay. The soil on the banks
of the river, absorbing the Jambu juice, and being dried by gentle
breezes, becomes the gold termed Jámbunada, of which the ornaments of
the Siddhas are fabricated.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

The country of Bhadráśwa lies on the east of Meru, and Ketumála on the
west; and between these two is the region of Ilávrita. On the east of
the same is the forest Chaitraratha; the Gandhamádana wood is on the
south; the forest of Vaibhrája is on the west; and the grove of Indra,
or Nandana, is on the north. There are also four great lakes, the waters
of which are partaken of by the gods, called Aruńoda, Mahábhadra,
Śítoda, and Mańasa <span id="fr_381"></span>[8](#fn_381).

The principal mountain ridges which project from the base of Meru, like
filaments from the root of the lotus, are, on the east, Śítánta,
Mukunda, Kurarí, Mályaván, and Vaikanka; on the south, Trikút́a, Śiśira,
Patanga, Ruchaka, and Nishadha; on the west, Śikhivásas, Vaidúrya,
Kapila, Gandhamádana, and Járudhi; and on the north, Śankhakút́a,
Rishabha, Nága, Hansa, and Kálanjara. These and others extend from
between the intervals in the body, or from the heart, of Meru <span
id="fr_382"></span>[9](#fn_382).

On the summit of Meru is the vast city of Brahmá, extending fourteen
thousand leagues, and renowned in heaven; and around it, in the cardinal
points and the intermediate quarters, are situated the stately cities of
Indra and the other regents of the spheres <span
id="fr_383"></span>[10](#fn_383). The capital of Brahmá

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

is enclosed by the river Ganges, which, issuing from the foot of Vishńu,
and washing the lunar orb, falls here from the skies <span
id="fr_384"></span>[11](#fn_384), and, after encircling the city,
divides into four mighty rivers, flowing in opposite directions. These
rivers are the Śítá, the Alakanandá, the Chakshu, and the Bhadrá. The
first, falling upon the tops of the inferior mountains, on the east side
of Meru, flows over their crests, and passes through the country of
Bhadráśwa to the ocean: the Alakanandá flows south, to the country of
Bhárata, and, dividing into seven rivers on the way, falls into the sea:
the Chakshu falls into the sea, after traversing all the western
mountains, and passing through the country of Ketumála: and the

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bhadrá washes the
country of the Uttara kurus, and empties itself into the northern
ocean <span id="fr_385"></span>[12](#fn_385).

Meru, then, is confined between the mountains Níla and Nishadha (on the
north and south), and between Mályaván and Gandhamádana (on the west and
east <span id="fr_386"></span>[13](#fn_386)): it lies between them like
the pericarp of a lotus. The countries of Bhárata, Ketumála, Bhadráśwa,
and Uttarakuru lie, like leaves of the lotus of the world, exterior to
the boundary mountains. Jat́hara and Devakút́a are two mountain ranges,
running north and south, and connecting the two chains of Nishadha and
Níla. Gandhamádana

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

and Kailása extend, east and west, eighty Yojanas in breadth, from sea
to sea. Nishadha and Páriyátra are the limitative mountains on the west,
stretching, like those on the east, between the Níla and Nishadha
ranges: and the mountains Triśringa and Járudhi are the northern limits
of Meru, extending, east and west, between the two seas <span
id="fr_387"></span>[14](#fn_387). Thus I have repeated to you the
mountains described by great sages as the boundary mountains, situated
in pairs, on each of the four sides of Meru. Those also, which have been
mentioned as the filament mountains (or spurs), Śítánta and the rest,
are exceedingly delightful. The vallies embosomed amongst them are the
favourite resorts of the Siddhas and Chárańas: and there are situated
upon them agreeable forests, and pleasant cities, embellished with the
palaces of Vishńu, Lakshmí, Agni, Súrya, and other deities, and peopled
by celestial spirits; whilst the Yakshas, Rákshasas, Daityas, and
Dánavas pursue their pastimes in the vales. These, in short, are the
regions of Paradise, or Swarga, the seats of the righteous, and where
the wicked do not arrive even after a hundred births.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

In the country of Bhadráśwa, Vishńu resides as Hayasírá (the
horse-headed); in Ketumála, as Varáha (the boar); in Bhárata, as the
tortoise (Kúrma); in Kuru, as the fish (Matsya); in his universal form,
every where; for Hari pervades all places: he, Maitreya, is the
supporter of all things; he is all things. In the eight realms of
Kimpurusha and the rest (or all exclusive of Bhárata) there is no
sorrow, nor weariness, nor anxiety, nor hunger, nor apprehension; their
inhabitants are exempt from all infirmity and pain, and live in
uninterrupted enjoyment for ten or twelve thousand years. Indra never
sends rain upon them, for the earth abounds with water. In those places
there is no distinction of Krita, Treta, or any succession of ages. In
each of these Varshas there are respectively seven principal ranges of
mountains, from which, oh best of Brahmans, hundreds of rivers take
their rise <span id="fr_388"></span>[15](#fn_388).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_374"></span>[166:1](vp059.htm#fr_374) The geography of the
Puráńas occurs in most of these works; and in all the main features, the
seven Dwípas, seven seas, the divisions of Jambu-dwípa, the situation
and extent of Meru, and the subdivisions of Bhárata, is the same. The
Agni and Bráhma are word for word the same with our text; and the Kúrma,
Linga, Matsya, Márkańd́eya, and Váyu present many passages common to them
and the Vishńu, or to one another. The Váyu, as usual, enters most fully
into particulars. The Bhágavata differs in its nomenclature of the
subordinate details from all, and is followed by the Padma. The others
either omit the subject, or advert to it but briefly. The Mahábhárata,
Bhíshma Parva, has an account essentially the same, and many of the
stanzas are common to it and different Puráńas. It does not follow the
same order, and has some peculiarities; one of which is calling
Jambu-dwípa, Sudarśana, such being the name of the Jambu-tree: it is
said also to consist of two portions, called Pippala and Śaśa, which are
reflected in the lunar orb, as in a mirror.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[167:2](vp059.htm#fr_375) The shape of Meru,
according to this description, is that of an inverted cone; and by the
comparison to the seed-cup its form should be circular: but there seems
to be some uncertainty upon this subject amongst the Pauráńics. The
Padma compares its form to the bell-shaped flower of the Dhatura. The
Váyu represents it as having four sides of different colours; or, white
on the east, yellow on the south, black on the west, and red on the
north; but notices also various opinions of the outline of the mountain,
which, according to Atri, had a hundred angles; to Bhrigu, a thousand:
Sávarni calls it octangular; Bháguri, quadrangular; and Varsháyani says
it has a thousand angles: Gálava makes it saucer-shaped; Garga, twisted,
like braided hair; and others maintain that it is circular. The Linga
makes its eastern face of the colour of the ruby; its southern, that of
the lotus; its western, golden; and its northern, coral. The Matsya has
the same colours as the Váyu, and both contain this line:
'Four-coloured, golden, four-cornered lofty:' but the Váyu compares its
summit, in one place, to a saucer; and observes that its circumference
must be thrice its diameter. The Matsya also, rather incompatibly, says
the measurement is that of a circular form, but it is considered
quadrangular. According to the Buddhists of Ceylon, Meru is said to be
of the same diameter throughout. Those of Nepal conceive it to be shaped
like a drum. A translation of the description of Meru and its
surrounding mountains, contained in the Brahmáńd́a, which is the same
exactly as that in the Váyu, occurs in the As. Researches, VIII. 343.
There are some differences in Col. Wilford's version from that which my
MSS. would authorize, but they are not in general of much importance.
Some, no doubt, depend upon variations in the readings of the different
copies: of others, I must question the accuracy.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[167:3](vp059.htm#fr_376) This diminution is
the necessary consequence of the diminished radius of the circle of
Jambu-dwípa, as the mountain ranges recede from the centre.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[168:4](vp059.htm#fr_377) These, being the two
outer Varshas, are said to take the form of a bow; that is, they are
exteriorly convex, being segments of the circle.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[168:5](vp059.htm#fr_378) The whole diameter of
Jambu-dwípa has been said to be 100,000 Yojanas. This is thus divided
from north to south: Ilávrita, in the centre, extends each way 9000,
making 18000: Meru itself; at the base, is 16000: the six Varshas, at
9000 each, are equal to 54000: and the six ranges, at 2000 each, are
12000: and 18 + 16 + 54 + 12 = 100. From east to west the Varshas are of
the extent necessary to occupy the space of the circle.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[168:6](vp059.htm#fr_379) The Bhágavata and
Padma call these Mandara, Merumandara, Supárśwa, and Kumuda.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[168:7](vp059.htm#fr_380) Nauclea Kadamba,
Eugenia Jambu, Ficus religiosa, and F. Indica. The Bhágavata substitutes
a mango-tree for the Pípal; placing it on Mandara, the Jambu on
Merumandara, the Kadamba on Supárśwa, and the Vat́a on Kumuda.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[169:8](vp059.htm#fr_381) The Bhágavata
substitutes Sarvatobhadra for the Gandhamádana forest; and calls the
lakes, lakes of milk, honey, treacle, and sweet water.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[169:9](vp059.htm#fr_382) The Váyu gives these
names, and many more; and describes at great length forests, lakes, and
cities of gods and demigods upon these fabulous mountains, or in the
valleys between them. (As. Res. VIII. 354.)

<span id="fn_383"></span>[169:10](vp059.htm#fr_383) The Lokapálas, or
eight deities in that character, Indra, Yama, Varuńa, Kuvera, Vivaswat,
Soma, Agni, and Váyu. Other cities of the gods are placed upon the
spurs, or filament mountains, by the Váyu; or that of Brahmá on
Hemaśringa, of Śankara on Kálanjara, of Garud́a on Vaikanka, and of
Kuvera on Kailása. Himavat is also specified by the same work as the
scene of Śiva's penance, and marriage with Umá; of his assuming the form
of a Kiráta, or forester: of the birth of Kártikeya, in the Śara forest;
and of his dividing the mountain Krauncha with his spear. This latter
legend, having been somewhat misunderstood by Col. Wilford, is made the
theme of one of his fanciful verifications. "Here, he (the author of the
Váyu) says, in the forest of Śankha, was born Shad́ánana or Kártikeya,
Mars with six faces. Here he wished or formed the resolution of going to
the mountains of Crauncha, Germany, part of Poland, &c. to rest and
recreate himself after his fatigues in the wars of the gods with the
giants. There, in the skirts of the mountains <span id="page_170">p.
170</span> of Crauncha, he flung his sword; the very same which Attila,
in the fifth century, asserted he had found under a clod of earth. It
was placed in his tomb, where it is probably to be found." As. Res.
VIII. 364. The text of which this is in part a representation is,
\#\#\#. The legend here alluded to is told at length in the Vámana
Puráńa. Mahishásura, flying from the battle, in which Táraka had been
slain by Kártikeya, took refuge in a cave in the Krauncha mountain. A
dispute arising between Kártikeya and Indra, as to their respective
prowess, they determined to decide the question by circumambulating the
mountain; the palm to be given to him who should first go round it.
Disagreeing about the result, they appealed to the mountain, who untruly
decided in favour of Indra. Kártikeya, to punish his injustice, hurled
his lance at the mountain Krauncha, and pierced at once it and the demon
Mahisha. Another division of Krauncha is ascribed to Paraśuráma. Megha
Dúta, v.59. Krauncha is also sometimes considered to be the name of an
Asura, killed by Kártikeya; but this is perhaps some misapprehension of
the Pauráńic legend by the grammarians, springing out of the synonymes
of Kártikeya, Kraunchári, Kraunchadárańa, &c., implying the foe or
destroyer of Krauncha, occurring in the Amara, and other Koshas.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[170:11](vp059.htm#fr_384) The Bhágavata is
more circumstantial. The river flowed over the great toe of Vishńu's
left foot, which had previously, as he lifted it up, made a fissure in
the shell of the mundane egg, and thus gave entrance to the heavenly
stream. The Váyu merely brings it from the lunar orb, and takes no
notice of Vishńu's interposition. In a different passage it describes
the detention of Gangá amidst the tresses of Śiva, in order to correct
her arrogance, until the divinity was moved by the penance and prayers
of king Bhagíratha to set her free. The Mahábhárata represents Śiva's
bearing the river for a hundred years on his head, merely to prevent its
falling too suddenly on the mountains.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[171:12](vp059.htm#fr_385) Although the Váyu
has this account, it subsequently inserts another, which is that also of
the Matsya and Padma. In this the Ganges, after escaping from Śiva, is
said to have formed seven streams; the Naliní, Hládiní, and Pavaní going
to the east; the Chakshu, Śítá, and Sindhu to the wrest; and the
Bhágirathí to the south. The Mahábhárata calls them Vaswaukasára,
Naliní, Pavaní, Gangá, Śítá, Sindhu, and Jambunadí. The more usual
legend, however, is the first, and it offers some trace of actual
geography. Mr. Faber, indeed, thinks that Meru, with the surrounding
Varsha of Ilávrita, and its four rivers, is a representation of the
garden of Eden. (Pagan Idolatry, I. 315.) However this may he, it seems
not unlikely to have originated in some imperfect account of four great
rivers flowing from the Himálaya, and the high lands north of that
range, towards the cardinal points: the Bhadrá, to the north,
representing the Oby of Siberia; and the Śítá, the river of China, or
Hoangho. The Alakanandá is well known as a main branch of the Ganges,
near its source; and the Chakshus is very possibly, as Major Wilford
supposed, the Oxus. (As. Res. VIII. 309.) The printed copy of the
Bhágavata, and the MS. Padma, read Bankshu; but the former is the more
usual reading. It is said, in the Váyu, of Ketumála, through which this
river runs, that it is peopled by various races of barbarians.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[171:13](vp059.htm#fr_386) The text applies the
latter name so variously as to cause confusion: it is given to one of
the four buttresses of Meru, that on the south; to one of the filament
mountains, on the west; to a range of boundary mountains, on the south;
and to the Varsha of Ketumála: here another mountain range is intended,
or a chain running north and south, upon the east of Ilávrita,
connecting the Níla and Nishadha ranges. Accordingly the Váyu states it
to be 34000 Yojanas in extent; that is, the diameter of Meru 16000, and
the breadth of Ilávrita on each side of it, or together 18000. A similar
range, that of Mályaván, bounds Ilávrita on the west. It was probably to
avoid the confusion arising from similarity of. nomenclature, that the
author of the Bhágavata substituted different names for Gandhamádana in
the other instances, calling the buttress, as we have seen, Merumandara;
the southern forest, Sarvatobhadra; and the filament mountain, Hansa;
restricting the term Gandhamádana to the eastern range: a correction, it
may be remarked, corroborative of a subsequent date.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[172:14](vp059.htm#fr_387) These eight
mountains are similarly enumerated in the Bhágavata and Váyu, but no
mention is made in them of any seas, and it is clear that the eastern
and western oceans cannot be intended, as the mountains Mályavat and
Gandhamádana intervene. The commentator would seem to understand
'Arńava' as signifying 'mountain,' as he says between the seas means
within Mályavat and Gandhamádana; The Bhágavata describes these eight
mountains as circling Meru for 18000 Yojanas in each direction, leaving,
according to the commentator, an interval of a thousand Yojanas between
them and the base of the central mountain, and being 2000 high, and as
many broad: they may be understood to be the exterior barriers of Meru,
separating it from Ilávritta. The names of these mountains, according to
the Bhágavata, are Jat́hara and Devakút́a on the east, Pavana and
Parípátra on the west, Triśringa and Makara on the north, and Kailása
and Karavíra on the south. Without believing it possible to verify the
position of these different creations of the legendary geography of the
Hindus, it can scarcely admit of doubt that the scheme was suggested by
imperfect acquaintance with the actual character of the country, by the
four great ranges, the Altai, Muztag or Thian-shan, Ku-en-nun, and
Himálaya, which traverse central Asia in a direction from east to west,
with a greater or less inclination from north to south, which are
connected or divided by many lofty transverse ridges, which enclose
several large lakes, and which give rise to the great rivers that water
Siberia, China, Tartary, and Hindustan. (Humboldt on the mountains of
Central Asia, and Ritter. Geogr. Asia.)

<span id="fn_388"></span>[173:15](vp059.htm#fr_388) More ample details
of the Varshas are given in the Mahábhárata, Bhágavata, Padma, Váyu,
Kúrma, Linga, Matsya, and Márkańd́eya Puráńas; but they are of an
entirely fanciful nature. Thus of the Ketumála-varsha it is said, in the
Váyu, the men are black, the women of the complexion of the lotus; the
people subsist upon the fruit of the Panasa or jack-tree, and live for
ten thousand years, exempt from sorrow or sickness: seven Kula or main
ranges of mountains in it are named, and a long list of countries and
rivers is added, none of which can be identified with any actually
existing, except perhaps the greats river the Suchakshus, the Amu or
Oxus. According to the Bhágavata, Vishńu is worshipped as Kámadeva in
Ketumála. The Váyu says the object of adoration there is Íśwara, the son
of Brahmá. Similar circumstances are asserted of the other Varshas. See
also As. Res. VIII. 352.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](vp060)
