[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp056)  [Next](vp058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

### CHAP. XXII.

Dominion over different provinces of creation assigned to different
beings. Universality of Vishńu. Four varieties of spiritual
contemplation. Two conditions of spirit. The perceptible attributes of
Vishńu types of his imperceptible properties. Vishńu every thing. Merit
of hearing the first book of the Vishńu Puráńa.

WHEN Prithu was installed in the government of the earth, the great
father of the spheres established sovereignties in other parts of the
creation. Soma was appointed monarch of the stars and planets, of
Brahmans and of plants, of sacrifices and of penance. Vaisravańa was
made king over kings; and Varuńa, over the waters. Vishńu was the chief
of the Ádityas; Pávaka, of the Vasus; Daksha, of the patriarchs; Vásava,
of the winds. To Prahláda was assigned dominion over the Daityas and
Dánavas; and Yama, the king of justice, was appointed the monarch of the
Manes (Pitris). Airávata was made the king of elephants; Garud́a, of
birds; Indra, of the gods. Uchchaiśravas was the chief of horses;
Vrishabha, of kine. Śesha became the snake-king; the lion, the monarch
of the beasts; and the sovereign of the trees was the holy
fig-tree <span id="fr_353"></span>[1](#fn_353). Having thus fixed the
limits of each authority, the great progenitor Brahmá stationed rulers
for the protection of the different quarters of the world: he made
Sudhanwan, the son of the patriarch Viraja, the regent of the east;
Sankhapáda, the son of the patriarch Kardama, of the south; the immortal
Ketumat, the son of Rajas, regent of the west; and Hirańyaroman, the son
of the patriarch Parjanya, regent of the north <span
id="fr_354"></span>[2](#fn_354). By these the whole earth, with its
seven continents and its

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

cities, is to the present day vigilantly protected, according to their
several limits.

All these monarchs, and whatever others may be invested with authority
by the mighty Vishńu, as instruments for the preservation of the world;
all the kings who have been, and all who shall be; are all, most worthy
Brahman, but portions of the universal Vishńu. The rulers of the gods,
the rulers of the Daityas, the rulers of the Dánavas, and the rulers of
all malignant spirits; the chief amongst beasts, amongst birds, amongst
men, amongst serpents; the best of trees, of mountains, of planets;
either those that now are, or that shall hereafter be, the most exalted
of their kind; are but portions of the universal Vishńu. The power of
protecting created things, the preservation of the world, resides with
no other than Hari, the lord of all. He is the creator, who creates the
world; he, the eternal, preserves it in its existence; and he, the
destroyer, destroys it; invested severally with the attributes of
foulness, goodness, and gloom. By a fourfold manifestation does
Janárddana operate in creation, preservation, and destruction. In one
portion, as Brahmá, the invisible assumes a visible form; in another
portion he, as Maríchi and the rest, is the progenitor of all creatures;
his third portion is time; his fourth is all beings: and thus he becomes
quadruple in creation, invested with the quality of passion. In the
preservation of the world he is, in one portion, Vishńu; in another
portion he is Manu and the other patriarchs; he is time in a third; and
all beings in a fourth portion: and thus, endowed with the property of
goodness, Purushottama preserves the world. When he assumes the property
of darkness, at the end of all things, the unborn deity becomes in one
portion Rudra; in another, the destroying fire; in a third, time; and in
a fourth, all beings: and thus, in a quadruple form, he is the destroyer
of the world. This, Brahman, is the fourfold condition of the deity at
all seasons.

Brahmá, Daksha, time, and all creatures are the four energies of Hari,
which are the causes of creation. Vishńu, Manu and the rest, time, and
all creatures are the four energies of Vishńu, which are the causes of
duration. Rudra, the destroying fire, time, and all creatures

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

are the four energies of Janárddana that are exerted for universal
dissolution. In the beginning and the duration of the world, until the
period of its end, creation is the work of Brahmá, the patriarchs, and
living animals. Brahmá creates in the beginning; then the patriarchs
beget progeny; and then animals incessantly multiply their kinds: but
Brahmá is not the active agent in creation, independent of time; neither
are the patriarchs, nor living animals. So, in the periods of creation
and of dissolution, the four portions of the god of gods are equally
essential. Whatever, oh Brahman, is engendered by any living being, the
body of Hari is cooperative in the birth of that being; so whatever
destroys any existing thing, movable or stationary, at any time, is the
destroying form of Janárddana as Rudra. Thus Janárddana is the creator,
the preserver, and the destroyer of the whole world--being threefold--in
the several seasons of creation, preservation, and destruction,
according to his assumption of the three qualities: but his highest
glory <span id="fr_355"></span>[3](#fn_355) is detached from all
qualities; for the fourfold essence of the supreme spirit is composed of
true wisdom, pervades all things, is only to be appreciated by itself,
and admits of no similitude.

MAITREYA.--But, Muni, describe to me fully the four varieties of the
condition of Brahma, and what is the supreme condition <span
id="fr_356"></span>[4](#fn_356).

PARÁŚARA.--That, Maitreya, which is the cause of a thing is called the
means of effecting it; and that which it is the desire of the soul to
accomplish is the thing to be effected. The operations of the Yogi who
is desirous of liberation, as suppression of breath and the like, are
his means: the end is the supreme Brahma, whence he returns to the world
no more. Essentially connected with, and dependant upon, the means
employed for emancipation by the Yogi, is discriminative knowledge; and
this is the first variety of the condition of Brahma <span
id="fr_357"></span>[5](#fn_357). The second

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

sort is the knowledge that is to be acquired by the Yogi whose end is
escape from suffering, or eternal felicity. The third kind is the
ascertainment of the identity of the end and the means, the rejection of
the notion of duality. The last kind is the removal of whatever
differences may have been conceived by the three first varieties of
knowledge, and the consequent contemplation of the true essence of soul.
The supreme condition of Vishńu, who is one with wisdom, is the
knowledge of truth; which requires no exercise; which is not to be
taught; which is internally diffused; which is unequalled; the object of
which is self-illumination; which is simply existent, and is not to be
defined; which is tranquil, fearless, pure; which is not the theme of
reasoning; which stands in need of no support <span
id="fr_358"></span>[6](#fn_358). Those Yogis who, by the annihilation of
ignorance, are resolved into this fourfold Brahma, lose the seminal
property, and can no longer germinate in the ploughed field of worldly
existence. This is the supreme condition, that is called Vishńu,
perfect,

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

perpetual, universal, undecaying, entire, and uniform: and the Yogi who
attains this supreme spirit (Brahma) returns not to life again; for
there he is freed from the distinction of virtue and vice, from
suffering, and from soil.

There are two states of this Brahma; one with, and one without shape;
one perishable, and one imperishable; which are inherent in all beings.
The imperishable is the supreme being; the perishable is all the world.
The blaze of fire burning on one spot diffuses light and heat around; so
the world is nothing more than the manifested energy of the supreme
Brahma: and inasmuch, Maitreya, as the light and heat are stronger or
feebler as we are near to the fire, or far off from it, so the energy of
the supreme is more or less intense in the beings that are less or more
remote from him. Brahma, Vishńu, and Śiva are the most powerful energies
of god; next to them are the inferior deities, then the attendant
spirits, then men, then animals, birds, insects, vegetables; each
becoming more and more feeble as they are farther from their primitive
source. In this way, illustrious Brahman, this whole world, although in
essence imperishable and eternal, appears and disappears, as if it was
subject to birth and death.

The supreme condition of Brahma, which is meditated by the Yogis in the
commencement of their abstraction, as invested with form, is Vishńu,
composed of all the divine energies, and the essence of Brahma, with
whom the mystic union that is sought, and which is accompanied by
suitable elements, is effected <span id="fr_359"></span>[7](#fn_359) by
the devotee whose whole mind is addressed to that object. This Hari, who
is the most immediate of all the energies of Brahma, is his embodied
shape, composed entirely of his essence; and in him therefore is the
whole world interwoven; and from him, and in him, is the universe; and
he, the supreme lord of all, comprising all that is perishable and
imperishable, bears upon him all material and spiritual existence,
identified in nature with his ornaments and weapons.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

MAITREYA.--Tell me in what manner Vishńu bears the whole world, abiding
in his nature, characterised by ornaments and weapons.

PARÁŚARA.--Having offered salutation to the mighty and indescribable
Vishńu, I repeat to you what was formerly related to me by Vaśisht́ha.
The glorious Hari wears the pure soul of the world, undefiled, and void
of qualities, as the Kaustubha gem. The chief principle of things
(Pradhána) is seated on the eternal, as the Srivatsa mark. Intellect
abides in Mádhava, in the form of his mace. The lord (Íśwara) supports
egotism (Ahankára) in its twofold division, into elements and organs of
sense, in the emblems of his conch-shell and his bow. In his hand Vishńu
holds, in the form of his discus, the mind, whose thoughts (like the
weapon) fly swifter than the winds. The necklace of the deity
Vaijayantí, composed of five precious gems <span
id="fr_360"></span>[8](#fn_360), is the aggregate of the five elemental
rudiments. Janárddana bears, in his numerous shafts, the faculties both
of action and of perception. The bright sword of Achyuta is holy wisdom,
concealed at some seasons in the scabbard of ignorance. In this manner
soul, nature, intellect, egotism, the elements, the senses, mind,
ignorance, and wisdom, are all assembled in the person of Hrishikeśa.
Hari, in a delusive form, embodies the shapeless elements of the world,
as his weapons and his ornaments, for the salvation of mankind <span
id="fr_361"></span>[9](#fn_361). Puńd́arikáksha, the lord of all, assumes
nature, with all its products, soul and all the world. All that is
wisdom, all that is ignorance, all that is, all that is not, all that is
everlasting, is centred in the destroyer of Madhu, the lord of all
creatures. The supreme, eternal Hari is time, with its divisions of
seconds, minutes, days, months, seasons, and years: he is the seven
worlds, the earth, the sky, heaven, the world of patriarchs,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

of sages, of saints, of truth: whose form is all worlds; first-born
before all the first-born; the supporter of all beings, himself
self-sustained: who exists in manifold forms, as gods, men, and animals;
and is thence the sovereign lord of all, eternal: whose shape is all
visible things; who is without shape or form: who is celebrated in the
Vedanta as the Rich, Yajush, Sáma, and Atharva Vedas, inspired history,
and sacred science. The Vedas, and their divisions; the institutes of
Manu and other lawgivers; traditional scriptures, and religious
manuals <span id="fr_362"></span>[10](#fn_362); poems, and all that is
said or sung; are the body of the mighty Vishńu, assuming the form of
sound. All kinds of substances, with or without shape, here or
elsewhere, are the body of Vishńu. I am Hari. All that I behold is
Janárddana; cause and effect are from none other than him. The man who
knows these truths shall never again experience the afflictions of
worldly existence.

Thus, Brahman, has the first portion of this Puráńa been duly revealed
to you: listening to which, expiates all offences. The man who hears
this Puráńa obtains the fruit of bathing in the Pushkara lake <span
id="fr_363"></span>[11](#fn_363) for twelve years, in the month of
Kártik. The gods bestow upon him who hears this work the dignity of a
divine sage, of a patriarch, or of a spirit of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_353"></span>[153:1](vp057.htm#fr_353) These are similarly
enumerated in the Váyu, Bráhma, Padma, Bhágavata, &c., with some
additions; as, Agni, king of the Pitris; Váyu, of the Gandharbas;
Súlapáni (Śiva), of the Bhútas; Kuvera, of riches, and of the Yakshas;
Vásuki, of the Nágas; Takshaka, of serpents; Chitraratha, of the
Gandharbas; Kámadeva, of the Apsarasas; Viprachitti, of the Dánavas;
Ráhu, of meteors; Parjanya, of clouds; Samvatsara, of times and seasons;
Samudra, of rivers; Himavat, of mountains, &c.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[153:2](vp057.htm#fr_354) We have already had
occasion to notice the descent of these Lokapálas, as specified in the
Váyu P.; and it is evident, although the Vishńu does not supply a
connected series of generations, yet that both accounts are derived from
a common source.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[155:3](vp057.htm#fr_355) Vibhúti, superhuman
or divine power or dignity.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[155:4](vp057.htm#fr_356) The question,
according to the commentator, implies a doubt how the supreme being, who
is without qualities, can be subject to specific variety, or to
existence in divided and different conditions.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[155:5](vp057.htm#fr_357) Of Brahmabhúta; of
him who, or that which, becomes identified with the supreme spirit,
which is the same respectively with absolute wisdom, Jnána, and
discriminative wisdom, Vijnána; leading to felicity, or the condition of
Brahma, expressed by the words, <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> Sat
chit ánandam, 'entire tranquillity of mind,' or 'internal enjoyment:'
the same also with the combination of wisdom and tranquillity, which the
devotee believes to exist in Adwaita, 'non- duality,' or unity of god
and himself: and finally, the same with the aggregate of these three
processes, or the conviction that spirit is one, universal, and the
same.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[156:6](vp057.htm#fr_358) The epithets of
Jnyána, 'wisdom,' here employed, are taken from the Yoga philosophy.
'Requires no exercise,' Nirvyápára, is explained, 'without the practice
of abstract contemplation,' &c. . 'Not to be taught,' Anákhyeyam; 'not
capable of being enjoined.' 'Internally diffused,' Vyáptimátram, means
'mental identification of individual with universal spirit' . The phrase
translated 'the object of which is self-illumination,' is explained
\#\#\#. 'Simply existent' is said to mean, 'being unmodified by the
accidents of happiness,' &c.; consequently it is not to be defined . So
the Yoga Pradípa explains Samádhi, or contemplation, to be the entire
occupation of the thoughts by the idea of Brahma, without any effort of
the mind. It is the entire abandonment of the faculties to one
all-engrossing notion. 'Tranquil,' Praśántam, is, 'being void of
passion,' &c. 'Fearless; not dreading agitation or perplexity by ideas
of duality. 'Pure;' undisturbed by external objects. 'Not the theme of
reasoning'; that is, 'not to be ascertained by logical deduction.'
'Stands in no need of support'; not resting or depending upon
perceptible objects.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[157:7](vp057.htm#fr_359) The great Yoga is
produced. This great Yoga, or union, is to have its relation or
dependance, which is Vishńu; and its seed, or mystical ejaculations; and
to be accompanied with Mantras and silent repetitions, or Japa.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[158:8](vp057.htm#fr_360) Or of pearl, ruby,
emerald, sapphire, and diamond.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[158:9](vp057.htm#fr_361) We have in the text a
representation of one mode of Dhyána, or contemplation, in which the
conception of a thing is attempted to be rendered more definite by
thinking upon its types; or in which, at least, the thoughts are more
readily concentrated by being addressed to a sensible emblem, instead of
an abstract truth. Thus the Yogi here says to himself, "I meditate upon
the jewel on Vishńu's brow, as the soul of the world; upon the gem on
his breast, as the first principle of things;" and so on: and thus
through a perceptible substance proceeds to an imperceptible idea.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[159:10](vp057.htm#fr_362) Ákhyánáni is said to
denote the Puráńas, and Anuváda the Kalpa, Sara, and similar works,
containing directions for supplementary rites.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[159:11](vp057.htm#fr_363) The celebrated lake
Pokher in Ajmer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](vp058)
