[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp062)  [Next](vp064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

### CHAP. V.

Of the seven regions of Pátála, below the earth. Nárada's praises of
Pátála. Account of the serpent Śesha. First teacher of astronomy and
astrology.

PARÁŚARA.--The extent of the surface of the earth has been thus
described to you, Maitreya. Its depth below the surface is said to be
seventy thousand Yojanas, each of the seven regions of Pátála extending
downwards ten thousand. These seven, worthy Muni, are called Atala,
Vitala, Nitala, Gabhastimat, Mahátala, Sutala, and Pátála <span
id="fr_649"></span>[1](#fn_649). Their soil is severally white, black,
purple, yellow, sandy, stony, and of gold. They are embellished with
magnificent palaces, in which dwell numerous Dánavas, Daityas, Yakshas,
and great snake-gods. The Muni Nárada, after his return from those
regions to the skies <span id="fr_650"></span>[2](#fn_650), declared
amongst the celestials that Pátála was much more delightful than Indra's
heaven. "What," exclaimed the sage, "can be compared to Pátála, where
the Nágas are decorated with brilliant and beautiful and
pleasure-shedding jewels? who will not delight in Pátála, where the
lovely daughters of the Daityas and Dánavas wander about, fascinating
even the most austere; where the rays of the sun diffuse light, and not
heat, by day; and where the moon shines by night for illumination, not
for cold; where the sons of Danu, happy in the enjoyment of delicious
viands and strong wines, know not how time passes? There are beautiful
groves and streams and lakes where the lotus blows; and the skies are
resonant with the Koïl's song. Splendid ornaments, fragrant perfumes,
rich unguents, the blended music of the lute and pipe and tabor; these
and many other enjoyments are the common portion of the Dánavas,
Daityas, and snake-gods, who inhabit the regions of Pátála <span
id="fr_651"></span>[3](#fn_651)."

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

Below the seven Pátálas is the form of Vishńu, proceeding from the
quality of darkness, which is called Śesha <span
id="fr_652"></span>[4](#fn_652), the excellencies of which neither
Daityas nor Dánavas can fully enumerate. This being is called Ananta by
the spirits of heaven, and is worshipped by sages and by gods. He has a
thousand heads, which are embellished with the pure and visible mystic
sign <span id="fr_653"></span>[5](#fn_653): and the thousand jewels in
his crests give light to all the regions. For the benefit of the world
he: deprives the Asuras of their strength. He rolls his eyes fiercely,
as if intoxicated. He wears a single ear-ring, a diadem, and wreath upon
each brow; and shines like the white mountains topped with flame. He is
clothed in purple raiment, and ornamented with a white necklace, and
looks like another Kailása, with the heavenly Gangá flowing down its
precipices. In one hand he holds a plough, and in the other a pestle;
and he is attended by Váruńí (the goddess of wine), who is his own
embodied radiance. From his mouths, at the end of the Kalpa, proceeds
the venomed fire that, impersonated as Rudra, who is one with Balaráma,
devours the three worlds.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

Śesha bears the entire world, like a diadem, upon his head, and he is
the foundation on which the seven Pátálas rest. His power, his glory,
his form, his nature, cannot be described, cannot he comprehended by the
gods themselves. Who shall recount his might, who wears this whole
earth, like a garland of flowers, tinged of a purple dye by the radiance
of the jewels of his crests. When Ananta, his eyes rolling with
intoxication, yawns, then earth, with all her woods, and mountains, and
seas, and rivers, trembles. Gandharbas, Apsarasas, Siddhas, Kinnaras,
Uragas, and Chárańas are unequal to hymn his praises, and therefore he
is called the infinite (Ananta), the imperishable. The sandal paste,
that is ground by the wives of the snake-gods, is scattered abroad by
his breath, and sheds perfume around the skies.

The ancient sage Garga <span id="fr_654"></span>[6](#fn_654), having
propitiated Śesha, acquired from him a knowledge of the principles of
astronomical science, of the planets, and of the good and evil denoted
by the aspects of the heavens.

The earth, sustained upon the head of this sovereign serpent, supports
in its turn the garland of the spheres, along with their inhabitants,
men, demons, and gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_649"></span>[204:1](vp063.htm#fr_649) In the Bhágavata and
Padma P. they are named Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talátala, Mahátala,
Rasátala, and Pátála. The Váyu has Rasátala, Sutala, Vitala, Gabhastala,
Mahátala, Śrítala, and Pátála. There are other varieties.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[204:2](vp063.htm#fr_650) Allusion is here
made, perhaps, to the description given in the Mahábhárata, Udyoga
Parva, p. 218, of Nárada's and Mátali's visit to Pátála. Several of the
particulars there given are not noticed in the Puráńas.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[204:3](vp063.htm#fr_651) There is no very
copious description of Pátála in any of the Puráńas. The most
circumstantial are those of the Váyu and Bhágavata: the latter has been
repeated, <span id="page_205">p. 205</span> with some additions, in the
first chapters of the Pátála Khańd́a of the Padma Puráńa. The Mahábhárata
and these two Puráńas assign different divisions to the Dánavas,
Daityas, and Nágas; placing Vásuki and the other Nága chiefs in the
lowest: but the Váyu has the cities of the principal Daityas and Nágas
in each; as in the first, those of the Daitya Namuchi, and serpent
Kálíya; in the second, of Hayagríva and Takshaka; in the third, of
Prahláda and Hemaka; in the fourth, of Kálanemi and Vainateya; in the
fifth, of Hirańyáksha and Kirmíra; and in the sixth, of Pulomán and
Vásuki: besides others. Bali the Daitya is the sovereign of Pátála,
according to this authority. The Mahábhárata places Vásuki in Rasátala,
and calls his capital Bhogavatí. The regions of Pátála, and their
inhabitants, are oftener the subjects of profane, than of sacred
fiction, in consequence of the frequent intercourse between mortal
heroes and the Nága-kanyás, or serpent-nymphs. A considerable section of
the Vrihat Kathá, the Súryaprabhá lambaka, consists of adventures and
events in this subterraneous world.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[205:4](vp063.htm#fr_652) Śesha is commonly
described as being in this situation: he is the great serpent on which
Vishńu sleeps during the intervals of creation, and upon whose numerous
heads the world is supported. The Puráńas, making him one with Balaráma
or Sankarshana, who is an impersonation or incarnation of Śesha, blend
the attributes of the serpent and the demigod in their description.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[205:5](vp063.htm#fr_653) With the Swastika, a
particular diagram used in mystical ceremonies.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[206:6](vp063.htm#fr_654) One of the oldest
writers on astronomy amongst the Hindus. According to Mr. Bentley, his
Sanhitá dates 548 B. C. (Ancient Astron. of the Hindus, p. 59.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](vp064)
