[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp068)  [Next](vp070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### CHAP. XI.

The sun distinct from, and supreme over, the attendants on his car:
identical with the three Vedas and with Vishńu: his functions.

MAITREYA.--You have related to me, holy preceptor, the seven classes of
beings who are ever present in the solar orb, and are the causes of heat
and cold: you have also described to me their individual functions,
sustained by the energy of Vishńu: but you have not told me the duty of
the sun himself; for if, as you say, the seven beings in his sphere are
the causes of heat, cold, and rain, how can it be also true, as you have
before mentioned, that rain proceeds from the sun? or how can it be
asserted that the sun rises, reaches the meridian, or sets, if these
situations be the act of the collective seven.

PARÁŚARA.--I will explain to you, Maitreya, the subject of your inquiry.
The sun, though identified with the seven beings in his orb, is distinct
from them as their chief. The entire and mighty energy of Vishńu, which
is called the three Vedas, or Rich, Yajush, and Sáman, is that which
enlightens the world, and destroys its iniquity. It is that also which,
during the continuance of things, is present as Vishńu, actively engaged
in the preservation of the universe, and abiding as the three Vedas
within the sun. The solar luminary, that appears in every month, is
nothing else than that very supreme energy of Vishńu which is composed
of the three Vedas, influencing the motions of the planet; for the
Richas (the hymns of the Rig-veda) shine in the morning, the prayers of
the Yajush at noon, and the Vrihadrathantara and other portions of the
Sáman in the afternoon. This triple impersonation of Vishńu,
distinguished by the titles of the three Vedas, is the energy of Vishńu,
which influences the positions of the sun <span
id="fr_715"></span>[1](#fn_715).

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

But this triple energy of Vishńu is not limited to the sun alone, for
Brahmá, Purusha (Vishńu), and Rudra are also made up of the same triform
essence. In creation it is Brahmá, consisting of the Rig-veda in
preservation it is Vishńu, composed of the Yajur-veda; and in
destruction Rudra, formed of the Sáma-veda, the utterance of which is
consequently inauspicious <span id="fr_716"></span>[2](#fn_716).

Thus the energy of Vishńu, made up of the three Vedas, and derived from
the property of goodness, presides in the sun, along with the seven
beings belonging to it; and through the presence of this power the
planet shines with intense radiance, dispersing with his beams the
darkness that spreads over the whole world: and hence the Munis praise
him, the quiristers and nymphs of heaven sing and dance before him, and
fierce spirits and holy sages attend upon his path. Vishńu, in the form
of his active energy, never either rises or sets, and is at once the.
sevenfold sun and distinct from it. In the same manner as a man
approaching a mirror, placed upon a stand, beholds in it his own image,
so the energy (or reflection) of Vishńu is never disjoined (from the
sun's car, which is the stand of the mirror), but remains month by month
in the sun (as in the mirror), which is there stationed.

The sovereign sun, oh Brahman, the cause of day and night, perpetually
revolves, affording delight to the gods, to the progenitors, and to
mankind. Cherished by the Sushumna ray of the sun <span
id="fr_717"></span>[3](#fn_717), the moon is fed to the full in the
fortnight of its growth; and in the fortnight of its wane the ambrosia
of its substance is perpetually drunk by the immortals, until the last
day of the half month, when the two remaining digits are drunk by the
progenitors: hence these two orders of beings are nourished

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

by the sun. The moisture of the earth, which the sun attracts by his
rays, he again parts with for the fertilization of the grain, and the
nutriment of all terrestrial creatures; and consequently the sun is the
source of subsistence to every class of living things, to gods,
progenitors, mankind, and the rest. The sun, Maitreya, satisfies the
wants of the gods for a fortnight (at a time); those of the progenitors
once a month; and those of men and other animals daily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_715"></span>[235:1](vp069.htm#fr_715) This mysticism
originates in part apparently from a misapprehension of metaphorical
texts of the Vedas, such as 'that triple knowledge (the Vedas)
*shines*;' and 'the hymns of the Rich *shine*;' and in part from the
symbolization of the light of religious truth by the light of the <span
id="page_236">p. 236</span> sun, as in the Gáyatri, [p.
222](vp066.htm#page_222). n. [13](vp066.htm#fn_692). To these are to be
added the sectarial notions of the Vaishńavas.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[236:2](vp069.htm#fr_716) The formulæ of the
Sáma-veda are not to be used along with those of the Rich and Yajush, at
sacrifices in general.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[236:3](vp069.htm#fr_717) The Váyu, Linga, and
Matsya P. specify several of the rays of the sun from amongst the many
thousands which they say proceed from him. Of these, seven are
principal, termed Sushumna, Harikeśa, Viśwakarman, Viśwakárya,
Sampadvasu, Arvavasu, and Swaráj, supplying heat severally to the moon,
the stars, and to Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](vp070)
