[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp069)  [Next](vp071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

### CHAP. XII.

Description of the moon: his chariot, horses, and course: fed by the
sun: drained periodically of ambrosia by the progenitors and gods. The
chariots and horses of the planets: kept in their orbits by aerial
chains attached to Dhruva. Typical members of the planetary porpoise.
Vásudeva alone real.

PARÁŚARA.--The chariot of the moon has three wheels, and is drawn by ten
horses, of the whiteness of the Jasmine, five on the right half (of the
yoke), five on the left. It moves along the asterisms, divided into
ranges, as before described; and, in like manner as the sun, is upheld
by Dhruva; the cords that fasten it being tightened or relaxed in the
same way, as it proceeds on its course. The horses of the moon, sprung
from the bosom of the waters <span id="fr_718"></span>[1](#fn_718), drag
the car for a whole Kalpa, as do the coursers of the sun. The radiant
sun supplies the moon, when reduced by the draughts of the gods to a
single Kalá, with a single ray; and in the same proportion as the ruler
of the night was exhausted by the celestials, it is replenished by the
sun, the plunderer of the waters: for the gods, Maitreya, drink the
nectar and ambrosia accumulated in the moon during half the month, and
from this being their food they are immortal. Thirty-six thousand three
hundred and thirty-three divinities drink the lunar ambrosia. When two
digits remain, the moon enters the orbit of the sun, and abides in the
ray called Amá; whence the period is termed Amávásya. In that orbit the
moon is immersed for a day and night in the water; thence it enters the
branches and shoots of the trees; and thence goes to the sun.
Consequently any one who cuts off a branch, or casts down a leaf, when
the moon is in the trees (the day of its rising invisible), is guilty of
Brahmanicide. When the remaining portion of the moon consists of but a
fifteenth part, the progenitors approach it in the afternoon, and drink
the last portion, that sacred Kali which is composed of ambrosia, and
contained in the two digits of

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

the form of the moon <span id="fr_719"></span>[2](#fn_719). Having drank
the nectar effused by the lunar rays on the day of conjunction, the
progenitors are satisfied, and remain tranquil for the ensuing month.
These progenitors (or Pitris) are of three classes, termed Saumyas,
Varhishadas, and Agnishwáttas <span id="fr_720"></span>[3](#fn_720). In
this manner the moon, with its cooling rays, nourishes the gods in the
light fortnight, the Pitris in the dark fortnight; vegetables, with the
cool nectary aqueous atoms it sheds upon them; and through their
developement it sustains men, animals, and insects; at the same time
gratifying them by its radiance.

The chariot of the son of Chandra, Budha or Mercury, is composed of the
elementary substances air and fire, and is drawn by eight bay horses of
the speed of the wind. The vast car of Śukra (Venus) is drawn by
earth-born horses <span id="fr_721"></span>[4](#fn_721), is equipped
with a protecting fender and a floor, armed with arrows, and decorated
by a banner. The splendid car of

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bhauma (Mars) is
of gold, of an octagonal shape, drawn by eight horses, of a ruby red,
sprung from fire. Vrihaspati (Jupiter), in a golden car drawn by eight
pale-coloured horses, travels from sign to sign in the period of a year:
and the tardy-paced Śani (Saturn) moves slowly along in a car drawn by
piebald steeds. Eight black horses draw the dusky chariot of Ráhu, and
once harnessed are attached to it for ever. On the Parvas (the nodes, or
lunar and solar eclipses), Ráhu directs his course from the sun to the
moon, and back again from the moon to the sun <span
id="fr_722"></span>[5](#fn_722). The eight horses of the chariot of Ketu
are of the dusky red colour of Lac, or of the smoke of burning straw.

I have thus described to you, Maitreya, the chariots of the nine
planets, all which are fastened to Dhruva by aerial cords. The orbs of
all the planets, asterisms, and stars are attached to Dhruva, and travel
accordingly in their proper orbits, being kept in their places by their
respective bands of air. As many as are the stars, so many are the
chains of air that secure them to Dhruva; and as they turn round, they
cause the pole-star also to revolve. In the same manner as the oil-man
himself, going round, causes the spindle to revolve, so the planets
travel round, suspended by cords of air, which are circling round a
(whirling) centre. The air, which is called Pravaha, is so termed
because it bears along the planets, which turn round, like a disc of
fire, driven by the aerial wheel <span id="fr_723"></span>[6](#fn_723).

The celestial porpoise, in which Dhruva is fixed, has been mentioned,
but you shall hear its constituent parts in more detail, as it is of
great efficacy; for the view of it at night expiates whatever sin has
been committed during the day; and those who behold it live as many
years as there are stars in it, in the sky, or even more. Uttánapáda is
to be considered as its upper jaw; Sacrifice as its lower. Dharma is
situated on its brow; Náráyańa in its heart. The Áswins are its two fore
feet;

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

and Varuńa and Áryamat its two hinder legs. Samvatsara is its sexual
organ; Mitra its organ of excretion. Agni, Mahendra, Kaśyapa, and
Dhruva, in succession, are placed in its tail; which four stars in this
constellation never set <span id="fr_724"></span>[7](#fn_724).

I have now described to you the disposition of the earth and of the
stars; of the insular zones, with their oceans and mountains, their
Varshas or regions, and their inhabitants: their nature has also been
explained, but it may be briefly recapitulated.

From the waters, which are the body of Vishńu, was produced the
lotus-shaped earth, with its seas and mountains. The stars are Vishńu;
the worlds are Vishńu; forests, mountains, regions, rivers, oceans are
Vishńu: he is all that is, all that is not. He, the lord, is identical
with knowledge, through which he is all forms, but is not a substance.
You must conceive therefore mountains, oceans, and all the diversities
of earth and the rest, are the illusions of the apprehension. When
knowledge is pure, real, universal, independent of works, and exempt
from defect, then the varieties of substance, which are the fruit of the
tree of desire, cease to exist in matter. For what is substance? Where
is the thing that is devoid of beginning, middle, and end, of one
uniform

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

nature? How can reality be predicated of that which is subject to
change, and reassumes no more its original character? Earth is
fabricated into a jar; the jar is divided into two halves; the halves
are broken to pieces; the pieces become dust; the dust becomes atoms.
Say, is this reality? though it be so understood by man, whose
self-knowledge is impeded by his own acts. Hence, Brahman, except
discriminative knowledge, there is nothing any where, or at any time,
that is real. Such knowledge is but one, although it appear manifold, as
diversified by the various consequences of our own acts. Knowledge
perfect, pure, free from pain, and detaching the affections from all
that causes affliction; knowledge single and eternal--is the supreme
Vásudeva, besides whom there is nothing. The truth has been thus
communicated to you by me; that knowledge which is truth; from which all
that differs is false. That information, however, which is of a temporal
and worldly nature has also been imparted to you; the sacrifice, the
victim, the fire, the priests, the acid juice, the gods, the desire for
heaven, the path pursued by acts of devotion and the rest, and the
worlds that are their consequences, have been displayed to you. In that
universe which I have described, he for ever migrates who is subject to
the influence of works; but he who knows Vásudeva to be eternal,
immutable, and of one unchanging, universal form, may continue to
perform them <span id="fr_725"></span>[8](#fn_725), as thereby he enters
into the deity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_718"></span>[238:1](vp070.htm#fr_718) So is the car,
according to the Váyu. The orb of the moon, according to the Linga, is
only congealed water; as that of the sun is concentrated heat.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[239:2](vp070.htm#fr_719) There is some
indistinctness in this account, from a confusion between the division of
the moon's surface into sixteen Kalás or phases, and its
[apportionment](errata.htm#9), as a receptacle of nectar, into fifteen
Kalás or digits, corresponding to the fifteen lunations, on the fourteen
of which, during the wane, the gods drink the amrita, and on the
fifteenth of which the Pitris exhaust the remaining portion. The
correspondence of the two distinctions appears to be intended by the
text, which terms the remaining digit or Kalá, composed of Amrita, the
form or superficies of the two Kalás. This, the commentator observes, is
the fifteenth, not the sixteenth. The commentator on our text observes,
also, that the passage is sometimes read \#\#\#, Lava meaning 'a
moment,' 'a short period.' The Matsya and Váyu express the parallel
passage so as to avoid all perplexity, by specifying the two Kalás as
referring to time, and leaving the number of nectareous Kalás undefined:
'They, the Pitris, drink the remaining Kalás in two Kalás of time.' Col.
Warren explains Kalá, or, as he 'writes it, Calá, in one of its
acceptations, 'the phases of the moon, of which the Hindus count
sixteen.' Kála Sankalita, 359. So the Bhágavata terms the moon, and the
Váyu, after noticing the exhaustion of the fifteenth portion on the day
of conjunction, states the recurrence of increase or wane to take place
in the sixteenth phase at the beginning of each fortnight.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[239:3](vp070.htm#fr_720) The Váyu and Matsya
add a fourth class, the Kavyas; identifying them with the cyclic years;
the Saumyas and Agnishwáttas with the seasons; and the Varhishads with
the months.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[239:4](vp070.htm#fr_721) The Váyu makes the
horses ten in number, each of a different colour.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[240:5](vp070.htm#fr_722) The Matsya, Linga,
and Váyu add the circumstance of Ráhu's taking up, on these occasions,
the circular shadow of the earth.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[240:6](vp070.htm#fr_723) The different bands
of air attached to Dhruva are, according to the commentator, varieties
of the Pravaha wind; but the Kúrma and Linga enumerate seven principal
winds which perform this function, of which the Pravaha is one.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[241:7](vp070.htm#fr_724) The four last are
therefore stars in the circle of perpetual apparition. One of these is
the pole-star; and in Kaśyapa we have a verbal affinity to Cassiopeia.
The Śiśumára, or porpoise, is rather a singular symbol for the celestial
sphere; but it is not more preposterous than many of the constellations
of classical fiction. The component parts of it are much more fully
detailed, in the Bhágavata, whence it has been translated by Sir Wm.
Jones. As. Res. II. 402. The Bhágavata, however, mystifies the
description, and says it is nothing more than the Dhárańá, or symbol, by
which Vishńu, identified with the starry firmament, is to be impressed
upon the mind in meditation. The account of the planetary system is, as
usual, fullest in the Váyu, with which the Linga and Matsya nearly
agree. The Bhavishya is nearly, also, the same. They all contain many
passages common to them and to our text. In the Agni, Padma, Kúrma,
Bráhma, Garud́a, and Vámana descriptions occur which enter into less
detail than the Vishńu, and often use its words, or passages found in
other Puráńas. Many intimations of a similar system occur in the Vedas,
but whether the whole is to be found in those works is yet to be
ascertained. It must not be considered as a correct representation of
the philosophical astronomy of the Hindus, being mixed up with, and
deformed by, mythological and symbolical fiction.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[242:8](vp070.htm#fr_725) Only, however, as far
as they are intended to propitiate Vishńu, and not for any other
purpose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](vp071)
