[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp090)  [Next](vp092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

### CHAP. XVII.

Of heretics, or those who reject the authority of the Vedas: their
origin, as described by Vaśisht́ha to Bhíshma: the gods, defeated by the
Daityas, praise Vishńu: an illusory being, or Buddha, produced from his
body.

PARÁŚARA.--Thus, in former days, spake the holy Aurva to the illustrious
monarch Sagara, when he inquired concerning the usages proper to be
practised by mankind; and thus I have explained to you the whole of
those observances against which no one ought to transgress.

MAITREYA.--You have told me, venerable sir, that an ancestral rite is
not to be looked upon by certain persons, amongst whom you mentioned
such as were apostates. I am desirous to learn whom you intended by that
appellation; what practices bestow such a title upon a man; and what is
the character of the individual to whom you alluded.

PARÁŚARA.--The Rig, Yajur, and Sáma Vedas constitute the triple covering
of the several castes, and the sinner who throws this off is said to be
naked (or apostate). The three Vedas are the raiment of all the orders
of men, and when that is discarded they are left bare <span
id="fr_902"></span>[1](#fn_902). On this subject hear what I heard my
grandfather, the pious Vaśisht́ha, relate to the magnanimous Bhíshma:

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

There was formerly a battle between the gods and demons, for the period
of a divine year, in which the gods were defeated by the demons under
the command of Hráda <span id="fr_903"></span>[2](#fn_903). The
discomfited deities fled to the northern shore of the milky ocean, where
engaging in religious penance they thus prayed to Vishńu: "May the first
of beings, the divine Vishńu, be pleased with the words that we are
about to address to him, in order to propitiate the lord of all worlds;
from which mighty cause all created things have originated, and into
whom they shall again dissolve! Who is able to declare his praise? We,
who have been put to shame by the triumph of our foes, will glorify
thee, although thy true power and might be not within the reach of
words. Thou art earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, crude matter, and
primeval soul: all this elementary creation, with or without visible
form, is thy body; all, from Brahmá to a stock, diversified by place and
time. Glory to thee, who art Brahmá, thy first form, evolved from the
lotus springing from thy navel, for the purpose of creation. Glory to
thee, who art Indra, the sun, Rudra, the Vasus, fire, the winds, and
even also ourselves. Glory to they, Govinda, who art all demons, whose
essence is arrogance and want of discrimination, unchecked by patience
or self-control. Glory to thee, who art the Yakshas, whose nature is
charmed with sounds, and whose frivolous hearts perfect knowledge cannot
pervade. Glory to thee, who art all fiends, that walk by night, sprung
from the quality of darkness, fierce, fraudulent, and cruel. Glory to
thee, Janárddana, who art that piety which is the instrument of
recompensing the virtues of those who abide in heaven. Glory to thee,
who art one with the saints, whose perfect nature is ever blessed, and
traverses unobstructed all permeable elements. Glory to thee, who art
one with the serpent race, double-tongued, impetuous, cruel, insatiate
of enjoyment, and abounding with wealth. Glory to thee, who art one with
the Rishis, whose nature is free from sin or defect, and is identified
with wisdom and tranquillity. Glory to thee, oh lotus-eyed, who art one
with time, the form that devours, without remorse, all created things at
the termination of the Kalpa. Glory to thee, who art Rudra, the being
that

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

dances with delight after he has swallowed up all things, the gods and
the rest, without distinction. Glory to thee, Janárddana, who art man,
the agent in developing the results of that activity which proceeds from
the quality of foulness. Glory to thee, who art brute animals, the
universal spirit that tends to perversity, which proceeds from the
quality of darkness, and is encumbered with the twenty-eight kinds of
obstructions <span id="fr_904"></span>[3](#fn_904). Glory to thee, who
art that chief spirit which is diversified in the vegetable world, and
which, as the essence of sacrifice, is the instrument of accomplishing
the perfection of the universe. Glory to thee, who art every thing, and
whose primeval form is the objects of perception, and heaven, and
animals, and men, and gods. Glory to thee, who art the cause of causes,
the supreme spirit; who art distinct from us and all beings composed of
intelligence and matter and the like, and with whose primeval nature
there is nothing that can be compared. We bow to thee, O lord, who hast
neither colour, nor extension, nor bulk, nor any predicable qualities;
and whose essence, purest of the pure, is appreciable only by holy
sages. We bow to thee, in the nature of Brahma, untreated, undecaying;
who art in our bodies, and in all other bodies, and in all living
creatures; and besides whom there is nothing else. We glorify that
Vásudeva, the sovereign lord of all, who is without soil, the seed of
all things, exempt from dissolution, unborn, eternal, being in essence
the supreme condition of spirit, and in substance the whole of this
universe."

Upon the conclusion of their prayers, the gods beheld the sovereign
deity Hari, armed with the shell, the discus, and the mace, riding on
Garud́a. Prostrating themselves before him, they addressed him, and said,
"Have compassion upon us, O lord, and protect us, who have come to thee
for succour from the Daityas. They have seized upon the three worlds,
and appropriated the offerings which are our portion, taking care not to
transgress the precepts of the Veda. Although we, as well as they, are
parts of thee, of whom all beings consist, yet we behold the world
impressed by the ignorance of unity, with the belief of its separate
existence. Engaged in the duties of their respective orders,

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

and following the paths prescribed by holy writ, practising also
religious penance, it is impossible for us to destroy them. Do thou,
whose wisdom is immeasurable, instruct us in some device by which we may
be able to exterminate the enemies of the gods."

When the mighty Vishńu heard their request, he emitted from his body an
illusory form, which he gave to the gods, and thus spake This deceptive
vision shall wholly beguile the Daityas, so that, being led astray from
the path of the Vedas, they may be put to death; for all gods, demons,
or others, who shall be opposed to the authority of the Veda, shall
perish by my might, whilst exercised for the preservation of the world.
Go then, and fear not: let this delusive vision precede you; it shall
this day be of great service unto you, oh gods!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_902"></span>[334:1](vp091.htm#fr_902) This idea is
expressed in nearly the same terms in the Váyu P.: 'The three Vedas are
the covering of all beings, and they who throw it off through delusion
are called Nagnas, naked.' The notion is probably original with neither
of the Puráńas, and the metaphorical sense of the term is not that in
which it was first employed; ascetics, whether of the Bauddha or of the
Digambara order of Jains, being literally Nagnas, or going naked. The
qualified application of it, however, was rendered necessary by the same
practice being familiar to ascetics of the orthodox faith. To go naked
was not necessarily a sign of a heretic, and therefore his nudity was
understood to be, rejecting the raiment of holy writ. Thus the Váyu P.
extends the word to all ascetics, including naked Brahmans, who practise
austerities fruitlessly, that is, heretically or hypocritically: 'The
Brahman who unprofitably bears a staff, shaves his head, goes naked,
makes a vow, or mutters prayers, all such persons are called Nagnas and
the like.'

<span id="fn_903"></span>[335:2](vp091.htm#fr_903) A son of
Hirańyakaśipu ([p. 124](vp050.htm#page_124)).

<span id="fn_904"></span>[336:3](vp091.htm#fr_904) See [p.
35](vp039.htm#page_35). n. [5](vp039.htm#fn_171).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](vp092)
