[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp100)  [Next](vp102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

### CHAP. VIII.

Sons of Áyus. Line of Kshatravriddha, or kings of Káśí. Former birth of
Dhanwantarí. Various names of Pratarddana. Greatness of Alarka.

ÁYUS, the eldest son of Purúravas, married the daughter of Ráhu (or
Áráhu), by whom he had five sons, Nahusha, Kshatravriddha <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[1](#fn_1069), Rambha <span
id="fr_1070"></span>[2](#fn_1070), Raji, and Anenas <span
id="fr_1071"></span>[3](#fn_1071).

The son of Kshatravriddha was Suhotra <span
id="fr_1072"></span>[4](#fn_1072), who had three sons, Káśa <span
id="fr_1073"></span>[5](#fn_1073), Leśa <span
id="fr_1074"></span>[6](#fn_1074), and Ghritsamada. The son of the last
was Śaunaka <span id="fr_1075"></span>[7](#fn_1075), who first
established the distinctions of the four castes <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[8](#fn_1076). The son of Káśa was Kaśirájá <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[9](#fn_1077); his son was Dírghatamas <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[10](#fn_1078); his son was Dhanwantari, whose
nature was exempt from human infirmities, and who in every existence had
been master of universal knowledge. In his past life (or when he was
produced by the agitation of the milky sea), Náráyańa had conferred upon
him the boon, that he should subsequently be born in the

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

family of Kásirájá, should compose the eightfold system of medical
science <span id="fr_1079"></span>[11](#fn_1079), and should be
thereafter entitled to a share of offerings made to the gods. The son of
Dhanwantari was Ketumat; his son was Bhímaratha; his son was
Divodása <span id="fr_1080"></span>[12](#fn_1080); his son was
Pratarddana, so

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

named from destroying the race of Bhadraśreńya. He had various other
appellations, as Śatrujit, 'the victor over his foes,' from having
vanquished all his enemies; Vatsa, or 'child,' from his father's
frequently calling him by that name; Ritadhwaja, 'he whose emblem was
truth,' being a great observer of veracity; and Kuvalayáśwa, because he
had a horse (aśwa) called Kuvalaya <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[13](#fn_1081). The son of this prince was Alarka,
of whom this verse is sung in the present day; "For sixty thousand and
sixty hundred years no other youthful monarch except Alarka, reigned
over the earth <span id="fr_1082"></span>[14](#fn_1082)." The son of
Alarka was

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Santati <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[15](#fn_1083); his son was Sunítha; his son was
Suketu; his son was Dharmaketu; his son was Satyaketu; his son was
Vibhu; his son was Suvibhu; his son was Sukumára; his son was
Dhrisht́aketu; his son was Vaińahotra; his son was Bharga; his son was
Bhargabhúmi; from whom also rules for the four castes were
promulgated <span id="fr_1084"></span>[16](#fn_1084). These are the
Káśya

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

princes, or descendants of Káśa <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[17](#fn_1085). We will now enumerate the
descendants of Raji.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[406:1](vp101.htm#fr_1069) Dharmavriddha:
Váyu. Vriddhaśarman: Matsya. Yajnaśarman: Padma.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[406:2](vp101.htm#fr_1070) Darbha: Agni.
Dambha: Padma.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[406:3](vp101.htm#fr_1071) Vipápman: Agni and
Matsya. Vidáman: Padma. The two last authorities proceed no farther with
this line.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[406:4](vp101.htm#fr_1072) Sunahotra: Váyu,
Bráhma.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[406:5](vp101.htm#fr_1073) Káśya: Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[406:6](vp101.htm#fr_1074) Sála: Váyu, Bráhma,
Hari V.: whose son was Ársht́isena, father of Charanta; Váyu: of Kaśyapa;
Bráhma and Hari V.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[406:7](vp101.htm#fr_1075) Here is probably an
error, for the Váyu, Bhágavata, and Bráhma agree in making Śunaka the
son of Ghritsamada, and father of Śaunaka.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[406:8](vp101.htm#fr_1076) The expression is
'The originator or causer of the distinctions (or duties) of the four
castes.' The commentator, however, understands the expression to
signify, that his descendants were of the four castes. So also the Váyu:
'The son of Ghritsamada was Śunaka, whose son was Śaunaka. Brahmans,
Kshatriyas, Vaiśyas, and Śúdras were born in his race; Brahmans by
distinguished deeds.' The existence of but one caste in the age of
purity, however incompatible with the legend which ascribes the origin
of the four tribes to Brahmá, is every where admitted. Their separation
is assigned to different individuals, whether accurately to any one may
be doubted; but the notion indicates that the distinction was of a
social or political character.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[406:9](vp101.htm#fr_1077) Káśiya: Bráhma.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[406:10](vp101.htm#fr_1078) Dírghatapas: Váyu.
Ghritsatamas: Agni. The Bhágavata inserts a Rásht́ra before this prince,
and the Váyu a Dharma after him.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[407:11](vp101.htm#fr_1079) The eight branches
of medical science are, 1. Śalya, extraction of extraneous bodies; 2.
Śaláká, treatment of external organic affections: these two constitute
surgery: 3. Chikitsá, administration of medicines, or medical treatment
in general; 4. Bhútavidyá, treatment of maladies referred to demoniac
possession; 5. Kaumárabhritya, midwifery and management of children; 6.
Agada, alexipharmacy; 7. Rasáyana, alchemical therapeutics; 8.
Bajikarańa, use of aphrodisiacs. Dhanwantari, according to the Brahma
Vaivartta P., was preceded in medical science by Átreya, Bharadwája, and
Charaka: his pupil Śuśruta is the reputed author of a celebrated work
still extant. It seems probable that Káśí or Benares was at an early
period a celebrated school of medicine.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[407:12](vp101.htm#fr_1080) Some rather
curious legends are connected with this prince in the Váyu and Bráhma
Puráńas, and Hari Vanśa, and especially in the Káśí Khańd́a of the Skánda
Puráńa. According to these authorities, Śiva and Párvatí, desirous of
occupying Káśí, which Divodása possessed, sent Nikumbha, one of the
Gańas of the former, to lead the prince to the adoption of Buddhist
doctrines; in consequence of which he was expelled from the sacred city,
and, according to the Váyu, founded another on the banks of the Gomatí.
We have, however, also some singular, though obscure intimations of some
of the political events of this and the succeeding reign. The passage of
the Váyu is, 'The king Divodása, having slain the hundred sons of
Bhadraśreńya, took possession of his kingdom, which was conquered by
that hero. The son of Bhadraśreńya, celebrated by the name of Durdama,
was spared by Divodása, as being an infant. Pratarddana was the son of
Divodása by Drishadvatí; and by that great prince, desirous of
destroying all enmity, (was recovered) that (territory) which had been
seized by that young boy (Durdama).' This is not very explicit, and
something is wanted to complete the sense. The Bráhma P. and Hari V.
tell the story twice over, chiefly in the words of the Váyu, but with
some additions. In ch. 29. we have, first, the first three lines of the
above extract; then comes the story of Benares being deserted; we then
have the two next lines; then follow, 'That prince (Durdama) invading
his patrimonial possessions, the territory which Divodása had seized by
force was recovered by the gallant son of Bhadhraśreńya, Durddama, a
warrior desirous, mighty king, <span id="page_408">p. 408</span> to
effect the destruction of his foes.' Here the victory is ascribed to
Durddama, in opposition to what appears to be the sense of the Váyu, and
what is undoubtedly that of our text, which says that he was called
Pratarddana from destroying the race of Bhadraśreńya, and Śatrujit from
vanquishing all his foes. By Vairasya anta, 'the end of hostility or
enmity,' is obviously not to be understood here, as M. Langlois has
intimated, a friendly pacification, but the end or destruction of all
enemies. In the 32d chapter of the Hari Vanśa we have precisely the same
lines, slightly varied as to their order; but they are preceded by this
verse; 'The city (that on the Gomati), before the existence of Benares,
of Bhadraśreńya, a pious prince of the Yadu race: This verse is not in
the Bráhma P. After giving the rest of the above quotation, except the
last line, the passage proceeds, 'The king called Asht́aratha was the son
of Bhímaratha; and by him, great king, a warrior desirous of destroying
his foes was (the country) recovered, the children (of Durdama) being
infants.' According to the same authority, we are here to understand
Bhímaratha and Asht́aratha as epithets of Divodása and Pratarddana. From
these scanty and ill-digested notices it appears, that Divodása, on
being expelled from Benares, took some city and district on the Gomati
from the family of Bhadraśreńya; that Durdama recovered the country, and
that Pratarddana again conquered it from his descendants. The
alternation concerned apparently only bordering districts, for the
princes of Máhíshmati and of Káśí continue, in both an earlier and a
later series, in undisturbed possession of their capitals and their
power.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[408:13](vp101.htm#fr_1081) The Váyu, Agni,
Bráhma P., and Hari V. interpose two sons of Pratarddana, Garga or
Bharga and Vatsa; and they make Vatsa the father of Alarka, except the
Bráhma, which has Śatrujit and Ritadhwaja as two princes following
Vatsa.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[408:14](vp101.htm#fr_1082) The Váyu, Bráhma,
and Hari V. repeat this stanza, and add that Alarka enjoyed such
protracted existence through the favour of Lopamudrá, and that having
<span id="page_409">p. 409</span> lived till the period at which the
curs upon terminated, he killed the Rákshas Kshemaka, by whom it had
been occupied after it was abandoned by Divodása, and caused the city to
be reinhabited. The Hari V. agrees as usual with the Bráhma, except in
the reading of one or two names. It is to be observed, however, that the
Agni makes the Káśí princes the descendants of Vitatha, the successor of
Bharata. The Bráhma P. and Hari V., determined apparently to be right,
give the list twice over, deriving it in one place from Kshatravriddha,
as in our text, the Váyu, and the Bhágavata; and in another, with the
Agni, from Vitatha. The series of the Bráhma, however, stops with Lauhi,
the son of Alarka, and does not warrant the repetition which the
carelessness of the compiler of the Hari Vanśa has superfluously
inserted.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[409:15](vp101.htm#fr_1083) Several varieties
occur, in the series that follows, as the comparative lists will best
shew:

<div align="center">

|              |              |              |            |
|--------------|--------------|--------------|------------|
| Bhágavata.   | Bráhma.      | Váyu.        | Agni.      |
| Alarka       | Alarka       | Alarka       | Alarka     |
| Santati      | Sannati      | Sannati      | Dharmaketu |
| Sunítha      | Sunítha      | Sunítha      | Vibhu      |
| Suketana     | Kshema       | Suketu       | Sukumára   |
| Dharmaketu   | Ketumat      | Dhrisht́aketu | Satyaketu  |
| Satyaketu    | Suketu       | Veńuhotra    |            |
| Dhrisht́aketu | Dharmaketu   | Gárgya       |            |
| Sukumára     | Satyaketu    | Gargabhúmi   |            |
| Vítihotra    | Vibhu        | Vatsabhúmi   |            |
| Bhárga       | Anartta      |              |            |
| Bhargabhúmi  | Sukumára     |              |            |
|              | Dhrisht́aketu |              |            |
|              | Veńuhotri    |              |            |
|              | Bharga       |              |            |
|              | Vatsabhúmi.  |              |            |

</div>

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[409:16](vp101.htm#fr_1084) Our text is clear
enough, and so is the Bhágavata, but the Váyu, Bráhma, and Hari V.
contain additions of rather doubtful import. The former has, 'The son of
Veńuhotra was the celebrated Gárgya; Gargabhúmi was the son of Gárgya;
and Vatsa, of the wise Vatsa: virtuous Brahmans and Kshatriyas<span
id="page_410">p. 410</span> were the sons of these two.' By the second
Vatsa is perhaps meant Vatsabhúmi; and the purport of the passage is,
that Gárgya (or possibly rather Bharga, one of the sons of Pratarddana)
and Vatsa were the founders of two races (Bhúmi, 'earth,' implying
'source' or founder', who were Kshatriyas by birth, and Brahmans by
profession. The Bráhma and Hari V., apparently misunderstanding this
text, have increased the perplexity. According to them, the son of
Veńuhotra was Bharga; Vatsabhúmi was the son of Vatsa; and Bhargabhúmi
(Bhrigubhúmi, Bráhma) was from Bhárgava. 'These sons of Angiras were
born in the family of Bhrigu, thousands of great might, Brahmans,
Kshatriyas and Vaiśyas.' The commentator has, 'Another son of Vatsa, the
father of Alarka, is described, Vatsabhúmi, &c. From Bhárgava, the
brother of Vatsa. (They were) Angirasas from Gálava belonging to that
family, (and were born) in the family of Bhrigu from the descent of
Viśwámitra.' The interpretation is not very clear, but it authorizes the
notion above expressed, that Vatsa and Bharga, the sons of Pratarddana,
are the founders of two races of Kshatriya-Brahmans.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[410:17](vp101.htm#fr_1085) On the subject of
note [12](#fn_1080). some farther illustration is derivable from the
Mahábhárata, Śánti P. Dána-dharma. Haryaśwa the king of the Káśis,
reigning between the Ganges and the Yamuná, or in the Do-ab, was invaded
and slain by the Haihayas, a race descended, according to this
authority, from Śaryáti, the son of Manu (see p. 358). Sudeva, the son
of Haryaśwa, was also attacked and defeated by the same enemies.
Divodása, his son, built and fortified Benares as a defence against the
Haihayas, but in vain, for they took it, and compelled him to fly. He
sought refuge with Bharadwája, by whose favour he had a son born to him,
Pratardana, who destroyed the Haihayas under their king Vítihavya, and
reestablished the kingdom of Káśí. Vítihavya, through the protection of
Bhrigu, became a Brahman. The Mahábhárata gives a list of his
descendants, which contains several of the names of the Kaśya dynasty of
the text; thus, Ghritsamada is said to be his son, and the two last of
the line are Śunaka and Śaunaka. See n. [7](#fn_1075).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](vp102)
