[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp117)  [Next](vp119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span> <span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

# VISHŃU PURÁŃA.

# BOOK V.

### CHAP. I.

The death of Kansa announced. Earth, oppressed by the Daityas, applies
to the gods. They accompany her to Vishńu, who promises to give her
relief. Kansa imprisons Vasudeva and Devakí. Vishńu's instructions to
Yoganidrá.

MAITREYA. <span id="fr_1438"></span>[1](#fn_1438)--You have related to
me a full account of all the different dynasties of kings, and of their
successive transactions. I wish

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

now to hear a more particular description, holy Rishi, of the portion of
Vishńu <span id="fr_1439"></span>[2](#fn_1439) that came down upon
earth, and was born in the family of Yadu. Tell me also what actions he
performed in his descent, as a part of a part of the supreme, upon the
earth <span id="fr_1440"></span>[3](#fn_1440).

PARÁŚARA.--I will relate to you, Maitreya, the account which you

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

have requested; the birth of a part of a part of Vishńu, and the
benefits which his actions conferred upon the world.

Vasudeva formerly married the daughter of Devaka, the illustrious
Devakí, a maiden of celestial beauty. After their nuptials, Kansa, the
increaser of the race of Bhoja, drove their car as their charioteer. As
they were going along, a voice in the sky, sounding aloud and deep as
thunder, addressed Kansa, and said, "Fool that you are, the eighth child
of the damsel whom you are driving in the car shall take away your
life <span id="fr_1441"></span>[4](#fn_1441)!" On hearing this, Kansa
drew his sword, and was about to put Devakí to death; but Vasudeva
interposed, saying, "Kill not Devakí, great warrior; spare her life, and
I will deliver to you every child that she may bring forth." Appeased by
which promise, and relying on the character of Vasudeva, Kansa desisted
from the attempt.

At that time, Earth, overburdened by her load, repaired to mount Meru to
an assembly of the gods, and addressing the divinities, with Brahmá at
their head, related in piteous accents all her distress. "Agni," said
Earth, "is the progenitor of gold; Súrya, of rays of light <span
id="fr_1442"></span>[5](#fn_1442): the parent and guide of me and of all
spheres is the supreme Náráyańa, who is Brahmá, the lord of the lord of
patriarchs; the eldest of the eldest born; one with minutes and hours;
one with time; having form, though indiscrete. This assemblage of
yourselves, O gods, is but a part of him. The sun, the winds, the
saints, the Rudras, the Vasus, the Aswins, fire, the patriarch creators
of the universe, of whom Atri is the first, all are but forms of the
mighty and inscrutable Vishńu. The Yakshas, Rákshasas, Daityas, spirits
of evil, serpents, and children of Danu, the singers and nymphs of
heaven, are forms of the great spirit, Vishńu. The heavens painted with
planets, constellations, and stars; fire, water, wind, and myself, and
every perceptible thing; the whole universe itself--consists of Vishńu.
The multifarious forms of that manifold being encounter

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

and succeed one another, night and day, like the waves of the sea. At
this present season many demons, of whom Kálanemi is the chief, have
overrun, and continually harrass, the region of mortals. The great Asura
Kálanemi <span id="fr_1443"></span>[6](#fn_1443), that was killed by the
powerful Vishńu, has revived in Kansa, the son of Ugrasena, and many
other mighty demons, more than I can enumerate, as Arisht́a, Dhenuka,
Keśin, Pralamba, Naraka, Sunda, and the fierce Báńa, the son of
Bali <span id="fr_1444"></span>[7](#fn_1444), are born in the palaces of
kings. Countless hosts of proud and powerful spirits, chiefs of the
demon race, assuming celestial forms, now walk the earth; and, unable to
support myself beneath the incumbent load, I come to you for succour.
Illustrious deities, do you so act that I may be relieved from my
burden, lest helpless I sink into the nethermost abyss."

When the gods had heard these complaints of Earth, Brahmá at their
request explained to them how her burden might be lightened.
"Celestials," said Brahmá, "all that Earth has said is undoubtedly true.
I, Mahádeva, and you all, are but Náráyańa; but the impersonations of
his power are for ever mutually fluctuating, and excess or diminution is
indicated by the predominance of the strong, and the depression of the
weak. Come therefore, let us repair to the northern coast of the milky
sea, and having glorified Hari, report to him what we have heard. He,
who is the spirit of all, and of whom the universe consists, constantly,
for the sake of Earth, descends in a small portion of his essence to
establish righteousness below." Accordingly Brahmá, attended by the
gods, went to the milky sea, and there, with minds intent upon him,
praised him whose emblem is Garud́a.

"O thou," said Brahmá, "who art distinct from holy writ <span
id="fr_1445"></span>[8](#fn_1445); whose double nature is twofold
wisdom <span id="fr_1446"></span>[9](#fn_1446), superior and inferior,
and who art the

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

essential end of both; who, alike devoid and possessed of form, art the
twofold Brahma <span id="fr_1447"></span>[10](#fn_1447); smallest of the
least, and largest of the large; all, and knowing all things; that
spirit which is language; that spirit which is supreme; that which is
Brahma, and of which Brahma is composed! Thou art the Rich, the Yajush,
the Sáman, and the Atharvan Vedas. Thou art accentuation, ritual,
signification, metre, and astronomy; history, tradition, grammar,
theology, logic, and law: thou who art inscrutable. Thou art the
doctrine that investigates the distinctions between soul, and life, and
body, and matter endowed with qualities <span
id="fr_1448"></span>[11](#fn_1448); and that doctrine is nothing else
but thy nature inherent in and presiding over it <span
id="fr_1449"></span>[12](#fn_1449). Thou art imperceptible,
indescribable, inconceivable; without name, or colour, or hands, or
feet; pure, eternal, and infinite. Thou hearest without ears, and seest
without eyes. Thou art one and multiform. Thou movest without feet; thou
seizest without hands. Thou knowest all, but art not by all to be
known <span id="fr_1450"></span>[13](#fn_1450). He who beholds thee as
the most subtile of atoms, not substantially existent, puts an end to
ignorance; and final emancipation is the reward of that wise man whose
understanding cherishes nothing other than thee in the form of supreme
delight <span id="fr_1451"></span>[14](#fn_1451). Thou art the common
centre of all <span id="fr_1452"></span>[15](#fn_1452), the protector of
the

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

world; and all beings exist in thee: all that has been, or will be, thou
art. Thou art the atom of atoms; thou art spirit; thou only art distinct
from primeval nature <span id="fr_1453"></span>[16](#fn_1453). Thou, as
the lord of fire in four manifestations <span
id="fr_1454"></span>[17](#fn_1454), givest light and fertility to Earth.
Thou art the eye of all, and wearer of many shapes, and unobstructedly
traversest the three regions of the universe. As fire, though one, is
variously kindled, and, though unchangeable in its essence, is modified
in many ways, so thou, lord, who art one omnipresent form, takest upon
thee all modifications that exist. Thou art one supreme; thou art that
supreme and eternal state which the wise behold with the eye of
knowledge. There is nothing else but thou, O lord; nothing else has been
or will be. Thou art both discrete and indiscrete, universal and
individual, omniscient, all-seeing, omnipotent, possessed of all wisdom
and strength and power. Thou art liable neither to diminution nor
increase; thou art independent and without beginning; thou art the
subjugator of all. Thou art unaffected by weariness, sloth, fear, anger,
or desire. Thou art free from soil, supreme, merciful <span
id="fr_1455"></span>[18](#fn_1455), uniform, undecaying, lord over all,
the stay of all, the fountain of light, imperishable. To thee,
uninvested by material envelopes <span
id="fr_1456"></span>[19](#fn_1456), unexposed to sensible imaginings,
aggregate of elemental substance <span
id="fr_1457"></span>[20](#fn_1457), spirit supreme, be adoration. Thou
assumest a shape, O pervader of the universe, not as the consequence of
virtue or vice, nor from any mixture of the two, but for the sole object
of maintaining piety in the world <span
id="fr_1458"></span>[21](#fn_1458)."

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

The unborn, universal Hari, having heard with his mental ear these
eulogiums, was pleased, and thus spake to Brahmá: "Tell me, Brahmá, what
you and the gods desire: speak boldly, certain of success." Brahmá,
beholding the divine, universal form of Hari, quickly prostrated
himself, and again renewed his praises. "Glory to thee, the
thousand-formed, the thousand-armed, the many-visaged, many-footed; to
thee, the illimitable author of creation, preservation, and destruction;
most subtile of the subtile, most vast of the great: to thee, who art
nature, intellect, and consciousness; and who art other spirit even than
the spiritual root of those principles <span
id="fr_1459"></span>[22](#fn_1459). Do thou shew favour upon us. Behold,
lord, this earth, oppressed by mighty Asuras, and shaken to her mountain
basements, comes to thee, who art her invincible defender, to be
relieved from her burden. Behold me, Indra, the Aswins, Varuńa, and
Yama, the Rudras, the Vasus, the suns, the winds, fire, and all other
celestials, prepared to execute whatever thou shalt will that we shall
do. Do thou, in whom there is no imperfection, O sovereign of the
deities, give thy orders to thy servants: lo, we are ready."

When Brahmá had ended, the supreme lord plucked off two hairs, one white
and one black, and said to the gods, "These my hairs shall descend upon
earth, and shall relieve her of the burden of her distress <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[23](#fn_1460).

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Let all the gods
also, in their own portions, go down to earth, and wage war with the
haughty Asuras, who are there incorporate, and who shall every one of
them be destroyed. Doubt not of this: they shall perish before the
withering glance of mine eyes. This my (black) hair shall be
impersonated in the eighth conception of the wife of Vasudeva, Devakí,
who is like a goddess; and shall slay Kansa, who is the demon Kálanemi."
Thus having spoken, Hari disappeared; and the gods bowing to him, though
invisible, returned to the summit of mount Meru, from whence they
descended upon earth.

The Muni Nárada informed Kansa that the supporter of the earth, Vishńu,
would be the eighth child of Devakí; and his wrath being excited by this
report, he placed both Vasudeva and Devakí in confinement. Agreeably to
his promise, the former delivered to Kansa each infant as soon as it was
born. It is said that these, to the number of six, were the children of
the demon Hirańyakaśipu, who were introduced into the womb of Devakí, at
the command of Vishńu, during the hours of Devakí's repose, by the
goddess Yoganidrá <span id="fr_1461"></span>[24](#fn_1461), the great
illusory energy of Vishńu, by whom, as utter ignorance, the whole world
is beguiled. To her Vishńu said, "Go, Nidrá, to the nether regions, and
by my command conduct successively six of their princes to be conceived
of Devakí. When these shall have been put to death by Kansa, the seventh
conception shall be formed of a portion of Śesha, who is a part of me;
and this you shall transfer, before the time of birth, to Rohińí,
another wife of Vasudeva, who resides at Gokula. The report shall run,
that Devakí miscarries, through the anxiety of imprisonment, and dread
of the Rájá of the Bhojas. From being extracted from his mother's womb,
the child shall be known by the name of Sankarshańa, and he shall be
valiant and strong, and like the peak of the white mountain in

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

bulk and complexion. I will myself become incarnate in the eighth
conception of Devakí; and you shall immediately take a similar character
as the embryo offspring of Yaśodá. In the night of the eighth lunation
of the dark half of the month Nabhas, in the season of the rains, I
shall be born. You shall receive birth on the ninth. Impelled and aided
by my power, Vasudeva shall bear me to the bed of Yaśodá, and you to
that of Devakí. Kansa shall take you, and hold you up to dash you
against a stone; but you shall escape from his grasp into the sky, where
the hundred-eyed Indra shall meet and do homage to you, through
reverence for me, and shall bow before you, and acknowledge you as his
sister. Having slain Sumbha, Nisumbha, and numerous other demons <span
id="fr_1462"></span>[25](#fn_1462), you shall sanctify the earth in many
places <span id="fr_1463"></span>[26](#fn_1463). Thou art wealth,
progeny, fame, patience, heaven and earth, fortitude, modesty,
nutrition, dawn, and every other female (form or property). They who
address thee morning and afternoon with reverence and praise, and call
thee Áryá, Durgá, Vedagarbhá, Ambiká, Bhadrá, Bhadrakálí, Kshemí, or
Kshemankarí, shall receive from my bounty whatever they desire.
Propitiated with offerings of wine and flesh and various viands, thou
shalt bestow upon mankind all their prayers. Through my favour all men
shall ever have faith in thee. Assured of this, go, goddess, and execute
my commands."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[491:1](vp118.htm#fr_1438) The whole of this
book is dedicated to the biography of Krishńa. Many of the Puráńas omit
this subject altogether, or only allude to it occasionally. In others it
is equally prominent. The Bráhma P. gives the story exactly in the same
words as our text: which has the best right to them may be questioned;
but, as it is usually met with, the Bráhma P. is a very heterogeneous
compilation. The Hari Vanśa has a narrative more detailed than that of
the text, with additions and embellishments of its own. The Brahma
Vaivartta throughout celebrates the acts of Krishńa; and one portion of
it, the Krishńa Janma Khańd́a, especially describes his boyhood and
youth. The incidents are the same in general as those in the text, but
they are lost amidst interminable descriptions of Krishńa's sports with
the Gopís and with his mistress Rádhá, a person not noticed elsewhere;
the whole is in a style indicative of a modern origin. The Agni P. and
Padma P. (Uttara Khańd́a) have accounts of Krishńa, but they are mere
summaries, compiled evidently from other works. The principal authority
for the adventures of Krishńa is the Bhágavata, the tenth book of which
is exclusively devoted to him. It is this work which has, no doubt,
mainly extended the worship of Krishńa, as its popularity is evinced by
its having been translated into all the spoken languages of India
professing to have a literature. The Prem-sagar, its Hindi version, is
well known; but there are also translations in Mahratta, Telugu, Tamil,
&c. It does not seem likely, however, that the Vishńu P. has copied the
Bhágavata; for although. its greater conciseness may sometimes look like
abridgment, yet the descriptions are generally of a more simple and
antiquated character. Here, as usual, the <span id="page_492">p.
492</span> Mahábhárata is no doubt the earliest extant authority; but it
is not the earliest, for whilst it omits to narrate most of his personal
adventures unconnected with his alliance with the Páńd́avas, it often
alludes to them, and names repeatedly his capital, his wives, and his
progeny. It also devotes a section, the Mauśala P., to the destruction
of the Yádavas. The story of Krishńa the prince and hero must have been
complete when the Mahábhárata was compiled. It is doubtful, however, if
Krishńa the boy, and his adventures at Vrindávan, were not subsequent
inventions. There are no allusions to them in the poem, of an
unsuspicious nature. The only ones that I have met with are contained in
a speech by Śiśupála, Sabhá P., vol. I. p. 360, in which he reviles
Krishńa; but they may easily have been interpolated. There may be others
scattered through the poem, but I have not observed them.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[492:2](vp118.htm#fr_1439) The notices of
Krishńa's origin and character in various passages of the Mahábhárata
are by no means consistent, and indicate different dates at least. In an
address to him by Arjuna, Vana P., vol. I. p. 436, he is said to have
passed thousands of years in various holy places, engaged in arduous
penances. He is frequently identified with the Rishi Náráyańa, or he and
Arjuna are said to be Nara and Náráyańa. In the Dána-dharma he is
represented as a worshipper of Śiva, and propitiating him and his wife
Umá, and receiving as boons from them wives and children. As a warrior
and prince he is always on the scene; but he is repeatedly called an
Anśa, or portion of Vishńu; whilst in a great number of places he is
identified with Vishńu or Náráyańa, and is consequently 'all things.'
This latter is his character, of course, amongst the Vaishńavas,
agreeably to the text of the Bhágavata: 'Krishńa is the lord (Vishńu)
himself.'

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[492:3](vp118.htm#fr_1440) This is a still
farther diminution of Krishńa's dignity; he is not even a part, but 'a
part of a part,' Anśánśávatára: but this, the commentator maintains, is
to be understood only of his form or condition as man, not of his power,
as it suffered no diminution, either in its primary or secondary state,
as light by suffusion suffers no decrease; and a verse of the Veda is
cited to this effect: 'Though that which is full be taken from what is
full, yet the remainder is undiminished;' 'Krishńa is nevertheless the
very supreme Brahma, though it be a mystery how the supreme should
assume the form of a man.' So the Bhágavata in one passage predicts that
the Para-purusha, Purushottama or Vishńu, will be born visibly in the
dwelling of Vasudeva.

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[493:4](vp118.htm#fr_1441) The Bhágavata tells
the circumstance as in the text. The Hari Vanśa makes Nárada apprise
Kansa of his danger. Nárada's interposition is not mentioned until
afterwards by our authority. Devakí is the cousin of Kansa: see [p.
436](vp107.htm#page_436).

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[493:5](vp118.htm#fr_1442) Agni, or fire,
refines gold, burns away the dross, according to the commentator. The
sun is the lord of the rays of light; or, as the cause of rain and
vegetation, the lord of cattle. The phrase is, \#\#\#.

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[494:6](vp118.htm#fr_1443) According to the
Váyu, Kálanemi or Kayabadha was a son of Virochana, the grandson of
Hirańyakaśipu: his death is described in the Hari Vanśa.

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[494:7](vp118.htm#fr_1444) These appear
subsequently in the narration, and are destroyed by Krishńa.

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[494:8](vp118.htm#fr_1445) Anámnáya; not the
immediate object of the Vedas, which is devotion, not abstraction;
ritual or worship, not knowledge.

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[494:9](vp118.htm#fr_1446) The two kinds of
knowledge are termed Pará, 'supreme,' and Apará, 'other' or
'subordinate;' the first is knowledge of Para Brahma, of spirit
abstractedly considered, perfect knowledge derived from abstraction; the
<span id="page_495">p. 495</span> second is knowledge of Śabda Brahma,
of spirit as described and taught in the Vedas, or their supplementary
branches. The identity of the supreme with both descriptions of holy
knowledge pervades the whole of the address.

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[495:10](vp118.htm#fr_1447) Para Brahma and
Śabda Brahma: see the preceding note.

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[495:11](vp118.htm#fr_1448) The doctrine
alluded to may be either intended generally, or in the several
instances, the discussion of the spiritual soul and living soul, of body
subtile and sensible, and of matter endowed with qualities, reference
may be purposed to the Vedánta, Yoga, and Sánkhya systems.

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[495:12](vp118.htm#fr_1449) That is, as the
Śabda Brahma, the supreme is identical with philosophical doctrines,
being the object, the instigator, and the result.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[495:13](vp118.htm#fr_1450) This is taken from
the Vedas, the original of which is quoted and translated by Sir Win.
Jones: see his Works, XIII. 368. The passage is thus cited by the
commentator on our text: 'Without hand or foot he runs, he grasps;
without eyes he sees; and without ears he hears: he knoweth all that may
be known, and no one knoweth him. Him they call the first great spirit.'

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[495:14](vp118.htm#fr_1451) Varenya rúpa,
explained by Paramánanda múrtti; he whose form or impersonation is
supreme felicity.

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[495:15](vp118.htm#fr_1452) Literally 'navel
of all.' <span id="page_496">p. 496</span> The passage is also read
'Thou art all and the first;' the cause or creator.

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[496:16](vp118.htm#fr_1453) Or the passage is
understood, 'Thou art one subsequently to Prakriti;' that is, thou art
Brahmá, the active will of the supreme, creating forms from rudimental
matter.

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[496:17](vp118.htm#fr_1454) As the three fires
enjoined by the Vedas, and the fire metaphorically of devotion; or
lightnings, solar heat, fire generated artificially, and the fire of
digestion or animal fire; or Vishńu in that character bestows beauty,
vigour, power, and wealth.

<span id="fn_1455"></span>[496:18](vp118.htm#fr_1455) Príta: one copy
has Śánta, 'calm,' 'undisturbed.'

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[496:19](vp118.htm#fr_1456) Beyond the
separate layers or envelopes of elementary substances (see [p.
19](vp036.htm#page_19)); or, according to the Vedánta notions,
uninvested by those grosser sheaths or coverings, derived from food and
the like, by which subtile body is enclosed.

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[496:20](vp118.htm#fr_1457) Mahávibhúti
sansthána. Vibhúti is explained by Prapancha, sensible, material, or
elementary substance, constituting body.

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[496:21](vp118.htm#fr_1458) The passage is
somewhat obscurely expressed, and is differently interpreted; <span
id="page_497">p. 497</span> it is, 'Not from no cause, nor from cause,
nor from cause and no cause.' The term 'no cause' may, the commentator
says, designate fixed prescribed duties, the Nityakarma; 'cause' may
signify occasional sacrifices, the Kámya-karma: neither of these can
form any necessity for Vishńu's descent, as they might of a mere
mortal's being born on the earth: or Kárańa is explained to mean
'obtaining pleasure,' from Ka and Árańa, 'obtaining;' obtaining
happiness, or the cause of it, piety, virtue; and with the negative,
Akárańa, the reverse, pain, the consequence of wickedness. The purport
is clear enough; it is merely meant to state that Vishńu is not subject
to the necessity which is the cause of human birth.

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[497:22](vp118.htm#fr_1459) The term Pradhána,
which is repeated in this passage, is explained in the second place to
mean Pumán, 'soul' or 'spirit.'

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[497:23](vp118.htm#fr_1460) The same account
of the origin of Krishńa is given in the Mahábhárata, Ádi P., vol. I. p.
266. The white hair is impersonated as Balaráma; the black, as Krishńa.
The commentator on our text maintains that this is not to be literally
understood: 'Vishńu did not intend that the two hairs should become
incarnate, but he meant to signify, that, should he send them, they
would be more than sufficient to destroy Kansa and his demons: or the
birth of Ráma and Krishńa was a double illusion, <span id="page_498">p.
498</span> typified by the two hairs.' This seems to be a refinement
upon an older and somewhat undignified account of the origin of Krishńa
and his brother. The commentator on the Mahábhárata argues that they are
to be understood merely as the media by which Devakí and Rohíní
conceived.

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[498:24](vp118.htm#fr_1461) Yoganidrá is the
sleep of devotion or abstraction, the active principle of illusion,
personified, and also termed Máyá and Mahamáyá, also Avidyá or
ignorance. In the Durgá Máhátmya of the Márkańd́eya Puráńa a she appears
as Deví or Durgá, the Śakti or bride of Śiva; but in our text as
Vaishńavi, or the Śakti of Vishńu.

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[499:25](vp118.htm#fr_1462) Allusion is here
made to the exploits of Durgá, as celebrated especially in the Durgá
Máhátmya; and it must be posterior to the date of that or some similar
composition. The passage may be an interpolation, as the Márkańd́eya P.
in general has the appearance of being a more recent compilation than
the Vishńu.

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[499:26](vp118.htm#fr_1463) This refers to the
Pít́ha sthánas, 'fifty-one places,' where, according to the Tantras, the
limbs of Śatí fell, when scattered by her husband Śiva, as he bore her
dead body about, and tore it to pieces, after she had put an end to her
existence at Daksha's sacrifice. This part of the legend seems to be an
addition to the original fable made by the Tantras, as it is not in the
Puráńas (see the story of Daksha's sacrifice). It bears some analogy to
the Egyptian fable of Isis and Osiris. At the Pít́ha sthánas, however, of
Jwálámukhí, Vindhyavásiní, Kálíghát, and others, temples are erected to
the different forms of Deví or Śatí, not to the phallic emblem of
Mahádeva, which, if present, is there as an accessory and embellishment,
not as a principal, and the chief object of worship is a figure of the
goddess; a circumstance in which there is an essential difference
between the temples of Durgá and shrines of Osiris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](vp119)
