[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp122)  [Next](vp124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

### CHAP. VI.

Krishńa overturns a waggon; casts down two trees. The Gopas depart to
Vrindávana. Sports of the boys. Description of the season of the rains.

ON one occasion, whilst Madhusúdana was asleep underneath the waggon, he
cried for the breast, and kicking up his feet he overturned the vehicle,
and all the pots and pans were upset and broken. The cowherds and their
wives, hearing the noise, came exclaiming, "Ah! ah!" and there they
found the child sleeping on his back. "Who could have upset the waggon?"
said the cowherds. "This child," replied some boys, who witnessed the
circumstance; "we saw him," said they, "crying, and kicking the waggon
with his feet, and so it was overturned: no one else had any thing to do
with it." The cowherds were exceedingly astonished at this account; and
Nanda, not knowing what to think, took up the boy; whilst Yaśodá offered
worship to the broken pieces of pots and to the waggon, with curds,
flowers, fruit, and unbruised grain.

The initiatory rites requisite for the two boys were performed by Garga,
who was sent to Gokula by Vasudeva for that purpose: he celebrated them
without the knowledge of the cowherds <span
id="fr_1471"></span>[1](#fn_1471); and the wise sage, eminent amongst
the wise, named the elder of them Ráma, and the other Krishńa. In a
short time they began to crawl about the ground, supporting themselves
on their hands and knees, and creeping every where, often amidst ashes
and filth. Neither Rohińí nor Yaśodá was able to prevent them from
getting into the cowpens, or amongst the calves, where they amused
themselves by pulling their tails. As they disregarded the prohibitions
of Yaśodá, and rambled about together constantly, she became angry, and
taking up a stick, followed them, and threatened the dark-complexioned
Krishńa with a whipping. Fastening a cord round his waist, she tied him
to the wooden mortar <span id="fr_1472"></span>[2](#fn_1472), and being
in

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

a great passion, she said to him, "Now, you naughty boy, get away from
hence if you can." She then went about her domestic affairs. As soon as
she had departed, the lotus-eyed Krishńa, endeavouring to extricate
himself, pulled the mortar after him to the space between two Arjuna
trees that grew near together: having dragged the mortar between these
trees, it became wedged awry there, and as Krishńa pulled it through, it
pulled down the trunks of the trees. Hearing the crackling noise, the
people of Vraja came to see what was the matter, and there they beheld
the two large trees, with shattered stems and broken branches, prostrate
on the ground, with the child fixed between them, with a rope round his
belly, laughing, and shewing his white little teeth, just budded. It is
hence that Krishńa is called Dámodara, from the binding of the rope
(dáma) round his belly (udara) <span id="fr_1473"></span>[3](#fn_1473).
The elders of the cowherds, with Nanda at their head, looked upon these
circumstances with alarm, considering them as of evil omen. "We cannot
remain in this place," said they; "let us go to some other part of the
forest; for here many evil signs threaten us with destruction; the death
of Pútaná, the upsetting of the waggon, and the fall of the trees
without their being blown down by the wind. Let us depart hence without
delay, and go to Vrindávana, where terrestrial prodigies may no more
disturb us."

Having thus resolved, the inhabitants of Vraja communicated their
intention to their families, and desired them to move without delay.
Accordingly they set off with their waggons and their cattle, driving
before them their bulls and cows and calves; the fragments of their
household stores they threw away, and in an instant Vraja was overspread
with flights of crows. Vrindávana was chosen by Krishńa, whom acts do
not affect, for the sake of providing for the nourishment of the

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

kine; for there in the hottest season the new grass springs up as
verdantly as in the rains. Having repaired, then, from Vraja to
Vrindávana, the inhabitants of the former drew up their waggons in the
form of a crescent <span id="fr_1474"></span>[4](#fn_1474).

As the two boys, Ráma and Dámodara, grew up, they were ever together in
the same place, and engaged in the same boyish sports. They made
themselves crests of the peacocks' plumes, and garlands of forest
flowers, and musical instruments of leaves and reeds, or played upon the
pipes used by the cowherds: their hair was trimmed like the wings of the
crow <span id="fr_1475"></span>[5](#fn_1475), and they resembled two
young princes, portions of the deity of war: they were robust, and they
roamed about, always laughing and playing, sometimes with each other,
sometimes with other boys; driving along with the young cowherds the
calves to pasture. Thus the two guardians of the world were keepers of
cattle, until they had attained seven years of age, in the cow-pens of
Vrindavan.

Then came on the season of the rains, when the atmosphere laboured with
accumulated clouds, and the quarters of the horizon were blended into
one by the driving showers. The waters of the rivers rose, and
overflowed their banks, and spread beyond all bounds, like the minds of
the weak and wicked transported beyond restraint by sudden prosperity.
The pure radiance of the moon was obscured by heavy vapours, as the
lessons of holy writ are darkened by the arrogant scoffs of fools (and
unbelievers). The bow of Indra held its place in the heavens all
unstrung, like a worthless man elevated by an injudicious prince to
honour. The white line of storks appeared upon the back of the cloud, in
such contrast as the bright conduct of a man of respectability opposes
to the behaviour of a scoundrel. The ever-fitful lightning, in its new
alliance with the sky, was like the friendship of a profligate for a man

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

of worth. Overgrown by the spreading grain, the paths were indistinctly
traced, like the speech of the ignorant, that conveys no positive
meaning.

At this time Krishńa and Ráma, accompanied by the cow-boys, traversed
the forests, that echoed with the hum of bees and the peacock's cry.
Sometimes they sang in chorus, or danced together; sometimes they sought
shelter from the cold beneath the trees; sometimes they decorated
themselves with flowery garlands, sometimes with peacocks' feathers;
sometimes they stained themselves of various hues with the minerals of
the mountain; sometimes weary they reposed on beds of leaves, and
sometimes imitated in mirth the muttering of the thundercloud; sometimes
they excited their juvenile associates to sing, and sometimes they
mimicked the cry of the peacock with their pipes. In this manner
participating in various feelings and emotions, and affectionately
attached to each other, they wandered, sporting and happy, through the
wood. At eveningtide came Krishńa and Balaráma, like two cow-boys, along
with the cows and the cowherds. At eveningtide the two immortals, having
come to the cow-pens, joined heartily in whatever sports amused the sons
of the herdsmen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[508:1](vp123.htm#fr_1471) The Bhágavata
describes Garga's interview with Nanda, and the inducements of the
latter to keep the former's celebration of the Sanskáras, or initiatory
rites of the two boys, secret from the Gopas. Garga there describes
himself as the Purdhit, or family priest, of the Yádavas.

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[508:2](vp123.htm#fr_1472) The Ulúkhala, or
mortar is a large <span id="page_509">p. 509</span> wooden bowl on a
solid stand of timber, both cut out of one piece; the pestle is also of
wood; and they are used chiefly for bruising or threshing unwinnowed
corn, and separating the chaff from the grain. As important agents in
household economy, they are regarded as sacred, and even hymned in the
Vedas.

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[509:3](vp123.htm#fr_1473) Our text, and that
of the Hari Vanśa, take no notice of the legend of Nalakuvera and
Mańigríva, sons of Kuvera, who, according to the Bhágavata, had been
metamorphosed, through a curse of Nárada, into these two trees, and for
whose liberation this feat of Krishńa was intended.

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[510:4](vp123.htm#fr_1474) The Hari Vanśa, not
satisfied with the prodigies which had alarmed the cowherds, adds
another, not found, it is believed, any where else. The emigration,
according to that work, originates, not with the Gopas, but the two
boys, who wish to go to Vrindávana, and in order to compel the removal,
Krishńa converts the hairs of his body into hundreds of wolves, who so
harass and alarm the inhabitants of Vraja, that they determine to
abandon their homes.

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[510:5](vp123.htm#fr_1475) The Káka-paksha, or
crow's wing, implies the hair left on each side of the head, the top
being shaved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](vp124)
