[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp127)  [Next](vp129.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

### CHAP. XI.

Indra, offended by the loss of his offerings, causes heavy rain to
deluge Gokula. Krishńa holds up the mountain Govarddhana to shelter the
cowherds and their cattle.

INDRA, being thus disappointed of his offerings, was exceedingly angry,
and thus addressed a cohort of his attendant clouds, called Samvarttaka:
"Ho, clouds," he said, "hear my words, and without delay execute what I
command. The insensate cowherd Nanda, assisted by his fellows, has
withheld the usual offerings to us, relying upon the protection of
Krishńa. Now, therefore, afflict the cattle, that are their sustenance,
and whence their occupation is derived, with rain and wind. Mounted upon
my elephant, as vast as a mountain peak, I will give you aid in
strengthening the tempest." When Indra ceased, the clouds, obedient to
his commands, came down, in a fearful storm of rain and wind, to destroy
the cattle. In an instant the earth, the points of the horizon, and the
sky, were all blended into one by the heavy and incessant shower. The
clouds roared aloud, as if in terror of the lightning's scourge, and
poured down uninterrupted torrents. The whole earth was enveloped in
impenetrable darkness by the thick and volumed clouds; and above, below,
and on every side, the world was water. The cattle, pelted by the storm,
shrunk cowering into the smallest size, or gave up their breath: some
covered their calves with their flanks, and some beheld their young ones
carried away by the flood. The calves, trembling in the wind, looked
piteously at their mothers, or implored in low moans, as it were, the
succour of Krishńa. Hari, beholding all Gokula agitated with alarm,
cowherds, cowherdesses, and cattle all in a state of consternation, thus
reflected: "This is the work of Mahendra, in resentment of the
prevention of his sacrifice, and it is incumbent on me to defend this
station of herdsmen. I will lift up this spacious mountain from its
stony base, and hold it up, as a large umbrella, over the cow-pens."
Having thus determined, Krishńa immediately plucked up the mountain
Govarddhana, and held it aloft with one hand in sport, saying to the
herdsmen, "Lo the mountain

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

is on high; enter beneath it quickly, and it will shelter you from the
storm: here you will be secure and at your ease in places defended from
the wind: enter without delay, and fear not that the mountain will
fall." Upon this, all the people, with their herds, and their waggons
and goods, and the Gopís, distressed by the rain, repaired to the
shelter of the mountain, which Krishńa held steadily over their heads;
and Krishńa, as he supported the mountain, was contemplated by the
dwellers of Vraja with joy and wonder; and, as their eyes opened wide
with astonishment and pleasure, the Gopas and Gopís sang his praise. For
seven days and nights did the vast clouds sent by Indra rain upon the
Gokula of Nanda to destroy its inhabitants, but they were protected by
the elevation of the mountain; and the slayer of Bala, Indra, being
foiled in his purpose, commanded the clouds to cease. The threats of
Indra having been fruitless, and the heavens clear, all Gokula came
forth from its shelter, and returned to its own abode. Then Krishńa, in
the sight of the surprised inhabitants of the forests, restored the
great mountain Govarddhana to its original site <span
id="fr_1490"></span>[1](#fn_1490.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[527:1](vp128.htm#fr_1490.md) It seems not
unlikely that this legend has some reference to the caves or cavern
temples in various parts of India. A remarkable representation of it
occurs upon the sculptured rocks of Mahabalipur. It is related much to
the same purport in the Bhágavata, &c. Śiśupála, ridiculing the exploit,
asserts that Govarddhana was nothing more than an ant hill.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](vp129.md)
