[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp119)  [Next](vp121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

### CHAP. III.

Birth of Krishńa: conveyed by Vasudeva to Mathurá, and exchanged with
the new-born daughter of Yaśodá. Kansa attempts to destroy the latter,
who becomes Yoganidrá.

THUS eulogized by the gods, Devakí bore in her womb the lotus-eyed
deity, the protector of the world. The sun of Achyuta rose in the dawn
of Devakí to cause the lotus petal of the universe to expand. On the day
of his birth the quarters of the horizon were irradiate with joy, as if
moonlight was diffused over the whole earth. The virtuous experienced
new delight, the strong winds were hushed, and the rivers glided
tranquilly, when Janárddana was about to be born. The seas with their
own melodious murmurings made the music, whilst the spirits and the
nymphs of heaven danced and sang: the gods, walking the sky, showered
down flowers upon the earth, and the holy fires glowed with a mild and
gentle flame. At midnight, when the supporter of all was about to be
born, the clouds emitted low pleasing sounds, and poured down rain of
flowers.

As soon as Ánakadundubhi beheld the child, of the complexion of the
lotus leaves, having four arms, and the mystic mark Śrívatsa on his
breast, he addressed him in terms of love and reverence, and represented
the fears he entertained of Kansa. "Thou art born," said Vasudeva, "O
sovereign god of gods, bearer of the shell, the discus, and the mace;
but now in mercy withhold this thy celestial form, for Kansa will
assuredly put me to death when he knows that thou hast descended in my
dwelling." Devakí also exclaimed, "God of gods, who art all things, who
comprisest all the regions of the world in thy person, and who by thine
illusion hast assumed the condition of an infant, have compassion upon
us, and forego this thy four-armed shape, nor let Kansa, the impious son
of Diti, know of thy descent."

To these applications Bhagavat answered and said, "Princess, in former
times I was prayed to by thee and adored in the hope of progeny: thy
prayers have been granted, for I am born thy son." So saying, he was
silent: and Vasudeva, taking the babe, went out that same night; for the
guards were all charmed by Yoganidrá, as were the warders at

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

the gates of Mathurá, and they obstructed not the passage of
Ánakadundubhi. To protect the infant from the heavy rain that fell from
the clouds of night, Śesha, the many-headed serpent, followed Vasudeva,
and spread his hoods above their heads; and when the prince, with the
child in his arms, crossed the Yamuná river, deep as it was, and
dangerous with numerous whirlpools, the waters were stilled, and rose
not above his knee.. On the bank he saw Nanda and the rest, who had come
thither to bring tribute due to Kansa; but they beheld him not <span
id="fr_1465"></span>[1](#fn_1465). At the same time Yaśodá was also
under the influence of Yoganidrá, whom she had brought forth as her
daughter, and whom the prudent Vasudeva took up, placing his son in her
place by the side of the mother: he then quickly returned home. When
Yaśodá awoke, she found that she had been delivered of a boy, as black
as the dark leaves of the lotus, and she was greatly rejoiced.

Vasudeva, bearing off the female infant of Yaśodá, reached his mansion
unobserved, and entered and placed the child in the bed of Devakí: he
then remained as usual. The guards were awakened by the cry of the
new-born babe, and, starting up, they sent word to Kansa that Devakí had
borne a child. Kansa immediately repaired to the residence of Vasudeva,
where he seized upon the infant. In vain Devakí convulsively entreated
him to relinquish the child: he threw it ruthlessly against a stone; but
it rose into the sky, and expanded into a gigantic figure, having eight
arms, each wielding some formidable weapon. This terrific being laughed
aloud, and said to Kansa, "What avails it thee, Kansa, to have hurled me
to the ground? he is born who shall kill thee, the mighty one amongst
the gods, who was formerly thy destroyer. Now quickly secure him, and
provide for thine own welfare." Thus having spoken, the goddess,
decorated with heavenly perfumes and garlands, and hymned by the spirits
of the air, vanished from before the eyes of Bhoja rájá <span
id="fr_1466"></span>[2](#fn_1466).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1465"></span>[503:1](vp120.htm#fr_1465) The Bhágavata more
consistently makes Vasudeva find Nanda and the rest fast asleep in their
houses, and subsequently describes their bringing tribute or tax (kara)
to Kansa.

<span id="fn_1466"></span>[503:2](vp120.htm#fr_1466) Chief of the tribe
of Bhoja, a branch of the Yádavas: see [p. 424](vp106.htm#page_424).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](vp121)
