[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp135)  [Next](vp137.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

### CHAP. XIX.

Akrúra conveys Krishńa and Ráma near to Mathurá, and leaves them: they
enter the town. Insolence of Kansa's washerman: Krishńa kills him.
Civility of a flower-seller: Krishńa gives him his benediction.

THUS the Yádava Akrúra, standing in the river, praised Krishńa, and
worshipped him with imaginary incense and flowers. Disregarding all
other objects, he fixed his whole mind upon the deity; and having
continued for a long time in spiritual contemplation, he at last
desisted from his abstraction, conceiving he had effected the purposes
of soul. Coming up from the water of the Yamuná, he went to the car, and
there he beheld Ráma and Krishńa seated as before. As his looks denoted
surprise, Krishńa said to him, "Surely, Akrúra, you have seen some
marvel in the stream of the Yamuná, for your eyes are staring as if with
astonishment." Akrúra replied, "The marvel that I have seen in the
stream of the Yamuná I behold before me, even here, in a bodily shape;
for he whom I have encountered in the water, Krishńa, is also your
wondrous self, of whose illustrious person the whole world is the
miraculous developement. But enough of this; let us proceed to Mathura:
I am afraid Kansa will be angry at our delay; such is the wretched
consequence of eating the bread of another." Thus speaking, he urged on
the quick horses, and they arrived after sunset at Mathura. When they
came in sight of the city, Akrúra said to Krishńa and Ráma, "You must
now journey on foot, whilst I proceed alone in the car; and you must not
go to the house of Vasudeva, for the elder has been banished by Kansa on
your account."

Akrúra having thus spoken, left them, and entered the city; whilst Ráma
and Krishńa continued to walk along the royal road. Regarded with
pleasure by men and women, they went along sportively, looking like two
young elephants. As they roamed about, they saw a washerman colouring
clothes, and with smiling countenances they went and threw down some of
his fine linen. The washerman was the servant of Kansa, made insolent by
his master's favour; and he provoked the two lads

<span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

with loud and scurrilous abuse, until Krishńa struck him down, with his
head to the ground, and killed him. Then taking the clothes, they went
their way, clad in yellow and blue raiment, until they came to a
flower-seller's shop. The flower-seller looked at them with
astonishment, and wondered who they could be, or whence they could have
come. Seeing two youths so lovely, dressed in yellow and blue garments,
he imagined them to be divinities descended upon earth. Being addressed
by them with mouths budding like lotuses, and asked for some flowers, he
placed his hands upon the ground, and touched it with his head, saying,
"My lords have shewn me great kindness in coming to my house, fortunate
that I am; I will pay them homage." Having thus spoken, the
flower-seller, with a smiling aspect, gave them whatever choice flowers
they selected, to conciliate their favour. Repeatedly prostrating
himself before them, he presented them with flowers, beautiful,
fragrant, and fresh. Krishńa then, being much pleased with him, gave him
this blessing; "Fortune, good friend, who depends upon me, shall never
forsake you: never shall you suffer loss of vigour, or loss of wealth:
as long as time shall last your descendants shall not fail. Having long
tasted various delights on earth, you shall finally obtain, by calling
me to recollection, a heavenly region, the consequence of my favour.
Your heart shall ever be intent on righteousness, and fulness of days
shall be the portion of your posterity. Your descendants shall not be
subject to natural infirmities, as long as the sun shall endure." Having
thus spoken, Krishńa and Ráma, worshipped by the flower-seller, went
forth from his dwelling <span id="fr_1510"></span>[1](#fn_1510.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[549:1](vp136.htm#fr_1510.md) These incidents are
told, with some unimportant differences, in the other accounts of
Krishńa's youth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](vp137.md)
