[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp131)  [Next](vp133.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

### CHAP. XV.

Kansa informed by Nárada of the existence of Krishńa and Balaráma: he
sends Keśin to destroy them, and Akrúra to bring them to Mathurá.

AFTER these things had come to pass, Arisht́a the bull-demon and Dhenuka
and Pralamba had been slain, Govarddhana had been lifted up, the serpent
Kálíya had been subdued, the two trees had been broken, the female fiend
Pútaná had been killed, and the waggon had been overturned, Nárada went
to Kansa, and related to him the whole, beginning with the transference
of the child from Devakí to Yaśodá, Hearing this from Nárada, Kansa was
highly incensed with Vasudeva, and bitterly reproached him, and all the
Yádavas, in an assembly of the tribe. Then reflecting what was to be
done, he determined to destroy both Krishńa and Ráma whilst they were
yet young, and before they had attained to manly vigour: for which
purpose he resolved to invite them from Vraja, under pretext of the
solemn rite of the lustration of arms, when he would engage them in a
trial of strength with his chief boxers, Cháńúra and Musht́ika, by whom
they would assuredly be killed. "I will send," he said, "the noble Yadu,
Akrúra the son of Swaphalka, to Gokula, to bring them hither: I will
order the fierce Keśin, who haunts the woods of Vrindávan, to attack
them, and he is of unequalled might, and will surely kill them; or, if
they arrive here, my elephant Kuvalayápíd́a shall trample to death these
two cow-boy sons of Vasudeva." Having thus laid his plans to destroy
Ráma and Janárddana, the impious Kansa sent for the heroic Akrúra, and
said to him, "Lord of liberal gifts <span
id="fr_1497"></span>[1](#fn_1497.md), attend to my words, and, out of
friendship for me, perform my orders. Ascend your chariot, and go hence
to the station of the herdsman Nanda. Two vile boys, portions of Vishńu,
have been born there, for the express object of effecting my
destruction. On the fourteenth lunation I have to celebrate the festival
of arms <span id="fr_1498"></span>[2](#fn_1498.md), and I wish them to be
brought here by

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

you, to take part in the games, and that the people may see them engage
in a boxing match with my two dexterous athletæ, Cháńúra and Musht́ika;
or haply my elephant Kuvalayápíd́a, driven against them by his rider,
shall kill these two iniquitous youngsters, sons of Vasudeva. When they
are out of the way, I will put to death Vasudeva himself, the cowherd
Nanda, and my foolish father, Ugrasena, and I will seize upon the herds
and flocks, and all the possessions, of the rebellious Gopas, who have
ever been my foes. Except thou, lord of liberality, all the Yádavas are
hostile to me; but I will devise schemes for their extirpation, and I
shall then reign over my kingdom, in concert with thee, without any
annoyance. Through regard for me, therefore, do thou go as I direct
thee; and thou shalt command the cowherds to bring in with speed their
supplies of milk and butter and curds."

Being thus instructed, the illustrious Akrúra readily undertook to visit
Krishńa, and, ascending his stately chariot, he went forth from the city
of Mathurá.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[537:1](vp132.htm#fr_1497.md) Dánapati: the
epithet refers to Akrúra's possession of the Syamantaka gem (see [p.
433](vp106.htm#page_433).md); although, as here used by Kansa, it is an
anachronism, the gem not becoming his until after Krishńa's maturity.

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[537:2](vp132.htm#fr_1498.md) Dhanurmaha: the
same phrase <span id="page_538">p. 538</span> occurs in the different
authorities. In its ordinary acceptation it would imply any military
festival. There is one of great celebrity, which, in the south of India,
closes the Dasahará, or festival of Durgá, when military exercises are
performed, and a field is ravaged, as typical of the opening of a
campaign. Worship is paid to military implements. The proper day for
this is the Vijaya daśamí, or tenth of the light half of Áświn, falling
about the end of September or beginning of October. Trans. Bombay Soc.
III. 73; also Amara Kosha, under the word \#\#\# (Lohábhisára). Both our
text and that of the Bhágavata, however, intimate the celebration of the
feast in question on the fourteenth day of the fortnight (in what month
is not specified), and an occasional 'passage of arms,' therefore is all
that is intended. The fourteenth day of the light lunation of any month
is commonly held appropriate for a holiday, or religious rite. It will
be seen in the sequel, that the leading feature of the ceremonial was
intended to have been a trial of archery, spoiled by Krishńa's breaking
the bow that was to have been used on the occasion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](vp133.md)
