[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp141)  [Next](vp143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_571">p. 571</span>

### CHAP. XXV.

Balaráma finds wine in the hollow of a tree; becomes inebriated;
commands the Yamuná to come to him, and on her refusal drags her out of
her course: Lakshmí gives him ornaments and a dress: he returns to
Dwáraká, and marries Revatí.

WHILST the mighty Śesha <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1](#fn_1530), the
upholder of the globe, was thus engaged in wandering amidst the forests
with the herdsmen, in the disguise of a mortal--having rendered great
services to earth, and still considering what more was to be
achieved--Varuńa, in order to provide for his recreation, said to his
wife Váruńí (the goddess of wine), "Thou, Madirá, art ever acceptable to
the powerful Ananta; go therefore, auspicious and kind goddess, and
promote his enjoyments." Obeying these commands, Váruní went and
established herself in the hollow of a Kadamba tree in the woods of
Vrindávana. Baladeva, roaming about, came there, and smelling the
pleasant fragrance of liquor, resumed his ancient passion for strong
drink. The holder of the ploughshare observing the vinous drops
distilling from the Kadamba tree, was much delighted, and gathered and
quaffed them <span id="fr_1531"></span>[2](#fn_1531) along with the
herdsmen and the Gopís, whilst those who were skilful with voice and
lute celebrated him in their songs. Being inebriated with the wine, and
the drops of perspiration standing like pearls upon his limbs, he called
out, not knowing what he said, "Come hither, Yamuná river, I want to
bathe." The river, disregarding the words of a drunken man, came not at
his bidding: on which

<span id="page_572">p. 572</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ráma in a rage
took up his ploughshare, which he plunged into her bank, and dragged her
to him, calling out, "Will you not come, you jade? will you not come?
Now go where you please (if you can)." Thus saying, he compelled the
dark river to quit its ordinary course, and follow him whithersoever he
wandered through the wood. Assuming a mortal figure, the Yamuná, with
distracted looks, approached Balabhadra, and entreated him to pardon
her, and let her go: but he replied, "I will drag you with my
ploughshare in a thousand directions, since you contemn my prowess and
strength." At last, however, appeased by her reiterated prayers, he let
her go, after she had watered all the country <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[3](#fn_1532). When he had bathed, the goddess of
beauty, Lakshmí, came and gave him a beautiful lotus to place in one
ear, and an earring for the other; a fresh necklace of lotus flowers,
sent by Varuńa; and garments of a dark blue colour, as costly as the
wealth of the ocean: and thus decorated with a lotus in one ear, a ring
in the other, dressed in blue garments, and wearing a garland, Balaráma
appeared united with loveliness. Thus decorated, Ráma sported two months
in Vraja, and then returned to Dwáraká, where the married Revatí, the
daughter of king Raivata, by whom he had two sons, Nishat́ha and
Ulmuka <span id="fr_1533"></span>[4](#fn_1533).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[571:1](vp142.htm#fr_1530) The great serpent,
of whom Balaráma is an incarnation.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[571:2](vp142.htm#fr_1531) There is no vinous
exudation from the Kadamba tree (Nauclea Kadamba), but its flowers are
said to yield a spirit by distillation; whence Kádambarí is one of the
synonymes of wine, or spiritous [liquor](errata.htm#24). The
grammarians, however, also derive the word from some legend, stating it
to be so called because it was produced from the hollow of a Kadamba
tree on the Gomantha mountain. The Hari Vanśa, which alone makes the
Gomantha mountain the scene of an exploit of Krishńa and Ráma, makes no
mention of this origin of wine; and the Bhágavata merely says that
Váruńí took up her abode in the hollow of a tree. There must be some
other authority therefore for this story.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[572:3](vp142.htm#fr_1532) The Bhágavata and
Hari Vanśa repeat this story; the latter very imperfectly; the former
adds, that the Yamuná is still to be seen following the course along
which she was dragged by Balaráma. The legend probably alludes to the
construction of canals from the Jumna, for the purposes of irrigation;
and the works of the Mohammedans in this way, which are well known, were
no doubt preceded by similar canals dug by order of Hindu princes.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[572:4](vp142.htm#fr_1533) See page
[439](vp108.htm#page_439).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](vp143)
