[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp148)  [Next](vp150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_591">p. 591</span>

### CHAP. XXXII.

Children of Krishńa. Ushá, the daughter of Báńa, sees Aniruddha in a
dream, and becomes enamoured of him.

PARÁŚARA.--I have enumerated to you Pradyumna and the other sons of
Rukminí. Satyabhámá bore Bhánu and Bhairika. The sons of Rohińí were
Díptimat, Támrapakshi, and others. The powerful Śámba and other sons
were born of Jámbavatí. Bhadravinda and other valiant youths were the
sons of Nágnajití. Śaivyá (or Mitravindá) had several sons, of whom
Sangrámajit was the chief. Vrika and others were begotten by Hari on
Mádrí. Lakshmaná had Gátravat and others: and Śruta and others were the
sons of Kálindí <span id="fr_1551"></span>[1](#fn_1551). Krishńa had
sons also by his other wives, in all one hundred and eighty thousand.
The eldest of the whole was Pradyumna, the son of Rukminí: his son was
Aniruddha, from whom Vraja was born: his mother was Ushá, the daughter
of Báńa, and grand-daughter of Bali, whom Aniruddha won in war. On that
occasion a fierce battle took place between Hari and Śankara, in which
the thousand arms of Báńa were lopped away by the discus of the former.

MAITREYA.--HOW happened it, venerable Brahman, that a contest on account
of Ushá arose between Śiva and Krishńa? and in what manner did Hari cut
off the thousand arms of Báńa? This, illustrious sir, thou art able to
narrate.

PARÁŚARA.--Ushá, the daughter of Báńa, having seen Párvatí sporting with
her lord, Śambhu, was inspired with a wish for similar dalliance. The
beautiful Gaurí, who knows the hearts of all, said to Ushá, "Do not
grieve; you shall have a husband." "But when will this be?" thought Ushá
to herself, "or who will be my lord?" On which Párvatí continued; "He
who shall appear to you, princess, in a dream on the twelfth lunation of
the light half of Vaiśákha, he will be your husband."

<span id="page_592">p. 592</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Accordingly, as
the goddess had foretold, on that lunar day a youth appeared to Ushá in
a dream, of whose person she became enamoured. When she woke, and no
longer perceived him, she was overcome with sorrow, and, unrestrained by
modesty, demanded of her companion whither he had gone. The companion
and friend of the princess was Chitralekhá, the daughter of Kubháńd́a,
the minister of Báńa. "Of whom do you speak?" inquired she of Ushá. But
the princess, recollecting herself, was ashamed, and remained silent. At
length, however, Chitralekhá conciliated her confidence, and she related
to her what had passed, and what the goddess had foretold; and she
requested her friend to devise some means of uniting her with the person
whom she had beheld in her dream.

Chitralekhá then delineated the most eminent gods, demons, spirits, and
mortals, and shewed them to Ushá. Putting aside the portraits of gods,
spirits, snake-gods, and demons, the princess selected those of mortals,
and amongst them the heroes of the races of Andhaka and Vrishńi. When
she came to the likenesses of Krishńa and Ráma, she was confused with
shame; from the portrait of Pradyumna she modestly averted her eyes; but
the moment she beheld the picture of his son, the object of her passion,
her eyes wide expanded, and all her bashfulness was discarded. "This is
he! this is he!" said she to Chitralekhá; and her friend, who was
endowed with magic power, bade her be of good cheer, and set off through
the air to Dwáraká.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[591:1](vp149.htm#fr_1551) The Bhágavata says,
each of his eight queens had ten sons, and gives the ten names of each
set, with one or two exceptions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII](vp150)
