[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp147)  [Next](vp149.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_589">p. 589</span>

### CHAP. XXXI.

Krishńa, with Indra's consent, takes the Párijáta tree to Dwáraká;
marries the princesses rescued from Naraka.

KEŚAVA, being thus eulogized by the king of the gods, smiled, and spake
gravely to him in reply. "Thou art Indra," said he, "the king of the
celestials: we are but mortals, O lord of the world: thou must pardon
therefore the offence that I have committed. Let this Párijáta tree be
taken to its appropriate situation. I removed it in compliance with the
words of Satyá. Receive back also this your thunderbolt, cast at me; for
this is your proper weapon, the destroyer of your foes." Indra answered
and said, "Thou beguilest us, O lord, in calling thyself a mortal; but
we know thee to be the lord, although not endowed with subtlety of
discernment. Thou art that thou art, engaged in the active preservation
of the earth; thou extractest the thorns implanted in her bosom,
destroyer of the demon race. Let this Párijáta tree be transferred to
Dwáraká, and it shall remain upon earth as long as thou abidest in the
world of mortals." Hari, having assented to the proposal of Indra,
returned to earth, hymned by attendant sages, saints, and quiristers of
heaven.

When Krishńa arrived over Dwáraká, he blew his shell, and delighted all
the inhabitants with the sound. Then alighting from Garud́a, he proceeded
with Satyabhámá to her garden, and there planted the great Párijáta
tree, the smell of which perfumed the earth for three furlongs, and an
approach to which enabled every one to recollect the events of a prior
existence; so that, on beholding their faces in that tree, all the
Yádavas contemplated themselves in their (original) celestial forms.
Then Krishńa took possession of the wealth, elephants, horses, and
women, which he had recovered from Naraka, and which had been brought to
Dwáraká by the servants of the demon; and at an auspicious season he
espoused all the maidens whom Naraka had carried off from their friends;

<span id="page_590">p. 590</span>

at one and the same moment he received the hands of all of them,
according to the ritual, in separate mansions. Sixteen thousand and one
hundred was the number of the maidens, and into so many different forms
did the foe of Madhu multiply himself; so that every one of the damsels
thought that he had wedded her in his single person; and the creator of
the world, Hari, the assumer of universal shape, abode severally in the
dwelling of each of these his wives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](vp149.md)
