[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp154)  [Next](vp156.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_613">p. 613</span>

### CHAP. XXXVIII.

Arjuna comes to Dwáraká, and burns the dead, and takes away the
surviving inhabitants. Commencement of the Kali age. Shepherds and
thieves attack Arjuna, and carry off the women and wealth. Arjuna
regrets the loss of his prowess to Vyása; who consoles him, and tells
him the story of Asht́ávakra's cursing the Apsarasas. Arjuna and his
brothers place Paríkshit on the throne, and go to the forests. End of
the fifth book.

ARJUNA having found the bodies of Krishńa and of Ráma, performed for
them, and the rest of the slain, the obsequial rites. The eight queens
of Krishńa, who have been named, with Rukminí at their head, embraced
the body of Hari, and entered the funeral fire <span
id="fr_1584"></span>[1](#fn_1584.md). Revatí also, embracing the corpse of
Ráma, entered the blazing pile, which was cool to her, happy in contact
with her lord. Hearing these events, Ugrasena and Anakadundubhi, with
Devakí and Rohiní, committed themselves to the flames <span
id="fr_1585"></span>[2](#fn_1585.md). The last ceremonies were performed
for all these by Arjuna, who then made all the people leave the city,
and took Vajra with him. The son of Kunti conducted the thousands of the
wives of Krishńa, with Vajra, and all the people, from Dwáraká, with
tenderness and care, and travelled slowly away. The Sudharman palace and
the Párijáta tree, which had been brought to earth by Krishńa, both
proceeded to heaven; and on the same day that Hari departed from the
earth the powerful dark-bodied Kali age descended <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[3](#fn_1586.md). The ocean rose, and submerged the
whole of Dwáraká, except alone the dwelling of the deity of the race of
Yadu. The sea has not yet been able to wash that temple away, and there
Keśava constantly abides, even in the present day. Whoever visits that
holy shrine, the place where Krishńa pursued his sports, is liberated
from all his sins <span id="fr_1587"></span>[4](#fn_1587.md).

<span id="page_614">p. 614</span>

The son of Prithá, Arjuna, halted the people he had brought from Dwáraká
in the Panchanada country <span id="fr_1588"></span>[5](#fn_1588.md), in a
rich and fertile spot; but the desires of the robbers (of the
neighbourhood) were excited, when they observed so many widowed females,
also such great riches, in the possession of Arjuna alone. Inflamed by
their cupidity, they assembled the villainous Ábhiras <span
id="fr_1589"></span>[6](#fn_1589.md), and said to them, "Here is this
Arjuna, immensely rich, and having numerous women, whose husbands have
been slain, passing confidently amongst us; a disgrace to all brave men.
His pride is raised by the death of Bhíshma, Drońa, Jayadratha, Karńa,
and others, whom he has slain: he does not know the prowess of simple
villagers. Up, up; take your long thick staves: this stupid fellow
despises us. Why should we not lift up our arms?" So saying, they
rushed, armed with cudgels and clods of earth, upon the people, who were
without their lord. Arjuna encountered them, and said to them in
derision, "Retire, wretches, ignorant of what is right, unless ye are
desirous of dying." But they disregarded his menaces, and seized his
treasures and his women, the wives of Viswaksena. Thereupon Arjuna began
to brace his heavenly bow Gándíva, irresistible in battle; but it was in
vain; for,

<span id="page_615">p. 615</span>

in spite of all his efforts to tighten it, it continued flaccid: neither
could he call to recollection the incantations of the superhuman
weapons. Losing all patience, he launched, as best he might, his shafts
upon the enemy; but those shot from Gándíva merely scratched the skin.
The arrows given him by Agni to carry certain destruction now were
themselves destroyed, and were fatal to Arjuna in his contest with
herdsmen. He endeavoured to recall the might of Krishńa; animated by
which, his numerous arrows had overthrown mighty kings; but he tried in
vain, for now they were put aside by the peasants, or they flew at
random, wide of their aim. His arrows being expended, he beat the
banditti with the horn of his bow; but they only laughed at his blows:
and the barbarians, in the sight of Arjuna, carried off all the women of
the Vrishńi and Andhaka tribes, and went their way <span
id="fr_1590"></span>[7](#fn_1590.md).

Then Jishńu was sorely distressed, and lamented bitterly, exclaiming,
Alas! alas! I am deserted by my lord!" and he wept: and in that instant
the bow and heavenly arms, his car and steeds, perished entirely, like a
donation to an unlearned Brahman. "Resistless," said he, "are the
decrees of fate, by whom feebleness has been inflicted upon me, deprived
of my illustrious friend, and victory given to the base. These two arms
are mine; mine, is this fist; this is my place; I am Arjuna: but without
that righteous aid all these are pithless. The valour of Arjuna, the
strength of Bhíma, was all his work; and without him I am overcome by
peasants: it cannot be from any other cause." So saying, Arjuna went to
the city of Mathurá, and there installed the Yádava prince, Vajra, as
its king. There he beheld Vyása, who was living in a wood, and he
approached the sage, and saluted him respectfully. The Muni surveyed him
for some time, as he lay prostrate at his feet, and said to him, "How is
it that I see you thus shorn of your lustre? Have you been guilty of
illicit intercourse with women, or of the death of a Brahman? or have
you suffered some grievous disappointment? that you are so dejected.
Have your prayers for progeny, or other good gifts, proved fruitless? or

<span id="page_616">p. 616</span>

have you indulged improper passions? that your lustre is so dim. Or are
you one that devours the meal he has given to the Brahmans? Say, Arjuna,
have you seized upon the substance of the poor? Has the wind of a
winnowing basket lighted upon you? or has an evil eye gazed upon you,
Arjuna? that you look thus miserable. Have you been touched by the water
of a finger-nail? or has the water of a water-jar sprinkled you? or,
what is most probably the case, have you been beaten by your inferiors
in battle?"

Arjuna, having sighed deeply, related to Vyása all the circumstances of
his discomfiture, and continued; "Hari, who was our strength, our might,
our heroism, our prowess, our prosperity, our brightness, has left us,
and departed. Deprived of him, our friend, illustrious, and ever kindly
speaking, we have become as feeble as if made of straw. Purushottama,
who was the living vigour of my weapons, my arrows and my bow, is gone.
As long as we looked upon him, fortune, fame, wealth, dignity never
abandoned us: but Govinda is gone from amongst us. That Krishńa has
quitted earth, through whose power Bhíshma, Drońa, the king of Anga,
Duryodhana, and the rest, were consumed. Not I alone, but Earth, has
grown old, miserable, and lustreless, in the absence of the holder of
the discus. Krishńa, through devotion to whom Bhíshma and other mighty
men perished like moths in the flame of my valour, is gone; and I am now
overcome by cowherds. The bow Gándíva, that was famed throughout the
three worlds, has been foiled, since he has departed, by the sticks of
peasants: the myriads of women over whom I was lord have been carried
off from me by thieves, armed but with cudgels: the whole household of
Krishńa, O Krishńa <span id="fr_1591"></span>[8](#fn_1591.md), has been
forcibly carried away by peasants, who with their staves have put my
strength to shame. That I am shorn of my lustre I do not marvel: it is
wonderful that I live. Surely, grandsire, I alone am so shameless as to
survive the stain of indignity inflicted by the vile."

Vyása replied to Arjuna, and said, "Think no more, my son, of your
disgrace: it does not become you to grieve. Know that time subjects all
beings to similar vicissitude. Time effects the production and
dissolution

<span id="page_617">p. 617</span>

of all creatures. All that exists is founded on time. Know this, Arjuna,
and retain your fortitude. Rivers, seas, mountains, the whole earth,
gods, men, animals, trees, insects, are all created, and all will be
destroyed, by time. Knowing that all that is, is the effect of time, be
tranquillized. These mighty works of Krishńa, whatever they have been,
have been performed to relieve earth of its burdens: for this he has
come down. Earth, oppressed by her load, has had recourse to the
assembly of the immortals; and Janárddana, who is one with time, has
descended on that account. This object has been now accomplished: all
the kings of the earth are slain; the race of Vrishńi and Andhaka is
destroyed: no more remained for him to accomplish. Therefore has the
lord departed whither he pleased, his ends being all fulfilled. At the
period of creation the god of gods creates; in that of duration he
preserves; and at the end of all he is mighty to annihilate. Now all is
done. Therefore, Arjuna, be not afflicted by thy defeat: the prowess of
mortals is the gift of time. Bhíshma, Karńa, and other kings, have been
slain by thee alone; this was the work of time: and why, therefore,
should not thy discomfiture, by those less than thou art, occur? In like
manner as through thy devotion to Vishńu these were overthrown by thee,
so at last has thy defeat by miserable thieves been wrought by time.
That divinity, assuming various bodies, preserves the world; and in the
end the lord of creatures destroys it. In the birth of thy fortunes
Janárddana was thy friend; in their decline, thy enemies have been
favoured by Keśava. Who would have believed that thou shouldst slay all
the descendants of Kuru, and kindred of Gangá? Who would have believed
that peasants should triumph over thee? Be assured, son of Pritha, that
it is but the sport of the universal Hari that the Kauravas have been
destroyed by thee, and that thou hast been defeated by herdsmen. With
respect to the women whom thou lamentest, and who have been carried off
by the thieves, hear from me an ancient story, which will explain why
this has happened.

"In former times a Brahman, named Asht́ávakra <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[9](#fn_1592.md), was pursuing his

<span id="page_618">p. 618</span>

religious penances, standing in water, and meditating on the eternal
spirit, for many years. In consequence of the overthrow of the Asuras,
there was a great festival on the summit of Meru: on their way to which,
Rambhá, Tilottamá, and hundreds and thousands of beautiful nymphs, saw
the ascetic Asht́ávakra, and they praised and hymned him for his
devotions. They bowed down before him, and eulogized him, as he was
immersed up to his throat in water, his hair twisted in a braid. So they
sang in honour of him whatever they thought would be most agreeable to
that most eminent of Brahmans. Asht́ávakra at last said to them, 'I am
well pleased with you, illustrious damsels; whatever you wish for, ask
of me, and I will give it you, however difficult it may be of
attainment.' Then all those nymphs, Rambhá, Tilottamá, and others,
recorded in the Vedas, replied, 'It is enough for us that thou art
pleased; what need we aught else, venerable Brahman?' But some amongst
them said, 'If, exalted sir, you are indeed pleased with us, then grant
us a husband, the best of men, and sovereign of the Brahmans.' 'So be
it,' replied Asht́ávakra, and thereupon came up from the waters. When the
nymphs beheld him coming out of the water, and saw that he was very
ugly, and crooked in eight places, they could not restrain their
merriment, but laughed aloud. The Muni was very angry, and cursed them,
and said, 'Since you have been so impertinent as to laugh at my
deformity, I denounce upon you this imprecation: through the grace I
have shewn unto you, you shall obtain the first of males for your
husband; but in consequence of my curse, you shall afterwards fall into
the hands of thieves.' When the nymphs heard this uttered by the Muni,
they endeavoured to appease him; and they so far succeeded, that he
announced to them they should finally return to the sphere of the gods.
It is in consequence, then, of the curse of the Muni Asht́ávakra that
these females, who were at first the wives of Keśava, have now fallen
into the hands of the barbarians; and there is no occasion, Arjuna, for
you to regret it in the least. All this destruction has been effected by
the lord

<span id="page_619">p. 619</span>

of all; and your end is also nigh at hand, since he has withdrawn from
you strength, splendour, valour, and preeminence. Death is the doom of
every one who is born: fall is the end of exaltation: union terminates
in separation: and growth tends but to decay. Knowing all this, wise men
are susceptible of neither grief nor joy; and those who learn their ways
are even as they are (equally free from pleasure or pain). Do you
therefore, most excellent prince, understand this truth, and, along with
your brothers, relinquish every thing, and repair to the holy forest. Go
now, and say from me to Yudhisht́hira, that he to-morrow, with his
brethren, tread the path of heroes."

Thus instructed by Vyása, Arjuna went and related to the other sons of
Pritha all that be had seen, had experienced, and had heard. When he had
communicated to them the message of Vyása, the sons of Páńd́u placed
Paríkshit on the throne, and went to the forest.

I have thus narrated to you, Maitreya, in detail, the actions of
Vásudeva, when he was born in the race of Yadu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[613:1](vp155.htm#fr_1584.md) The Mahábhárata
takes the wives of Krishńa first to Indraprasthá, and there Rukminí and
four others burn; but Satyabhámá and others become ascetics, going to
perform Tapasya in the forest.

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[613:2](vp155.htm#fr_1585.md) It is merely said
in the Mahábhárata that Vasudeva expired; on which four of his wives
burnt themselves.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[613:3](vp155.htm#fr_1586.md) The Kali age
commenced from the death of Krishńa, according to the usual notions; but
it is commonly supposed to commence a little later, or with the reign of
Paríkshit.

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[613:4](vp155.htm#fr_1587.md) The Bhágavata
agrees with the text in <span id="page_614">p. 614</span> excepting the
temple of Dwáraká, and asserting that it still remains, in direct
contradiction of the Mahábhárata, which declares that the sea did not
spare any part whatever. It is clear, therefore, that when the latter
was compiled the temple was not standing, and that it was erected
between the date of the compilation and that of the two Puráńas. The
present shrine, which is held in great repute, stands at the extremity
of the peninsula of Guzerat. It is still an object of pilgrimage; it was
so in the reign of Akbar (Ayin Akbari); and has been so, no doubt, from
a remote period. The image formerly worshipped there was carried off 600
years ago, and this was most probably subsequent to the date of both the
Puráńas; for the idol was a form of Krishńa, called Rańa chor, a popular
divinity, unknown in the Pauráńik pantheon. Another image was
substituted in place of that which was taken away. Notwithstanding the
testimony of our text, and that of the Bhágavata, the originality of the
temple is disputed, and a place thirty miles south from Purbandar is
said to be the spot where Dwáraká was swallowed up by the ocean.
Hamilton, from Macmurdo, &c. I. 662.

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[614:5](vp155.htm#fr_1588.md) 'The country of the
five rivers,' the Panjab: rather an out of the way route from Dwáraká to
[Delhi](errata.htm#28.md).

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[614:6](vp155.htm#fr_1589.md) Ábhíras mean
'herds,' and they are afterwards called by Arjuna, Gopálas, 'herdsmen'
The pastoral tribes of the west of India, and particularly those of
Afghanistan, almost always combine the character of freebooter with that
of shepherd.

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[615:7](vp155.htm#fr_1590.md) The principal wives
of Krishńa, however, according to the Mahábhárata, escaped. The
occurrence is described there much in the same way, but more briefly. It
is not detailed in the Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[616:8](vp155.htm#fr_1591.md) A name of Vyása.

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[617:9](vp155.htm#fr_1592.md) The story of
Asht́ávakra is related in the Mahábhárata. He was the son of Kahora, who
neglecting his wife, was rebuked for it by his yet unborn son. The <span
id="page_610">p. 610</span> father angrily cursed him, that he should be
born bent in every part; and he was accordingly brought forth crooked
(vakra) in eight limbs (asht́a). He became nevertheless a celebrated
sage. See also Hindu Theatre, I. 293, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](vp156.md)
