[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp156)  [Next](vp158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_627">p. 627</span>

### CHAP. II.

Redeeming properties of the Kali age. Devotion to Vishńu sufficient to
salvation in that age for all castes and persons.

UPON this subject, Maitreya, you shall hear what the wise Vyása has
related, as it is communicated truly by me.

It was once a matter of dispute amongst the sages, at what season the
least moral merit obtained the greatest reward, and by whom it was most
easily displayed. In order to terminate the discussion, they went to
Veda Vyása to remove their doubts. They found the illustrious Muni, my
son, half immersed in the water of the Ganges; and awaiting the close of
his ablutions, the sages remained on the banks of the sacred stream,
under shelter of a grove of trees. As my son plunged down into the
water, and again rose up from it, the Munis heard him exclaim,
"Excellent, excellent, is the Kali age!" Again he dived, and again
rising, said in their hearing, "Well done, well done Śúdra; thou art
happy!" Again he sank down, and as he once more emerged they heard him
say, "Well done, well done, women; they are happy! who are more
fortunate than they?" After this, my son finished his bathing, and the
sages met him as he approached to welcome them. After he had given them
seats, and they had proffered their respects, the son of Satyavatí said
to them, "On what account have you come to me?" They replied, "We came
to you to consult you on a subject on which we entertain some doubt; but
that may be at present suspended: explain to us something else. We heard
you say, 'Excellent is the Kali age! Well done, Śúdra! Well done,
women!' Now we are desirous to know why this was said, why you called
them repeatedly, happy. Tell us the meaning of it, if it be not a
mystery. We will then propose to you the question that occupies our
thoughts."

Being thus addressed by the Munis, Vyása smiled, and said to them,
"Hear, excellent sages, why I uttered the words 'Well done, well done.'
The fruit of penance, of continence, of silent prayer, and the like,
practised in the Krita age for ten years, in the Treta for one year, in
the Dwápara for a month, is obtained in the Kali age in a day and night:
therefore did I exclaim, 'Excellent, excellent, is the Kali age!' That

<span id="page_628">p. 628</span>

reward which a man obtains in the Krita by abstract meditation, in the
Treta by sacrifice, in the Dwápara by adoration, he receives in the Kali
by merely reciting the name of Keśava. In the Kali age a man displays
the most exalted virtue by very little exertion; therefore, pious sages,
who know what virtue is, I was pleased with the Kali age. Formerly the
Vedas were to be acquired by the twice-born through the diligent
observance of self-denial; and it was their duty to celebrate sacrifices
conformably to the ritual. Then idle prayers, idle feasts, and fruitless
ceremonies, were practised but to mislead the twice-born; for although
observed by them devoutly, yet, in consequence of some irregularity in
their celebration, sin was incurred in all their works, and what they
ate, or what they drank, did not effect the fulfilment of their desires.
In all their objects the twice-born enjoyed no independence, and they
attained their respective spheres only with exceeding pain. The Śúdra,
on the contrary, more fortunate than they, reaches his assigned station
by rendering them service, and performing merely the sacrifice of
preparing food, in which no rules determine what may or may not be
eaten, what may or may not be drunk. Therefore, most excellent sages, is
the Śúdra fortunate.

"Riches are accumulated by men in modes not incompatible with their
peculiar duties, and they are then to be bestowed upon the worthy, and
expended in constant sacrifice. There is great trouble in their
acquisition; great care in their preservation; great distress from the
want of them; and great grief for their loss. Thus, eminent Brahmans,
through these and other sources of anxiety, men attain their allotted
spheres of Prajápati and the rest only by exceeding labour and
suffering. This is not the case with women: a woman has only to honour
her husband, in act, thought, and speech, to reach the same region to
which he is elevated; and she thus accomplishes her object without any
great exertion. This was the purport of my exclamation, 'Well done!' the
third time. I have thus related to you what you asked. Now demand the
question you came to put to me, in any way you please, and I will make
you a distinct reply."

The Munis then said to Vyása, "The question we intended to have asked
you has been already answered by you in your reply to our

<span id="page_629">p. 629</span>

subsequent inquiry." On hearing which, Krishńa Dwaipáyana laughed, and
said to the holy persons who had come to see him, whose eyes were wide
open with astonishment, "I perceived, with the eye of divine knowledge,
the question you intended to ask, and in allusion to it I uttered the
expressions, 'Well done, well done.' In truth, in the Kali age duty is
discharged with very little trouble by mortals, whose faults are all
washed away by the water of their individual merits; by Śúdras, through
diligent attendance only upon the twice-born; and by women, through the
slight effort of obedience to their husbands. Therefore, Brahmans, did I
thrice express my admiration of their happiness; for in the Krita and
other ages great were the toils of the regenerate to perform their duty.
I waited not for your inquiry, but replied at once to the question you
purposed to ask. Now, ye who know what virtue is, what else do you wish
me to tell you?"

The Munis then saluted and praised Vyása, and, being freed by him from
uncertainty, departed as they came. To you also, excellent Maitreya,
have I imparted this secret, this one great virtue of the otherwise
vicious Kali age. The dissolution of the world, and the aggregation of
the elements, I will now describe to you <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[1](#fn_1611).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[629:1](vp157.htm#fr_1611) The illustration of
the efficacy of devotion to Vishńu given in this chapter is peculiar to
this Puráńa, but the doctrine is common to it and the Bhágavata. It is
repeatedly inculcated in that work. The parallel passage in the twelfth
book is the following. "Purushottama, abiding in the hearts of men,
takes away all the sins of the Kali age, produced by place or property.
Bhagaván, abiding in the heart, and heard, repeated, read of,
worshipped, or honoured, dissipates the ills of men for ten thousand
births. As fire, entering into the substance of gold, purifies it from
the alloy with which it is debased in the mine, so Vishńu, united with
the devotee, is the refiner from all that is evil. By learning, penance,
suppression of breath, friendship, pilgrimage, ablution, mortification,
gifts, prayer, the soul attains not that exceeding purity which it
derives from the presence of Vishńu. Therefore, with all your soul, O
king, hold Keśava ever present in your heart. Let one about to die be
most careful in this; for so he goes to supreme felicity. Let the name
of the supreme god, Vishńu, be repeated diligently by all in their last
moments; for he who desires liberation shall attain it by the frequent
repetition of the name of Krishńa. Final felicity is derived in the
Krita age from holy study; in the Treta, from religious rites. In the
Dwápara it is attained by pious services; but in the Kali age it is
secured by repeating the name of Hari." Similar doctrines are taught in
the Git́a, and other Vaishńava works. See As. Res. vol. XVI. p. 116.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](vp158)
