[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp155)  [Next](vp157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_620">p. 620</span> <span id="page_621">p. 621</span>

# VISHŃU PURÁŃA.

# BOOK VI.

### CHAP. I.

Of the dissolution of the world: the four ages: the decline of all
things, and deterioration of mankind, in the Kali age.

MAITREYA.--You have narrated to me, illustrious sage, the creation of
the world, the genealogies of the patriarchs, the duration of the
Manwantaras, and the dynasties of princes, in detail. I am now desirous
to hear from you an account of the dissolution of the world, the season
of total destruction, and that which occurs at the expiration of a
Kalpa <span id="fr_1593"></span>[1](#fn_1593).

PARÁŚARA.--Hear from me, Maitreya, exactly the circumstances of the end
of all things, and the dissolution that occurs either at the expiration
of a Kalpa, or that which takes place at the close of the life of
Brahmá. A month of mortals is a day and night of the progenitors: a year
of mortals is a day and night of the gods. Twice a thousand aggregates
of the four ages is a day and night of Brahmá <span
id="fr_1594"></span>[2](#fn_1594). The four ages are the Krita, Treta,
Dwápara, and Kali; comprehending together twelve thousand years of the
gods. There are infinite successions of these four ages, of a similar
description, the first of which is always called the Krita, and the last
the Kali. In the first, the Krita, is that age which is created by
Brahmá; in the last, which is the Kali age, a dissolution of the world
occurs.

<span id="page_622">p. 622</span>

MAITREYA.--Venerable sir, you are able to give me a description of the
nature of the Kali age, in which four-footed virtue <span
id="fr_1595"></span>[3](#fn_1595) suffers total extinction.

PARÁŚARA.--Hear, Maitreya, an account of the nature of the Kali age,
respecting which you have inquired, and which is now close at hand.

The observance of caste, order, and institutes will not prevail in the
Kali age, nor will that of the ceremonial enjoined by the Sáma, Rik, and
Yajur Vedas. Marriages in this age will not be conformable to the
ritual, nor will the rules that connect the spiritual preceptor and his
disciple be in force. The laws that regulate the conduct of husband and
wife will be disregarded, and oblations to the gods with fire no longer
be offered. In whatever family he may be born, a powerful and rich man
will be held entitled to espouse maidens of every tribe. A regenerate
man will be initiated in any way whatever, and such acts of penance as
may be performed will be unattended by any results <span
id="fr_1596"></span>[4](#fn_1596). Every text will be scripture that
people choose to think so <span id="fr_1597"></span>[5](#fn_1597): all
gods will be gods to them that worship them; and all orders of life will
be common alike to all persons. In the Kali age, fasting, austerity,
liberality, practised according to the pleasure of those by whom they
are observed, will constitute righteousness. Pride of wealth will be
inspired by very insignificant possessions. Pride of beauty will be
prompted by (no other personal charm than fine) hair. Gold, jewels,
diamonds, clothes, will all have perished, and then hair will be the
only ornament with which women can decorate themselves. Wives will
desert their husbands, when they lose their property; and they only who
are wealthy will be considered by women as their lords. He who gives
away much money will be the master of men; and family descent will no
longer be a title

<span id="page_623">p. 623</span>

of supremacy. Accumulated treasures will be expended on (ostentatious)
dwellings. The minds of men will be wholly occupied in acquiring wealth;
and wealth will be spent solely on selfish gratifications. Women will
follow their inclinations, and be ever fond of pleasure. Men will fix
their desires upon riches, even though dishonestly acquired. No man will
part with the smallest fraction of the smallest coin <span
id="fr_1598"></span>[6](#fn_1598), though entreated by a friend. Men of
all degrees will conceit themselves to be equal with Brahmans. Cows will
be held in esteem only as they supply milk <span
id="fr_1599"></span>[7](#fn_1599). The people will be almost always in
dread of dearth, and apprehensive of scarcity; and will hence ever be
watching the appearances of the sky: they will all live, like anchorets,
upon leaves and roots and fruit, and put a period to their lives through
fear of famine and want. In truth there will never be abundance in the
Kali age, and men will never enjoy pleasure and happiness. They will
take their food without previous ablution, and without worshipping fire,
gods, or guests, or offering obsequial libations to their progenitors.
The women will be fickle, short of stature, gluttonous: they will have
many children, and little means: scratching their heads with both hands,
they will pay no attention to the commands of their husbands or parents:
they will be selfish, abject, and slatternly: they will be scolds and
liars: they will be indecent and immoral in their conduct, and will ever
attach themselves to dissolute men. Youths, although disregarding the
rules of studentship, will study the Vedas. Householders will neither
sacrifice nor practise becoming liberality. Anchorets will subsist upon
food accepted from rustics; and mendicants will be influenced by regard
for friends and associates <span id="fr_1600"></span>[8](#fn_1600).
Princes, instead of protecting, will plunder their subjects; and, under
the pretext of levying customs, will rob merchants of their property. In

<span id="page_624">p. 624</span>

the Kali age every one who has cars and elephants and steeds will be a
Rájá <span id="fr_1601"></span>[9](#fn_1601): every one who is feeble
will be a slave. Vaiśyas will abandon agriculture and commerce, and gain
a livelihood by servitude or the exercise of mechanical arts. Śúdras,
seeking a subsistence by begging, and assuming the outward marks of
religious mendicants, will become the impure followers of impious and
heretical doctrines <span id="fr_1602"></span>[10](#fn_1602).

Oppressed by famine and taxation, men will desert their native lands,
and go to those countries which are fit for coarser grains <span
id="fr_1603"></span>[11](#fn_1603). The path of the Vedas being
obliterated, and men having deviated into heresy, iniquity will
flourish, and the duration of life will therefore decrease. In
consequence of horrible penances not enjoined by scripture, and of the
vices of the rulers, children will die in their infancy. Women will bear
children at the age of five, six, or seven years; and men beget them
when they are eight, nine, or ten. A man will be grey when he is twelve;
and no one will exceed twenty years of life <span
id="fr_1604"></span>[12](#fn_1604). Men will possess little sense,
vigour, or virtue, and will therefore perish in a very brief period. In
proportion as heresy extends, so, Maitreya, shall the progress of the
Kali age be estimated by the wise. In proportion as the number of the
pious, who adhere to the lessons of the Vedas, diminishes--as the
efforts of individuals who cultivate virtue relax--as the first of males
becomes no longer the object of sacrifices--as respect for the teachers
of the Vedas declines--and as regard is acknowledged for the
disseminators

<span id="page_625">p. 625</span>

of heresy--so may wise men note the augmented influence of the Kali
age <span id="fr_1605"></span>[13](#fn_1605).

In the Kali age, Maitreya, men, corrupted by unbelievers, will refrain
from adoring Vishńu, the lord of sacrifice, the creator and lord of all;
and will say, "Of what authority are the Vedas? what are gods or
Brahmans? what need is there of purification with water?" Then will the
clouds yield scanty rain: then will the corn be light in ear, and the
grain will be poor, and of little sap: garments will be mostly made of
the fibres of the San <span id="fr_1606"></span>[14](#fn_1606): the
principal of trees will be the Sami <span
id="fr_1607"></span>[15](#fn_1607): the prevailing caste will be the
Śúdra: millet will be the more common grain: the milk in use will be
chiefly that of goats: unguents will be made of Usíra grass. The mother
and father-in-law will be venerated in place of parents; and a man's
friends will be his brother-in-law, or one who has a wanton wife. Men
will say, "Who has a father? who has a mother? each one is born
according to his deeds:" and therefore they will look upon a wife's or
husband's parents as their own. Endowed with little sense, men, subject
to all the infirmities of mind, speech, and body, will daily commit
sins; and every thing that is calculated to afflict beings, vicious,
impure, and wretched, will be generated in the Kali age. Then shall some
places follow a separate duty <span id="fr_1608"></span>[16](#fn_1608),
devoid of holy study, oblations to fire, and invocations of the
gods <span id="fr_1609"></span>[17](#fn_1609). Then, in the

<span id="page_626">p. 626</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kali age, shall a
man acquire by a trifling exertion as much eminence in virtue as is the
result of arduous penance in the Krita age, or age of purity <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[18](#fn_1610).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[621:1](vp156.htm#fr_1593) Two kinds of great
or universal dissolution are here intimated; one occurring at the end of
a Kalpa, or day of Brahmá, to which the term Upasanhriti is applied in
the text, and Átyantika laya by the commentator; and the other taking
place at the end of the life of Brahmá, which is termed a great or
elemental dissolution: Mahá pralaya and Prákrita pralaya.

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[621:2](vp156.htm#fr_1594) These measures of
time are more fully detailed in the first book: see [p.
22](vp037.htm#page_22).

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[622:3](vp156.htm#fr_1595) This is an allusion
to a popular notion, originating probably with Manu: "In the Krita age
the genius of truth and right stands firm on his four feet; but in the
following ages he is deprived successively of one foot," &c. I. 81, 82.

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[622:4](vp156.htm#fr_1596) 'Such an act is
just what it is;' that is, it may be attended by inconvenience to the
individual, but is utterly inefficacious for the expiation of sin.

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[622:5](vp156.htm#fr_1597) Whether it is
conformable or contradictory to the Vedas and the law. The passage may
be rendered also, 'The doctrine or dogma of any one soever will be
scripture.'

<span id="fn_1598"></span>[623:6](vp156.htm#fr_1598) He will not part
with the half of the half of half a Pańa; that is, with ten Cowries; a
Pańa being equal to eighty Cowries, or small shells. Five Pańas are
equal to one Ana, or the sixteenth of a Rupee; and, at two shillings the
Rupee, ten Cowries are equal to about one-seventh of a farthing.

<span id="fn_1599"></span>[623:7](vp156.htm#fr_1599) They will be valued
for their individual use only, not from any notion of their generic
sanctity.

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[623:8](vp156.htm#fr_1600) The Bhágavata has,
"Religious students will be regardless of vows and purification;
householders will beg, not give alms; anchorets will dwell in villages;
and mendicants will be desirous of riches."

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[624:9](vp156.htm#fr_1601) That is, princes
and warriors will be so no longer by virtue of their birth and caste.

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[624:10](vp156.htm#fr_1602) Most of the
mendicant orders admit members without distinction of caste; but
probably Buddhists especially are here intended. The Bhágavata
repeatedly alludes to the diffusion of heretical doctrines and
practices, the substitution of outward signs and marks for devotion, and
the abandonment of the worship of Vishńu. The Śaiva mendicant orders are
probably those especially in view. The same probably are intended by our
text in the subsequent allusion to unauthorized austerities, and
sectarial marks.

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[624:11](vp156.htm#fr_1603) 'Gavedhuka (Coix
barbata) and other bad sorts of grain;' Another reading is, 'Countries
growing wheat, barley, and the like.' But to place wheat and barley
amongst inferior grains, and to rank them lower than rice, is a
classification that could have occurred to a native of Bengal alone.

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[624:12](vp156.htm#fr_1604) The Váyu says
three and twenty; the Bhágavata, from twenty to thirty.

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[625:13](vp156.htm#fr_1605) The complaints of
the prevalence of heterodox doctrines, and neglect of the practices of
the Vedas, which recur in the Bhágavata and our text, indicate a period
of change in the condition of the Hindu religion, which it would be
important to verify. If reference is made to Buddhism, to which in some
respects the allusions especially apply, it would probably denote a
period not long subsequent to the Christian era; but it is more likely
to be of a later date, or in the eighth and ninth centuries, when
Śankara is said to have reformed a variety of corrupt practices, and
given rise to others. See As. Res. vol. XVI. p. la.

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[625:14](vp156.htm#fr_1606) Crotolaria juncea.

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[625:15](vp156.htm#fr_1607) The silk cotton,
Bombax heptaphylla.

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[625:16](vp156.htm#fr_1608) The expression
Kwachil-loka, 'a certain place,' is explained by the commentator,
Kíkat́a, &c.; confirming the inference that Buddhism is especially aimed
at in the previous passages; for Kíkat́a, or south Behar, is the scene of
Śákya's earliest and most successful labours.

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[625:17](vp156.htm#fr_1609) Several of the
Puráńas contain allusions to the degeneracy of the Kali age, <span
id="page_626">p. 626</span> but none afford more copious details. The
description in the Bhágavata is much shorter; that of the Váyu is much
the same, and employs many of the same verses and illustrations.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[626:18](vp156.htm#fr_1610) This might be
suspected of being said ironically, referring to what had been just
observed of places where a religion prevailed that required neither
study nor sacrifice. The commentator, however, understands it literally,
and asserts that allusion is here made to the Vaishńava faith, in which
devotion to Vishńu or Krishńa, and the mere repetition of his name, are
equally efficacious in the Kali age with the penances and sacrifices of
the preceding ages: therefore he concludes the Kali, by this one
property, is the best of all the ages. This interpretation is confirmed
by the following chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](vp157)
