[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp162)  [Next](vp164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_660">p. 660</span>

### CHAP. VIII.

Conclusion of the dialogue between Paráśara and Maitreya. Recapitulation
of the contents of the Vishńu Puráńa: merit of hearing it: how handed
down. Praises of Vishńu. Concluding prayer.

I HAVE now explained to you, Maitreya, the third kind of worldly
dissolution, or that which is absolute and final, which is, liberation
and resolution into eternal spirit <span
id="fr_1660"></span>[1](#fn_1660). I have related to you primary and
secondary creation, the families of the patriarchs, the periods of the
Manwantaras, and the genealogical histories (of the kings). I have
repeated to you, in short, who were desirous of hearing it, the
imperishable Vaishńava Puráńa, which is destructive of all sins, the
most excellent of all holy writings, and the means of attaining the
great end of man. If there is any thing else you wish to hear, propose
your question, and I will answer it.

MAITREYA.--Holy teacher, you have indeed related to me all that I wished
to know, and I have listened to it with pious attention. I have nothing
further to inquire. The doubts inseparable from the mind of man have all
been resolved by you, and through your instructions I am acquainted with
the origin, duration, and end of all things; with Vishńu in his
collective fourfold form <span id="fr_1661"></span>[2](#fn_1661); his
three energies <span id="fr_1662"></span>[3](#fn_1662); and with the
three modes of apprehending the object of contemplation <span
id="fr_1663"></span>[4](#fn_1663). Of all this have I acquired a
knowledge through your favour, and nothing else is worthy to be known,
when it is once understood that Vishńu and this world are not mutually
distinct. Great Muni, I have obtained through your kindness all I
desired, the dissipation of my doubts, since you have instructed me

<span id="page_661">p. 661</span>

in the duties of the several tribes, and in other obligations; the
nature of active life, and discontinuance of action; and the derivation
of all that exists from works. There is nothing else, venerable Brahman,
that I have to inquire of you; and forgive me if your answers to my
questions have imposed upon you any fatigue. Pardon me the trouble that
I have given you, through that amiable quality of the virtuous -which
makes no distinction between a disciple and a child.

PARÁŚARA.--I have related to you this Puráńa, which is equal to the
Vedas in sanctity, and by hearing which all faults and sins whatever are
expiated. In this have been described to you the primary and secondary
creation, the families of the patriarchs, the Manwantaras, the regal
dynasties; the gods, Daityas, Gandharbas, serpents, Rákshasas, Yakshas,
Vidyádharas, Siddhas, and heavenly nymphs; Munis endowed with spiritual
wisdom, and practisers of devotion; the distinctions of the four castes,
and the actions of the most eminent amongst men; holy places on the
earth, holy rivers and oceans, sacred mountains, and legends of the
truly wise; the duties of the different tribes, and the observances
enjoined by the Vedas. By hearing this, all sins are at once
obliterated. In this also the glorious Hari has been revealed, the cause
of the creation, preservation, and destruction of the world; the soul of
all things, and himself all things: by the repetition of whose name man
is undoubtedly liberated from all sins, which fly like wolves that are
frightened by a lion. The repetition of his name with devout faith is
the best remover of all sins, destroying them as fire purifies the metal
from the dross. The stain of the Kali age, which ensures to men sharp
punishments in hell, is at once effaced by a single invocation of Hari.
He who is all that is, the whole egg of Brahmá, with Hirańyagarbha,
Indra, Rudra, the Ádityas, the Aswins, the winds, the Kinnaras, the
Vasus, the Sádhyas, Viśwadevas, the celestial gods, the Yakshas,
serpents, Rákshasas, the Siddhas, Daityas, Gandharbas, Dánavas, nymphs,
the stars, asterisms, planets, the seven Rishis, the regents and
superintendants of the quarters, men, Brahmans and the rest, animals
tame and wild, insects, birds, ghosts and goblins, trees, mountains,
woods, rivers, oceans, the subterrene legions, the divisions of the
earth, and all perceptible objects--he who is all things, who

<span id="page_662">p. 662</span>

knoweth all things, who is the form of all things, being without form
himself, and of whom whatever is, from mount Meru to an atom, all
consists--he, the glorious Vishńu, the destroyer of all sin--is
described in this Puráńa. By hearing this Puráńa an equal recompense is
obtained to that which is derived from the performance of an Aśwamedha
sacrifice, or from fasting at the holy places Prayága, Pushkara,
Kurukshetra, or Arbuda. Hearing this Puráńa but once is as efficacious
as the offering of oblations in a perpetual fire for a year. The man who
with well-governed passions bathes at Mathurá on the twelfth day of the
month Jyesht́ha <span id="fr_1664"></span>[5](#fn_1664), and beholds (the
image of) Hari, obtains a great recompense; so does he who with mind
fixed upon Keśava attentively recites this Puráńa. The man who bathes in
the waters of the Yamuná on the twelfth lunation of the light fortnight
of the month in which the moon is in the mansion Jyesht́há, and who fasts
and worships Achyuta in the city of Mathurá, receives the reward of an
uninterrupted Aśwamedha. Beholding the degree of prosperity enjoyed by
others of eminence, through the merits of their descendants, a man's
paternal ancestors, his parents and their parents, exclaim, "Whosoever
of our descendants, having bathed in the Yamuná and fasted, will worship
Govinda in Mathurá, in the light fortnight of Jyesht́ha, will secure for
us eminent exaltation; for we shall be elevated by the merits of our
posterity!" A man of good extraction will present obsequial cakes to his
fortunate ancestors in the Yamuná, having worshipped Janárddana in the
light fortnight of Jyesht́ha. But the same degree of merit that a man
reaps front adoring Janárddana at that season with a devoted heart, and
from bathing in the Yamuná, and effecting the liberation of his
progenitors by offering to them on such an occasion obsequial cakes, he
derives also from hearing with equal devotion a section of this Puráńa.
This Puráńa is the best of all preservatives for those who are afraid of
worldly existence,

<span id="page_663">p. 663</span>

a certain alleviation of the sufferings of men, and remover of all
imperfections.

This Puráńa, originally composed by the Rishi (Náráyańa), was
communicated by Brahmá to Ribhu; he related it to Priyavrata, by whom it
was imparted to Bháguri. Bháguri recited it to Tamasitra <span
id="fr_1665"></span>[6](#fn_1665), and he to Dadícha, who gave it to
Sáraswata. From the last Bhrigu received it, who imparted it to
Purukutsa, and he taught it to Narmadá. The goddess delivered it to
Dhritarásht́ra the Nága king, and to Puráńa of the same race, by whom it
was repeated to their monarch Vásuki. Vásuki communicated it to Vatsa,
and he to Áswatara, from whom it successively proceeded to Kambala and
Elapatra. When the Muni Vedaśiras descended to Pátála, he there received
the whole Puráńa from these Nágas, and communicated it to Pramati.
Pramati consigned it to the wise Játukarńa, and he taught it to many
other holy persons. Through the blessing of Vaśisht́ha it came to my
knowledge, and I have now, Maitreya, faithfully imparted it to you. You
will teach it, at the end of the Kali age, to Śamíka <span
id="fr_1666"></span>[7](#fn_1666). Whoever hears this great mystery,
which removes the contamination of the Kali, shall be freed from all his
sins. He who hears this every day acquits himself of his daily
obligations to ancestors, gods, and men. The great and rarely attainable
merit that a man acquires by the gift of a brown cow, he derives from
hearing ten chapters of this Puráńa <span
id="fr_1667"></span>[8](#fn_1667). He who hears the entire Puráńa,
contemplating in his mind Achyuta, who is all things, and of whom all
things are made; who is the stay of the whole world, the receptacle of
spirit; who is knowledge, and that which is to be known; who is without
beginning or end, and the benefactor of the gods--obtains assuredly the
reward that attends the uninterrupted celebration of the Aśwamedha rite.
He who reads and retains with faith this Puráńa,

<span id="page_664">p. 664</span>

in the beginning, middle, and end of which is described the glorious
Achyuta, the lord of the universe in every stage, the master of all that
is stationary or moveable, composed of spiritual knowledge, acquires
such purity as exists not in any world, the eternal state of perfection,
which is Hari. The man who fixes his mind on Vishńu goes not to hell: he
who meditates upon him regards heavenly enjoyment only as an impediment:
and he whose mind and soul are penetrated by him thinks little of the
world of Brahmá; for when present in the minds of those whose intellects
are free from soil, he confers upon them eternal freedom. What marvel
therefore is it that the sins of one who repeats the name of Achyuta
should be wiped away? Should not that Hari be heard of, whom those
devoted to acts worship with sacrifices continually as the god of
sacrifice; whom those devoted to meditation contemplate as primary and
secondary, composed of spirit; by obtaining whom man is not born, nor
nourished, nor subjected to death; who is all that is, and that is not
(or both cause and of effect); who, as the progenitors, receives the
libations made to them; who, as the gods, accepts the offerings
addressed to them; the glorious being who is without beginning or end;
whose name is both Swáhá and Swadhá <span
id="fr_1668"></span>[9](#fn_1668); who is the abode of all spiritual
power; in whom the limits of finite things cannot be measured <span
id="fr_1669"></span>[10](#fn_1669); and who, when he enters the ear,
destroys all sin?

I adore him, that first of gods, Purushottama, who is without end and
without beginning, without growth, without decay, without death; who is
substance that knows not change. I adore that ever inexhaustible spirit;
who assumed sensible qualities; who, though one, became many; who,
though pure, became as if impure, by appearing in many and various
shapes; who is endowed with divine wisdom, and is the author of the
preservation of all creatures. I adore him, who is the one conjoined
essence and object of both meditative wisdom and active virtue;

<span id="page_665">p. 665</span>

who is watchful in providing for human enjoyments; who is one with the
three qualities; who, without undergoing change, is the cause of the
evolution of the world; who exists of his own essence, ever exempt from
decay. I constantly adore him, who is entitled heaven, air, fire, water,
earth, and ether; who is the bestower of all the objects which give
gratification to the senses; who benefits mankind with the instruments
of fruition; who is perceptible, who is subtile, who is imperceptible.
May that unborn, eternal Hari, whose form is manifold, and whose essence
is composed of both nature and spirit, bestow upon all mankind that
blessed state which knows neither birth nor decay!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[660:1](vp163.htm#fr_1660) The term is
Brahmáńi laya, which means, 'a melting away,' 'a dissolution' or
'fusion,' from the root, 'to liquefy,' 'to melt,' 'to dissolve.'

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[660:2](vp163.htm#fr_1661) Or with Vishńu in
the four modifications described in the first section, spirit, matter,
form, and time: see [p. 9](vp036.htm#page_9).

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[660:3](vp163.htm#fr_1662) Or Śakti, noticed
in the last chapter, [p. 655](vp162.htm#page_655).

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[660:4](vp163.htm#fr_1663) Or Bhávanás, also
described in the preceding section, [p. 654](vp162.htm#page_654).

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[662:5](vp163.htm#fr_1664) This month is also
called Jyesht́hamúla, which the commentator explains to mean, the month,
of which the root or cause (Múla) of being so called is the moon's being
full in the constellation Jyesht́há: but it may be so termed, perhaps,
from the lunar asterism Múlá, which is next to Jyesht́há, falling also
within the moon's passage through the same month.

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[663:6](vp163.htm#fr_1665) This name is also
read Tambamitra. One copy has Tava-mitráya, 'to thy friend,' as if it
was an epithet of Dadhícha; but the construction of the verse requires a
proper name. 'Bháguri gave it to Tambamitra, and he to Dadhíchi.'

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[663:7](vp163.htm#fr_1666) A different series
of narrators has been specified in the first book, [p.
9](vp036.htm#page_9).

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[663:8](vp163.htm#fr_1667) This seems to be an
injudicious interpolation; it is not in all the copies.

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[664:9](vp163.htm#fr_1668) The words or
prayers employed in presenting oblations with fire.

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[664:10](vp163.htm#fr_1669) The text has,
\#\#\#. Mána commonly means 'pride,' but here it seems most
appropriately rendered by its radical import, 'measure' the measures
which are for the determination of measurable things are not applicable
to Vishńu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A](vp164)
