[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gd01)  [Next](gd03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0252068823/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
*The Grateful Dead*, by Gordon Hall Gerould, \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage](index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

THE combination of narrative themes is so frequent a phenomenon in folk
and formal literature that one almost forgets to wonder at it. Yet in
point of fact the reason for it and the means by which it is
accomplished are mysteries past our present comprehension. If we could
learn how and where popular tales unite, if we could formulate any
general principle of union or severance, we should be well on the way to
an understanding of the riddle which has hitherto baffled all students
of narrative, namely, the diffusion of stories. We have theories enough;
our immediate need is for more studies of individual themes, careful
and, if it must be, elaborate discussions of many well-known cycles.
Happily, these are accumulating and give promise of much useful
knowledge at no distant day.

One principle has become clear. Since motives are so frequently found in
combination, it is essential that the complex types be analyzed and
arranged, with an eye kept single nevertheless to the master-theme under
discussion. Collectors, both primary and subsidiary, have done such
valiant service that the treasures at our command are amply sufficient
for such studies, so extensive, indeed, that the task of going through
them thoroughly has become too great for the unassisted student. It
cannot be too strongly urged that a single theme in its various types
and compounds must be made predominant in any useful comparative study.
This is true when the sources and analogues of any literary work are
treated; it is even truer when the bare motive is discussed.

*The Grateful Dead* furnishes an apt illustration of the necessity of
such handling. It appears in a variety of different

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

combinations, almost never alone. Indeed, it is so widespread a tale,
and its combinations are so various, that there is the utmost difficulty
in determining just what may properly he regarded the original kernel of
it, the simple theme to which other motives were joined. Various
opinions, as we shall see, have been held with reference to this matter,
most of them justified perhaps by the materials in the hands of the
scholars holding them, but none quite adequate in view of later
evidence. The true way to solve the riddle appears to be this: we must
ask the question,—what is the residuum when the tale is stripped of
elements not common to a very great majority of the versions belonging
to the cycle? What is left amounts to the following,—the story reduced
to its lowest terms, I take it.

A man finds a corpse lying unburied, and out of pure philanthropy
procures interment for it at great personal inconvenience. Later he is
met by the ghost of the dead man, who in many cases promises him help on
condition of receiving, in return, half of whatever he gets. The hero
obtains a wife (or some other reward), and, when called upon, is ready
to fulfil his bargain as to sharing his possessions.

Nowhere does a version appear in quite this form; but from what follows
it will be seen that the simple story must have proceeded along some
such lines. The compounds in which it occurs show much variety. It will
be necessary to study these in detail, not merely one or two of them but
as many as can be found. Despite the bewildering complexities that may
arise, I hope that this method of approach may throw some new light on
the wanderings of the tale.

Of my debt to various friends and to many books, though indicated in the
body of the work, I wish to make general and grateful acknowledgment
here. My thanks, furthermore, are due to the librarians of Harvard
University for their courteous hospitality; to Professor G. L. Kittredge
for his generous encouragement to proceed with this study, though he
himself, as I found after most of my material was collected, had
undertaken it several years before I began; and to Professor R. K. Root
for his help in reading the proofs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. A Review](gd03)
