[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gd02)  [Next](gd04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0252068823/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
*The Grateful Dead*, by Gordon Hall Gerould, \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### CHAPTER I.

#### A REVIEW.

To Karl Simrock is due the honour of discovering the importance of *The
Grateful Dead* for the student of literature and legend. In his little
book, *Der gute Gerhard and die dankbaren Todten*, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) he called attention to the theme as a theme,
and treated it with a breadth of knowledge and a clearness of insight
remarkable in an attempt to unravel for the first time the mixed strands
of so wide-spread a tale. Using the Middle High German exemplary
romance, *Der gute Gerhard*, as his point of departure, he examined
seventeen other stories, all but two of which have the motive well
preserved. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) Unhappily, the versions
which he found came from a limited section of Europe, most of them from
Germanic sources. Thus he was led to an interpretation of the tale on
the basis of Germanic mythology. This, though ingenious enough and very
erudite, need not detain us. It was done according to a fashion of the
time, which has long since been discarded. Simrock took the essential
traits of the theme to be the burial of the dead and the ransom from
captivity. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) "Wo nur noch eine von
beiden das Thema zu bilden scheint," he said, "da hat die Ueberlieferung
gelitten." Here again he was misled by the narrow

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

range of his material, as later studies have shown. Nearly all the
versions he cited have the motive of a ransomed princess, though the
majority of the stories now known to be members of the cycle do not
contain it.

Three years after the publication of Simrock's monograph Benfey treated
some features of the theme in a note appended to his discussion of *The
Thankful Beasts* in the monumental *Pantschatantra*. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) Though he named but a few variants, he found
an Armenian tale which he compared with the European versions, coming to
the conclusion not only that the motive proceeded from the Orient but
also that the Armenian version had the original form of it. That is, he
took the ransom and burial of the dead, the parting of a woman possessed
by a serpent, and the saving of the hero on the bridal night as the
essential features. This was a step in advance.

George Stephens in his edition of *Sir Amadas* <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md) held much the same view. He added several
important versions, and scored Simrock for admitting *Der gute Gerhard*,
saying that he could not see that it had "any direct connection" with
*The Grateful Dead*. <span id="fr_5"></span>[3](#fn_5.md) He was at least
partly in the right, even though his statement was misleading. According
to his opinion, <span id="fr_6"></span>[4](#fn_6.md) "the peculiar feature
of the Princess (Maiden) being freed from *demonic* influence by
*celestial* aid, is undoubtedly the original form of the tale."

In a series of notes beginning in the year 1858 Köhler <span
id="fr_7"></span>[5](#fn_7.md) supplied a large number of variants, which
have been invaluable for succeeding study of the theme. Nowhere,

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

however, did he give an ordered account of the versions at his command
or discuss the relation of the elements—a regrettable omission. The
contributions of Liebrecht, <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) though
less extensive, were of the same sort. In his article published in 1868
he said that he thought *The Grateful Dead* to be of European
origin, <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9.md) but he added nothing to our
knowledge of the essential form of the story. The following decade saw
the publication by Sepp of a rather brief account of the motive, <span
id="fr_10"></span>[3](#fn_10.md) which was chiefly remarkable for its
summary of classical and pre-classical references concerning the duty of
burial. Like Stephens he assumed that the release of a maiden from the
possession of demons was an essential part of the tale. In 1886 Cosquin
brought the discussion one step further by showing <span
id="fr_11"></span>[4](#fn_11.md) that the theme is sometimes found in
combination with *The Golden Bird* and *The Water of Life*. He did not,
however, attempt to define the original form of the story nor to trace
its development.

By all odds the most adequate treatment that *The Grateful Dead* has yet
received is found in Hippe's monograph, *Untersuchungen zu der
mittelenglischen Romanze von Sir Amadas*, which appeared in 1888. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[5](#fn_12.md) Not only did he gather together
practically all the variants mentioned previous to that time and add
some few new ones, but he studied the theme with such interpretative
insight that anyone going over the same field would be tempted to offer
an apology for what may seem superfluous labour. Such a follower, and
all followers, must gratefully acknowledge their indebtedness to his
labours.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

Yet one who follows imperfectly the counsels of perfection may discover
certain defects in Hippe's work. He neglects altogether Cosquin's hint
as to the combination of the theme with *The Water of Life* and allied
tales, thus leaving out of account an important element, which is
intimately connected with the chief motive in a large number of tales.
Indeed, his effort to simplify, commendable and even necessary as it is,
brings him to conclusions that in some respects, I believe, are not
sound. Though he states the essential points of the primitive story in a
form <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) which can hardly be bettered
and which corresponds almost exactly to the one that I have been led to
accept from independent consideration of the material, <span
id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14.md) he fails to see that he is dealing in
almost every case, not with a simple theme with modified details but
with compound themes. Thus he starts out with the "Sage vom dankbaren
Toten und der Frau mit den Drachen im Leibe" <span
id="fr_15"></span>[3](#fn_15.md) and explains all variations from this type
either by the weakening of this feature and that or by the introduction
of a single new motive, the story of *The Ransomed Woman*. He would thus
make it appear <span id="fr_16"></span>[4](#fn_16.md) that we have a
well-ordered progression from one combined type to various other
combined and simplified types. Such a series is possible without doubt,
but it can hardly be admitted till the interplay of all accessible
themes, which have entered into combination with the chief theme, is
investigated. Hippe passes these things

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

over silently and so gives the subject a specious air of simplicity to
which it has no right.

I should be the last to deny the necessity of treating narrative themes
each for itself, and I have nothing but admiration for the general
conduct of Hippe's investigation; but I wish to show that his methods,
and therefore his results, are at fault in so far as he does not
recognize the nature of the combinations into which *The Grateful Dead*
enters. Traces of other stories, unless their presence is obviously
artificial, must be carefully considered, since in dealing with cycles
of such fluid stuff as folk-tales it is certainly wise to give each
element due consideration. Certain minor errors in Hippe's article will
be mentioned in due course, though my constant obligations to it must be
emphasized here.

Since the appearance of Hippe's study no one has treated *The Grateful
Dead* with such scope as to modify his conclusions. Perhaps the most
interesting work in the field has been that of Dr. Dutz <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) on the relation of George Peele's *Old
Wives’ Tale* to our theme. He follows Hippe's scheme, but gives some
interesting new variants. Of less importance, but useful within its
limits, is the section devoted to the saga by Dr. Heinrich Wilhelmi in
his *Studien über die Chanson de Lion de Bourges*. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18.md) Though he added no new versions, the
author studied in detail the relationship of some of the mediaeval forms
to one another, basing his results for the most part on careful textual
comparison. His gravest fault was the thoroughly artificial way in which
he mapped out the field as a whole, a method which could lead only to
erroneous conclusions, since he classified according to a couple of
superficial traits. An English study by Mr. F. H. Groome on *Tobit and
Jack the* 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](gd03.htm#fr_0.md) 1856.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](gd03.htm#fr_1.md) *Guter Gerhard*, as will be
seen later, does not follow the theme at all.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](gd03.htm#fr_2.md) P. 114.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2:1](gd03.htm#fr_3.md) 1859, i. 219-221.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2:2](gd03.htm#fr_4.md) *Ghost-Thanks or The
Grateful Unburied, A Mythic Tale in its Oldest European Form, Sir
Amadace*, 1860.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[2:3](gd03.htm#fr_5.md) P. 9.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[2:4](gd03.htm#fr_6.md) P. 7.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[2:5](gd03.htm#fr_7.md) *Germania*, iii. 199-210,
xii. 55 ff.; *Or. u. Occ.* ii. 322-329, iii. 93-103; *Arch. f. slav.
Phil.* ii. 631-634, v. 40 ff.; Gonzenbach, *Sicilianische Märchen*,
1870, ii. 248-250.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[3:1](gd03.htm#fr_8.md) *Heidelberger Jahrbücher der
Lit.* 1868, lxi. 449-452, 1872, lxv. 894 f.; *Germania*, xxiv. 132 f.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[3:2](gd03.htm#fr_9.md) P. 449.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[3:3](gd03.htm#fr_10.md) *Altbayerischer
Sagenschatz zur Bereicherung der indogermanischen Mythologie*, 1876, pp.
678-689.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[3:4](gd03.htm#fr_11.md) *Contes populaires de
Lorraine*, i. 214, 215.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[3:5](gd03.htm#fr_12.md) *Archiv f. d. Stud. d.
neueren Sprachen*, lxxxi. 141-183.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[4:1](gd03.htm#fr_13.md) P. 167. "Ein Jüngling
zeigt sich menschenfreundlich gegen die Leiche eines Unbekannten (indem
er dieselbe vor Schimf bewahrt, bestattet, etc.). Der Geist des Toten
gesellt sich darauf zu ihm und erweist sich ihm dankbar, indem er ihm zu
Reichtum und zum Besitze des von ihm zur Frau begehrten Mädchens
verhilft, jedoch unter der Bedingung, dass er dereinst alles durch ihn
Gewonnene mit ihm teile. Der Jüngling geht auf diesen Vertrag ein, und
der Geist stellt sich nach einer gewissen Zeit wieder ein, um das
Versprochene entgegenzunehmen, verlangt aber nicht die Hälfte des
gewonnene Gutes, sondern die der Frau. (Schluss variabel.)"

<span id="fn_14"></span>[4:2](gd03.htm#fr_14.md) See [p.
x](gd01.htm#page_x.md). above.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[4:3](gd03.htm#fr_15.md) P. 180.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[4:4](gd03.htm#fr_16.md) See his scheme on p. 181.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[5:1](gd03.htm#fr_17.md) *Der Dank des Todten in
der englischen Literatur, Jahresbericht der Staats-Oberrealschule in
Troppau*, 1894.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[5:2](gd03.htm#fr_18.md) Marburg diss. 1894, pp.
43-63.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
*Giant-Killer* <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) unhappily was written
without regard to the previous literature of the subject, and simply
rehearses a number of well-known variants.

In this brief review I have touched only on such studies of *The
Grateful Dead* as have materially enlarged the knowledge of the subject
or have attempted a discussion of the theme in a broad way. In the
following chapter reference will be made to other works, in which
particular versions have been printed or summarized.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[6:1](gd03.htm#fr_19.md) *Folk-Lore*, ix. 226-244
(1898).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Bibliography](gd04.md)
