[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gd05)  [Next](gd07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0252068823/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
*The Grateful Dead*, by Gordon Hall Gerould, \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

#### THE GRATEFUL DEAD AND THE POISON MAIDEN.

ONE of the most prevalent types of *The Grateful Dead* is that in which
it has combined with *The Poison Maiden*, a theme almost world-wide in
distribution and application. From the time of Benfey and Stephens <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) the connection between the two themes has
been regarded as vital. Though Hippe recognised that the stories were
perhaps originally independent, <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66.md) he
took the compound as his point of departure and derived all other forms
from it. As will be seen in the course of our study, such a filiation is
exceedingly improbable, if the essential features of *The Grateful Dead*
and *The Poison Maiden* be closely examined. Hippe went wrong, I should
say, in failing to differentiate between what traits belong to the
former and what to the latter theme.

As a matter of fact, *The Poison Maiden* exists in a cycle of its own.
Any doubt about this and any necessity of studying the theme in detail
here is removed by the valuable monograph of Wilhelm Hertz, *Die Sage
vom Giftmädchen*, <span id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_67.md) in which the
literature of the subject has been marshalled with masterly skill.
Starting with the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

stories of how a maiden, who had been fed with snake-poison, was sent to
Alexander the Great from India by an enemy, and how the plot to kill the
emperor through her embraces was foiled by the cunning of
Aristotle, <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md) Hertz shows <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69.md) that the central idea of the tale is the
belief that a man could be killed by sexual connection with a woman who
had been nourished on poison. In most of the variants, to be sure, it is
the bite of the woman that is venomous, while in others it is her glance
or her breath; but these are natural modifications. Without following
the study into details, the important fact to remember is that there has
existed from early times a tale relating how a man was saved by a
watchful friend on his bridal night from a maiden whose embraces were
certain death. <span id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70.md) With this in mind we
can safely proceed to a consideration of the variants of *The Grateful
Dead* which have similar features.

Twenty-four of the stories in my list fall into this category, *viz.*:
*Tobit*, *Armenian*, *Gypsy*, *Siberian*, *Russian* 

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

*I.*, *II.*, *III.*, and *IV.*, *Servian II.*, *III.*, and *IV*,
*Bulgarian*, *Esthonian II.*, *Finnish*, *Rumanian I.*, *Irish I.*,
*II.*, and *III.*, *Breton I.*, *Danish III.*, *Norwegian II.*, *Simrock
X.*, *Harz I.*, *Jack the Giant Killer*, and *Old Wives’ Tale*. All but
three of them <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71.md) are folk-tales, a fact
that considerably simplifies the discussion.

According to the apocryphal story, Tobit buries by night the dead who
lie in the street. He is thrown into prison, and later becomes blind and
poverty-stricken. He sends his son Tobias to his brother Gabael for the
return of a loan. The youth is accompanied by the angel Raphael in
disguise, who calls himself Azarias. On the journey Tobias catches a
fish and preserves the heart, liver, and gall at the bidding of his
companion. When they arrive at their journey's end, the angel, as
go-between, asks Gabael's daughter Sara in wedlock for Tobias, though
seven men have died while consummating their marriage with her. By
burning the heart and liver of the fish at the command of the angel, and
by prayer, Tobias escapes; for the demon Asmodeus is driven out of the
maiden and bound by Raphael. With his bride and companion Tobias goes
home, where he cures Tobit's blindness by means of the gall of the fish.
After being offered half of the wealth that he has brought the family,
Raphael explains his identity and disappears.

This variant is peculiar in that the father does the good action, while
the son is chiefly rewarded. Indeed, it is the son whose life is saved
from the possessed woman whom he marries. Moreover, the grateful dead is
replaced by an angel, who indeed commends Tobit for his good deed, but
is certainly a substitute for the ghost. Obviously Tobit with such
peculiarities as these cannot be regarded as the general source of the
widespread folk-tale. At the same time we must not forget that it has
been, perhaps, the best-loved story in the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Apocrypha, <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md) and that its influence on details of the
narrative may be looked for almost anywhere in Christendom.

In the *Armenian* story from Transcaucasia <span
id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73.md) a man finds a corpse hanging in a tree and
being beaten by his late creditors. The man pays the debt and buries the
body. Some years later he becomes poor. A rich man offers him in
marriage his daughter, with whom five bridegrooms have already met death
on the wedding night. While thinking over the proposition, he is
approached by a man who offers to become his servant for half of his
future possessions, and counsels him to marry the woman. On the night of
the marriage the servant stands with a sword in the chamber, cuts off
the head of a serpent that comes from the bride's mouth, and pulls out
its body. Later he asks for his share of his master's gains. When he is
about to split the woman through the middle, a second snake glides from
her mouth. The servant then says that he is the ghost of the corpse long
ago rescued, and disappears. Here the story appears in a very normal
form, except that the hero is not taking a journey at the time of his
kind deed, and that he waits several years for his reward. Moreover, the
second snake appears to be due to reduplication.

In *Gypsy* a youth gives his last twelve piasters for the release of a
corpse, which is being maltreated by Jews. The ghost of the dead man
follows him and promises to get him a bride if he will share her with
him. The youth consents and marries a woman whose five bridegrooms have
died on the wedding night. The companion keeps watch in the chamber and
cuts off the head of a dragon that comes from the bride's mouth.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Later he demands
his half of the woman, and takes a sword to cut her asunder, when she
screams and disgorges the dragon's body. The ghost then explains the
situation and disappears. <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md)

With the *Siberian* variant some very important modifications enter. A
soldier buys a picture of the Saviour from a peasant and maltreats it. A
merchant's son then buys it out of reverence and takes it to his mother.
Later he helps an old man on a raft and goes with him to market. There
he meets the daughter of a priest and, by the advice of his friend,
marries her. When the old man strikes her with a whip, she splits open,
and the devil comes out. She is put together again by the mysterious
companion, and accompanies them home, where the old man asks for a
division of the gains they have made together. Again he divides the
woman. After she has been burned, she is found living and purified. Then
the old man says that he is God and departs.

This tale, found among the Turkish race of southern Siberia, has
transformed the opening incident altogether. For the burial of the
corpse it substitutes a good deed, which is entirely different from the
original trait. Yet it is evident that we have to do with *The Grateful
Dead*, after all, since the divine image is rescued from senseless
contumely and God himself appears in the rôle of the thankful ghost. It
is evident also that the theme is combined with *The Poison Maiden*.
Though we do not hear of any misadventures of other men with the
priest's daughter, the marvels which attend her purification indicate
the danger in which the hero stood.

*Russian I.* is likewise peculiar in several respects. The younger of
two brothers angers his parents by going

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

to the wars without their permission. He is killed. Later he appears to
his brother, asking him to implore pardon of their mother, whose anger
prevents him from resting quietly in his grave. The elder brother thus
succeeds in giving peace to the ghost. Later, when he marries a
merchant's daughter, whose first two husbands have been killed by a
dragon on the wedding night, he is saved by the ghost of the dead, which
keeps watch in the chamber with a sword and kills the nine-headed
dragon.

This tale stands almost alone <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md) in
giving the two chief characters personal relations, since it is nearly
always a total stranger whom the hero benefits. That actual burial of
the dead does not come in question is not so remarkable, as various
changes have been made in this trait. One story, <span
id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76.md) indeed, which otherwise has no likeness,
similarly makes the dead man uneasy in his grave. The beginning of
*Russian I.* has thus suffered considerable modification. The ending is
also different from the normal type in that the division of the property
and the woman has entirely disappeared.

*Russian II.* has also some peculiarities, though none which is
difficult to explain. A youth named Hans receives three hundred rubles
from his uncle, who has taken his inheritance, and goes into the world.
In another province he ransoms with his whole stock of money an
unbeliever, who is being bled by the people. He has the poor man
baptised, but is not able to save his life, so sorely has he been
wounded. The people, however, pay for proper burial. Hans goes on and is
joined by an angel, who proposes that he take him as uncle and divide
with him whatever they get while in one another's company. They come to
a city where

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the king proposes that Hans marry his daughter, and to this the hero
agrees at his companion's advice, despite the protests of the citizens,
who say that the princess has already strangled six bridegrooms. On the
wedding night the uncle keeps watch, and slays a dragon which is
approaching to kill the young man. After two months the pair set out for
home with the uncle. On the way they are saved by the old man from
robbers, and get a store of gold. When they arrive at the place where
the uncle first appeared, he calls for a fulfilment of their agreement,
and saws the bride asunder. Young dragons come out of her; but, when she
has been washed and sprinkled with water, she is made whole. The angel
thereupon parts with the couple.

For the burial of the dead we have in this tale the interesting
substitution of an unsuccessful attempt of the hero to save a man's life
by paying his entire inheritance as ransom. That the man dies and is
buried shows how the change probably arose, Strangely enough, as in the
case of *Tobit*, an angel appears in the rôle of the grateful dead, and,
even more oddly, takes the form of the hero's uncle, who gave him the
money with which he set forth on his journey. The recurrence of the
angel in this and in one other variant <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) inclines me to the belief that the
essential feature of the reward in the original story was that it came
from heaven. The remainder of *Russian II.* has no characteristic
unusual in the tales where the woman is actually divided to get rid of
the snakes or dragons.

In *Russian III.* <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78.md) the youngest of
three brothers rescues a swimming coffin from the sea and takes it on
his ship. From the coffin comes a man clothed in a white shirt, who
enters the service of his rescuer, and helps him win a beautiful
princess as wife. A six-headed dragon has hitherto killed all her
bridegrooms on the wedding night,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

but it is overcome by the hero through his obedience to the advice of
his servant. The latter cleanses the bride's body of the dragon brood
and goes away. Here the opening has been modified, though not beyond
recognition, since the rescued man is clearly enough the grateful dead.

*Russian IV.*, taken like the preceding from a folk-book, differs from
that in only minor points, though the ampler form in which I have found
it makes it of more importance. The three sons of a czar go out in
separate ships to see the world. The youngest, named Sila, rescues a
swimming coffin, which his brothers have not heeded, and buries it on
shore. There he leaves his companions, and goes on alone till joined by
a man dressed in a shroud, who says that he is the rescued corpse and
proposes that Sila win a certain Princess Truda as wife by his aid. The
hero is dismayed when he sees the walls of her city decorated with the
heads of countless former suitors, but he is told by his servant not to
fear. On the bridal night he is counselled to keep silence, and, when
his wife presses her hand on his breast, to beat her, as she is in
league with a six-headed dragon. Sila obeys, the dragon appears, and the
servant cuts off two of its heads. Two more heads are cut off on the
second night, and the remaining two on the third. The bride is not
completely cleansed, however, till the end of a year, when the servant
cuts her in two, burns the evil things that emerge from her body, and
sprinkles her with living water to make her well again. He then
disappears.

Here the grateful dead appears with perfect clearness, as he did not in
*Russian III.* The course of events by which the lady is won does not
differ materially from that of *Russian II.* Presumably *III.* would
follow the same procedure, had we an adequate summary. *III.* and *IV.*
are like *I.*, and different from *II.*, in omitting

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

all mention of any division of property or of the woman between hero and
assistant. The division for the sake of cleansing in *IV.* is, however,
actual.

Not without contamination from another source, *Russian V.* and *VI.*
still belong to the class containing variants with *The Poison Maiden*.
In *Russian V.* the only son of a rich man went out into the world to
seek his fortune. On the road he gave a large sum of money for two
horses. Later he stopped at an inn, where the widow of the landlord was
weeping because she had no money to pay the debts of her husband, who
was cursed by all the people, though he had been dead two years. The
hero gave all his money to save the memory of the dead man, and
proceeded. Soon he met two unsatisfied creditors, who still cursed the
dead landlord, and to them he gave his two horses. Not long afterward he
was joined by a man, who accompanied him on condition of receiving half
of what they might win together. They came to a place where a lord
offered a thousand rubles to anyone who would watch his daughter's
corpse over night in a chapel. The hero undertook the adventure, and
received payment in advance. At dark his companion came to him, and gave
him a cross as protection. At midnight the lady came out of her coffin,
but could not find the man because he held the cross. The same adventure
was repeated the next night. On the third night the hero, according to
his companion's advice, got into the coffin when the vampire rose, and
would not get out for all her entreaties, being protected by the cross.
So in the morning both were found alive, and were betrothed. Then came
the companion, cut the maiden into halves, took out her entrails, and
put her together again, when she became very beautiful. Next day he
called the hero aside, explained his identity with the dead landlord,
and disappeared.

*Russian VI.* differs from the above in several points,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

but is closely allied to it. There were two brothers, one good and the
other stingy. The former expended in benevolence all his wealth, save a
hundred rubles, while the latter grew richer and richer. A poor man
borrowed a hundred rubles from the miser, calling St. George as witness
that he would pay; but he died in debt. The rich brother came to the
widow, and said that he would get his money from St. George if not from
the dead man. He pulled down an image of the saint from the wall, dug up
the corpse, and spat upon them both. At this juncture the good brother
came by, and gave his last hundred rubles to put the matter right. He
then went to a large city, where the king's daughter had eaten all the
deacons who watched with her dead body. So when volunteers were called
for to stay with her, the hero offered to undertake the task at the
advice of an old man, who promised to pray for his safety on condition
of receiving half his winnings. He received payment in advance from the
king, and divided with the old man, by whom he was given a sanctified
coal, a taper, a cross, and a scapulary, together with advice how to
act. So he entered the chapel, lighted his taper, closed his eyes, made
the sign of the cross, and enclosed himself in a circle marked with the
coal near the head of the bier. At cockcrow the vampire came out all
blue and grinning; but, though she yelled horribly, she could not touch
the man in the circle, who put the cross in the coffin. At the second
cockcrow she tried to get into the coffin, and unavailingly begged him
to take out the cross. At the third cockcrow he put the scapulary on
her, whereupon she rose and thanked him, promising to be his wife and
servant. So in the morning the hero married her and received the kingdom
from her father. To their chamber that night came the old man, and
recalled the agreement to divide. He cut the lady into halves, minced
her flesh on the table, and blew on the bits, whereupon she came

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

together more beautiful than ever. The helper then threw off his
gaberdine, and showed himself to be St. George.

In the two stories just summarized *The Grateful Dead* is clear enough,
though in *VI.* St. George has ousted the ghost from part of its proper
functions, just as the angel does in *Tobit*, *Russian II.*, and
*Simrock IV.*, God in *Siberian*, and various saints elsewhere. The
introduction in VI. is a unique trait, as far as I know. In both the
variants the main features of the theme appear without distortion,
including the picturesque cleansing of the woman by actual division.
*The Poison Maiden*, however, has been replaced by a story of similar
character, but of different content, which I have not elsewhere found
compounded with *The Grateful Dead*. A vampire infests a church (or a
churchyard). A soldier is sent to watch nights, and to try to dislodge
her. He successfully counters her tricks, and finally gets hold of
something belonging to her, which he refuses to return. Thereupon she is
reduced to submission, promises him happiness, and is married to him
with the consent of the king. <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) This
tale, it will be evident, bears a strong likeness to *The Poison Maiden*
in the figure of the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

heroine, though it certainly is independent. The vital difference
between the two is the absence of any helping friend in the story of the
vampire. Because of the lack of this figure it seems improbable that the
tale was compounded with *The Grateful Dead* without the intermediary
stage in which *The Poison Maiden* appears. I regard the vampire as
usurping the place of the possessed maiden, and the two Russian variants
as a secondary growth. Given the normal form of the compound as it
appears in *Russian II.*, for instance, there would be no difficulty in
substituting an even more gruesome figure for that of the heroine there
depicted, and in making the hero's danger lie in a prenuptial attack on
her part.

The three Servian tales, which fall in this section, differ widely in
their characteristics. The first of them, *Servian II.*, <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md) is the most nearly normal. Vlatko goes
into the world to trade, but pays all his money to free from debt a
corpse, which creditors are digging up in order to vent their spite upon
it. He returns home, and is sent out again by his parents, receiving a
greater sum of money and, from his mother, an apple by means of which he
can tell the intentions of anyone who desires his friendship by the
way. <span id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81.md) He is joined by a man, who cuts
the apple into two exact halves, and so is accepted as a friend. After
Vlatko has prospered in trade, the friend proposes that he marry the
emperor's daughter, with whom ninety-nine men have already died on the
wedding night. Arrangements are made, and the friend keeps watch in the
bridal chamber. During the night he cuts off the heads of three snakes,
which come from the lady's mouth. Sometime afterwards all three set out
for Vlatko's home; and on the way the hero divides his property with his
friend.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jestingly the
latter proposes that they divide the wife, and, after blindfolding the
husband, shakes her three times, when three dead snakes come out of her.
Thereupon he disappears.

Like *Armenian* and *Gypsy*, this variant has the ghost cut off the head
of the monster (here three snakes) that possesses the maiden. The actual
division of the woman as it appears in those tales occurs here as a mere
jest, which is the case with most of the European versions. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82.md)

*Servian III*. has a more romantic character. The daughter of an emperor
had been married thirteen times, but each of her bridegrooms had died on
the wedding night. A certain prince, who had fallen in love with her
through a dream, set out for her castle. On the way he paid the debts of
a poor man, whose corpse was held by creditors, and buried him. Soon
after, he was met by a man who became his servant, and won a castle for
him by a wonderful adventure. After the wedding this man killed the
snakes that came out of the bride, and also caused her to disgorge three
snake eggs by threatening her with his drawn sword. He then disappeared.

This variant shows traces of foreign substance in the dream and the
winning of the castle by the unrevealed companion. Possibly the latter
trait unites it with the combined type of which *The Water of Life* is
one of the elements. It will be noticed that the division of the
property and of the woman is not brought into question, though the sword
is used somewhat incongruously for the removal of the last traces of the
heroine's snaky infestation. Thus, by an evident change in structure,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

the identity of the hero's companion is never explained.

With *Servian IV.* <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md) we encounter a
most serious problem, which must receive special treatment later
on, <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84.md) the relation of *The Grateful
Dead* to *The Thankful Beasts* theme. A poor youth three times set free
a gold-fish which he had three times caught. Later he was cast out of
his father's house and sent into the world. He was joined by a man, who
swore friendship with him on a sword, and accompanied him to a city
where many men had been mysteriously slain while undertaking to pass a
night with the king's daughter. The hero undertook the adventure, and
was saved by his companion, who cut off the head of a serpent that came
from the princess's mouth. In the morning the youth was married to the
lady, and divided all his property with his helper. On their way home
the latter demanded half of the bride, and, while she was held by two
servants, swung a sword above her. With a shriek she cast first two
sections, and finally the tail, of a serpent from her mouth. Thereupon
the friend leaped into the sea, for he was the gold-fish.

The burial of the dead has here been ousted by a good deed which the
hero does to a gold-fish. That the trait is foreign to the type,
however, seems clear. From the time when the companion appears to the
hero, the story follows the normal course until the very end, when the
man unexpectedly leaps into the sea. The thankful dead has been replaced
by the thankful beast, but the tale really belongs to the present
category, since otherwise it has all the characteristics of the type.
Thus the division of the woman is almost precisely similar to that of
*Armenian* and *Gypsy*—that is, the sword is raised, and the woman
disgorges the serpent with a scream. That it comes out piecemeal may be
a faulty recollection

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

of the actual division. As so often, it is not stated that the companion
made a share of the gains a condition of his help.

*Bulgarian* is in some respects very primitive, though fragmentary. A
father sends his son out into the world to gain experience. The youth is
joined by an archangel, who promises him assistance on condition that he
will pay their joint expenses and will be obedient. The companion kills
a negro and a serpent, and goes with the hero into their den, where the
adventurers find, but leave, great treasure. They come to a city where
the king's daughter has been thrice married, each time only to have her
bridegroom die on the wedding night. Now she is to be given to any man
who can live with her one night; and many wooers have died in the
attempt. The youth offers himself as a suitor, and is saved by the
archangel, who draws a serpent out of the woman. Later he helps the hero
to get the wealth previously found in the cave, and demands the division
of everything, even the wife. When he cuts her in two, many little
snakes fall out of her body. He then unites her, and gives the hero all
the riches they have obtained.

The burial of the dead has entirely disappeared, as will be observed,
though the other traits of the story show that we must regard it as of
the type now under consideration. The appearance of the archangel as
companion, and the plunder which they take by the way, suggest the
influence of *Tobit*, which indeed appears as a folk-tale in the same
collection. <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md) The conditions made by
the angel are only slightly altered from the normal form, while every
other feature is found intact, even to the actual division of the woman.

*Esthonian II.* has altogether lost the essential features of our theme;
and it has besides put in several traits from a *märchen*, which, as we
shall soon see, is joined

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

to ours with considerable frequency. The inclusion of this variant here
is justified only by some vague traces indicating that the extraneous
parts of the narrative have replaced others which, if preserved, would
make it an ordinary representative of *The Grateful Dead*.

A certain couple had a weak-minded son, who could not learn. Wishing to
get rid of him, the father took the boy into a forest and gave him
gladly to an old man whom he chanced to meet. From the man the youth
received books in foreign tongues, which he learned to read in a day. He
then wandered till he came to a city, where lived a princess who was in
the power of devils and went to church with them every night. The hero
watched in the church for three nights, with three, six, and twelve
candles, successively. Thus on the third night he freed the princess and
married her, receiving half the kingdom. He then sought the old man, who
told him to cut the woman in halves and divide her. The old man halved
her himself, when there sprang out a serpent, a toad, and a lizard.
After this he gave her back to her husband.

The obscurity of motivation in this tale makes apparent the extensive
revision that it has undergone. The introduction is nowhere else found
combined, as far as I know, with the stories of our cycle. The
characteristics of *The Poison Maiden* are sufficiently evident in the
conclusion; but there seems to be no way to account for the peculiar
form of demonic possession, together with the actual division of the
woman, except by supposing, with Dutz, <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md) that the variant has lost the part
concerning the burial of the dead man. If this be true, the story
belongs in the category where it is here placed.

The *Finnish* variant <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87.md) presents
difficulties of a somewhat different sort. A merchant's son, to whom it
has been foretold that he will marry a three-horned maiden,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

goes abroad to escape this fate. There he sees the corpse of a debtor
hanging nailed to a church wall, and insulted by the passers-by. He
expends all but nine silver kopecks in rescuing the body, and turns
homeward. He is joined by a companion, who makes the money last three
days, and on the fourth arranges for him to marry the three-horned
daughter of a king. On the wedding night the helper brings the hero
fresh-cut twigs. By beating the maiden with these her blood is purified,
the horns drop off, and she becomes very beautiful.

No new material is here introduced; but the handling is considerably
changed, and the narrative abridged. The woman in the case is
three-horned instead of possessed by snakes, nor is there any hint of
harm to the bridegroom. A reminiscence of the division of the woman,
though not of the dowry, appears in the beating which the ghostly
companion gives her, whereby she is freed from her horns and made very
beautiful. The variant appears to be weakened by frequent retelling.

*Rumanian I.* is more striking, since it has undergone both revision and
addition. The only daughter of an emperor wears out twelve pairs of
slippers every night, until her father offers her hand and the heirship
of the kingdom to any man who can explain this extraordinary and costly
habit. Many men of high birth and low make the attempt unsuccessfully.
Meanwhile, a certain peasant, whose servant had died when his year of
service was but half ended, had placed the body in a chest under the
roof in revenge for his disappointment. The new servant had discovered
this, and had given the corpse the rites due the dead, as far as
permitted by his master. When he departs at the end of his year of
service, the dead man comes from the earth, thanks him, and proposes
that they swear on the cross to be brothers. So they do, and go on
together till they come to an iron wood. The vampire breaks off a twig,
and casts it to

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the earth in the place where the emperor's daughter comes at night with
the sons of the dragon. When she appears, she sees the broken twig, and
is afraid. So she goes to the copper wood, where she sees another twig
broken by the vampire, and hastens on to the place where the sons of the
dragon dwell. It is in going so far that she wears out her slippers.
When she comes to the place, and is about to sit down at table, she
drops her handkerchief. The vampire, who has followed her from the
copper wood in the form of a cat, takes it away, as he does also the
spoon that falls from her hand and the ring that falls from her finger.
He goes back to the copper wood with them, and explains everything to
his friend. The latter takes them to the emperor and wins the lady.

This curious tale has several elements which make it difficult to
classify. As far as the kindness to the dead goes, the matter is simple.
Instead of an agreement between the companions to divide their gains,
however, an oath of brotherhood is introduced. This is probably a local
substitution, since it has long been a custom of the Slays of the south
to swear brotherhood on the cross, <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88.md)
but it necessitates the further loss of important features at the end of
the narrative such as the saving of the bridegroom on the wedding night
and the division of the maiden (or some modification of that feature) by
the vampire. Indeed, the heroine is rather enchanted than possessed. The
whole series of acts by which she is freed introduces traits into the
narrative which we have hitherto met only in *Esthonian II.* Were it not
that they are repeated in all the other members of the group save
*Breton I.*, which we have still to consider, there would be
considerable doubt about placing

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

this variant under the category of *The Grateful Dead* + *The Poison
Maiden*. As it is, we can with security say that this and the following
versions belong here. They have simply modified the normal form by the
addition of certain elements from another theme.

The three Irish versions all have this form. In *Irish I.* a king's son,
while hunting, pays five pounds to the creditors of a dead man, so that
he may be buried. Later the prince kills a raven, and declares that he
will marry only that woman who has hair as black as the raven, skin as
white as snow, and cheeks as red as blood upon the snow. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) On his way to find her he meets a
red-haired youth, who takes service with him for half of what they may
gain in a year and a day. The youth obtains for him from various giants
by threats of what his master will do <span
id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90.md) horses of gold and silver, a sword of
light, a cloak of darkness, and the slippery shoes. When they come to
the castle of the maiden, he helps the Prince to keep over night a comb
and a pair of scissors in spite of enchantment, and he obtains at her
bidding the lips of the giant enchanter, which are the last that she has
kissed. He then tells the prince and the maiden's father to strike her
three times, when three devils come from her mouth in fire. So the
prince marries her, and is ready at the end of a year and a day to
divide his child <span id="fr_91"></span>[3](#fn_91.md) at the servant's
command. But the latter explains that he is the soul of the dead man,
and disappears.

*Irish II.* differs little except in details from the above. The king of
Ireland's son sets forth to find a woman with hair as black as the
raven, skin as white as snow,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

and cheeks as red as blood. Ten pounds of the twenty which he takes with
him he pays to release the corpse of a man on which writs are laid. He
meets a short green man, who goes with him for his wife's first kiss;
and he comes upon a gunner, a man listening to the growing grass, a
swift runner, a man blowing a windmill with one nostril, and a strong
man, all of whom accompany him for the promise of a house and garden
apiece. After various adventures in the castles of giants, they arrive
in the east, where the prince's lady dwells. She says that her suitor
must loose her *geasa* from her before she can marry him. With the help
of the short green man he gives her the scissors, the comb, and the King
of Porson's head, which she requires. He is then told to get three
bottles of healing water from the well of the western world. The runner
sets out for them, and is stopped and put to sleep by an old hag on the
way back; but the earman hears him snoring, the gunman sees him and
wakes him up, and the windman keeps the hag back till he returns.
Finally the strong man crushes three miles of steel needles so that the
prince can walk over them. Thus the bride is won. The short green man
claims the first kiss, and finds her full of serpents, which he picks
out of her. He then tells the youth that he is the man who was in the
coffin, and disappears with his fellows.

In *Irish III.* three brothers set out from home with three pounds
apiece. The youngest gives his all to pay a dead man's debts to three
giants. He shares his food with a poor man, who offers to be his
servant, saying that the corpse was his brother, and had appeared to him
in a dream. <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md) Jack the servant
frightens the first giant into giving up his sword of sharpness, the
second giant his cloak of darkness, and the third giant his shoes

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

of swiftness. The two Jacks come to the castle of a king, whose daughter
has to be wooed by accomplishing three tasks. Jack the servant follows
the princess in the cloak of darkness to the demon king of Moróco and
rescues her scissors. Next day Jack the master runs a race with the king
and beats him because shod with the shoes of swiftness. That night Jack
the servant goes again to the demon king and cuts off his head with the
sword of sharpness, thus accomplishing the third task. So Jack the
master marries the princess.

These three variants make evident the nature of the foreign material in
*Esthonian II.* and *Rumanian I.* The whole sub-group, indeed, has in
combination with *The Grateful Dead* + *The Poison Maiden* important
elements from the themes of *The Water of Life* and *The Lady and the
Monster*. These features will be considered in detail in a later
chapter, <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93.md) when we study the general
type *The Grateful Dead* + *The Water of Life*. For the present it is
enough to indicate how the addition has affected the type with which we
are immediately concerned.

Of the three Irish tales, the first two have best preserved the
characteristics of the compound as found in Asia and Eastern Europe.
*Irish I.* has all the essential features of *Armenian* and *Gypsy*,—for
example, the burial, the agreement to divide what is gained, and the
removal of the evil things by which the woman is possessed. To be sure,
the latter are devils, not serpents, and the woman is beaten, not
divided. Yet the division appears in another form, since the hero is
ready to share his child with the red-haired man, a trait connected with
the theme of *Amis and Amiloun*. <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94.md)
*Irish II.* is in some respects more changed, and in some respects less,
than *Irish I.* The agreement to divide is changed to a promise that the
green man shall have the first kiss of

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the bride. On the other hand, the serpents in the woman's body are
retained, a trait which is very primitive and very important in enabling
us to identify the position of these variants. *Irish III.* has lost
most of the typical features of the compound. Kennedy's evidence shows
that Jack the servant is to be regarded as really the thankful dead; but
the agreement to divide the gains and the removal of the demons or
serpents have entirely disappeared under pressure from the secondary
theme, the essential idea of which is the accomplishment by the hero of
certain unspelling tasks. In conjunction with the other two variants,
however, the position of *Irish III.* is clear.

Very different from the Irish tales is *Breton I.*, since under the
influence of a tendency very common in Brittany, the narrative has
become a Mary legend and has lost its clearness of outline in the
process. Yet it really belongs to this group, replacing by a
dragon-fight and a rescue of the hero from the villain the cleansing of
the bride. At least, I am led to the belief that such is the case by the
fact that the story fits into no other category. Nor is it surprising
that the position of the tale should be obscure in view of the grotesque
transformation which it has undergone.

A youth named Mao pays all his money to have the body of a beggar
interred. The spirit of the dead man helps him win the daughter of a
rich man after killing a dragon in the stables. The lady's treacherous
cousin tries to burn him alive in an old mill, whence he is saved by the
ghost. He forgives the man, and is tricked into promising him half of
all his possessions in order to save his wife. When a son is born, the
villain demands its division. At the hero's appeal, the Virgin comes
with the ghost and takes Mao and his family to heaven, while the cousin
is sent to hell.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

*Norwegian II.* and *Danish III.* stand together, since the relation of
the latter (Andersen's *Reisekammeraten*) to the former is simply that
of a literary redaction to its original. A brief analysis of each is,
however, necessary.

In *Norwegian II.* a young peasant on account of a dream sets forth to
win the hand of a princess. On his way he gives most of his money to
bury a dishonest tapster, who has been executed and left frozen in a
block of ice outside a church for passers-by to spit upon. As he
proceeds, the youth is joined by the ghost of the tapster, who
accompanies him. They go to a hill, where they get a magic sword from
one witch, a golden ball of yarn from another, and a magical hat from a
third. Of the yarn they make a bridge, and so come to the princess's
castle. The hero is told to keep her scissors overnight and loses them;
but the companion rides behind the princess on her goat in the hat of
invisibility, when she goes to her troll lover, and so rescues them. The
hero is told to keep a golden ball overnight, and the same adventure is
repeated. The hero is then told to bring what the princess is thinking
of. The companion rides again with the princess and beats her with his
sword, gets the troll's head for his master, and so enables him to win
the lady. On the wedding night the hero flogs his wife at the advice of
the companion, only just in time to save himself, indeed, as she is
about to kill him with a butcher-knife. He dips her into a tub of whey,
whence she comes out black as a raven, but after a rubbing with
buttermilk and new milk she becomes very beautiful. The companion
discovers his identity and disappears.

In *Danish III.* poor John, whose father has died, dreams of a beautiful
princess, and sets forth to find her. He does various kind deeds by the
way, and one night takes refuge from the storm in a church. There

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

he sees two evil men dragging a corpse from its coffin, and pays his all
that it may be buried. He is joined by the ghost of the dead man, who
accompanies him. They get three rods from an old woman, who is healed by
the comrade's salve, and they come to a city, where they get a sword
from a showman, whose puppets are made alive by the salve. They come to
a mountain, where the companion cuts off the wings of a great white swan
and carries them along. They come at length to the city of the beautiful
princess, who is a witch. Anyone can marry her who guesses three things,
but every man who has tried has failed and been killed. John tells the
king that he will try to win her, and is told to come the next day. In
the night the comrade puts on the wings of the swan, takes the largest
of the rods, and follows the princess when she flies out to the palace
of her wizard lover. There he hears that she is to think of her shoe
when her suitor comes in the morning. All the way to the mountain and
back the comrade beats her so that the blood flows. The next morning he
tells John to guess her shoe when asked what she has thought of.
Everyone save the princess rejoices when the youth guesses right. The
next night the companion beats the princess with two rods as she flies,
and learns that she is to think of her glove. Again everyone is pleased
with John's answer. The third night the companion takes all three rods
and the sword. He cuts off the wizard's head when he learns that the
princess is to think of that, and he gives it to John, wrapped in a
handkerchief. John produces this when asked by the Princess what she has
thought about, and so he wins her. That night, at the bidding of the
companion, he dips her three times in a tub of water, into which have
been shaken three swan's feathers and some drops from a flask. The first
time she becomes a black swan, the second a white swan, and the third a
more

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

beautiful princess than ever. The next day the comrade explains his
identity and disappears.

It will be seen that Andersen simply embroidered the Norwegian tale as
was his wont, adding a good many picturesque details, and softening some
features. The changes do not materially affect the course of the
narrative, nor need they delay us here, interesting though they are of
themselves, <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95.md) since the position of
the variant with reference to the story-type under consideration is
perfectly clear. *Norwegian II.* demands further attention. Like
*Esthonian II.*, *Rumanian I.*, and *Irish I.*, *II.*, and *III.*, it
has the form *The Grateful Dead* + *The Poison Maiden* + *The Water of
Life*. The burial of the dead is undisturbed, but the agreement between
the companions to divide their gains has entirely disappeared, perhaps
because the secondary theme takes so large a place. The removal of the
poisonous habitants of the bride is clearly indicated, though it has
been weakened into a flogging, which is given, however, only just in
time to save the bridegroom from death. The subsequent milk bath seems
to show a conflict between the conclusions of the two subsidiary
motives—the end of *The Poison Maiden* being release from something like
demonic possession, and that of *The Water of Life* in this form being
release from a spell—though perhaps the bath is only a reduplication of
the purifying process.

*Simrock X.* is not unlike the two variants just cited. A king's son
wastes his property, and is sent out to shift for himself. He pays the
debts of a naked corpse, and has only enough money left to pay his
reckoning at his inn. So he takes the body to a wood, and buries it
there. As he goes his way, he is met by a man, who becomes his follower
and secures three rods, a sword, and a pair of wings from a dead raven.
They come to

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

a castle, where to win the king's daughter the prince has to guess her
thoughts for three days in succession. The companion flies with her each
night when she goes to her wizard for counsel, and learns that the
prince must say "bread," "the princess's jewels," and "the wizard's
head" in turn. On the last night he cuts off the wizard's head and
brings it to his master, who displays it at court and so breaks the
spell. When the couple are married, the companion explains that he is
the spirit of the dead man, and disappears.

This variant obviously belongs to the same type as those preceding. As
in *Irish I.* and *II.* the hero is a prince instead of a youth of low
birth; but there is no general uniformity in this trait. The agreement
of division and the violent dispossession of the heroine have
disappeared. Indeed, so far has *The Water of Life* supplanted the other
motives that the position of the tale is only evident when it is placed
side by side with other versions of the same class. When so considered,
however, the peculiar features of the succession of feats by which the
bride is won appear very prominently, and establish the type.

*Harz I.* stands closer to *Norwegian II.* than the preceding. A youth
pays his all for the burial of a poor man, whose ghost joins him. They
go to a city, where a bespelled princess kills all her suitors who
cannot answer a riddle. The companion spirit tells the youth to save
her, explaining his own identity. He gives wings and an iron rod to the
hero, who flies with the princess to a mountain spirit, and hears that
he must guess that she is thinking of her father's white horse. The next
night the youth follows her with two rods and is thus enabled to guess
that she is thinking of her father's sword. The third night he follows
her with two rods and a sword, with which he cuts off the monster's
head. This he shows her in the morning when asked

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

the usual question, and so he breaks the spell. On the wedding night he
dips her thrice in water. The first time she comes from the bath a
raven, the second time a dove, and the third time in her own shape, but
purified.

The burial is here retained, but the agreement is entirely lost. Though
the variant follows *Norwegian II.* in general, even to such details as
the preliminary beating of the lady, and the bath of final purification,
the important trait of flogging the bride, by which the hero is saved on
the wedding night, has altogether disappeared. Like *Simrock X.*, the
tale has obscured the first of the two secondary themes for the benefit
of the second. Its position seems sure, however, as a member of the
little group now being considered.

*Jack the Giant-Killer* clearly belongs to this group, approaching
*Irish I.* in form. The earliest complete version that I know is
unfortunately not older than the eighteenth century, and perhaps has
lost several features of interest which might be found in earlier forms.
King Arthur's son sets forth to free a lady possessed of seven spirits.
At a market town in Wales he pays almost all his money to release the
body of a man who died in debt. He gives his last twopence to an old
woman, who meets him after he has left the town. *Jack the Giant-Killer*
is so pleased with these good deeds that he becomes the prince's
servant. They go to a giant's castle together. Jack tells the giant that
a mighty prince is coming <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96.md) and locks
him up, so that the two take all his gold. Jack takes also an old coat
and cap, a rusty sword, and a pair of slippers. They arrive at the
lady's house. She tells the prince to show her in the morning a
handkerchief, which she conceals in her dress. By putting on the coat of
darkness, and the shoes of swiftness, and following her when she goes to

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

her demon lover, Jack gets the handkerchief for his master. Next day the
lady tells the prince to get the lips which she will kiss the last that
night. Jack follows her again and cuts off the demon's head, which the
prince produces, thus breaking the spell that has bound her to the evil
spirits.

This variant, even in what is probably a mutilated state, is strikingly
similar to *Irish I.* in such details as the means used to follow the
lady, and the tasks imposed upon the suitor. Indeed, the fact that the
adventures take place in Wales might lead one to suppose that the story
in this form was Celtic, were not the knowledge of it so persistent in
England also. Several features are obscured, at least in the form from
which I cite. Though the burial of the dead is given clearly enough, and
the fact that the lady is possessed is insisted on, the prince is kind
to an old woman as well as to a dead man, and Jack is certainly not
understood to be a ghost. All mention of an agreement between the
companions, and of the means taken to free the heroine from her
possession by dividing her or flogging her, has likewise disappeared.
However, the correspondence both in outline and in detail with *Irish
I.* is sufficient to establish the position of the variant.

In the *Old Wives’ Tale* the theme of *The Grateful Dead* is imbedded in
such a mass of folk-lore and folk-tales that it is quite impossible to
restore adequately the narrative as Peele found it. He treated the story
as a literary artist, of course, modifying and adding details to suit
the scheme of his play. The outline of the story, as Peele gives it, is
as follows: A king, or a lord, or a duke, has a daughter as white as
snow and as red as blood, who is carried off by a conjurer in the form
of a dragon. Her two brothers set forth to seek her, and by a cross meet
an old man named Erestus, who calls himself the White Bear of England's
Wood.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He, they learn,
has been enchanted by the conjurer, and is a man by day and a bear by
night. He tells them of his own troubles, and gives them good advice.
Later he is met by the wandering knight Eumenides, who likewise is
seeking the lady Delia and is counselled:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Bestowe thy aimes, give more than all,  
 Till dead men's bones come at thy call."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Eumenides pays all
his money except three farthings to bury the body of Jack, while the
conjurer compels Delia to goad her brothers at the work to which he has
set them. Eumenides is overtaken by the ghost of Jack, who becomes his
servant, or "copartner," provides him with money, and slays the conjurer
while invisible, thus breaking the spell of all the enchanted persons.
Jack then demands his half of Delia, refuses to take her whole, and,
when Eumenides prepares to cut her in twain, explains that he has asked
this only as a trial of constancy. He quickly disappears.

Dutz has already shown <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97.md) that *Old
Wives’ Tale* has three of the essential features of *The Grateful Dead*,
*viz.*: the burial of the dead with the peculiar prophetic advice of
Erestus, the reward of the hero by assistance in getting a wife, and the
sharing of the woman. Because of the non-schematic nature of his
discussion he did not make any attempt to classify the variant more
specifically. In his edition of the play, <span
id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98.md) Professor Gummere, in indicating some of
the folk-lore which Peele used, has likewise called attention <span
id="fr_99"></span>[3](#fn_99.md) to the connection with our theme. Of
particular importance is his hint as to the likeness of the variant to
the story which I call *Irish III.* It is practicable, however, to carry
the matter somewhat further. The adventures of Delia, Eumenides, and
Jack are all that really concern us. It will be seen that

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

these conform in essentials to the type under consideration. There is
the burial, the agreement, the death of the wizard, and the division. To
be sure, as in other instances, the dispossession of the woman has been
obscured by other elements; yet the type is unmistakable, it seems to
me. One trait in particular connects *Old Wives’ Tale* with *Irish I.*
and *II.* In all three the hero seeks a maiden who is white as snow and
red as blood. On the other hand, the ghost is called Jack as in *Irish
III.* and the English tale which bears Jack's name. Because of these
similarities and discrepancies one is forced to conclude that for this
part of his play Peele drew upon some version of *Jack the
Giant-Killer*, which was far better preserved than the forms known
to-day. His original must have had many points in common with the tale
as extant in Ireland, though we need not believe that he knew it in
other than English dress.

It yet remains to consider the relations of the two sets of variants
discussed in this chapter to *The Poison Maiden* and to one another. The
group is peculiar in that all the members of it are folk-tales, save
three: *Tobit*, *Danish III.* and *Old Wives’ Tale*. The two latter are,
however, immediately derived from popular narratives of an easily
discernible type. Thus *Tobit* is an anomaly from almost any point of
view, obscure in its origin and possessed of only trivial influence upon
the other tales belonging to the same group. Of the twenty-six variants,
fifteen have *The Grateful Dead* + *The Poison Maiden* simply, while the
other eleven add thereto more or less distinct elements of *The Water of
Life*.

In the following versions the hero is saved on the wedding night, or the
bride is purified by some means: *Tobit*, *Armenian*, *Gypsy*,
*Siberian*, *Russian I.*, *Russian II.*, *Russian III.*, *Russian IV.*,
*Russian V.*, *Russian VI.*, *Servian II.*, *Servian III*., *Servian
IV.*, *Bulgarian*,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Esthonian II.*,
*Irish I.*, *Irish II.*, *Danish III.*, *Norwegian II.*, and *Harz I.*
Not all the stories which I have placed in the group, it will be
observed, have this feature; but, out of all the variants of *The
Grateful Dead* enumerated in the bibliographical list, not one has it
except members of the group. Now this purification of the bride, by
means of which the hero is saved, is precisely the element of *The
Poison Maiden* which is most essential. There can be no doubt,
therefore, that this theme actually united with a more primitive form of
*The Grateful Dead* to form the compound discussed in this chapter. The
combination must have been made very early and in Asia, as *Tobit* and
*Armenian* bear witness. It will be noted that all the variants, save
*Finnish*, which have the simple compound, retain the rescue of the
bridegroom, while only half of those where a subsidiary motive has been
introduced have the like, Apparently the intrusion of new matter of a
very romantic sort tended to obscure the original climax of the combined
type.

Another feature of much importance in this connection is the division of
the woman, or whatever is substituted for it. In a large majority of the
variants studied, which have the trait at all, the purpose of the
division proposed or accomplished is to test the fidelity of the hero.
Hippe believed <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) that this was a
modification of the original trait, an opinion which would be justified
if the compound type *The Grateful Dead* + *The Poison Maiden* only were
considered. The versions which have the purification are the following:
*Armenian*, *Gypsy*, *Siberian*, *Russian II.*, *Russian IV.*, *Russian
V.*, *Russian VI.*, *Servian II.*, *Servian III*., *Servian IV.*,
*Bulgarian*, *Esthonian II.*, *Finnish*, *Irish I.*, *Irish II.*, and
*Old Wives’ Tale*. In these the purpose of the division, or beating,
whether actually performed or not, is the disposal of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

serpents or other venomous creatures by which the woman is
possessed. <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md) It will be noted,
however, that all of these variants are of the type treated in the
present chapter. If the division for the sake of purification were then
regarded as more primitive and older than the division for the sake of
sharing the gains or of testing the hero, it would naturally follow that
all the combined types must proceed from *The Grateful Dead* + *The
Poison Maiden*. Hippe followed the logical course from his premises in
so regarding the relationship of the groups. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102.md) However, it seems clear to me—and it
will be increasingly evident as we study the other groups—that the
division for purification belongs solely to the compound treated in this
chapter. It would follow logically from combining *The Poison Maiden*,
where a friend saves the hero from the fatal embraces of a woman, with
*The Grateful Dead*, where the hero is willing to divide his wife to
satisfy the agreement which he has made with his benefactor. Only by
such an explanation is it possible to account for the development of the
several groups from a common root. The barbarous character of the
division for purification, and the softening which it has undergone in
the group which we have been studying, give it an appearance of
antiquity to which it has no right. In point of fact, it belongs only to
this group, which is thus clearly set off from all the others as an
independent branch. The division for the sake of fulfilling an
obligation is more widespread, though it has suffered many
modifications.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[44:1](gd06.htm#fr_65.md) See pp. 1 and 2.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[44:2](gd06.htm#fr_66.md) P. 181.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[44:3](gd06.htm#fr_67.md) *Abhandlungen der k.
bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften*, 1893, pp. 89-166. Reprinted,
with some additional notes by the editor, in *Gesammelte Abhandlungen*
von Wilhelm Hertz, ed. F. von der Leyen, 1905, pp. 156-277.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[45:1](gd06.htm#fr_68.md) The existing versions go
back to the pseudo-Aristotelian *De secretis secretorum* or *De regimine
principum*, which was taken from the Arabic in the twelfth century
(Hertz, p. 92). It is probable, however, that the tale existed far
earlier than this and came from India (Hertz, pp. 151-155).

<span id="fn_69"></span>[45:2](gd06.htm#fr_69.md) Pp. 115 ff.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[45:3](gd06.htm#fr_70.md) Two Asiatic parallels not
cited by Hertz will serve to illustrate the theme further. One of these
is "The Story of Swet-Basanta" from Lal Behari Day, *Folk-tales of
Bengal*, 1883, pp. 100 f. The hero is found by an elephant and made king
of a land, where the successive sovereigns are killed every night
mysteriously. He watches and sees something like a thread coming from
the queen's nostrils. This proves to be a great serpent, which he kills,
thus remaining as king. The other is from J. H. Knowles, *Folk-tales of
Kashmir*, 1888, pp. 32 ff., "A Lach of Rupees for a Bit of Advice." A
prince pays a lach of rupees for a paper containing four rules of
conduct. His father exiles him for this extravagance. In his wanderings
the prince finds a potter alternately laughing and crying because his
son must soon marry a princess, who has to be wedded anew each night. So
the prince marries the woman instead and kills two serpents that come
from her nostrils, thus retaining the kingdom. In these two stories
there is no question of aid coming to the hero; he is saved by his own
watchfulness.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[46:1](gd06.htm#fr_71.md) *Tobit*, *Danish III.*
(Andersen's tale), and Peele's *Old Wives’ Tale*.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[47:1](gd06.htm#fr_72.md) For example, it appears
in Schischmánoff's *Légendes religieuses bulgares*, 1896, pp. 194-201,
side by side with our Bulgarian tale.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[47:2](gd06.htm#fr_73.md) I summarise from Köhler's
reprint in *Germania*, iii. pp. 202 ff.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[48:1](gd06.htm#fr_74.md) Paspati's tale on pp. 605
ff. also has a dragon slain on a wedding night by a youth, who keeps
watch. This single trait in a totally different setting must be borrowed
from a Gypsy form of the simple or compound theme.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[49:1](gd06.htm#fr_75.md) See *Annamite*, *Greek*,
*Oliver*, and *Walewein*. There is something approaching it in *Rumanian
I.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[49:2](gd06.htm#fr_76.md) *Icelandic I.*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[50:1](gd06.htm#fr_77.md) *Simrock IV.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[50:2](gd06.htm#fr_78.md) See Hippe, p. 145.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[54:1](gd06.htm#fr_79.md) References to this story
have been collected by G. Polívka, and printed in *Archiv f. slav.
Phil.* xix. 251, in citing our *Russian V.* He says: "Vgl. Романовъ, iv.
S. 124, Nr. 65; Weryho, *Pod. białoruskie*, S. 46; Худяковъ, i. Nr. 11,
12; Садовниковъ, S. 44, 310; Манжура, 61; Драгомановъ Мапор. Преп, S.
268 f.; Dowojna Sylwestrowicz, ii. 129 f.; Karłowicz, Nr. 19; Kolberg,
viii. S. 138 f., Nr. 55, 56; xiv. S. 72 f., Nr. 16, 17; Ciszewski, i.
Nr. 128; Kulda, iii. Nr. 14; Strohal, Nr. 18, 19; Kres, iv. S. 350, Nr.
19; Tb. Vernaleken, *Oesterr. K.H.M.* S. 44f.; Ul. Jahn, i. 92, 356;
Pröhle, *Märchen für die Jugend*, S. 42; Wolf, *D.H.M.* 258 f.;
Sébillot, *Contes des marins*, S. 38." As far as I have been able to
ascertain, these references are all to the tale sketched above,
uncompounded with *The Grateful Dead*. I must thank Professor Wiener for
my knowledge of the Slavic forms, which he very generously examined for
me as far as the books were available, *viz.* Romanov, Khudyakov,
Sadovnikov, Manžura, Dragomanov, Sylwestrowicz, and Kolberg.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[55:1](gd06.htm#fr_80.md) See Hippe, pp. 145 f.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[55:2](gd06.htm#fr_81.md) For the test of
friendship with an apple, see Köhler's notes in Gonzenbach, *Sicil.
Märchen*, ii. 259 f., and in *Arch. f. slav. Phil.* v. 44 ff.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[56:1](gd06.htm#fr_82.md) Hippe is in error,
however, when he says (p. 178) that the division is everywhere modified
in the European variants. See *Russian II.*, *IV.*, *V.* and *VI.*,
*Bulgarian*, and *Esthonian II.* Moreover, I believe that Hippe's theory
puts the cart before the horse—that the actual division is not so
ancient a trait as it seems. See pp. [74](#page_74), [75](#page_75.md)
below.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[57:1](gd06.htm#fr_83.md) See Hippe, p. 246.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[57:2](gd06.htm#fr_84.md) See chapter vii.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[58:1](gd06.htm#fr_85) See [p. 47](#page_47.md),
note, above.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[59:1](gd06.htm#fr_86.md) P. 19.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[59:2](gd06.htm#fr_87.md) See Hippe, pp. 148 f.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[61:1](gd06.htm#fr_88.md) See note by Schott, p.
473, in which he gives evidence based on personal knowledge, and Grimm,
*Geschichte der deutschen Sprache*, p. 92. I have touched on the matter
in *Engl. Stud.* xxxvi. 195-201.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[62:1](gd06.htm#fr_89.md) This trait is found not
infrequently in other settings. See, for example, Vernaleken,
*Oesterreichische Kinder- and Hausmärchen*, p. 141.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[62:2](gd06.htm#fr_90.md) This trait recalls *Puss
in Boots*, which is otherwise compounded with *The Grateful Dead*. See
preceding chapter, [p. 42](gd05.htm#page_42), and [p. 70](#page_70.md)
below.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[62:3](gd06.htm#fr_91.md) See chapter vii.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[63:1](gd06.htm#fr_92.md) Kennedy says, p. 38: "In
some versions of 'Jack the Master,' etc., Jack the servant is the spirit
of the dead man."

<span id="fn_93"></span>[64:1](gd06.htm#fr_93.md) Chapter vi.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[64:2](gd06.htm#fr_94.md) See chapter vii.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[68:1](gd06.htm#fr_95.md) The three rods with which
the princess is flogged are found in *Harz I.* See pp. [69](#page_69.md),
[70](#page_70.md) below.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[70:1](gd06.htm#fr_96) See [p. 62](#page_62.md),
note [2](#fn_90.md).

<span id="fn_97"></span>[72:1](gd06.htm#fr_97.md) Pp. 10 f.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[72:2](gd06.htm#fr_98.md) Gayley, *Representative
English Comedies*, 1903, pp. 333-384.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[72:3](gd06.htm#fr_99.md) P. 345.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[74:1](gd06.htm#fr_100.md) Pp. 176-178.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[75:1](gd06.htm#fr_101.md) *Russian V.* and *VI.*
are, of course, exceptions, since the woman is there a vampire.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[75:2](gd06.htm#fr_102.md) See his scheme on page
181.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Grateful Dead and the Ransomed Woman](gd07.md)
