[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gd07)  [Next](gd09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0252068823/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
*The Grateful Dead*, by Gordon Hall Gerould, \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

#### *THE GRATEFUL DEAD* AND *THE WATER OF LIFE* OR KINDRED THEMES.

THE *märchen* known in its various forms as *The Water of Life* <span
id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162.md) is based on the myth which goes by the
same name. <span id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_163.md) The myth, as has been
shown quite independently by two recent investigators, Dr. Wünsche <span
id="fr_164"></span>[3](#fn_164.md) and Dr. E. W. Hopkins, <span
id="fr_165"></span>[4](#fn_165.md) is of Semitic origin, and is found among
the traditions of the Assyrio-Babylonian cycle. It is to be
distinguished from the very similar myth of *The Fountain of Youth*,
which apparently originated in India. <span
id="fr_166"></span>[5](#fn_166.md) The latter concerns the magic properties
of the "water of rejuvenation"; the former in its uncontaminated

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

form, at least, deals with water which cures, revivifies, or
revitalizes. The two have been frequently confused, not only in popular
tradition of all ages, but in critical writings of contemporary date as
well. It is the great merit of Professor Hopkins’ article, to which
reference has been made, that their essential difference in origin and
character is clearly marked. Though he makes no pretence that his study
of *The Fountain of Youth* is definitive, he has broken ground which
sadly needed the plough, and incidentally has thrown light upon *The
Water of Life*.

The myth which is properly known by this name is intimately connected in
origin and development with that of *The Tree of Life*, <span
id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167.md) which finds expression in the legends of
the Cross. In the words of Dr. Wünsche: <span
id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_168.md) "Wie wir aus den kosmogonischen und
theogonischen Mythen und Sagen der Völker das Rauschen des Lebensbaumes
vernehmen, durch dessen Früchte sich Götter und Menschen ihre
ungeschwächte Lebenskraft und ewige Jugendfrische erhalten, so nicht
minder das Sprudeln einer Quelle des Lebenswassers, die Leben schafft
und zu Ende gehendes oder bereits erloschenes Leben wieder zu neuem Sein
erweckt." Both myths are Semitic, and both have profoundly influenced
Christian doctrine. It is with the "water of life," however, that we are
immediately concerned, and with that only as it has found embodiment in
a widely disseminated and variously modified tale. Whence this *märchen*
came we must presently inquire, in order to reach some conclusion as to
the point in space and time where it joined *The Grateful Dead*, but we
must first fix its essential traits.

Owing to the complex variations which the tale

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

presents in its various combinations with really foreign themes, there
is great difficulty in getting at the outline of the original story or
even the characteristics common to all the known variants. To do this
satisfactorily would require a searching and detailed study, which it is
impossible to undertake here,—an examination with *The Water of Life* as
the point of attack. It is possible, however, to arrive at a rough
sketch of the theme.

"Dans tous ces contes," says Cosquin, in his notes on *The Water of
Life*, <span id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169.md) "trois princes vont
chercher pour leur père l’eau de la vie ou un fruit merveilleux qui doit
le guérir, et c’est le plus jeune qui réussit dans cette entreprise.
Dans plusieurs . . . les deux aînés font des dettes, et ils sont au
moment d’être pendus, quand leur frère paie les créanciers (dans des
contes allemands et dans les contes autrichiens, malgré l’avis que lui
avait donné un hermite, un nain ou des animaux reconaissants, de ne pas
acheter de 'gibier de potence'). Il est tué par eux ou, dans un conte
allemand (Meier, no. 5), jeté dans un grand trou; mais ensuite il est
rappelé à la vie dans des circonstances qu’il serait trop long
d’expliquer."

Dr. Wünsche's summary is somewhat different: <span
id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_170.md) "Gewöhnlich handelt es sich um einen
König und seine drei Söhne. Der König leidet an einer schlimmen
Krankheit, von der ihn kein Arzt zu heilen vermag. Da wird ihm durch
irgendeine Gelegenheit die Kunde, dass er von seinem Siechtum durch das
Lebenswasser eines fernen Landes befreit werden könne. Aus Liebe zu
ihrem Vater machen sich die drei Söhne nacheinander auf den Weg, das
Lebenswasser zu holen. Doch die beiden ältesten erliegen den auf dem
Wege ihnen begegnenden Versuchungen, nur der jüngste ist wegen seiner
Standhaftigkeit und Bescheidenheit so glücklich, es zu erhalten. Ein
Riese, ein Zwerg, ein alter Mann oder ein alte Frau

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

sind ihm zur Auffindung der Wunderquelle behilflich, indem sie ihm guten
Rat erteilen und ihm sagen, wie er es anzufangen und wovor er sich in
acht zu nehmen habe. Hier und da greifen auch dienstbare Tiere,
Vierfüssler, Vögel und Fische hilfreich ein, indem sie dem Jünglinge
genau die Örtlichkeit des Wassers angeben, oder auch selbst ihn mit
Schnelligkeit dahin bringen. Die Lebensquelle sprudelt in einem Berge,
der sich nur zu gewissen Zeiten, gewöhnlich gegen Mittag oder
Mitternacht von 11-12 Uhr öffnet. Im berge steht in der Regel in einem
prächtigen Garten ein versunkenes Schloss, das die grossen Schätze und
Kostbarkeiten birgt, durch deren Anblick der Eintretende geblendet wird.
In einem Gemache des Schlosses wieder ruht auf einem Bett eine Jungfrau
von wunderbarer Schönheit, die später als Prinzessin hervortritt und den
Prinzen, der durch das Schöpfen des Lebenswassers sie von ihrem Zauber
gelöst hat, zum Gemahle heischt. Der Prinz hat nur kurze Zeit bei ihr
geruht oder ihr einen flüchtigen Kuss auf die Lippen gedrückt. In vielen
Fällen wird der Eingang zur Quelle von einem Drachen oder einem anderen
Ungeheuer bewacht, die erst aus dem Wege geräumt werden müssen. Es
kostet einen schweren Kampf. Auf dem Heimweg trifft der jüngste
Königssohn gewöhnlich mit seinen älteren Brüdern wieder zusammen, die
ihr Leben durch tolle Streiche verwirkt haben und die er vom Tode
loskauft. Zuweilen sind aber die Brüder durch ihre Unbedachtsamkeit in
schwarze Steine verwandelt worden und liegen am Abhange des
Zauberberges, oder stehen als Marmorsäulen auf demselben, oder sind
infolge ihres Hochmutes in einen tiefen Abgrund eingeschlossen. Auch in
diesem Zustande werden sie durch den jüngsten Bruder bald durch das
geschöpfte Wasser des Lebens, bald auf seine Bitten hin wieder ins Leben
gerufen. Vereint reisen sie nun mit ihrem Bruder nach Hause zum Könige.
Unterwegs

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

aber erfasst die Beiden Falschen Neid und Missgunst, weil ihr Bruder
allein in den Besitz des Lebenswasser gelangt ist und sie sich
vergeblich darum gemüht haben. Daher vertauschen sie das Lebenswasser,
während der Bruder schläft, mit gewöhnlichem Wasser und eilen nun voraus
und machen mit dem erbeuteten Trank den kranken König gesund, oder sie
erscheinen nach der Ankunft des Bruders, dessen vertauschtes Wasser den
König nur noch elender gemacht hat. Dabei raunen sie dem Könige heimlich
ins Ohr, dass der jüngere Bruder ihn habe vergiften wollen,
infolgedessen dieser vom Könige verbannt oder gar zum Tode verurteilt
wird. Derselbe lebt nun längere Zeit zurückgezogen in einer
untergeordneten Stellung, bis endlich durch die von ihm entzauberte
Prinzessin seine Unschuld an den Tag kommt."

Dr. Wünsche gives as subsidiary types stories where a princess wishes
the magic water for herself, and, when her two brothers fail to return
with it, goes on a quest which results in obtaining the water and
releasing the enchanted brothers; where a mother and son are the chief
actors; where a bird, or fruit, or the water of death is substituted for
the water of life; and where thankful beasts appear. All of these
elements and more appear in the accessible variants, yet not all of them
can be said rightly to represent *The Water of Life* as such. The basal
traits of the story are much more simple than Dr. Wünsche would have us
believe. They do not include, for example, the wonderful companions whom
the hero finds nor the adventures with the enchanted princess, since
these are in reality traits of originally separate themes, as will
presently be shown. <span id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_171.md)

On the other hand, Cosquin's outline seems to me defective in two ways.
First, he does not recognize that there existed in the original theme
some reward due the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

hero for his constancy and intelligence in the pursuit of his quest. *A
priori* this conclusion would be expected from the general manner of
folk-tales, and as a matter of fact it appears in all the versions which
have come to my attention. The reward almost always takes the form of a
princess, though the manner in which she is won varies very greatly. In
the second place, Cosquin seems to regard *The Golden Bird* as a theme
quite independent of *The Water of Life*. <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172.md) This, I think, is to lose sight of the
essential likeness between the two tales, despite their difference of
introduction. As Dr. Wünsche notes, <span
id="fr_173"></span>[2](#fn_173.md) not only a bird, but a fruit or the
water of death may be substituted for the usual object of the quest.
Indeed, certain variants have more than one of these magical
forces. <span id="fr_174"></span>[3](#fn_174.md) To be sure, this
superfluity of riches doubtless results from the fusion of subsidiary
types, but none the less it points to the original unity of the central
theme, which is all that I wish to suggest.

From this discussion we emerge with an outline of *The Water of Life* in
something like the following form: A sick king has three sons, who go
out to seek some magical water (or bird, or fruit) for his healing. The
two older sons fall by the way into some misfortune due to their own
fault; but the youngest, not without aid of one sort or another from
beings with supernatural powers, succeeds in the quest and at the same
time wins a princess as wife. While returning, he rescues his brothers,
and is exposed by their envy and ingratitude to the loss of all he has
gained (sometimes even of his

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

life). In the end, however, he comes to his own either because the cure
cannot be completed without him or because his wife brings the older
princes to book.

This summary I should be unwilling to have considered as anything more
than a tentative sketch, since a systematic study of the material may
bring to light certain features which I have overlooked. <span
id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_175.md) It will, however, serve its purpose
here.

This simple form of *The Water of Life* is not that with which *The
Grateful Dead* has combined. Indeed, the opinion that this union was
secondary to that of *The Grateful Dead* with *The Poison Maiden* and
*The Ransomed Woman* <span id="fr_176"></span>[2](#fn_176.md) is
strengthened by the fact that it is found with both of these compound
types, and that *The Water of Life* almost invariably appears in a
somewhat distorted form. In point of fact, the latter tale seems to have
lent itself with remarkable facility to combination with other themes.
Thus it is frequently found mixed with *The Skilful Companions* <span
id="fr_177"></span>[3](#fn_177.md) (both with

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

and without *The Grateful Dead*), *The Lady and the Monster*, <span
id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_178.md) and *The Thankful Beasts*.

The reason for the existence of the compounds just mentioned is not far
to seek. With *The Skilful Companions* <span
id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_179.md) there is a ready point of contact in the
hero's need for aid in the accomplishment of his quest, another in the
circumstance that three or more companions set out together with a
common end in view, and still another in the fact that a maiden is
rescued by them. To *The Lady and the Monster*, at least in those
variants where *The Grateful Dead* appears, *The Water of Life* has the
necessary approach in the rôle of the lady herself. As for *The Thankful
Beasts*, their appearance at opportune

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

moments when the heroes of folk-tales need assistance is too frequent to
require justification in any particular case. It is with such
combinations as these, intricate and involved, that many variants of
*The Grateful Dead* are found joined. Sometimes one element, sometimes
another, predominates, so that the threads which unite them are
hopelessly snarled. Sometimes *The Water of Life* is lost in the
entanglement, or only appears as a distorted trait, while *The Skilful
Companions* or *The Lady and the Monster* come out more clearly. Through
this labyrinth we must painfully take our way, exercising what caution
we can. The present guide recognizes the danger of losing the road and
does not pretend to more than a rough and ready knowledge of the
wilderness. Accordingly, he undertakes only to conduct the curious
wayfarer by the least difficult of the paths that traverse it.

Let us first consider the tales into which *The Poison Maiden* and *The
Ransomed Woman* do not enter, which have only *The Grateful Dead* + *The
Water of Life* or some kindred theme. These include *Maltese*, *Polish*,
*Hungarian I.*, *Rumanian II.*, *Straparola II.*, *Venetian*,
*Sicilian*, *Treu Heinrich*, and *Harz II.* They are as widely different
in their characteristics as in their sources.

*Maltese* has the following form: The three sons of a king successively
go out in search of a bird, the song of which will make their father
young. The elder two lose their all by gambling with a maiden in a
palace by the way. The youngest brother pays four thousand pounds
sterling to bury properly a man who has been dead eight months. He is
warned against the maiden by a ghost, and so wins all from her (by using
his own cards), thus rescuing his brothers. When he comes to the castle,
the ghost again appears, and tells him to take the bird that he finds in
a dirty cage. On the way back he is thrown overboard from the steamboat
by his brothers,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

but is saved by the ghost, who appears in the form of a rock with a tree
on it. He is rescued by another steamer, and comes home in rags, where
he is recognized by the bird, which has hitherto refused to sing. The
brothers are banished.

According to the *Polish* story, a poor scholar pays his all for the
burial of a corpse lying maltreated by the way. Later he goes to sleep
under an oak, and on awaking finds his purse full of gold. He is robbed
of this while crossing a stream, by some scoundrels who cast him into
the water; but he is rescued by the ghost of the dead man, who appears
in the form of a plank and gives him the power of turning himself into a
crow, a hare, or a deer. He becomes a huntsman to a king, whose daughter
lives on an inaccessible island. In her castle is a sword with which a
man could overcome the greatest army. When war threatens, the king
offers the princess to any man who can obtain the sword. By means of his
power of metamorphosis the hero carries her a letter and wins her love.
When he exhibits his magical powers, she cuts off a bit of the fur, or a
feather, from each creature into which he turns. With the sword he then
starts back to court, but on the way he is shot by a rival and robbed of
the sword and a letter from the princess. He lies in the way in the form
of a dead hare till the war is ended and the rival is about to marry the
princess, when he is revived and warned by the ghost. At court he is
recognized by the princess, who proves his tale by having him turn into
various shapes and fitting the samples which she has taken.

In *Hungarian I.* a soldier gave all he had to an old beggar, who in
turn gave him the power to change at will into a dove, a fish, or a
hare. He took service with a king, and one day was sent back to the
castle for a magic ring. There he met the princess, and exhibited to her
his powers of metamorphosis, permitting her to

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

pull two feathers, take eight scales, and cut off his tail. While
running back to the king in the form of a hare, he was shot by an
envious comrade, who took the ring and was rewarded. The hero was
restored to life by the old beggar, and returned to the castle, where he
was brought to the princess. She succeeded in proving the truth of his
story by means of the feathers, the scales, and the tail, which she had
so fortunately preserved.

*Rumanian II.*, though changed into legendary form, does not differ
greatly from the two variants just cited. A shepherd boy gave his one
sheep to Christ, when He asked for food. In return, he received a knife
with three blades. Later he took service with a man, with whom he
entered the army of the emperor. One day the monarch found that he had
forgotten his ring, and promised half his kingdom to anybody who could
bring it to him from the palace within twenty-four hours. By means of
his magical knife the hero changed into a hare, obtained the emperor's
ring as well as one from the princess's own hand, and returned to the
army. There he was met by his master, who plundered him, threw him into
a spring, and went to the emperor for reward. When the battle was over
and all had returned to the capital, the princess said that the man who
was presented as her bridegroom was not he to whom she gave the ring.
Meanwhile, Christ had rescued the hero from the spring and sent him to
the palace in the form of a fox with his ring in a basket. The princess
recognized from the token that he was her true bridegroom, and brought
him to the emperor.

*Straparola II.* introduces certain new elements to our notice. A king's
son releases a wild man, whom his father has incarcerated, in order to
get back an arrow that the man has taken from him. The man is really a
disappointed lover, who had given himself up to a savage life. The boy's
mother, in fear of the king, sends him

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

away in the care of two faithful servants, with whom he lives in
obscurity till he is sixteen years old. Covetous. of his wealth, they
are about to kill him, when the wild man, transformed into a splendid
knight by a grateful fairy, joins them. They go to a beautiful city
called Ireland, which is devastated by a ferocious horse and an equally
savage mare. The traitorous servants plot to destroy the prince by
giving out, first, that he has boasted that he can overcome the horse,
and, second, the mare. By the advice of his unknown friend and the help
of the latter's fairy horse, he accomplishes these labours. He is told
by the king that he may have one of his daughters in marriage, if he can
tell which has hair of gold. He is told by his companion that a hornet,
which he has released, will appear at the test and fly three times
around the head of the princess whom he is to choose. The man explains
at the same time the cause of his benevolence,—gratitude because by him
he has been delivered from death. The prince is thus enabled to pick out
the princess with golden hair, and is married to her, while his
companion receives the sister.

In the *Venetian* tale, again a peculiar variant, twelve brothers seek
twelve sisters as wives. Eleven of them go out at first, and are turned
to stone. The youngest brother sets out after a year, and on the way has
a poor dead man buried. Later, when he has saved his eleven brothers,
they become envious, and throw him into a well. The thankful dead man
then comes, draws him out with a cord, and explains who he is. The hero
proceeds to his home and tells his story.

*Sicilian* is more extended but less difficult to place. The three
orphaned sons of a rich man try to win the daughter of a certain king,
who has announced that he will marry the princess to anyone who can make
a ship that will travel alike on land and water. The eldest and middle
brothers are unsuccessful because they are

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

unkind to the poor who ask for work. The youngest brother gives work to
both old and young, and, when an old man (St. Joseph) appears, makes him
overseer. After the work is done, he agrees to give half of what he
obtains to the old man, and goes with him in the ship to court. On the
way he takes in a man who is found putting clouds in a sack, another who
is bearing half a forest on his back, another who has drunk half a
stream, another who is aiming his bow at a quail in the underworld, and
another who stands with one foot at Catania and the other at Messina. At
the court the king refuses to give up his daughter till the hero can
send a message to the underworld and get an answer in an hour, which he
does by means of the long-strider and the shooter; and till he can find
a man who will drink half the contents of his cellar in one day, which
the drinker easily accomplishes. The king then offers as dowry only what
one man can carry away, but he is foiled by the man who bore half the
forest on his back, who now takes all the contents of the palace and
departs with the hero, the princess, and their companions. The king
pursues them, but is befogged by the man with the clouds. When they
arrive at home, the saint demands his half, even of the king's daughter;
but when the hero takes his sword to divide her, he cries out that he
merely wished to test his faithfulness.

In *Treu Heinrich* a noble youth lost his property through prodigality
in tournaments. Finally he sold his all to enter a tourney for the hand
of the daughter of the King of Cyprus, but he gave half to his faithful
follower Heinrich. After they set out for Cyprus, they were joined by a
knight, who shared the hero's hospitality for fourteen days, agreeing to
do the same in return, but at last riding away. In destitution they
arrived at Famagust in Cyprus. While Heinrich was in the city, the hero
found a clear stone left by a bird, through which

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

he obtained power to become a bird. He then established himself in the
city, met the princess with the result that they fell in love, and flew
to her chamber as a bird. He obtained from her not only his desire but
an ornament which he gave to the strange knight, who had again joined
him. Later he overcame this knight in the tourney, but the latter was
mistaken for himself. Again he flew to the princess, who gave him a
crown, and again, after giving it to the stranger, he overcame him in a
fight. The princess now gave him a helmet, which he kept; and he was
proclaimed victor of the jousting. Once more he flew to the princess,
and obtained from her an ornament for his helmet, made by herself. Thus
he won her as wife.

In *Harz II.* our primary motive is far less obscure than in the version
just summarized. A youth pays his all, thirty-eight dollars, to free a
dead man from indebtedness. He goes his way, and meets a young fellow,
who accompanies him. They fall in with a man bearing two trees, a man
with a hat on one side, a man with a wooden leg, and a man with a blind
eye. The six go together to a city, where the princess can be won only
by performing feats, with the penalty of death attached to failure. The
companions aid the hero by bringing water from a distant spring and by
keeping a fiery furnace habitable, so that he wins the princess.

These nine variants are, it will be seen, related in very different
degrees to *The Grateful Dead*. What a debased type of the *märchen*
they represent is shown by the fact that in no less than five <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180.md) the burial of the corpse, which is the
most fundamental trait of the theme, has been lost. Yet for two reasons
it is clear that they are really scions of the stock. In the first
place, wherever the burial has been cut away, other elements of

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

the motive in its simple form have been retained. Thus in *Hungarian I.*
and *Rumanian II.* the deeds of the old beggar (or Christ) make his
identity with the ghost unquestionable; in *Straparola II.*, despite its
sophistication, the wild man fills the same rôle, while his explanations
at the end show that the burial has been merely blurred; in *Sicilian*
both the agreement to divide and the division of the woman as a test are
introduced; and in *Treu Heinrich* there is double division in a way,
since the hero divides his property with his faithful follower to begin
with and afterwards agrees to an exchange of hospitality with the
helpful knight, going so far as actually to give him two of the four
gifts received from the princess. In the second place, certain variants
without the burial are very closely allied with others which retain
it, <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_181.md) as will be seen in a moment.
Thus all those treated here may safely be admitted to the group.

The reader must, however, have been struck, while examining the
summaries just given, with the great diversity of the residuum which
would be left if the parts properly belonging to *The Grateful Dead*
were taken away. Indeed, they may be separated on this score into four
categories with a couple of minor divisions. *Polish*, *Hungarian I.*,
and *Rumanian II.* are very similar in respect to these matters, having
a princess who is won by the feat of obtaining something left at home by
her father (this feat made possible by the power given the hero to
change his form) and a treacherous rival. *Polish* has the peculiarity
that the article to be obtained by the hero is a magical sword. <span
id="fr_182"></span>[2](#fn_182.md) *Treu Heinrich* stands a little apart
from these, since the rival does not appear

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

and the princess is won by a tourney; yet it has the curious
metamorphosis, and must be considered as having some connection.
*Maltese* and *Venetian* fall together. *Venetian* has retained from
*The Water of Life* only the misfortune and the treachery of the older
brothers, <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183.md) while *Maltese* keeps
also the magical bird and the features naturally connected therewith.
The introduction of two steamboats in the latter is a curious
illustration of the ease with which popular tales change details without
altering essentials. *Sicilian* and *Harz II.* again are alike, both
being compounded with *The Skilful Companions*, <span
id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_184.md) and making the winning of the princess
depend on feats really accomplished by the helpers characteristic to
that tale. *Straparola II.* must be placed alone, having nearly all
trace of *The Water of Life* lost in the traits of *The Lady and the
Monster*, with a princess won by the hero's happily directed
choice. <span id="fr_185"></span>[3](#fn_185.md)

All of these features will appear again when we come to discuss variants
which combine the compound types *The Grateful Dead* + *The Poison
Maiden* or *The Ransomed Woman* with *The Water of Life*. They may,
therefore, be passed over for the present, together with the question as
to whether such a simple combination as *The Grateful Dead* + *The Water
of Life* may be regarded as being the original from which the more
complicated types have sprung. It is sufficient for the moment to
recognize the tendency of the simpler variants to fall

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

into groups on the basis of the residuum left by subtracting traits
belonging to *The Grateful Dead*.

Let us now consider the tales where a thankful beast plays the part of
the grateful dead through at least a portion of the narrative, and where
there is still no trace of either *The Poison Maiden* or *The Ransomed
Woman*. The change of beast for ghost is so obvious and easy that the
separation of these variants from the preceding appears at first sight
to be of merely formal use. Yet thus considered, they may serve to
define the subdivisions already noticed. Nine such versions have come to
my knowledge: *Walewein*, *Lotharingian*, *Tuscan*, *Brazilian*, *Basque
I.*, *Breton IV.*, *V.*, and *VI.*, and *Simrock IX.* All but one are
folk-tales, and that, curiously enough, an episode in a thirteenth
century <span id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_186.md) Dutch romance translated
from the French. <span id="fr_187"></span>[2](#fn_187.md)

*Walewein*, the variant in question, has the following form: Walewein
(or more familiarly Gawain) sets forth from Arthur's court to secure a
magical chessboard. He is promised it by King Wonder if only he will get
the sword of rings from King Amoris, who in turn will give that up if
Walewein will bring him the princess of the Garden of India. On this
quest the hero mortally wounds a certain Red Knight, who prays him for
Christian burial and is properly interred. He then proceeds to the
castle of King Assentin, whose daughter recognizes in him the ideal
knight whom she has seen in a dream. He is led under the dark river
which surrounds the castle by the Fox Rogès, and wins the princess. The
lovers and the fox (a prince transformed) escape by the help of the Red
Knight's ghost. After many adventures they come together to the court
with a chessboard, which is given up by King Wonder in exchange for the
sword. Walewein is able to keep the princess for his own because of the
death of Amoris.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

*Lotharingian* runs as follows: A king has three sons. He sends them
successively to seek the water of life. Two of them refuse to help a
shepherd on the way, and rest from their search in Pekin. The third, who
is deformed, aids the shepherd, and receives from him some arrows, which
will pierce well whatever they strike, and a flageolet, which will make
everyone dance within hearing of it. Arrived at Pekin, the humpback pays
the debts of a corpse, and has it buried. He goes on till his money is
exhausted. When he is about to shoot a fox one day, he is stayed by
pity, and is directed by the creature to the castle where the water of
life is to be found. There he is detained by an ogre, and wins battles
for him by the aid of the magical arrows. There is a princess in the
castle, who refuses to marry the ogre. The hero makes her dance, and
obtains from the ogre as recompense the promise of whatever he wishes.
He asks for the most beautiful thing there and the right to circle the
castle three times. So he takes the princess, a phial of the water of
life, as well as the uglier of the two mules and of the two green birds,
as the fox has told him, and flees away. He meets the fox again, and is
warned not to help any one in trouble. Nevertheless, he rescues his two
brothers from the scaffold in Pekin, and is cast into a well by them.
They go home, but are not able to heal the king. Meanwhile, the prince
is saved by the fox, and is made straight of body. He goes home, and at
his coming the king becomes young again, while the brothers are burned.
So the prince marries the lady.

In *Tuscan* we learn that the youngest of three princes, while
wandering, paid the debts of a man whose corpse was being insulted. When
he had buried the man, he found himself without a farthing, and so slept
in the forest. In the morning he was greeted by a hare (*lieprina*) with
a basket of food in its mouth. He took

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

this gladly, and reflected that the creature must be the soul of the man
whom he had buried. He then came to an inn, and took service with the
host, whose beautiful daughter he soon discovered to be a princess, who
had been bought while an infant. After winning her love, the hero went
on into two kingdoms, where he obtained a magical purse and a wonderful
horse from two ugly daughters of innkeepers. With these possessions he
returned to the princess, and started with her for his home. On the way
he saved from death his two older brothers, who had gone out to seek
adventures at the same time as himself. They repaid the kindness by
trying to drown him and by carrying the princess off home, where only by
feigning illness could she frustrate their plan that she choose one of
them as husband. Meanwhile, the hero was rescued from drowning by the
hare, and came home. By pretending to be a physician he obtained access
to the princess, was recognized, and then revealed himself to his
father.

The *Brazilian* tale is brief but not unusual in type. A prince, while
seeking a remedy for his father, passes through a town and sees a
corpse, which is held for debt. He pays the creditors, and has the
corpse buried. Later he is met by a fox, which helps him obtain not only
the remedy for his father but in addition a princess as his wife. On its
last appearance the beast declares that it is the soul of the man whom
he buried.

*Basque I.* has the following form: Three sons go out to seek a white
blackbird by which their father can be healed. Two of them get into debt
to the same three ladies, and, according to the custom of the land, are
imprisoned. The third son resists the sirens, ransoms his brothers, and
also pays the debts of a dead man, whose corpse is being maltreated. He
arrives at the house of the king who has the white blackbird, and is
told to get a certain young woman from another king.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He goes far on
till he comes near the castle, where he meets a fox and is instructed by
it to enter a certain room, in which he will find the lady dressed in
poor clothing. He must have her put on good clothes, and she will sing.
He follows the advice, but is interrupted, while the lady is singing, by
the king of the castle, who tells him that he must get a white horse
from still another king. He meets the fox again, and is instructed that,
when he finds the horse with an old saddle on it, he must put on a good
one, so that it will neigh. Again he follows the fox's advice, and is
interrupted by people who rush in when they hear the horse neigh. From
them he obtains the steed, and retraces his steps, eloping with the lady
at the second king's castle and at the first king's carrying off the
blackbird. On his arrival at home he is thrown into a cistern by his
treacherous brothers, who take his spoil to the king. He is saved by the
fox, however, which draws him out with its tail. When he comes into the
presence of his father, and not till then, is the healing accomplished.

In *Breton IV.* we find again three sons of a king, who set forth to get
the white blackbird and also the lady with locks of gold. Jeannot, the
youngest of them, pays for the interment of a beggar on the way. Later a
fox comes to him, saying that it is the soul of the poor man. It helps
him procure the youth-giving blackbird and afterward the lady with the
marvellous hair. He then meets his brothers, who for envy push him over
a precipice, but he is saved and sent homeward by the fox.

*Breton V.* does not differ materially from the preceding, though it has
interesting minor variations. The three sons of a king seek the bird
Drédaine in its golden cage in order to cure their father. The two elder
brothers go to England, and there meet jolly companions, but find no
trace of the bird. The third brother, the ugly one, comes thither, is
mocked and robbed by

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

them, but goes his way. One night he lodges in a forest hut, and there
finds a man's body, which the widow cannot bury for lack of money to pay
the priest. He is now poor, but pays for the interment of the corpse,
and proceeds. He is followed by a white fox, which instructs him how to
achieve his quest. He soon reaches the castle, traverses three courts,
comes to one chamber where he finds a piece of inexhaustible bread,
enters a second where he gets an unfailing pot of wine and makes love to
a sleeping princess, and goes on to a third where he finds a magical
sword and the bird. He hastens away with his booty, guided for a time by
the fox, sells his bread and his wine to innkeepers on condition that
they be given up to the princess if ever she comes for them, and arrives
at the city where his brothers are now in prison. He ransoms them by
helping the king, and pays their debts by selling his sword. On their
way home he is thrown into a well by his brothers, who take the bird to
their father, but do not succeed in curing him. Meanwhile, the hero is
saved by the fox, which now explains that it is the soul of the man whom
he has buried, and definitely disappears. He arrives at his home as a
beggar, and takes service with his father. Later the princess comes
thither with the son that is the fruit of their union, and brings with
her the bread, wine, and sword which she has found on the way. The bird
sings, the king is healed, and the wicked brothers are executed.

*Breton VI.* lacks some of the interesting traits of the variant just
given, but embroiders the theme with considerable grace. The three sons
of a king set out to find the princess of Hungary, who has the only
remedy that will cure their father. The eldest forgets his purpose, and
wastes his money in rioting. The second finds him just as he is being
led to death on account of debt, ransoms him, and shares his riotous
pleasures. The third

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

brother, a humpback, goes out with little money, but on his way procures
burial for a man's corpse, which the widow has been unable to do because
of lack of money to pay the priest. The next day a fox with a white tail
meets him, and in return for a bit of cake leads him to the castle of a
princess. There the prince resists the lady's advances, which he
suspects are derisive, and is sent to her sister's castle, where he has
the same experience. When he arrives at the castle of the third sister,
he yields to her proposals, is given the remedy for his father and a
magical sword, and is told how to go home. On the way he rescues his
brothers from the scaffold by waving his sword, and is robbed and thrown
into a well by them. Thence he is rescued by the fox, which comes at his
call, and before it disappears explains that it is the ghost. Meanwhile,
the older brothers have cured the king by the water of life in a phial;
so when the hero comes home he is not believed. In a year and a day the
princess arrives there according to her promise, and with a little son.
At a feast she proclaims the truth, cuts her husband into bits,
sprinkles the heap of fragments with the water of life, and marries the
handsome youth who at once arises—the humpback transformed. <span
id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_188.md)

According to *Simrock IX.*, finally, the three sons of a king seek the
bird phoenix to cure their blind father. The two elder enter the castle
of a beautiful maiden, and are lost; but the youngest resists the
temptation, and takes lodging at an inn. There at night he is startled
by a ghost, which tells him that it is the spirit of a man whom the host
has buried in the cellar for non-payment of a score, and which implores
his help. The youth arranges for payment of the debt and for proper
burial, then goes his way. In the wood he meets a wolf, which instructs
him how to find the bird phoenix in a cage in

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

the magical castle, and carries him thither. Because he fails to take
the worse-looking bird according to instructions, he has to get a steed
as swift as wind for the lord of the castle. Again he is disobedient
when told to take the worst-looking horse only, and so has to get the
most beautiful woman in the world for the lord of this castle. Again he
is brought by the wolf to a castle, where he obediently chooses a black
maiden instead of one who is apparently beautiful. With maiden, horse,
and bird he turns home. The wolf in parting from him explains that it is
the ghost of the dead man, and warns him not to buy gallows flesh. When
he meets his brothers on their way to be hanged, however, he forgets
this, and ransoms them. In return he is nearly murdered by them and left
for dead, but is rescued and healed by the wolf, and so at last reaches
his destination.

In none of these nine stories is the burial of the dead, one of the two
most fundamental features of our leading motive, in any way obscured.
They are thus less difficult to treat than was the preceding group, in
spite of the added complications introduced by the advent of the helpful
animal. This creature should naturally take the rôle of the ghost,
appear as the embodiment of the dead man's soul indeed; and with but two
exceptions <span id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189.md) it actually fulfils the
part. In those two there has been, apparently, imperfect amalgamation,
so that the helper is duplicated, and the motivation obscured. In
*Walewein*, a literary version, consciously adapted to the requirements
of a *roman d’aventure*, this need excite no wonder. The ghost does its
part properly, and the fox is merely an additional agency in the service
of the hero, acting out of pure kindness of heart <span
id="fr_190"></span>[2](#fn_190.md) as far as one can see. *Lotharingian*,
not contented with duplicating the trait, triplicates it.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The fox, as in the
ordinary form of *The Thankful Beasts*, helps the hero because of a
benefit received; the shepherd bestows magical gifts, as in a common
type of *The Water of Life*, because of the hero's kindness; while the
dead debtor remains inactive after the burial, and plays no further part
in the narrative.

As for *The Water of Life*, there are fewer complications in this group
than in that where the thankful beast does not appear. In all of the
variants some of the fundamental traits of the theme remain intact. In
all save *Walewein* and *Brazilian* (which is a degenerate form
presumably carried across the sea by Spaniards or Portuguese) the three
brothers set out from home in quite the normal way. *Walewein* again
lacks the water of life, which *Brazilian* retains. All the other
versions, save Tuscan, keep this water or replace it by some other
restorative agency. Two variants only fail to make the older brothers
act treacherously towards the hero, these being again *Walewein* and
*Brazilian*. The former thus lacks three of the essentials of the theme,
the latter two. Yet since *Walewein* makes the hero win his princess by
going on from adventure to adventure quite in the normal manner, and
since *Brazilian* makes him obtain both water of life and princess,
though with loss of interesting details, we are surely justified in
placing both in this category.

It is worth our while to note in this connection that all these nine
variants come from southern Europe, directly or by derivation. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_191.md) Geographical proximity, though not
sufficient in itself as a basis of classification, adds welcome
confirmation to other proof in cases like this, where a small group of
highly complicated tales is found to exist in neighbouring countries
only. That

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Walewein* can be
connected with this specialized subdivision has important bearings on
the question whence the material for that romance was taken. In view of
the limited territory which this form of the story has covered as a
folk-tale in six hundred years, and the fact that France would be the
centre of the region, it seems fair to assume that some thirteenth
century French writer took a *märchen* of his own land as the basis for
his work, thus elaborating with native material the adventures of a
Celtic hero.

The question now arises as to what light the group just considered
throws upon the variants which combine the simple theme of *The Grateful
Dead* with *The Water of Life* or some such motive. It appeared, the
reader will remember, that according to the elements foreign to the main
motive they must be separated into four classes. Reference to these
classes <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192.md) will show that the
variants with *The Thankful Beasts* are in many respects different from
any one of them as far as the features peculiar to *The Water of Life*,
or kindred themes, are concerned. Yet because *Maltese* and the brief
*Venetian*, though otherwise transformed, are the only tales aside from
these <span id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_193.md) that preserve the treachery
of the hero's brothers, it is safe to class them together. Both
*Maltese* and *Venetian* come, it will be observed, from the same
general region as all the other members of the group.

Since the elements left by subtracting *The Grateful Dead* from the
variants of the four categories thus discovered are very diverse, we
cannot postulate a parent form from which all four classes might have
sprung. Indeed, the evidence thus far obtained all points to a separate
combination of already developed themes with *The Grateful Dead*. The
test of this will be found in

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

an examination of those variants of those larger compounds, which have
also traces of *The Water of Life* or some allied motive.

Turning first to such versions of the combination *The Grateful Dead* +
*The Poison Maiden*, we find eleven on our list, all of which have
already been summarized and discussed in connection with the simple
compound. <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194.md) These are *Esthonian
II.*, *Rumanian I.*, *Irish I.*, *Irish II.*, *Irish III.*, *Danish
III.*, *Norwegian II.*, *Simrock X.*, *Harz I.*, *Jack the
Giant-Killer*, and *Old Wives’ Tale*. Since we know definitely that
*Danish III.* (the tale by Christian Andersen) was taken from *Norwegian
II.*, it may be left out of account. Ten variants thus remain to be
studied with reference to the subsidiary elements.

In *Esthonian II.* the hero releases a princess, who goes with devils
every night to church, by watching in the church for three nights with
three, six, and twelve candles on successive nights. In *Rumanian I.*
the hero wins a princess by explaining why she wears out twelve pairs of
slippers every night; and he accomplishes this by the aid of his helper,
who follows the lady in the form of a cat, and picks up the
handkerchief, spoon, and ring which she drops in the house of the
dragons. According to *Irish I.* the helper obtains for the hero horses
of gold and silver, a sword of light, a cloak of darkness, and a pair of
slippery shoes; he helps him keep over night a comb and a pair of
scissors, in spite of enchantment, and finally gets the lips of the
giant enchanter, so that the hero unspells and wins the lady of his
quest. In *Irish II.* the hero is joined by a green man (the grateful
dead), a gunner, a listener, a blower, and a strong man. By the aid of
the first he gives his princess a pair of scissors, a comb, and the
enchanter's head; by the aid of the others he obtains water from the
well of the western world, and is enabled to walk over three miles of
needles. *Irish III.*

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

has a helper who obtains for the hero a sword, a cloak of darkness, and
swift shoes, rescues a pair of scissors, and obtains the enchanter's
head, while the hero wins a race by the aid of the shoes. According to
*Norwegian II.* the hero and helper get a sword, a ball of yarn, and a
hat, while the latter follows the princess and rescues a pair of
scissors and a ball, finally obtaining the troll's head. In *Simrock X.*
the helper secures three rods, a sword, and a pair of wings, follows the
princess, and learns how to answer her riddles, emphasizing his
knowledge by getting the wizard's head. *Harz I.* has the helper give
wings and a rod to the hero, who flies with the princess and learns to
guess her riddles, cutting off the monster's head. In *Jack the
Giant-Killer* Jack obtains gold, a coat and cap, a sword, and a pair of
slippers for his master, follows the princess, and secures the
handkerchief and the demon's head, which are requisite to the
unspelling. Finally, according to *Old Wives’ Tale*, the helper, while
invisible, slays the conjuror, and so obtains the princess for his
master.

It will at once be recognized that all of these variants are of one type
as far as the traits just specified are concerned. The basal element is
the hero's success in winning an enchanted princess either by
accomplishing difficult feats or answering riddles. The water of life,
as such, appears in only one story, *Irish II.*, and there not as the
prime goal of the hero's quest, but merely as the object of a subsidiary
labour. Clearly these tales not only form a group by themselves, but
have in combination with *The Grateful Dead* and *The Poison Maiden* a
theme which is not properly *The Water of Life*. This theme is as
clearly *The Lady and the Monster*, <span
id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_195.md) which is closely allied to *The Water of
Life*, but is essentially distinct. It has already been found compounded
with the simple form of *The Grateful Dead* in the somewhat

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

degenerate and literary *Straparola II.*, <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196.md) though the method by which the enchanted
princess was won in that variant was different from that given in the
present group.

Within the group there are minor differences with reference to the
manner of unspelling the princess, which resolve themselves either, on
the one hand, into the hero's keeping or obtaining something for her,
or, on the other, into his guessing the object of her thoughts. These
details are not, however, of much importance for the purpose in hand,
though they might become so if an attempt were made to sub-divide the
group. Thus *Esthonian II.* is decidedly unusual in its treatment of the
matter just mentioned. *Irish I.* has traces of the *Sword of
Light* <span id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_197.md) and of *The Two
Friends*. <span id="fr_198"></span>[3](#fn_198.md) In *Harz I.* the hero
himself follows the princess instead of leaving the actual work of
unspelling to the helper, as is elsewhere the case. *Irish II.*,
finally, is peculiar not only in bringing in *The Water of Life*, as
mentioned above, but also the motive of *The Skilful Companions*, which
we have already met with in Sicilian and *Harz II*. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[4](#fn_199.md)

*Irish II.* is, indeed, of great importance to our study at this point.
It is in some way a link between Sicilian and *Harz II.* and the
subdivision now under discussion. Furthermore, the fact that *Straparola
II.* has some traits of *The Lady and the Monster* in common with all
the members of the group under consideration shows that it can safely be
placed in the same category as *Sicilian* and *Harz II.* Though the
feats by which the princess is won are somewhat different in the
last-named variants from the feats in *Straparola II.* on the one hand
and in the compound *The Grateful Dead* + *The Poison Maiden* + *The
Water of Life* (*The Lady and the Monster*) on the other, there can be
little doubt, it seems

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

to me, that all of them belong together. *Irish II.* by the introduction
of *The Skilful Companions* thus furnishes a clue by which the tales
having the compound just mentioned may be classed with two varieties of
the simple combination, and permits us to reduce the total number of
categories with reference to *The Water of Life* from four to three.

Before proceeding to a general discussion of the means by which this
theme was brought into connection with *The Grateful Dead* and the
comparative date of the combination or series of combinations, it is
necessary to examine four other versions,—those which have the form *The
Grateful Dead* + *The Ransomed Woman* + *The Water of Life*. Like the
group just treated, all of them have been summarized and discussed with
reference to the prime features of the compound. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200.md) They are *Bohemian*, *Simrock I.*,
*Simrock III.*, and *Simrock VII.*

The elements of these variants, apart from those due to the main
compound, are as follows. In *Bohemian* the hero is given a flute and a
captive princess by his helper, and escapes with them from prison. Later
he is cast into the sea by a rival, but is rescued by the helper and
given a wishing ring. By means of this ring he turns first into an eagle
and afterwards into an old man, and succeeds in winning the princess by
building and painting a church. In *Simrock I.* the hero is rescued by
the helper after being cast overboard by a rival, and is given the power
of obtaining his wishes. Thereby he paints three rooms to the liking of
the princess, and is recognized by her. *Simrock III.* differs from this
only in making the helper do the painting and in having one room painted
instead of three. In *Simrock VII.*, finally, the hero releases a
princess by hewing trees, separating grain, and choosing his mistress
among three hundred women, all without aid. Later he is rescued

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

from the sea and recognized by means of a ring and a handkerchief.

The first three of these variants clearly show in the subsidiary
elements just enumerated their relationship to *The Water of Life*. They
lack the quest for some magical fountain or bird, to be sure, but they
preserve the quest for the lady, which is an important factor in the
*märchen*. Of the three, *Bohemian* has the most extended and probably
the best presentation of the details of the difficult courtship; and it
gives the hero that power of metamorphosis which was noted in four
variants of the type *The Grateful Dead* + *The Water of Life* simply.
It may, therefore, on the basis of general and particular resemblance be
classed with *Polish*, *Hungarian I.*, *Rumanian II.*, and *Treu
Heinrich*. <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_201.md) Along with it, of
course, go the briefer *Simrock I.* and *Simrock III.* There is this
important difference between the two sets of tales, that in the simpler
form the princess is won by the hero's success in bringing something
from a distance, in the more complicated form by building and
decorating. Yet the resemblance is sufficient to warrant the
classification proposed.

With *Simrock VII.* the case is altogether different. There the
subsidiary elements are connected with *The Lady and the Monster* rather
than *The Water of Life* proper, yet not with that theme as it appears
in combination with *The Poison Maiden*, <span
id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_202.md) since in that group the hero disenchants
the princess by guessing some secret, here by performing two feats of
prowess or discrimination and by choosing the proper lady from a host of
maidens. With *Straparola II.*, however, which has the simpler
combination *The Grateful Dead* + *The Lady and the Monster*, the
resemblance is very close, <span id="fr_203"></span>[3](#fn_203.md) as both
have the happily directed choice. The complicated *Simrock VII.* thus
falls into the same category with reference

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

to this matter as *Straparola II.*, *Sicilian*, and *Harz II.*, and the
group having the form *The Grateful Dead* + *The Poison Maiden* + *The
Water of Life* (*The Lady and the Monster* specifically).

A summary of our three categories will be of service in discussing their
relations to one another and to the themes with which *The Water of
Life* or *The Lady and the Monster* are combined.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

CLASS I.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Polish*.

*Hungarian I.*

*Rumanian II.*

*Treu Heinrich*.

*Bohemian*, *Simrock I.,* *Simrock III.* (With *The Ransomed Woman*.)

</div>

CLASS II.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Sicilian*.

*Harz II.*

*Straparola II.*

All recorded variants with *The Poison Maiden*.

*Simrock VII.* (With *The Ransomed Woman*.)

</div>

CLASS III.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Maltese*.

*Venetian*.

All variants with *The Thankful Beasts*.

</div>

</div>

Class I. forms a territorially homogeneous group, all the members of it
coming from eastern and central Europe. It is not altogether homogeneous
in content, but preserves the theme of *The Water of Life* proper in a
form where the hero wins a princess by means, among other feats, of
metamorphosis. Class II. is the most widespread of all territorially, as
its members come from all parts of Europe. It has instead of *The Water
of Life* proper what must be regarded, in the present

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

state of the evidence, as the closely allied theme of *The Lady and the
Monster*. Class III., the most compact of all in the region that it
inhabits, preserves *The Water of Life* better than any other group,
though not without frequent admixture and, in many instances, the loss
of some elements.

It has been stated above <span id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_204.md) that it
would be hard to imagine such various traits coming from a single type
of story. This becomes even more evident from the tabulation just made.
To suppose that *The Grateful Dead* first united with *The Water of
Life*, and that this compound gave rise to the varieties, as enumerated,
would involve us in the direst confusion. If such were the case, how
could Class II. with its introduction of *The Lady and the Monster* be
explained? Why, moreover, should one variant having *The Ransomed Woman*
fall into Class II., while three others fall into Class I.? Such an
assumption, it is clear, would be self-destructive.

The only alternative is to suppose that *The Water of Life* entered into
combination with simple or compound types of *The Grateful Dead* at more
than one time and in more than one region. That *The Grateful Dead*
united with *The Poison Maiden* and *The Ransomed Woman* rather early
and quite independently abundant evidence goes to show; that *The Water
of Life* is an independent motive and that, like at least two of the
other themes, it was of Asiatic origin has likewise been made clear;
that the latter could not have united with *The Grateful Dead* so early
as did *The Poison Maiden* and *The Ransomed Woman* is proved by the
discrepancies noted above. If it be assumed, on the contrary, that after
the compounds *The Grateful Dead* + *The Poison Maiden* and *The
Ransomed Woman* had arisen, both they and the simple theme in one or
another form came into connection with one or another

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

form of *The Water of Life* our difficulties are in great measure
resolved.

With this in mind let us consider the three categories. Sometime before
the fourteenth century <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205.md) *The Water
of Life*, perhaps in a rather peculiar form, came into contact with *The
Grateful Dead*, both simple and combined with *The Ransomed
Woman*, <span id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206.md) in eastern or central
Europe. With each form it seems to have united, giving rise in the
century named to the German romance of *Treu Heinrich* and the legend of
Nicholas by Gobius, as well as, sooner or later, to the folk-tales with
which it has been found combined in those regions within the past
hundred years. The territorial limitation of the resulting type is a
point in the favour of the proposed theory, though I cannot but be aware
that this may be disturbed by a variant outside the seemingly fixed
circle. Yet even so, the relation of the variants of Class I. to the
themes concerned appears to be pretty definitely established. With Class
III. the matter is even simpler. According to my view, some form of *The
Grateful Dead*, more or less confused with one of the countless versions
of *The Thankful Beasts* met with a very clear type of *The Water of
Life* in southern or south-western Europe by or before the thirteenth
century. <span id="fr_207"></span>[3](#fn_207.md) With this it united and
gave rise to an Old French romance (later turned into Dutch) and to a
considerable body of folk-tales, which have not strayed far from the
point of departure save in one instance, <span
id="fr_208"></span>[4](#fn_208.md) where the means of transmission is not
difficult to ascertain. Apparently the thankful beast was not absolutely
in solution, since in *Maltese* and *Venetian* the human ghost resumes
its characteristic rôle. <span id="fr_209"></span>[5](#fn_209.md) With
Class

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> II. the case is
different and more difficult of explanation. Here the compound has no
definite territorial limits, and it is besides of a very complicated
character. We have to suppose that *The Lady and the Monster*, a
*märchen* allied to *The Water of Life*, was afloat in Europe somewhat
before the early sixteenth century. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210.md) There it met and united with *The
Grateful Dead*, in its simple form on the one hand, giving rise to three
of our variants, and on the other hand separately with the compounds
having *The Poison Maiden* and *The Ransomed Woman*. The former double
compound must have been made fairly early, <span
id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_211.md) since it has been found in such widely
separated countries as Rumania and Ireland, and furnished one of the
most important elements to the making of a sixteenth century English
play, Peele's *Old Wives’ Tale*. The second of the double compounds is
unfortunately represented on our list by a single folk-tale only, and
may possibly be a later formation.

Such, then, seems to be the relationship of *The Water of Life* and
allied motives to the main theme of our study,—purely subsidiary and
relatively late. The theory which has been proposed involves the
necessity of placing the entrance of the Semitic *märchen* into Europe
not much earlier than the twelfth century, though such matters of
chronology must be left somewhat to speculation; it shows the points of
contact between the various motives concerned; and it avoids
contradictions of space and time. Writer and reader may perhaps
congratulate themselves on finding so clear a road through the maze.
Should subsequent discovery of material necessitate modification of the
views here expressed, it should be welcomed by both with equal pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_162"></span>[119:1](gd08.htm#fr_162.md) The most adequate
treatment of the motive yet published is by August Wünsche, *Die Sagen
vom Lebensbaum and Lebenswasser*, 1905, pp. 90-104. This is the same
study which had previously been printed in the *Zts. f. vergleichende
Litteraturgeschichte*, 1899, N.F. xiii. 166-180, but is furnished with a
new introduction and a few additional illustrations. Dr. Wünsche's
monograph, thoroughgoing [and](errata.htm#2.md) conclusive as it is with
reference to the myths of the Tree of Life and the Water of Life, leaves
much to be desired as an account of the folk-tale based on the latter
belief. He himself says in his preface, p. iv: "Man sieht auch daraus,
dass es sich um Wanderstoffe handelt, an die sich immer neue Elemente
ankristallisiert haben." These elements he has not studied with any
degree of completeness. Thus, for example, he does not use Cosquin's
valuable contributions in *Contes populaires de Lorraine*, i. 212-222,
which would have given him valuable assistance. The theme yet awaits
definitive treatment.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[119:2](gd08.htm#fr_163.md) See Wünsche, p. 92.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[119:3](gd08.htm#fr_164.md) P. 71.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[119:4](gd08.htm#fr_165.md) "The Fountain of
Youth," *Journal of the American Oriental Society*, xxvi. 1st half, 19
and 55.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[119:5](gd08.htm#fr_166.md) Hopkins, pp. 19, 42,
55, etc.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[120:1](gd08.htm#fr_167.md) Wünsche, p. iii: "Es
sind altorientalische Mythen, die in alle Kulturreligionen übergangen
sind. Zeit und Ort haben ihnen ein sehr verschiedenes Gepräge gegeben,
der Grundgedanke ist derselbe geblieben."

<span id="fn_168"></span>[120:2](gd08.htm#fr_168.md) P. 71. See also
Hopkins, p. 55.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[121:1](gd08.htm#fr_169.md) *Contes populaires de
Lorraine*, i. 213.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[121:2](gd08.htm#fr_170.md) Pp. 90 f.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[123:1](gd08.htm#fr_171.md) See pp.
[125](#page_125)-[127](#page_127.md) below.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[124:1](gd08.htm#fr_172.md) Pp. 212-214. He
regards the story in Wolf, Hausmärchen, p. 230, as linking the two.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[124:2](gd08.htm#fr_173.md) P. 91. Cosquin, it
will be noted, makes the fruit an alternative of the water of life.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[124:3](gd08.htm#fr_174.md) For example, "The
Baker's Three Daughters" in Mrs. M. Carey's *Fairy Legends of the French
Provinces*, 1887, pp. 86 ff., unites the water of life with both the
magical apples and the bird.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[125:1](gd08.htm#fr_175.md) The need of such a
study may be shown by stating that, while Wünsche has treated about
thirty variants, I know at present of something like four times that
number.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[125:2](gd08.htm#fr_176.md) See [p.
118](gd07.htm#page_118.md) above.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[125:3](gd08.htm#fr_177.md) This well-known
*märchen* has been treated by various scholars, most recently by G. L.
Kittredge, in *Arthur and Gorlagon* (*Studies and Notes in Philology and
Literature*, viii.) 1903, pp. 226 f., from whom I take the liberty of
transcribing the following references, some of which would otherwise be
unknown to me. In note 2 to p. 226 he says: "See Benfey, *Das Märchen
von den* 'Menschen mit den wunderbaren Eigenschaften,' *Ausland*, 1858,
pp. 969 ff. (*Kleinere Schriften* II. iii. 94 ff.); Wesselofsky, in
Giovanni da Prato, *Il Paradiso degli Alberti*, 1867, I. ii. 238 ff.;
d’Ancona, *Studj di Critica e Storia Letteraria*, 1880, pp. 357-358;
Köhler-Bolte, *Ztsch. des Ver. f. Volkskunde*, vi. 77; Köhler, *Kleinere
Schriften*, i. 192 ff., 298 ff., 389-390, 431, 544; ii. 591; Cosquin,
*Contes pop. de Lorraine*, i. 23 ff.; Crane, *Italian Popular Tales*, p.
67; Nutt, in Macinnes, *Folk and Hero Tales*, pp. 445 ff.; Laistner,
*Rätsel der Sphinx* ii. 357 ff.; Steel, *Tales of the Punjab*, pp. 42
ff.; Jurkschat, *Litauische Märchen*, pp. 29 ff.; etc." A peculiarly
interesting specimen is that in Bladé, *Contes pop. de la Gascogne*,
1886, iii. 12-22. See also Luzel, *Contes pop. de Basse-Bretagne*, 1887,
iii. 296-311; Carnoy and Nicolaides, *Traditions pop. de l’Asie
Mineure*, 1889, pp. 43-56; and Goldschmidt, *Russische Märchen*, 1883,
pp. 69-78.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[126:1](gd08.htm#fr_178.md) So I venture to call
the story of the woman, who through enchantment or her own bad taste is
the mistress of an ogre or some other monster. She is rescued by a hero,
who is able to solve the extraordinary riddles or to accomplish the
apparently impossible tasks which she sets him at the advice of the
monster, after other suitors have perished in the attempt. See
Kittredge, *Arthur and Gorlagon*, p. 250 (note to p. 249); Wesselofsky,
*Arch. f. slav. Phil.* vi. 594. A good specimen tale is "The Magic
Turban" in R. Nisbet Bain's *Turkish Fairy Tales*, 1901, pp. 102-111.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[126:2](gd08.htm#fr_179.md) Kittredge thus
summarizes the tale (*work cited*, p. 226): "Three or more brothers (or
comrades) are suitors for the hand of a beautiful girl. While her father
is deliberating, the girl disappears. The companions undertake to
recover her. One of them, by contemplation (or by keenness. of sight),
finds that she has been stolen by a demon (or dragon) and taken to his
abode on a rock in the sea. Another builds a ship by his magic (or
possesses a magic ship) which instantly transports them to the rock.
Another, who is a skilful climber, ascends the castle and finds that the
monster is asleep with his head in the maiden's lap. Another, a master
thief, steals the girl without waking her captor. They embark, but are
pursued by the monster. One of the companions, an unerring shot, kills.
the pursuer with an arrow. The girl is restored to her parents." This
analysis would not hold for all variants, even when uncompounded (e.g.
Grimm, *Kinder- and Hausmärchen*, No. 71, "Sechse kommen durch die ganze
Welt") but a better could scarcely be made without a systematic study of
the type. As Kittredge notes, the companions are not at all constant in
number and function.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[132:1](gd08.htm#fr_180.md) *Hungarian I.*,
*Rumanian II.*, *Straparola II.*, *Sicilian*, and *Treu Heinrich*.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[133:1](gd08.htm#fr_181.md) Thus *Hungarian I.*
and *Rumanian II.* with *Polish*, *Sicilian* with *Harz II.*

<span id="fn_182"></span>[133:2](gd08.htm#fr_182.md) Possibly a trace of
some such story as *The Quest of the Sword of Light* discussed by
Kittredge, *Arthur and Gorlagon*, pp. 214 ff.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[134:1](gd08.htm#fr_183.md) Since twelve brothers
set out to win twelve sisters, there is probably a union here with the
widespread tale of *The Brothers and Sisters*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[134:2](gd08.htm#fr_184.md) The ship that will
travel equally well on land and water is seemingly a common trait in
forms of *The Skilful Companions*. See the variant cited from Bladé on
[p. 125](#page_125), note [3](#fn_177.md). It occurs in a curious tale from
Mauritius, given by Baissac, *Le Folk-lore de l’Île-Maurice*, 1888, p.
78.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[134:3](gd08.htm#fr_185.md) For examples of
stories in which a king's son liberates one or more prisoners, and has
the service returned in an emergency, see Child, *English and Scottish
Popular Ballads*, v. 42-48.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[135:1](gd08.htm#fr_186.md) See Jonckbloet, ii.
131 ff.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[135:2](gd08.htm#fr_187.md) Paris, *Hist. litt. de
la France*, xxx. 82.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[140:1](gd08.htm#fr_188.md) The only instance
known to me where such transformation occurs with reference to the hero.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[141:1](gd08.htm#fr_189.md) Walewein and
Lotharingian.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[141:2](gd08.htm#fr_190.md) Like the wolf in
*Guillaume de Palerne*, which is likewise a transformed prince.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[142:1](gd08.htm#fr_191.md) *Lotharingian* comes
from a region farther north than any other, since the Dutch romance is
merely a translation from Old French. *Simrock IX.* is from Tyrol.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[143:1](gd08.htm#fr_192.md) See pp.
[133](#page_133)-[135](#page_135.md).

<span id="fn_193"></span>[143:2](gd08.htm#fr_193.md) I include all the
tales treated in this chapter.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[144:1](gd08.htm#fr_194.md) See pp.
[58](gd06.htm#page_58)-[73](gd06.htm#page_73.md).

<span id="fn_195"></span>[145:1](gd08.htm#fr_195.md) See [p.
126](#page_126), note [1](#fn_178.md).

<span id="fn_196"></span>[146:1](gd08.htm#fr_196.md) See [p.
134](#page_134.md).

<span id="fn_197"></span>[146:2](gd08.htm#fr_197.md) See [p.
133](#page_133), note [2](#fn_182.md).

<span id="fn_198"></span>[146:3](gd08.htm#fr_198.md) See pp.
[92](gd07.htm#page_92.md) ff. above, and pp.
[156](gd09.htm#page_156)-[158](gd09.htm#page_158.md) below.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[146:4](gd08.htm#fr_199.md) With the form *The
Grateful Dead* + *The Water of Life* simply.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[147:1](gd08.htm#fr_200.md) Pp.
[107](gd07.htm#page_107.md) f.,
[111](gd07.htm#page_111)-[115](gd07.htm#page_115.md).

<span id="fn_201"></span>[148:1](gd08.htm#fr_201.md) See pp.
[133](#page_133.md) f.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[148:2](gd08.htm#fr_202.md) See pp.
[145](#page_145)-[147](#page_147.md).

<span id="fn_203"></span>[148:3](gd08.htm#fr_203.md) See pp.
[146](#page_146.md) f.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[150:1](gd08.htm#fr_204) P. [143](#page_143.md).

<span id="fn_205"></span>[151:1](gd08.htm#fr_205.md) The date of *Treu
Heinrich*. This gives the date *a quo*.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[151:2](gd08.htm#fr_206.md) The compound existed
before the fourteenth century certainly. See pp.
[117](gd07.htm#page_117.md)f.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[151:3](gd08.htm#fr_207.md) The date is here
determined by the existence of *Walewein*.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[151:4](gd08.htm#fr_208.md) *Brazilian*.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[151:5](gd08.htm#fr_209.md) *Venetian* has,
however, united with other material, which may account for this in the
one case.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[152:1](gd08.htm#fr_210.md) The date of
Straparola, one of whose stories belongs to this class.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[152:2](gd08.htm#fr_211.md) The compound *The
Grateful Dead* + *The Poison Maiden* had been in existence since the end
of the first century, as *Tobit* proves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Relations of the Grateful Dead to the
Spendthrift Knight, the Two Friends, and the Thankful Beasts](gd09.md)
