[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc13017)  [Next](cc13019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 12:1-6

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** And in that day thou shalt say, O
Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is
turned away, and thou comfortedst me.

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et dices in die illo: Cantabo tibi
Iehova, Tametsi iratus es mihi, aversus est furor tuus, et consolatus es
me.

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span>**2.** Behold, God *is* my salvation; I will
trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord JEHOVAH *is* my strength and *my*
song; he also is become my salvation.

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ecce Deus salus mea: confidam, et non
pavebo. Quoniam fortitudo mea et canticum Deus Iehova; factusque est
(vel *erit*) mihi in salutem.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>**3.** Therefore with joy shall ye draw water
out of the wells of salvation.

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Haurietis aquas cum gaudio, de
fontibus salvatoris (vel, *salutis*).

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>**4.** And in that day shall ye say, Praise
the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make
mention that his name is exalted.

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et dicetis in die illa: Canite
Iehovae; invocate nomen ejus; celebrate in populis opera ejus;
commemorate, quia nomen ejus exaltatum est.

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span>**5.** Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done
excellent things: this *is* known in all the earth.

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Psallite Iehovae, quoniam magnifica
gessit; et hoc vulgatum est per totam terram.

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>**6.** Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of
Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Jubila et canta habitatrix Sion; quia
magnus in medio tui Sanctus Israel.

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span><span id="xix.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span>**1.** *And thou shalt say in that day.*
Isaiah now exhorts all the godly to thanksgiving. Yet the exhortation
has also this object, that the promise may be more fully believed; for
he seals it with that exhortation, that they may be convinced that it is
certain, and may not think that they are deluded by unfounded hope, when
a form of thanksgiving is now given, and, as it were, put into their
mouth; and this would not have been the case, if there had not been just
and solid grounds. At the same time, he points out the purpose which the
Lord has in view in doing good in his Church. It is, that the
remembrance of his name may be extolled; not that he needs our praise,
but it is profitable to ourselves. We ought also to consider the honor
which he bestows upon us, when he condescends to make use of our
services for extolling and spreading the glory of his name, though we
are altogether useless and of no value.

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span>*Thou shalt say.* He addresses the whole
people as if he were addressing one man, because it was their duty to be
so united as to be one. We also are taught by the same example that we
ought to be united together, that there may be *one soul and one mouth*,
(<span id="xix.i-p17.1"></span>[Ro
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006)<span id="xix.i-p17.1"></span>,)
if we desire to have our prayers and thanksgivings accepted by God.

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span>*Though thou wast angry with me.* The
leading thought of this song is, that God, though he was justly offended
at his people, yet was satisfied with inflicting a moderate
chastisement, and showed that he was willing to be pacified. The
particle <span id="xix.i-p18.1"></span>כי (*ki*) being sometimes
expressive of a cause, some render it, *I will praise thee, O Lord,*
*because, having been angry with me, still thou art immediately*
*reconciled*; but as it sometimes signifies *though*,  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) I have adopted the rendering which I
considered to agree best with this passage.

<span id="xix.i-p24"></span>Believers, therefore, first acknowledge
their guilt, and next ascribe it to the mercy of God that they have been
freed from their distresses. The words being in the future tense, the
following interpretation might also be adopted: — “The temporal
chastisement will not prevent thee from having at length compassion on
me, and from giving me ground of joy and comfort.” Whichsoever of these
views be taken, this sentiment ought to be carefully observed; for as
soon as a conviction of God’s anger seizes our minds, it prompts us to
despair, and if it be not seasonably counteracted, it will speedily
overwhelm us. Satan also tempts us by all methods, and employs every
expedient to compel us to despair. We ought, therefore, to be fortified
by this doctrine, that, though we feel the anger of the Lord, we may
know that it is of short duration, (<span id="xix.i-p24.1"></span>[Ps
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span id="xix.i-p24.1"></span>,)
and that we shall be comforted as soon as he has chastened us.

<span id="xix.i-p25"></span>When we have been relieved from distresses,
let us call to remembrance that our punishment is ended, not because we
have paid to the justice of God what we had deserved, but because
through his fatherly love he spares our weakness. This confession
belongs properly to the godly and elect; for though the chastisements of
the godly and ungodly appear to be the same, yet the reasons of them are
exceedingly different. The wrath of the Lord against the ungodly is
perpetual, and the chastisements which are inflicted on them are
forerunners of everlasting destruction: no alleviation or consolation is
promised to them. But the godly feel that the wrath of God is of short
duration, and encourage their hearts by hope and confidence; for they
know that God will be gracious to them, since he has declared that he
punishes their sins for no other reason than to train them to
repentance, *that they may not perish along with the* *world*. (<span
id="xix.i-p25.1"></span>[1Co
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)<span id="xix.i-p25.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p26"></span><span id="xix.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p27"></span>**2.** *Behold, God is my salvation.* Though
it is proper to behold by faith the salvation of God in the midst of our
afflictions, yet here Isaiah speaks of knowledge derived from
experience; for he lays down a form of a joyful song, in which God shows
by outward signs that he is pacified towards his Church. Such is also
the import of the phrase <span id="xix.i-p27.1"></span>הנה, (*hinneh*,)
*Behold*; for now the brightness of God’s countenance, which had been
hidden for a time, shines forth, so that they can point to it as with
the finger. Since, therefore, our punishments fill us with dread, and it
is impossible for our minds not to be overclouded by our sins, as if we
had no interest in God’s salvation, or as if it were withdrawn from us,
the Prophet describes here a change of feeling, when God is reconciled
to us. But this prediction relates chiefly to the coming of Christ,
which first exhibited fully the salvation of God.

<span id="xix.i-p28"></span>*I will trust and not be afraid.* He adds,
that when we are fully convinced that salvation is laid up for us in
God, this is a solid foundation of full confidence, and the best remedy
for allaying fears. But for this we must have trembled, and been uneasy
and distressed, and tortured by painful emotions. Hence, we conclude,
that confidence proceeds from faith, as an effect from its cause. By
faith we perceive that salvation is laid up for us in God, and a calm
and peaceful state of mind arises from it; but when faith is wanting
there can be no peace of conscience. Let us therefore know that we have
made good progress in faith, when we have been endued with such
confidence as the Prophet describes.

<span id="xix.i-p29"></span>Besides, this confidence ought to have *the
chief place in our* *hearts*, (<span id="xix.i-p29.1"></span>[Col
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#015)<span id="xix.i-p29.1"></span>,)
so as to banish all fear and dread; not that we are free from all
distress and uneasiness, but that assurance will at length be
victorious. Yet we must keep in mind what I said, that the Prophet here
speaks of the cheerfulness which believers, who had formerly been almost
overwhelmed under the load of temptations, obtain, when God is
reconciled to them.

<span id="xix.i-p30"></span>*For the Lord* *JEHOVAH is my strength.* He
states more clearly and more expressly that believers will have good
reason to sing, because they will have known by experience that they are
*strong* in their God, as indeed redemption was an illustrious display
of the power of God. Since Isaiah does not describe the benefit of a
single day, but that which God had determined to carry forward till the
coming of Christ, it follows that there are none who sincerely and
heartily sing the praises of God, but those who, convinced of their
weakness, seek to obtain strength from God alone in answer to prayer.
Nor is he here called a part or an aid of our strength, but our complete
*strength*; for we are strong, so far as he supplies us with strength.

<span id="xix.i-p31"></span>*And my song.* The reason why he is called
*The song of the godly* is, that he bestows on them so much kindness for
the purpose of exciting them to perform the duty of thankfulness. Hence
we conclude that the beginning of joy springs from the favor of God, and
that the end of it is *the sacrifice of praise*. (<span
id="xix.i-p31.1"></span>[Ps. 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023),
[Hos. 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002), [Heb.
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)<span id="xix.i-p31.1"></span>.)
Thus, the hearts of the godly ought to be trained to patience, that they
may not cease to bless God; but in a state of joy and prosperity their
mouth is opened, so that they loudly proclaim God’s benefits. But since
the ungodly freely indulge in despising God, and, having laid their
consciences asleep, riot like brutes in drunken mirth, and never awake
to praise God, Christ justly curses their joy.

<span id="xix.i-p32"></span>Wo to you that laugh, for ye shall mourn;
your joy shall be turned into grief, and your laughter into qnashing of
teeth.  
(<span id="xix.i-p32.2"></span>[Lu
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#025)<span id="xix.i-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p33"></span>*And he hath become my salvation.*  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) If it be thought better to take this
clause in the past tense, the meaning will be, that believers sing
joyfully, *because God hath saved them*. But it will be most appropriate
to take it in the future tense, *and he will become my salvation*; that
is, God not only *hath been salvation* to his people, but will be so to
the end; for believers ought not to confine their attention to the
present benefit, but to extend their hope to the uninterrupted progress
of his favor.

<span id="xix.i-p35"></span><span id="xix.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p36"></span>**3.** *You shall draw waters with joy*. In
this verse he confirms what we have already noticed, that this chapter
may be regarded as a seal to confirm the promise which he gave about the
redemption of his people. As if he had said, “The salvation of God hath
been set before you, as if it were a constant running *fountain*, from
which you can *draw waters* in abundance.” This is a very beautiful
metaphor; for in this life nothing is more necessary than *water*, so
that there is no kind of scarcity that gives us more uneasiness or more
distress than a scarcity of *water*. Thus, by a figure of speech, in
which a part is taken for the whole, he declares that everything
necessary for supporting life flows to us from the undeserved goodness
of God. And since we are empty and destitute of everything good, he
appropriately compares the mercy of God to a *fountain*, which satisfies
those who are thirsty and dry, refreshes those who are parched with
heat, and revives those who are worn out with fatigue.

<span id="xix.i-p37"></span>*From the fountains of the Savior.*  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) This word is more appropriate to this
passage than if he had said, “*from the fountains* of God;” for it
yields more consolation when we know that he is the author of our
salvation, and therefore the Prophet has skilfully adapted this term to
the situation in which it is placed. Now, if this promise includes the
whole of Christ’s reign, we ought constantly to apply it to our use. Let
us therefore know that the goodness of God is held out to us, that we
may be satisfied with it; for we ought to be like *a dry* *and thirsty
land*, as the Psalmist says, (<span id="xix.i-p38.1"></span>[Ps
143:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#006)<span id="xix.i-p38.1"></span>,)
that we may desire the waters of the Lord. This goodness of God is
wonderful and beyond what could have been believed, that he does not
suffer us to burn with unsatisfied desire, but presents *a fountain*
from which we may *draw* abundantly. That *fountain* is Christ, in whom
all God’s benefits are imparted to us; *for out of his fullness*, as
John says, *we all draw*. (<span id="xix.i-p38.2"></span>[Joh
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span id="xix.i-p38.2"></span>.)
It remains, therefore, that whenever we feel our want we go directly to
him.

<span id="xix.i-p39"></span><span id="xix.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p40"></span>**4.** *And in that day shall ye say.* He
now exhorts them not only to sing praise and give thanks to God
individually, but to excite others to do the same. As he had formerly
said, *Many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up into the
mountain of the Lord,* (<span id="xix.i-p40.1"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="xix.i-p40.1"></span>,)
that is, exciting each other by mutual exhortation to embrace the pure
worship of God; so after having enjoined them individually to be
thankful to God, he now also commands them mutually to excite each other
to thanksgiving. He means that they ought to speak not to one, but to
all, and not at one time only, but during their whole life.

<span id="xix.i-p41"></span>*Call upon his name.*  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) He now gives a short description of
the manner in which praise is properly rendered to God, when he enjoins
us to

<span id="xix.i-p43"></span>call upon him, that we may not glory in any
other.  
(<span id="xix.i-p43.2"></span>[Jer.
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span id="xix.i-p43.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p44"></span>Hence also, by taking a part for the whole,
(<span id="xix.i-p44.1"></span>συνεκδοχικῶς,) Scripture frequently
describes the whole of worship under the designation of *calling upon
God*. In this way we show that our confidence is placed in God; and this
is also what he chiefly demands from us. In like manner, I think that
here the Prophet connects *calling upon* God with praises, in order to
include the whole of the worship of God.

<span id="xix.i-p45"></span>*Make known his works among the peoples.*
 <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) He means that the work of this
deliverance will be so excellent, that it ought to be proclaimed, not in
one corner only, but throughout the whole world. He wished, indeed, that
it should be first *made known* to the Jews, but that it should
afterwards spread abroad to all men. This exhortation, by which the Jews
testified their gratitude, might be regarded as a forerunner of the
preaching of the gospel, which afterwards followed in the proper order.
As the Jews proclaimed among the Medes and Persians, and other
neighboring nations, the favor which had been showed to them, so, when
Christ was manifested, they ought to have been heralds to sound aloud
the name of God through every country in the world. Hence it is evident
what is the desire which ought to be cherished among all the godly. It
is, that the goodness of God may be *made known* to all, that all may
join in the same worship of God. We ought especially to be inflamed with
this desire, after having been delivered from some alarming danger, and
most of all after having been delivered from the tyranny of the devil
and from everlasting death.

<span id="xix.i-p47"></span><span id="xix.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p48"></span>**5.** *Sing unto the Lord* He continues his
exhortation, showing what is the feeling from which this thanksgiving
ought to proceed; for he shows that it is our duty to proclaim the
goodness of God to every nation. While we exhort and encourage others,
we must not at the same time sit down in indolence, but it is proper
that we set an example before others; for nothing can be more absurd
than to see lazy and slothful men who are exciting other men to praise
God.

<span id="xix.i-p49"></span>*For he hath done glorious things.* When he
asserts that God *hath* *done gloriously*, he means that there is
abundant ground for singing. The Lord does not wish that his praises
should be proclaimed without any reason, but holds out a very rich and
very abundant subject of praise, when he frees his people from very hard
bondage. We have said that this song is not limited to a short period,
but, on the contrary, extends to the whole of Christ’s reign. This work
therefore is truly glorious, that *God sent his Son* to reconcile us to
himself, (<span id="xix.i-p49.1"></span>[John
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)<span id="xix.i-p49.1"></span>,)
and to destroy the dominion of death and the devil. (<span
id="xix.i-p49.2"></span>[Heb 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span
id="xix.i-p49.2"></span>.) If, therefore, we consider the work of our
deliverance as we ought to do, we shall have very abundant ground for
praising God.

<span id="xix.i-p50"></span>*And this hath been made known through all
the earth.* When he says that this *hath been made known*, he glances at
the calling of the Gentiles, and confirms what has been already stated,
that the work is such as ought not to be concealed in a corner, but to
be everywhere proclaimed.

<span id="xix.i-p51"></span><span id="xix.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p52"></span>**6.** *Shout and sing.* He again exhorts
the godly to rejoice in the Lord, at the same time reminding them what
is the nature of true joy, and on what it is founded. We have no other
happiness than to have God dwelling *in the midst of us*. But for this,
our life would be wretched and unhappy, though we should have abundance
of other blessings and of every kind of riches. Now, if our heart be set
on our *treasure*, (<span id="xix.i-p52.1"></span>[Mt
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)<span id="xix.i-p52.1"></span>,)
this happiness will attract all our feelings.

<span id="xix.i-p53"></span>*The Holy One of Israel.* He calls him *the
Holy One*, in order to inform us what he intends to prove himself to be
to us, while he dwells with us; that is, that not only his majesty may
fill our minds with reverence towards him, for it would at the same time
overwhelm us with terror; but that he may vouchsafe to make us the
objects of his peculiar care, though separated from the rest of the
world. He calls him *the Holy One*, from the effect produced; for, by
gathering us to himself, (<span id="xix.i-p53.1"></span>[Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p53.1"></span>,)
and saving us by his grace, he may be said to *sanctify* us to be his
own property. Accordingly, if God is with us, the conviction of his
presence will fill us with inconceivable joy. Hence it follows that,
when he is absent, we continue to be exposed to grief and sadness.

<span id="xix.i-p54"></span>By the words, *Shout and sing*, he means
that when God magnifies his power *in the midst of us*, he gives us
occasion for no ordinary joy. Again, by directly addressing *the
inhabitants of Zion*, he intimates that all are not capable of so great
a blessing, and at the same time indirectly exhorts them to maintain
unity of faith, that, by being united to the Church, we may partake of
this blessed joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc13018.htm#fr_192) <span
id="xix.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span> Lowth remarks that the Hebrew phrase is
exactly the same with what we find in <span id="xix.i-p19.1"></span>[Ro
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)<span id="xix.i-p19.1"></span>.
*But thanks be to God that ye were the* *slaves of sin, but have obeyed
from the heart*; that is, *that whereas*, or *though ye were the slaves
of sin; yet ye* *have now obeyed from the heart the doctrine on the
model of* *which ye were formed*. “*For thou wast angry*. That is,
whereas thou wast angry, now hast thou forgiven and comforted me.” —
*Stock*.

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span> FT185 *He also is become my salvation*. —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="xix.i-p21"></span> FT186 In the margin he adds, “or, *of
salvation*.”

<span id="xix.i-p22"></span> FT187 *Call upon his name*, (or, *Proclaim
his name*.) — Eng Ver.

<span id="xix.i-p23"></span> FT188 *Declare his doings among the
people*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc13018.htm#fr_193) <span
id="xix.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p34"></span>

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc13018.htm#fr_194) <span
id="xix.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p38"></span>

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc13018.htm#fr_195) <span
id="xix.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p42"></span>

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc13018.htm#fr_196) <span
id="xix.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p46"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](cc13019)
