[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc13014)  [Next](cc13016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 9:1-21

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Nevertheless, the dimness *shall* not
*be* such as *was* in her vexation, when at the first he lightly
afflicted the land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali, and afterward
did more grievously afflict *her by* the way of the sea, beyond Jordan,
in Galilee of the nations.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Non tamen obscuratio juxta angustiam
quae ei accidit tempore quo primum leviter attigerunt terram Zabulon et
terram Nephtali: nec posterius, cum aggravarunt per viam maris ultra
Iordanem, in Galilaea Gentium.

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** The people that walked in darkness
have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of
death, upon them hath the light shined.

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Populus ambulans in tenebris vidit
lucem magnam. Qui habitabant in terra umbrae mortis, lux affulsit super
eos.

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span>**3.** Thou hast multiplied the nation, *and*
not increased the joy: they joy before thee according to the joy in
harvest, *and* as *men* rejoice when they divide the spoil.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Multiplicando gentem non auxisti
laetitiam, laetati sunt coram te secundum laetitiam in messe,
quemadmodum exultant dividendo spolia.

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>**4.** For thou hast broken the yoke of his
burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in
the day of Midian.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quoniam jugum ejus onerosum, et virgam
humeri ejus, sceptrum exactoris ejus confregisti, sicut in die Madian.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>**5.** For every battle of the warrior *is*
with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but *this* shall be
with burning *and* fuel of fire.

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quanquam omne proelium bellantis fit
cum strepitu et volutatione vestis in sanguine; erit hoc in
combustionem, cibum ignis.

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>**6.** For unto us a child is born, unto us
a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his
name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Quia puer natus est nobis; et
constitutus est principatus super humerum ejus; et vocabitur nomen ejus,
Admirabilis, Consiliarius, Deus fortis, Pater seculi, princeps pacis.

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span>**7.** Of the increase of *his* government
and peace *there shall be* no end, upon the throne of David, and upon
his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with
justice from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts
will perform this.

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Multiplicationi principatus et paci
non erit finis; super solium David, et super regnum ejus, ut disponat et
stabiliat ipsum in judicio et justitia, ab hoc tempore usque in
perpetuum. Zelus Iehovae exercituum hanc rem faciet.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span>**8.** The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and
it hath lighted upon Israel.

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Verbum misit Dominus in Iacob, et
cecidit in Israel.

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span>**9.** And all the people shall know, *even*
Ephraim, and the inhabitants of Samaria, that say in the pride and
stoutness of heart,

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et sciet populus, omnes Ephraim, et
incolae Samariae, qui dicunt in superbia et altitudine cordis,

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>**10.** The bricks are fallen down, but we
will build with hewn stones; the sycamores are cut down, but we will
change *them into* cedars.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Lateres ceciderunt, et politis
aedificabimus; sycomori succisae sunt, et cedros sufficiemus.

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span>**11.** Therefore the Lord shall set up the
adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together;

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Atqui roborabit Iehova hostes Rezin
contra ipsum; et inimicos ejus coadjuvabit.

<span id="xvi.i-p24"></span>**12.** The Syrians before, and the
Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For
all this anger is not turned away, but his hand *is* stretched out
still.

<span id="xvi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Syria a fronte, et Philistaei a
tergo; devorabuntque Israel toto ore. Nec in hoc toto aversus erit furor
ejus, sed manus ejus adhuc extenta.

<span id="xvi.i-p26"></span>**13.** For the people turneth not unto him
that smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of hosts:

<span id="xvi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Atqui populus non est reversus ad
percussorem suum; nec Iehovam exercituum quaesierunt.

<span id="xvi.i-p28"></span>**14.** Therefore the Lord will cut off from
Israel head and tail, branch and rush, in one day.

<span id="xvi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Abscindet ergo Iehova ab Israele
caput et caudam, ramum et arundinem die uno.

<span id="xvi.i-p30"></span>**15.** The ancient and honourable, he *is*
the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he *is* the tail.

<span id="xvi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Senex et vulta suspiciendus, hic est
caput: Propheta autem qui docet mendacium, hic est cauda.

<span id="xvi.i-p32"></span>**16.** For the leaders of this people cause
*them* to err; and *they that are* led of them *are* destroyed.

<span id="xvi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Nam gubernatores populi hujus, sunt
seductores; et qui reguntur in eo, perditi.

<span id="xvi.i-p34"></span>**17.** Therefore the Lord shall have no joy
in their young men, neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and
widows: for every one *is* an hypocrite and an evil-doer, and every
mouth speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his
hand *is* stretched out still.

<span id="xvi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Propterea super adolescentibus ejus
non gaudebit Dominus; et pupillorum ejus et viduarum non miserebitur.
Quoniam omnes sunt hypocritae et scelerati, et omne os loquitur
nequitiam. In hoc toto non erit aversus furor ejus, sed adhuc manus ejus
extenta.

<span id="xvi.i-p36"></span>**18.** For wickedness burneth as the fire:
it shall devour the briars and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets
of the forest; and they shall mount up *like* the lifting up of smoke.

<span id="xvi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Quoniam succensa est velut ignis
impietas; vepres et spinas devorabit. Postea exardebit in condensa
sylvae; et elevabitur fumus ascendentis.

<span id="xvi.i-p38"></span>**19.** Through the wrath of the Lord of
hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the
fire: no man shall spare his brother.

<span id="xvi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Prae ira Iehovae exercituum
obscurabitur terra, et fiet populus quasi cibus ignis. Nemo fratri suo
parcet.

<span id="xvi.i-p40"></span>**20.** And he shall snatch on the right
hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall
not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm:

<span id="xvi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Rapiet quisque ad dexteram, et
esuriet; comedet ad sinistram, et non saturabitur: quisque carnem
brachii sui devorabit;

<span id="xvi.i-p42"></span>**21.** Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim,
Manasseh: *and* they together *shall be* against Judah. For all this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand *is* stretched out still.

<span id="xvi.i-p43"></span>**21.** Menasse Ephraim, et Ephraim Menasse;
pariter ipsi contra Iudam. Nec in hoc toto aversus erit furor ejus; sed
manus ejus adhuc extenta.

<span id="xvi.i-p44"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p45"></span><span id="xvi.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p46"></span>**1.** *Yet the darkness shall not be.* He
begins to comfort the wretched by the hope of alleviation, that they may
not be swallowed up by the huge mass of distresses. Many take these
words in quite an opposite meaning, that is, as a threatening which
denounces against the Jews a heavier affliction than that with which
Tiglath-pileser (<span id="xvi.i-p46.1"></span>[2Ki
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029)<span id="xvi.i-p46.1"></span>)
and Shalmanezer (<span id="xvi.i-p46.2"></span>[2Ki
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006)<span id="xvi.i-p46.2"></span>)
afflicted them. The former inflicted a heavy calamity, the latter
inflicted one still heavier, for he carried the twelve tribes into
captivity, and blotted out the name of the nation. Some think that he
now foretells the heaviest calamity of all, for if it be compared with
the former two, it exceeds both of them. Though I am not prepared to
reject this view, for it does not want plausibility, yet I rather favor
a different opinion. The other interpretation is indeed more plausible,
that the Prophet intended to deprive hypocrites of every enjoyment, that
they might not imagine that this calamity would quickly pass away like a
storm as the others had done, for it would be utterly destructive; and
so we shall take the particle <span id="xvi.i-p46.3"></span>כי (*ki*) in
its literal meaning.  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137)

<span id="xvi.i-p48"></span>But in my opinion it is most appropriate to
view it as a consolation, in which he begins to mitigate what he had
said about that frightful *darkness* and *driving*, (<span
id="xvi.i-p48.1"></span>[Isa 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022)<span
id="xvi.i-p48.1"></span>,) and, by allaying the bitterness of those
punishments, encourages them to expect the favor of God. As if he had
said, “*and yet*, amidst that shocking calamity which the Jews shall
endure, *the darkness will not be such as when* the land of Israel was
afflicted, first, by Tiglath-pileser, (<span
id="xvi.i-p48.2"></span>[2Ki
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029)<span id="xvi.i-p48.2"></span>,)
and afterwards more grievously by Shalmanezer,” (<span
id="xvi.i-p48.3"></span>[2Ki 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006)<span
id="xvi.i-p48.3"></span>.) Amidst so great extremities believers might
otherwise have fainted, if their hearts had not been cheered by some
consolation. Isaiah therefore directs his discourse to them lest they
should think that they were ruined, for he intimates that the
chastisements which are now to be inflicted will be lighter than those
which came before. That this is the natural interpretation will quickly
appear from what immediately follows.

<span id="xvi.i-p49"></span>But why does the Prophet say that this
calamity, which was far more dreadful, would be more mild and gentle?
For Jerusalem was to be razed, the temple thrown down, and the
sacrifices abolished, which had remained untouched during the former
calamities. It might be thought that these were the severest of all, and
that the former, in comparison of them, were light. But it ought to be
observed, that while in the former instances there was no promise, an
explicit promise was added to this threatening. By this alone can
temptations be overcome and chastisements be rendered light. By this
seasoning alone, I say, are our afflictions alleviated; and all who are
destitute of it must despair. But if, by means of it, the Lord
strengthen us by holding out the hope of assistance, there is no
affliction so heavy that we shall not reckon it to be light.

<span id="xvi.i-p50"></span>This may be made plain by a comparison. A
man may happen to be drowned in a small stream, and yet, though he had
fallen into the open sea, if he had got hold of a plank he might have
been rescued and brought on shore. In like manner the slightest
calamities will overwhelm us if we are deprived of God’s favor; but if
we relied on the word of God, we might come out of the heaviest calamity
safe and uninjured.

<span id="xvi.i-p51"></span>As to the words, some take <span
id="xvi.i-p51.1"></span>מועף (*mugnaph*) for an adjective, as if the
Prophet said, *It shall not be darkened*; but the feminine pronoun which
immediately follows, <span id="xvi.i-p51.2"></span>בה (*bahh*), *in
her*, does not allow us to refer this to men. It is more accurately
described by others to be a substantive noun; and, therefore, I have
resolved to render it literally, *there shall not be darkness* in Judea
*according to the affliction of the time when, etc*. Some explain <span
id="xvi.i-p51.3"></span>הקל (*hekal*) to mean that the land was
*relieved of a burden*, in consequence of the people having been carried
into captivity; but this is altogether at variance with the Prophet’s
meaning, and does not agree with what follows; for it is immediately
added that the seacoast has been *more grievously afflicted* by a second
calamity. There can be no doubt, therefore, that this verb corresponds
to the other verb <span id="xvi.i-p51.4"></span>הכביד, (*hikbid*.)
 <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) Not more than a small part of
the kingdom having been afflicted by Tiglath-pileser, the calamity which
he brought upon it is said to be light as compared with the second which
was inflicted by Shalmanezer.

<span id="xvi.i-p53"></span>*By the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in
Galilee of the Gentiles.* He calls it *the way of the sea*, because
*Galilee* was adjoining to the coast of the Mediterranean *Sea*, and on
one side it was bounded by the course of the *Jordan*. It is called
*Galilee of the Gentiles*, not only because it was contiguous to Tyre
and Sidon, but because it contained a great multitude of *Gentiles*, who
were mingled with the Jews; for from the time that Solomon granted this
country to King Hiram, (<span id="xvi.i-p53.1"></span>[1Ki
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#011)<span id="xvi.i-p53.1"></span>,)
it could never be subdued in such a manner as not to have some part of
it possessed by *the Gentiles*

<span id="xvi.i-p54"></span><span id="xvi.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p55"></span>**2.** *The people walking in darkness hath
seen a great light.* He speaks of future events in the past tense, and
thus brings them before the immediate view of the people, that in the
destruction of the city, in their captivity, and in what appeared to be
their utter destruction, they may behold the *light* of God. It may
therefore be summed up in this manner: “Even *in darkness*, nay, in
*death* itself, there is nevertheless good ground of hope; for the power
of God is sufficient to restore life to his people, when they appear to
be already dead.” Matthew, who quotes this passage, appears to torture
it to a different meaning; for he says that this prediction was
fulfilled when Christ preached along the sea-coast. (<span
id="xvi.i-p55.1"></span>[Mt 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016)<span
id="xvi.i-p55.1"></span>.) But if we take a just view of the comparison,
it will be found that Matthew has applied this passage to Christ
correctly, and in its true meaning. Yet it does not appear that the view
generally given by our commentators is a successful elucidation of the
passage; for they merely assert that it belongs to the kingdom of
Christ, but do not assign a reason, or show how it accords with this
passage. If, therefore, we wish to ascertain the true meaning of this
passage, we must bring to our recollection what has been already stated,
that the Prophet, when he speaks of bringing back the people from
Babylon, does not look to a single age, but includes all the rest, till
Christ came and brought the most complete deliverance to his people. The
deliverance from Babylon was but a prelude to the restoration of the
Church, and was intended to last, not for a few years only, but till
Christ should come and bring true salvation, not only to their bodies,
but likewise to their souls. When we shall have made a little progress
in reading Isaiah, we shall find that this was his ordinary custom.

<span id="xvi.i-p56"></span>Having spoken of the captivity in Babylon,
which held out the prospect of a very heavy calamity, he shows that this
calamity will be *lighter* than that which Israel formerly endured;
because the Lord had fixed a term and limit to that calamity, namely,
*seventy years*, (<span id="xvi.i-p56.1"></span>[Jer.
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012), [Jer.
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)<span id="xvi.i-p56.1"></span>,)
after the expiration of which the *light* of the Lord would shine on
them. By this confident hope of deliverance, therefore, he encourages
their hearts when overpowered by fear, that they might not be distressed
beyond measure; and thus he made a distinction between the Jews and the
Israelites, to whom the expectation of a deliverance so near was not
promised. Though the Prophets had given to the elect remnant some taste
of the mercy of God, yet, in consequence of the redemption of Israel
being, as it were, an addition to the redemption of Judah, and dependent
on it, justly does the Prophet now declare that a new *light* has been
exhibited; because God hath determined to redeem his people.
Appropriately and skilfully, too, does Matthew extend the rays of
*light* to *Galilee* and *the land of Zebulun*. (<span
id="xvi.i-p56.2"></span>[Mt 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#015)<span
id="xvi.i-p56.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p57"></span>*In the land of the shadow of death.* He now
compares the captivity in Babylon to *darkness* and *death*; for those
who were kept there, were wretched and miserable, and altogether like
dead men; as Ezekiel also relates their speech,

<span id="xvi.i-p58"></span>Dead men shall arise out of the graves.
(<span id="xvi.i-p58.1"></span>[Ezek.
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#012)<span id="xvi.i-p58.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p59"></span>Their condition, therefore, was such as if
no brightness, no ray of *light*, had shone on them. Yet he shows that
this will not prevent them from enjoying *light*, and recovering their
former liberty; and that liberty he extends, not to a short period, but,
as we have already said, to the time of Christ.

<span id="xvi.i-p60"></span>Thus it is customary with the Apostles to
borrow arguments from the Prophets, and to show their real use and
design. In this manner Paul quotes (<span id="xvi.i-p60.1"></span>[Ro
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)<span id="xvi.i-p60.1"></span>)
that passage from Hosea,

<span id="xvi.i-p61"></span>I will call them my people which were not my
people,  
(<span id="xvi.i-p61.2"></span>[Ho
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span id="xvi.i-p61.2"></span>,)
 <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)

<span id="xvi.i-p63"></span>and applies it to the calling of the
Gentiles, though strictly it was spoken of the Jews; and he shows that
it was fulfilled when the Lord brought the Gentiles into the Church.
Thus, when the people might be said to be buried in that captivity, they
differed in no respect from the Gentiles; and since both were in the
same condition, it is reasonable to believe that this passage relates,
not only to the Jews, but to the Gentiles also. Nor must it be viewed as
referring to outward misery only, but to the *darkness* of eternal
*death*, in which souls are plunged, till they come forth to spiritual
light; for unquestionably we lie buried in *darkness*, till Christ shine
on us by the doctrine of his word. Hence also Paul exhorts,

<span id="xvi.i-p64"></span>Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the
dead,  
and Christ shall give thee light. (<span id="xvi.i-p64.2"></span>[Eph
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p64.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p65"></span>If therefore we extend the commencement of
the deliverance from the return from Babylon down to the coming of
Christ, on whom all liberty and all bestowal of blessings depends, we
shall understand the true meaning of this passage, which otherwise has
not been satisfactorily explained by commentators.

<span id="xvi.i-p66"></span><span id="xvi.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p67"></span>**3.** *Thou hast multiplied.* This passage
is somewhat obscure, both in itself, and on account of the diversity of
interpretations; for it appears to be absurd to say that *the joy was
not increased*, seeing that he immediately afterwards adds, *they
rejoiced*. On this account the Jews interpret <span
id="xvi.i-p67.1"></span>לא (*lo*) not negatively, but as if <span
id="xvi.i-p67.2"></span>ו (*vau*) had been substituted for <span
id="xvi.i-p67.3"></span>א (*aleph*); for sometimes, though rarely, it
has this meaning in the Scriptures.  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) (<span id="xvi.i-p68.10"></span>[Ex
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008)<span id="xvi.i-p68.10"></span>.)
The Jews do this, because they cannot reconcile the words of the Prophet
with their opinion. Again, some view these words as referring to
Sennacherib, because his army, though it was large, brought him no
ground of *joy*, but rather of grief. (<span
id="xvi.i-p68.11"></span>[2Ki
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span id="xvi.i-p68.11"></span>.)
Others explain it as relating to the Church, and justly, but mistake the
method of applying it; for they think that the Prophet said this because
believers, as long as they live, are subject to numerous and diversified
afflictions. Others go still farther from the point, by saying that the
conversion of the Gentiles, which will enlarge the Church, *will not*
*bring joy* to the Jews and the ancient synagogue.

<span id="xvi.i-p69"></span>But I cannot approve of any of those
interpretations, and therefore I interpret it in this manner. As the
Prophet, in the beginning of the chapter, had made a preliminary
statement, that this blessing of redemption was greater than all other
blessings, though it might appear to be unworthy of being so highly
extolled, on account of the small number of those who were redeemed; so
now he repeats the same comparison, or one not very different from it,
namely, that this favor of God would be more remarkable than when he had
formerly *multiplied* his people. This might at first sight be thought
to be highly inappropriate; for if we compare the condition of the
Jewish kingdom, before the Babylonish captivity, with its condition
after the return from it, we may be led to think that the period during
which its ancient possession remained unimpaired was a season of greater
prosperity. It was but a small remnant that returned in comparison of
that multitude which had been carried away. Besides, they had not the
free possession of their land, but might be said to be tenants at will;
and they had to pay tribute to the Persians, and retained hardly any
semblance of their former rank. Who, therefore, would not have preferred
that prosperous reign which had been enjoyed by the family of David to
that condition?

<span id="xvi.i-p70"></span>But the Prophet declares that this latter
condition, though it may appear to be greatly inferior, and even more
wretched, ought to be preferred to that which was prosperous and
splendid, and shows that it will yield greater *joy* than when they had
an abundant share of wealth and of all kinds of possessions. This was
also testified by Haggai,

<span id="xvi.i-p71"></span>that the glory of the latter temple would be
greater  
than the glory of the former, (<span id="xvi.i-p71.2"></span>[Hag
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)<span id="xvi.i-p71.2"></span>,)

<span id="xvi.i-p72"></span>though at first sight it might appear to be
far otherwise. It is as if Isaiah had said, “There never was greater
joy, though the multitude of the people was greater. Though we are few
and contemptible in number, yet by the light with which thou shinest on
us thou hast cheered us to such a degree that no joy of our former
condition can be compared with the present.” For that redemption might
be regarded as a prelude to the full and perfect salvation which was at
length obtained through Christ.

<span id="xvi.i-p73"></span>*Before thee.* He means that the *joy* was
true and complete, not slight or temporary. Men often rejoice, but with
a deceitful and transitory *joy*, which is followed by mourning and
tears. He affirms that this *joy* has its roots so deeply laid, that it
can never perish or be destroyed. Such is also the import of the phrase
*before thee*; for nothing cheers the godly so much as when the face of
God shines sweetly on them. They are not like irreligious men, who are
carried hither and thither by a blind and uncertain *joy*, but they have
that which alone gives ground for full joy, their reliance on God’s
fatherly kindness. Perhaps also the Prophet intended to allude to those
words which frequently occur in the writings of Moses: *Thou shalt
rejoice* *before the Lord thy God*. (<span id="xvi.i-p73.1"></span>[Le
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#040)<span id="xvi.i-p73.1"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p73.2"></span>[Deut.
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#012),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018)<span id="xvi.i-p73.2"></span>.)
For though the subject there spoken of is the Tabernacle, still the mode
of expression is fitly applied to the present occasion, that the *joy*
of a believing people will not be irreligious, but will arise from
acknowledging God, and beholding him by the eyes of faith to be *the*
*author of salvation*. (<span id="xvi.i-p73.3"></span>[Heb
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009)<span id="xvi.i-p73.3"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p74"></span>Others explain it more ingeniously, that
inwardly believers rejoice *before God* in their consciences, because in
the world grief and sighing continually awaits them. Though this is
true, yet a more natural meaning is drawn from the connection of the
passage, namely, that believers whom God shall redeem will possess true
*joy*; because they will have been instructed by undoubted proof that he
is their Father, so that they may freely boast that they will always be
safe under his guidance; and, therefore, as I lately mentioned, it
denotes continuance.

<span id="xvi.i-p75"></span>*According to the joy in harvest, and as men
rejoice when they divide the spoils.* The comparisons of *Harvest* and
*Victory*, by which he heightens the amount of the joy, are sufficiently
plain. Now, hence it is evident what Christ brings to us, namely, a full
and perfect joy, of which we cannot in any way be robbed or deprived,
though various storms and tempests should arise, and though we should be
weighed down by every kind of afflictions. However weak and feeble we
may be, still we ought to be glad and joyful; for the ground of our joy
does not lie in numbers, or wealth, or outward splendor, but in
spiritual happiness, which we obtain through the word of Christ.

<span id="xvi.i-p76"></span>*For thou hast broken his burdensome yoke.*
He explains the cause of *the joy*, that believers, when they have been
delivered from a frightful and cruel tyranny, will feel as if they had
been rescued from death. In order to illustrate the grace of God, he
reminds them how shameful and burdensome was the slavery with which the
Jews had been oppressed and afflicted; and this is his object in heaping
up the expressions, *the yoke of the shoulder, the staff of the
shoulder, the rod of the oppressor* or *overseer*. Whatever may be our
excessive effeminacy or cowardice, while we actually feel afflictions,
yet as soon as they are gone, we easily come to forget them. That the
redeemed people may not think lightly of the favor of God, the Prophet
bids them consider how bitter and mournful was the slavery, when they
groaned under a heavy *yoke* or triumphal car, when the *staff* was laid
on their shoulders, and they were oppressed by tyrannical rule; and
therefore their deliverance ought justly to make them more glad and
joyful.

<span id="xvi.i-p77"></span>Next, he extolls the excellence of this
favor on another ground, that God has openly displayed his hand from
heaven. For this purpose he adduces an ancient and memorable instance.
As God had formerly overthrown the Midianites, without the help of men,
by a wonderful and amazing method, (<span id="xvi.i-p77.1"></span>[Jud
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#021)<span id="xvi.i-p77.1"></span>,)
so now there will be a similar and illustrious display of power; for God
will deliver his people from a cruel tyranny, when not one of the
wretched Jews will venture to lift a finger. Now, it ought to be
observed that God sometimes assists his people in such a manner as to
make use of ordinary methods; but when he sees that this hinders men
from beholding his hand, which may be said to be concealed, he sometimes
works alone, and by evident miracles, that nothing may prevent or
obscure the manifestation of his power. Thus in this victory of Gideon,
when the enemies were routed without any agency of men, the arm of God
openly appeared. For what had Gideon but the noise of pitchers, which
could scarcely have driven away mice, and a small band of men, against a
vast army, and, instead of weapons, a useless scarecrow? To this
deliverance, therefore, he compares the future deliverance of the
people, in which the hand of God will be not less openly and
illustriously displayed.

<span id="xvi.i-p78"></span>Some explain this passage as relating merely
to the law, which might not inappropriately have been called *a
burdensome yoke*, and *a rod* lying on the shoulders. But that
interpretation is unsuitable; for it would give to the Prophet the
appearance of having suddenly broken off from his subject, and would be
a violent torture of this passage. We must therefore attend to that
arrangement which I formerly noticed, namely, that when God brought his
people out of Babylon, he continued that blessing of deliverance till
Christ. The meaning therefore is, “Thou hast broken those burdens by
which thy people were unjustly and cruelly oppressed.”

<span id="xvi.i-p79"></span>Others apply it to the destruction of
Jerusalem during the reign of Vespasian, but they have no argument on
their side. Almost all the Jews refer it to Hezekiah, when in this
manner the Lord delivered the city from the siege of Sennacherib, and
cut off his army. (<span id="xvi.i-p79.1"></span>[2Ki
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span id="xvi.i-p79.1"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p79.2"></span>[Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)<span id="xvi.i-p79.2"></span>.)
But that interpretation could not be admitted, for Hezekiah did not
reign tyrannically over the Jews. Besides, at that time the Lord rescued
the people from fear and danger, and not from slavery. Hence it is
evident that this prediction had a more distant object, and that the
interpretation which I have given to this passage is just and
reasonable.

<span id="xvi.i-p80"></span><span id="xvi.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p81"></span>**5.** *For every battle.* Here commentators
are nearly agreed that Isaiah intended to contrast the victory which God
was about to give to his people with other victories. Others conquer by
making a great slaughter of the enemies, but here the Lord will conquer
by his own hand alone. He expresses more fully what he had said, *As in
the day of* *Midian*. (Verse 4.) The Lord therefore, he says, will not
employ the agency of a great multitude, but will achieve a victory for
himself from heaven. When the Lord acts by himself, every covering is
removed, and we perceive more clearly that he is the Author of our life
and salvation.

<span id="xvi.i-p82"></span>Now, since there is a contrast which
expresses the difference between the ordinary mode of warfare and the
miracle of redemption, the copulative <span id="xvi.i-p82.1"></span>ו,
(*vau*,) in the middle of the verse, ought to be rendered *but*; as if
he had said, that it is usually amidst the confusion of the battle that
enemies are hewn down: but God will act in a very different manner; for
he will destroy the enemies of the Church, as if he sent down lightning
from heaven, or suddenly struck them by thunderbolts. It may perhaps be
thought better to adopt the opinion of those who explain the second
clause as a continuation of the first, that *all warriors will be with
trembling and with burning fire.* But the former meaning is more
appropriate, and is likewise supported by the words of the Prophet.
Hence it is evident that the present subject is not merely the
deliverance which the people obtained from Cyrus, permitting them to
return to their native country, but that these words must be viewed as
extending to the kingdom of Christ.

<span id="xvi.i-p83"></span><span id="xvi.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p84"></span>**6.** *For unto us a child is born.* Isaiah
now argues from the design, to show why this deliverance ought to be
preferred to the rest of God’s benefits, namely, because not only will
God bring back the people from captivity, but he will place Christ on
his royal throne, that under him supreme and everlasting happiness may
be enjoyed. Thus he affirms that the kindness of God will not be
temporary, for it includes the whole of that intermediate period during
which the Church was preserved till the coming of Christ. Nor is it
wonderful if the Prophet makes a sudden transition from the return of
the ancient people to the full restoration of the Church, which took
place many centuries afterwards; for in our observations on <span
id="xvi.i-p84.1"></span>[Isaiah
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p84.1"></span>,
 <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) we have remarked, that there
being no other way that God is reconciled to us than through the
Mediator, all the promises are founded on him; and that on this account
it is customary with the Prophets, whenever they wish to encourage the
hearts of believers by good hope, to bring this forward as a pledge or
earnest. To this must be added, that the return from the captivity in
Babylon was the commencement of the renovation of the Church, which was
completed when Christ appeared; and consequently there is no absurdity
in an uninterrupted succession. Justly, therefore, does Isaiah teach
that they ought not to confine their attention to the present benefit,
but should consider the end, and refer everything to it. “This is your
highest happiness, that you have been rescued from death, not only that
you may live in the land of Canaan, but that you may arrive at the
kingdom of God.”

<span id="xvi.i-p86"></span>Hence we learn that we ought not to swallow
up the benefits which we receive from God, so as instantly to forget
them, but should raise our minds to Christ, otherwise the advantage will
be small, and the joy will be transitory; because they will not lead us
to taste the sweetness of a Father’s love, unless we keep in remembrance
the free election of God, which is ratified in Christ. In short, the
Prophet does not wish that this people should be wholly occupied with
the joy occasioned by the outward and short-lived freedom which they had
obtained, but that they should look at the end, that is, at the
preservation of the Church, till Christ, the only Redeemer, should
appear; for he ought to be the ground and perfection of all our joy.

<span id="xvi.i-p87"></span>*A child is born.* The Jews impudently
torture this passage, for they interpret it as relating to Hezekiah,
though he had been born before this prediction was uttered. But he
speaks of it as something new and unexpected; and it is even a promise,
intended to arouse believers to the expectation of a future event; and
therefore there can be no hesitation in concluding that he describes *a
child* that was afterwards to be *born*

<span id="xvi.i-p88"></span>He is called the *Son* of God. Although in
the Hebrew language the word *son*, I admit, has a wide acceptation, yet
that is when something is added to it. Every man is the *son* of his
father: those who are a hundred years old are called (<span
id="xvi.i-p88.1"></span>[Isa
65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020)<span id="xvi.i-p88.1"></span>)
*the sons of a hundred* *years*; wicked men are called *the sons of
wickedness*; those who are blessed are called *the sons of blessing*;
and Isaiah called a fruitful hill *the son of fatness*. (<span
id="xvi.i-p88.2"></span>[Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)<span
id="xvi.i-p88.2"></span>.) But *son*, without any addition, can mean
none else than *the Son of God*; and it is now ascribed to Christ, by
way of eminence, (<span id="xvi.i-p88.3"></span>κατ ᾿ ἐξοχὴν,) in order
to inform us, that by this striking mark he is distinguished from the
rest of mankind. Nor can it be doubted that Isaiah referred to that
well-known prediction, which was in the mouth of every person,

<span id="xvi.i-p89"></span>I will be his Father, and he shall be my
Son,  
(<span id="xvi.i-p89.2"></span>[2Sa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p89.2"></span>,)

<span id="xvi.i-p90"></span>as it is afterwards repeated,

<span id="xvi.i-p91"></span>Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten
thee.  
(<span id="xvi.i-p91.2"></span>[Ps
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="xvi.i-p91.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p92"></span>Had it not been commonly and generally known
that the Messiah would be the *Son* of God, it would have been foolish
and unmeaning for Isaiah simply to call him *the Son*. Accordingly, this
title is derived from the former prediction, from which the Apostle
reasons, that the excellence of Christ exalts him above all the angels.
(<span id="xvi.i-p92.1"></span>[Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)<span id="xvi.i-p92.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p93"></span>Now, though in the person of *a child*
Christ might have a mean appearance, still the designation of *Son*
points out his high rank. Yet I do not deny that he might have been
called the *Son* of David, but it is more natural to apply it to him as
God. The titles which follow are still less applicable to Hezekiah. I
shall soon give an ample refutation of the sophistry by which the Jews
attempt to evade this passage. Let them slander as they may, the matter
is sufficient plain to all who will calmly and soberly examine it.

<span id="xvi.i-p94"></span>*A Son hath been given to us*. There is
weight in what he now adds, that this *Son* was *given* to the people,
in order to inform the Jews that their salvation and that of the whole
Church is contained in the person of Christ. And this *giving* is one of
the chief articles of our faith; for it would have been of little avail
to us, that Christ was *born*, if he had not likewise been our own. What
this *child* will be, and what is his rank, he declares in the following
statements.

<span id="xvi.i-p95"></span>*And the government hath been laid upon his
shoulder.* To suppose, as some do, that this is an allusion to the cross
of Christ is manifestly childish. Christ *carried the cross* on his
shoulders, (<span id="xvi.i-p95.1"></span>[Joh
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017)<span id="xvi.i-p95.1"></span>,)
and by the cross he gained a splendid triumph over *the prince of this
world*. (<span id="xvi.i-p95.2"></span>[Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)<span id="xvi.i-p95.2"></span>.)
But as *the* *government* is here said to have been *laid on his
shoulders* in the same sense in which we shall see that *the key of the
house of David* *was laid on the shoulders* of Eliakim, (<span
id="xvi.i-p95.3"></span>[Isa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#022)<span id="xvi.i-p95.3"></span>,)
we need not go far to seek ingenious expositions. Yet I agree with those
who think that there is an indirect contrast between *the government*
which the Redeemer *bore on his shoulders* and *the staff of the
shoulder* which was just now mentioned; for it agrees well, and is not
liable to any objections. He therefore shows that the Messiah will be
different from indolent kings, who leave off business and cares, and
live at their ease; for he will be able to *bear the burden* Thus he
asserts the superiority and grandeur of his government, because by his
own power Christ will obtain homage to himself, and he will discharge
his office, not only with the tips of his fingers, but with his full
strength.

<span id="xvi.i-p96"></span>*And his name shall be called.* Though <span
id="xvi.i-p96.1"></span>יקרא, (*yikra*,) *he* *shall call*, be an active
verb, I have not hesitated to translate it in a passive sense; for the
meaning is the same as if he had made use of the plural number, *they
shall call*. We have a French idiom that resembles it, <span
id="xvi.i-p96.2"></span>*on appellera*, literally, *one shall call*,
that is, *he shall be called*. The Jews apply it to God, and read it
continuously, *he shall call his name Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty
God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace*. But it is very
evident that this proceeds from a desire, or rather from a licentious
eagerness, to obscure the glory of Christ; for if they had not labored
with excessive keenness to rob him of his Godhead, the passage would run
on very smoothly as interpreted by our divines. Besides, what necessity
was there for ascribing to God those attributes, if the Prophet meant
nothing more than that God gave a name to Messiah? For the attributes
which are usually ascribed to God are either perpetual or accommodated
to the case in hand, neither of which suppositions can here be admitted.
Again, it would have been an interruption of the regular order to insert
the name of God in the midst of various titles, but it ought to have run
thus, *the mighty God, Wonderful, Counsellor, shall call.* Now, I do not
see how the name <span id="xvi.i-p96.3"></span>יועץ (*yognetz*) can be
applied absolutely to God, for it belongs to *counsellors* who attend
kings or other persons. If any obstinate wrangler shall contend for the
notion of the Rabbins, he will show nothing but his own impudence. Let
us follow the plain and natural meaning.

<span id="xvi.i-p97"></span>*Wonderful.* It ought to be observed that
those titles are not foreign to the subject, but are adapted to the case
in hand, for the Prophet describes what Christ will show himself to be
towards believers. He does not speak of Christ’s mysterious essence, but
applauds his excellencies, which we perceive and experience by faith.
This ought to be the more carefully considered, because the greater part
of men are satisfied with his mere name, and do not observe his power
and energy, though that ought to be chiefly regarded.

<span id="xvi.i-p98"></span>By the first title he arouses the minds of
the godly to earnest attention, that they may expect from Christ
something more excellent than what we see in the ordinary course of
God’s works, as if he had said, that *in Christ are hidden* the
invaluable *treasures* of *wonderful* things. (<span
id="xvi.i-p98.1"></span>[Col 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span
id="xvi.i-p98.1"></span>.) And, indeed, the redemption which he has
brought surpasses even the creation of the world. It amounts to this,
that the grace of God, which will be exhibited in Christ, exceeds all
miracles.

<span id="xvi.i-p99"></span>*Counselor.* The reason of this second title
is, that the Redeemer will come endowed with absolute wisdom. Now, let
us remember what I have just noticed, that the Prophet does not here
reason about the hidden essence of Christ, but about the power which he
displays towards us. It is not, therefore, because he knows all his
Father’s secrets that the Prophet calls him *Counsellor*, but rather
because, *proceeding from* *the bosom of the Father*, (<span
id="xvi.i-p99.1"></span>[Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="xvi.i-p99.1"></span>,) he is in every respect the highest and most
perfect teacher. In like manner we are not permitted to get wisdom but
from his Gospel, and this contributes also to the praise of the Gospel,
for it contains the perfect wisdom of God, as Paul frequently shows.
(<span id="xvi.i-p99.2"></span>[1 Cor.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="xvi.i-p99.2"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p99.3"></span>[Eph
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017)<span id="xvi.i-p99.3"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p99.4"></span>[Col
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009)<span id="xvi.i-p99.4"></span>.)
All that is necessary for salvation is opened up by Christ in such a
manner, and explained with such familiarity, that he addresses the
disciples *no* *longer as servants but as friends*. (<span
id="xvi.i-p99.5"></span>[John 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="xvi.i-p99.5"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p100"></span>*The mighty God.* <span
id="xvi.i-p100.1"></span>אל (*El*) is one of the names of God, though
derived from *strength*, so that it is sometimes added as an attribute.
But here it is evidently a proper name, because Isaiah is not satisfied
with it, and in addition to it employs the adjective <span
id="xvi.i-p100.2"></span>גבור, (*gibbor*,) which means *strong*. And
indeed if Christ had not been *God*, it would have been unlawful to
glory in him; for it is written,

<span id="xvi.i-p101"></span>Cursed be he that trusteth in man. (<span
id="xvi.i-p101.1"></span>[Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="xvi.i-p101.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p102"></span>We must, therefore, meet with the majesty
of God in him, so that there truly dwells in him that which cannot
without sacrilege be attributed to a creature.

<span id="xvi.i-p103"></span>He is, therefore, called *the mighty God*,
for the same reason that he was formerly called *Immanuel*. (<span
id="xvi.i-p103.1"></span>[Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p103.1"></span>.)
For if we find in Christ nothing but the flesh and nature of man, our
glorying will be foolish and vain, and our hope will rest on au
uncertain and insecure foundation; but if he shows himself to be to us
*God* and *the* *mighty God*, we may now rely on him with safety. With
good reason does he call him *strong* or *mighty*, because our contest
is with the devil, death, and sin, (<span id="xvi.i-p103.2"></span>[Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="xvi.i-p103.2"></span>,)
enemies too powerful and strong, by whom we would be immediately
vanquished, if the *strength* of Christ had not rendered us invincible.
Thus we learn from this title that there is in Christ abundance of
protection for defending our salvation, so that we desire nothing beyond
him; for he is *God*, who is pleased to show himself *strong* on our
behalf. This application may be regarded as the key to this and similar
passages, leading us to distinguish between Christ’s mysterious essence
and the power by which he hath revealed himself to us.

<span id="xvi.i-p104"></span>*The father of the age.* The Greek
translator has added <span id="xvi.i-p104.1"></span>μέλλοντος *future*;
 <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) and, in my opinion, the
translation is correct, for it denotes *eternity*, unless it be thought
better to view it as denoting “perpetual duration,” or “an endless
succession of ages,” lest any one should improperly limit it to the
heavenly life, which is still *hidden* from us. (<span
id="xvi.i-p108.1"></span>[Col 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span
id="xvi.i-p108.1"></span>.) True, the Prophet includes it, and even
declares that Christ will come, in order to bestow immortality on his
people; but as believers, even in this world, *pass* *from death to
life*, (<span id="xvi.i-p108.2"></span>[Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span id="xvi.i-p108.2"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p108.3"></span>[1Jo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p108.3"></span>,)
this world is embraced by the eternal condition of the Church.

<span id="xvi.i-p109"></span>The name *Father* is put for *Author*,
because Christ preserves the existence of his Church through all ages,
and bestows immortality on the body and on the individual members. Hence
we conclude how transitory our condition is, apart from him; for,
granting that we were to live for a very long period after the ordinary
manner of men, what after all will be the value of our long life? We
ought, therefore, to elevate our minds to that blessed and everlasting
life, *which as yet we see not*, but which we possess *by hope and
faith*. (<span id="xvi.i-p109.1"></span>[Ro
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span id="xvi.i-p109.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p110"></span>*The Prince of Peace.* This is the last
title, and the Prophet declares by it that the coming of Christ will be
the cause of full and perfect happiness, or, at least, of calm and
blessed safety. In the Hebrew language *peace* often signifies
*prosperity*, for of all blessings not one is better or more desirable
than *peace*. The general meaning is, that all who submit to the
dominion of Christ will lead a quiet and blessed life in obedience to
him. Hence it follows that life, without this King, is restless and
miserable.

<span id="xvi.i-p111"></span>But we must also take into consideration
the nature of this *peace*. It is the same with that of the kingdom, for
it resides chiefly in the consciences; otherwise we must be engaged in
incessant conflicts and liable to daily attacks. Not only, therefore,
does he promise outward *peace*, but that peace by which we return to a
state of favor with God, who were formerly at enmity with him.
*Justified by faith*, says Paul, *we have peace with God*. (<span
id="xvi.i-p111.2"></span>[Ro 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span
id="xvi.i-p111.2"></span>.) Now, when Christ shall have brought
composure to our minds, the same spiritual *peace* will hold the highest
place *in our hearts*, (<span id="xvi.i-p111.3"></span>[Php
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)<span id="xvi.i-p111.3"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p111.4"></span>[Col
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#015)<span id="xvi.i-p111.4"></span>,)
so that we will patiently endure every kind of adversity, and from the
same fountain will likewise flow outward prosperity, which is nothing
else than the effect of the blessing of God.

<span id="xvi.i-p112"></span>Now, to apply this for our own instruction,
whenever any distrust arises, and all means of escape are taken away
from us, whenever, in short, it appears to us that everything is in a
ruinous condition, let us recall to our remembrance that Christ is
called *Wonderful*, because he has inconceivable methods of assisting
us, and because his power is far beyond what we are able to conceive.
When we need counsel, let us remember that he is the *Counsellor*. When
we need strength, let us remember that he is *Mighty* and *Strong*. When
new terrors spring up suddenly every instant, and when many deaths
threaten us from various quarters, let us rely on that *eternity* of
which he is with good reason called the Father, and by the same comfort
let us learn to soothe all temporal distresses. When we are inwardly
tossed by various tempests, and when Satan attempts to disturb our
consciences, let us remember that Christ is *The Prince of Peace*, and
that it is easy for him quickly to allay all our uneasy feelings. Thus
will these titles confirm us more and more in the faith of Christ, and
fortify us against Satan and against hell itself.

<span id="xvi.i-p113"></span><span id="xvi.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p114"></span>**7.** *To the increase of the government
there will be no end.* He begins to explain and confirm what he had
formerly said, that Christ is *The Prince of Peace*, by saying that his
government is extended to every age, and is perpetual; *that there will
be no end to the government or to peace*. This was also repeated by
Daniel, who predicts that his *kingdom is an everlasting kingdom*.
(<span id="xvi.i-p114.1"></span>[Da
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027)<span id="xvi.i-p114.1"></span>.)
Gabriel also alluded to it when he carried the message to the virgin;
and he gave the true exposition of this passage, for it cannot be
understood to refer to any other than to Christ.

<span id="xvi.i-p115"></span>He shall reign, says he, over the house of
Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. (<span
id="xvi.i-p115.1"></span>[Lu 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033)<span
id="xvi.i-p115.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p116"></span>We see that the mightiest *governments* of
this world, as if they had been built on a *slippery* foundation, (<span
id="xvi.i-p116.1"></span>[Ps
73:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#018)<span id="xvi.i-p116.1"></span>,)
are unexpectedly overturned and suddenly fall. How fickle and changeable
all the kingdoms under heaven are, we learn from history and from daily
examples. This *government* alone is unchangeable and eternal.

<span id="xvi.i-p117"></span>Now, this continuance, of which Isaiah now
speaks, consists of two parts. It belongs both to time and to quality.
Though the kingdom of Christ is in such a condition that it appears as
if it were about to perish at every moment, yet God not only protects
and defends it, but also extends its boundaries far and wide, and then
preserves and carries it forward in uninterrupted progression to
*eternity*. We ought firmly to believe this, that the frequency of those
shocks by which the Church is shaken may not weaken our faith, when we
learn that, amidst the mad outcry and violent attacks of enemies, the
*kingdom* of Christ stands firm through the invincible power of God, so
that, though the whole world should oppose and resist, it will remain
through all ages. We must not judge of its stability from the present
appearances of things, but from the promise, which assures us of its
*continuance* and of its constant increase.

<span id="xvi.i-p118"></span>*And to the peace.* To *the government* he
adds the eternity of *the peace*, for the one cannot be separated from
the other. It is impossible that Christ should be *King* without also
keeping his people in calm and blessed *peace*, and enriching them with
every blessing. But as they are daily exposed to innumerable vexations,
endure fierce attacks, and are tossed and perplexed by fears and
anxieties, they ought to cultivate that *peace* of Christ, which holds
the highest place *in their hearts*, (<span
id="xvi.i-p118.1"></span>[Php 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.i-p118.1"></span>; <span id="xvi.i-p118.2"></span>[Col
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#015)<span id="xvi.i-p118.2"></span>,)
that they may remain unhurt, and may even retain their composure amidst
the destruction of the whole world.

<span id="xvi.i-p119"></span>In the word <span
id="xvi.i-p119.1"></span>לםרבה, (*lemarbeh*,) contrary to the usual
manner of writing, there is the close form of <span
id="xvi.i-p119.2"></span>ם (*mem*).  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) Some think that it denotes the slavery
by which the Jewish people should be oppressed till the coming of
Christ. Others think that that nation, on account of its treachery, was
excluded by this mark from having any share in this *kingdom*. I do not
find fault with these views. Indeed, we can hardly assert that the
Prophet wrote it in this manner; but yet, since this is the form in
which it has come into our hands, and since the Rabbins were so close
observers of the minutest portion of a letter, we cannot avoid thinking
that this was not rashly done. And if we admit that the Prophet
intentionally wrote it in this manner, I think that it conveyed this
useful instruction, that believers should not imagine that the splendor
of Christ’s kingdom would consist in outward pomp, or cherish vain hopes
of worldly triumphs, but should only expect, amidst various calamities,
an unseen extension of the kingdom, because it had been promised.

<span id="xvi.i-p121"></span>*Upon the throne of David.* A promise
having been made to *David* that the Redeemer would spring from his
seed, (<span id="xvi.i-p121.1"></span>[2 Sam.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013)<span id="xvi.i-p121.1"></span>,)
and his kingdom having been nothing else than an image or faint shadow
of that more perfect and truly blessed state which God had determined to
establish by the hand of his Son, the Prophets, in order to remind the
people of that remarkable miracle, usually call Christ *the Son of*
*David*. (<span id="xvi.i-p121.2"></span>[Jer.
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005), [Jer.
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015)<span id="xvi.i-p121.2"></span>.)
Though the name of such a holy and upright king was justly beloved and
revered, yet believers esteemed more highly the promised restoration to
full salvation, and even among the most ignorant persons that prediction
was universally remembered, and its truth and authenticity were
considered to be clear and undoubted. I shall collect but a few of the
passages in which the Prophets promise to an afflicted people
restoration in the person of *David* or of *his* *Son*. (<span
id="xvi.i-p121.3"></span>[Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009)<span id="xvi.i-p121.3"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p121.4"></span>[Ezek.
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023), [Ezek.
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024)<span id="xvi.i-p121.4"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p121.5"></span>[Ho
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)<span id="xvi.i-p121.5"></span>.)
Sometimes they foretell that *David*, who was already dead, would be
king. In like manner Isaiah, in this passage, intimates that he brings
forward nothing that is new, but only reminds them of that which God had
formerly promised about the perpetuity of *the kingdom*. Indirectly also
he insinuates what Amoz more plainly states, that Christ will

<span id="xvi.i-p122"></span>again raise up the throne which for some
time had been fallen. (<span id="xvi.i-p122.1"></span>[Am
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)<span id="xvi.i-p122.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p123"></span>To order it, and to establish it with
judgment and with righteousness. He describes the quality of the
kingdom, but by a comparison drawn from earthly governments; for he says
that Christ will be a King, to order and establish his kingdom with
judgment and with righteousness. These are the means by which earthly
governments prosper and take deep roots; but those which are only
administered by fear and violence cannot be lasting. Since, therefore,
justice is the best guardian of kingdoms and governments, and since the
happiness of the whole of the people depends on it, by this clause
Isaiah shows that the kingdom of Christ will be the model of the best
kind of government.

<span id="xvi.i-p124"></span>*Judgment* and *righteousness* do not here
relate to outward affairs of state. We must observe the analogy between
the kingdom of Christ and its qualities; for, being spiritual, it is
established by the power of the Holy Spirit. In a word, all these things
must be viewed as referring to the inner man, that is, when we are
regenerated by God to true *righteousness*. Outward *righteousness*
indeed follows afterwards, but it must be preceded by that renovation of
the mind and heart. We are not Christ’s, therefore, unless we follow
what is good and just, and bear on our hearts the impress of that
*righteousness* which hath been sealed by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="xvi.i-p125"></span>*Henceforth even for ever.* This must be
understood, I think, to refer to the perpetuity of *righteousness* and
doctrine rather than of *the kingdom*, lest we should imagine that his
laws resemble the statutes of kings and princes, which are in force for
three days, or for a short period, and are continually renewed, and soon
become old again, but that we may know that their obligation is
everlasting; for they have been established, as Zecharias says,

<span id="xvi.i-p126"></span>that we may serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. (<span
id="xvi.i-p126.1"></span>[Luke 1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074),
[75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075)<span id="xvi.i-p126.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p127"></span>As Christ’s kingdom is everlasting, because
*he* *dieth no more*, (<span id="xvi.i-p127.1"></span>[Ro
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="xvi.i-p127.1"></span>,)
so it follows that *righteousness* and judgment will be everlasting, for
they cannot be changed by any length of time.

<span id="xvi.i-p128"></span>*The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform
this.* By *zeal* I understand that ardent desire which God will display
in preserving his Church, by removing all difficulties and obstructions
which might otherwise have hindered its redemption. When we engage in
any difficult undertaking, our earnestness, and the warmth of our
feelings, overcome the difficulties which present themselves to baffle
or retard our attempts. In like manner Isaiah shows that God is inflamed
with an uncommon and extraordinary desire to promote the salvation of
the Church, so that if believers cannot measure by their own capacity
what he has just now promised, still they ought not to cease to
entertain confident hope, for the manner of it is wonderful and
inconceivable. In short, he intimates that God will come with no light
or slow arm to redeem his Church, for he will be all on flame with
amazing love of believers, and anxiety about their salvation.

<span id="xvi.i-p129"></span><span id="xvi.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p130"></span>**8.** *The Lord hath sent a word.* Here he
relates a new prediction, for I think that this discourse is separated
from the former, because the Prophet now returns to speak of the future
condition of the kingdom of *Israel*, which was at that time hostile to
the Jews. Now, we know that the Jews had good reason for being alarmed
at the forces and power of that kingdom, especially when it had made a
league with the Syrians, because they saw that they had not sufficient
strength to oppose them. In order, therefore, to yield comfort to the
godly, he shows what will be the future condition of the kingdom of
*Israel*

<span id="xvi.i-p131"></span>By *Jacob* and *Israel* he means the same
thing; but the diversity of expression is elegant, and is intended to
show that the wicked gain nothing by their opposition, when they
endeavor either to turn away from them, or to alter the judgment of God.
He alludes to the speech of those who think that they can escape by
means of their witticisms, and who turn into jest and sport all that is
threatened by the Prophets; just as if one were to attempt to drive away
a storm by the breath of his mouth. It is, therefore, an ironical
admission, as if he had said, “In your opinion, what God pronounces
against you will fall on others; but all the threatenings which he
utters against *Jacob* will *light upon* *Israel*.”

<span id="xvi.i-p132"></span>To *send* means to appoint. The preposition
<span id="xvi.i-p132.1"></span>ב (*beth*) means in *Jacob himself*. The
word of God must dwell and rest *in him*, for it cannot vanish away
without producing any effect. This is what he afterwards lays down in
other words, “*My word shall not return to me void*; that is, because it
is an effectual publication of that which I have once decreed.” (<span
id="xvi.i-p132.2"></span>[Isa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011)<span id="xvi.i-p132.2"></span>.)
By the word, *it hath fallen*,  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144)
he points out the certainty of the effect and result; as if he had said,
“I do not conjecture these things, nor do I contrive them out of my own
head; but God hath spoken, who cannot be deceived, and cannot change.”

<span id="xvi.i-p134"></span><span id="xvi.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p135"></span>**9.** *And the people shall know.* By the
word *people* I understand, not the Jews, but rather the Israelites;
and, indeed, the Prophet removes doubt by expressly naming *Ephraim*. He
likewise adds *Samaria*, which was the metropolis of that *people*, or
of the ten tribes; for fortified cities, conceiving themselves to be
placed beyond the reach of danger, are much more insolent in their
pretensions. They think that they will always have the remedy in their
hands by capitulating with the enemy, though the whole country were laid
waste. On this account Isaiah threatens that they will not be exempted
from the general calamity. He says that all will feel that the
predictions which were uttered by the mouth of God will not be without
effect. By the word *know*, which relates to actual experience, he
indirectly reproves their unbelief; as if he had said, “Since I speak to
the deaf, and you set no value on the warnings which I now address to
you, the actual event will teach you, but too late.”

<span id="xvi.i-p136"></span>*Who say.* Here the Prophet attacks the
obstinacy and rebellion of that people, because, though they had once
and again been chastised by God’s scourges, and that sharply, they were
so far from repentance that they reckoned their losses to be gain, and
became more hardened. Assuredly they who thus insolently mock at God are
not brought to obedience without being reduced to utter weakness. Now,
such an insult openly and avowedly provokes God’s anger, and therefore
the Prophet says that it proceeds from *the haughtiness and pride of the
heart*. Hence it follows that it is right to apply to knotty timber
chisels that are harder still.

<span id="xvi.i-p137"></span><span id="xvi.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p138"></span>**10.** *The bricks are fallen down.* These
are the words of men who were obstinate, and who despised the calamity
which they had sustained, as if it had been of advantage to them,
because it afforded them an opportunity of adorning with greater
splendor both their houses and their fields. “*We shall build*,” they
say, “*more magnificently*. The brick houses have been thrown down that
we may dwell in splendid palaces; and since the trees have been cut
down, we shall plant more fruitful ones.” This was not the fault of a
single age, for at this day we see the same obstinacy in the world. How
many are the distresses with which Europe has been afflicted for thirty
or forty years? How many are the chastisements by which she has been
called to repentance? And yet it does not appear that those numerous
chastisements have done any good. On the contrary, luxury increases
every day, lawless passions are inflamed, and men go on in crimes and
profligacy more shamelessly than ever. In short, those very calamities
appear to have been so many excitements to luxury and splendor. What
then should we expect but to be bruised with heavier blows?

<span id="xvi.i-p139"></span><span id="xvi.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p140"></span>**11.** *But the Lord will set up the
adversaries of Rezin against him.* The Israelites having been proud of
their alliance with the king of Syria, and hoping that everything would
succeed to their wish, Isaiah threatens a new change which will take
away all their hope and utterly frustrate their designs, for the
Assyrians afterwards took arms and waged war with the Syrians.
Accordingly, when *Rezin* had been slain, (<span
id="xvi.i-p140.1"></span>[2Ki
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009)<span id="xvi.i-p140.1"></span>,)
that country was entirely ruined. Still more does he heighten this, by
adding, *he shall mingle*;  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) for
he means that the Lord will gather together and *mingle* various enemies
whom he will commission to destroy the king of Syria, as the soldiers
who composed the army of that vast monarchy were collected out of
various nations.

<span id="xvi.i-p142"></span><span id="xvi.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p143"></span>**12.** *Syria in front.*  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) The Prophet shows what will be the
nature of this change, and what will happen after the death of *Rezin*,
(<span id="xvi.i-p144.1"></span>[2Ki
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009)<span id="xvi.i-p144.1"></span>,)
who had allied himself with Israel against Judah; namely, that *the
Syrians*, after the death of their king, from being allies will suddenly
become enemies, and will make war against Israel, which took place.
(<span id="xvi.i-p144.2"></span>[2Ki
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p144.2"></span>.)
This is what he means when he says that *Syria* will be *in front*; for
I do not agree with those expositors who make *Syria* to mean “those on
the East,” and *the* *Philistines* “those on the West.” A more natural
meaning is, that the enemies will invade them on every side; because on
all sides they who had been regarded as faithful friends will rise up to
destroy them. The phrases *in front* and *behind* agree with the
ordinary modes of speaking, so that we ought not to seek an
interpretation that is new and foreign to the purpose.

<span id="xvi.i-p145"></span>From this example we ought to learn what it
is to rely on human power and the alliances of kings, and especially
when, in consequence of being entangled by unlawful covenants, we become
careless and fall asleep; for as soon as the Lord pleases, they who were
formerly on our side will, in the smallest portion of time, be turned
against us to our ruin; and remedies, which we thought would be useful
to us will prove to be our destruction, and will assist us both *before*
and *behind*. We ought also to observe that God does not all at once
expend all his scourges, but when we proceed obstinately, and provoke
him more and more, he increases and multiplies the chastisements, and
still inflicts a new kind of punishment, till at length he subdues our
obstinacy and rebellion.

<span id="xvi.i-p146"></span>*And will devour Israel with the whole
mouth.*  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) The phrase *with the
whole mouth*,  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) is equivalent to
an ordinary idiom of our own, (<span id="xvi.i-p148.4"></span>*a pleine
bouche*,) *with full mouth*. As if he had said, “Israel will be exposed
as a prey to her enemies, so that on every hand she will be devoured
*with open mouth*, both by the Syrians and by the Philistines.”

<span id="xvi.i-p149"></span>*His anger is not turned away.* This is the
severest of all, and beyond everything else ought to have terrified the
ungodly, that if they had suffered much, they have more to endure; that
new punishments continually await them, because by going on in their
obstinacy they inflame still more the wrath of God. Men take this as an
incentive to more obstinate and determined wickedness, that, having
suffered some punishment, they think that they have nothing more to
suffer, and become more hardened. They do not even believe that they are
any longer exposed to the judgment of God, who has already spent his
rods; and as if they were altogether out of his power, they give
themselves greater indulgence, and shake off every yoke.

<span id="xvi.i-p150"></span>*But his hand is stretched out still.* What
we have now stated is the reason why Isaiah threatens that *the hand of
the Lord is still stretched out*, that they may not think that they have
escaped that *hand*. Now, this is said not for the purpose of
instructing, but of accusing, though the threatenings have also a
tendency to make doctrine better understood; but as he had to do with
obstinate men, on whom no chastisement produced any good effect, he
therefore announces that the chastisements are not yet at an end; and
that, although God has for a time discontinued those chastisements,
still he has not dispensed with them, but has *his hand lifted up* to
inflict a new wound.

<span id="xvi.i-p151"></span><span id="xvi.i-p151.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p152"></span>**13.** *But the people hath not turned.*
 <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) The copulative <span
id="xvi.i-p153.1"></span>ו (*vau*) is rendered by some interpreters
*for*, as if the Prophet were assigning a reason why the Lord does not
cease to employ his scourges in the continual infliction of
chastisements; that is, because *the people* are so hardened and
obstinate that they will not repent. When there is no repentance, it is
unreasonable to expect that God will yield to obstinate men, as if he
were vanquished; and the consequence is, that he prepares himself for
inflicting severer punishment. Since, therefore, no chastisements had
produced any amendment in Israel, he must perish; for when they had been
so frequently struck and punished, and did not at all repent, this was a
proof of the most desperate wickedness.

<span id="xvi.i-p154"></span>This is a very severe rebuke, that although
the Lord not only admonishes us by words, but actually pushes us
forward, and constrains us by various chastisements, still we grow
hardened, and do not suffer ourselves to be drawn away from our crimes
and our lusts. Desperate wickedness is thus evinced, and nothing more
heinous could be spoken or conceived. It is a heinous offense, when men
do not receive instruction as soon as it is delivered to them; it is
more heinous, when they are not affected by rebukes; it is the most
heinous of all, when, in spite even of chastisements, they grow
hardened, and even kick, or by their headstrong behavior inflame still
more the indignation of the Judge, and do not consider why they were
punished, or what it is to which the Lord calls them. Accordingly, when
no remedies produce any good effect, what must we think but that the
disease is incurable and utterly desperate?

<span id="xvi.i-p155"></span>This rebuke applies not to the Israelites
only but to us also. Already hath the Lord chastised the whole world by
various afflictions, so that hardly any part could be exempted from
distresses and calamities. And yet all appear to have obstinately
conspired against God, so that, whatever He does, they cease not to
retain their former character, and to carry on their wicked courses.
Justly, therefore, might the Lord address to us the same expostulation,
and assuredly he addresses us by the mouth of Isaiah; and we ought not
to look for another Prophet to threaten new chastisements, seeing that
our case is not different from that of the Israelites, and we are
involved in the same blame with them.

<span id="xvi.i-p156"></span>*Nor have they sought the Lord of hosts.*
This is immediately added as an explanation, for the reason why God
inflicts punishment is, to bring back the wanderers to himself. By this
method, indeed, he appears to drive men to a greater distance from him;
but as it belongs to him to bring out of the grave those whom he
appeared to have wounded and slain, by terrifying sinners he only
humbles them, in order that they may return to him. And indeed the
beginning of conversion is to *seek God*, or rather it is the only rule
of living well; if we turn aside from it we have no rest for the sole of
our foot. But we must now inquire what it is to *seek God*, or in what
manner we ought to *seek him*; for hypocrites will always be ready to
plead, that by prayers and fastings, and tears, and a sorrowful
countenance, they earnestly entreat God and implore forgiveness. But God
chooses to be *sought* in another manner; that is, when the sinner truly
subdued, willingly takes the yoke which he had shaken off, and yields
obedience to him whom he had despised.

<span id="xvi.i-p157"></span><span id="xvi.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p158"></span>**14.** *Therefore the Lord will cut off
from Israel.* He intimates that God’s vengeance will be universal, and
will involve all ranks; for the whole nation was corrupted, and the
contagion had spread over the whole country, to such an extent that no
part was left whole or sound. Now, when iniquity thus abounds, every one
flatters himself, and they think that they have concealed themselves by
an admirable veil, because they have many who are like them; and when
they compare themselves with others, they think that they have pleaded
their excuse. This is the reason why he threatens that vengeance
generally against all; for not one was free from the general disease.

<span id="xvi.i-p159"></span>*Head and tail, branch and reed.*  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) By *branch* he means the stronger and
more powerful; by *reed* or *rush* he means the feebler, that is, men of
the lowest rank, and who had scarcely any wealth. He therefore means
that the vengeance of God hangs over them, and spares neither the strong
nor the weak, neither the highest nor the lowest, because no part is
sound or uninfected by the general disease.

<span id="xvi.i-p161"></span><span id="xvi.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p162"></span>**15.** *The ancient and honorable, he is
the head.* What he had spoken allegorically about *the head* and *the
tail* he explains more plainly and without a figure. He says that the
*heads* are the princes and nobles who had the charge of public affairs,
and sat at the helm of the commonwealth. To these he adds the *false
prophets*, and says that they are meant by *the tail*. But he explains
only the first part of the verse, and says nothing about the *branch and
reed*. The reason why he omitted them is easily explained. It is,
because he intended to press hardest on those who were more heinous
transgressors, and who led others to commit sin, in consequence of the
influence which they obtained from their high rank. He gives to the
prophets the name of *the tail*, not because they were mean and
contemptible, as some think; but he intended to denote the lowest parts
of the whole body. By *the head* he means magistrates and judges, and by
*the tail* he means *false* *prophets*, because they deceive and impose
upon men by falsehoods and hypocrisy, as if he had compared the one to
lions or bears, and the other to foxes.

<span id="xvi.i-p163"></span>This passage warns us that we ought not to
slumber in our sins, because wickedness and profligacy abound in all
ranks, and no class of men is sound or uninfected; for the more that
vices abound, so much the more will the wrath of God be kindled against
the highest and the lowest. We ought, especially in the present day,
amidst that pestilence of every kind of evils, to fear lest, when the
wrath of God hath begun to burn, it may consume everything, high and
low.

<span id="xvi.i-p164"></span><span id="xvi.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p165"></span>**16.** *For the rulers of this people are
seducers.*  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) Some render it,
*they who make thee blessed*, or, *they who call thee blessed*; as if he
had said that nothing was more hurtful or destructive to a nation than
flatteries, which gave encouragement to unbounded licentiousness. But I
shall follow the reading which I approved on a former occasion, when the
same word occurred.  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) (<span
id="xvi.i-p167.2"></span>[Isa
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012)<span id="xvi.i-p167.2"></span>.)
He means that the rulers and magistrates, whose duty it was to restrain
the people within the limits of decent behavior, allowed all to indulge
freely in crimes and wickedness. On this account they ought justly to be
reckoned *seducers* and corrupters, for corruption flows from them to
the whole body of the people, as from the head to the members.
Magistrates and pastors are appointed in order to restrain the
waywardness of the people, to enjoin what is good and right, and
especially to defend the honor of God. If they neglect these duties they
ought to be reckoned impostors and not *rulers*, for they give rise to
miserable confusion. Now, when every one does what he pleases, and the
reins of government are nowhere to be found, can there be anything but
the most terrible result? When the common people are thus punished on
account of their faults, no lighter vengeance awaits the *rulers*,
because they have neglected the duty entrusted to them, and have
occasioned so many evils.

<span id="xvi.i-p168"></span>*And they who are governed are destroyed.*
By this clause he means that wicked princes, and those who rule
according to their own caprice, are destructive; and in like manner
teachers who rather deceive and impose on men than point out the way of
salvation, because through their fault the people are ruined. But at the
same time he shows that this affords no excuse to any one for seeking to
make bad rulers a cloak for their own transgressions, as is commonly
done, for *if the blind lead the blind,* as Christ says, *both will fall
into the ditch*. It is certain that none are ruined by wicked and
treacherous *leaders*, but those who of their own accord wish to be led
astray.

<span id="xvi.i-p169"></span><span id="xvi.i-p169.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p170"></span>**17.** *Therefore the LORD will not
delight in their young men.* Isaiah describes more clearly how dreadful
will be that vengeance of God against all ranks; for so far will more
flagrant transgressors be from escaping, that neither boys nor youths,
nor widows, will be exempted, who are usually spared even amidst
dreadful slaughter; which was usually done even among heathens at the
sacking of towns, as we learn from history. But here the Lord threatens
that he will pay no regard either to sex or to age. Yet the following
view will not be unsuitable. “Although the carnage will rob many women
of their husbands, and will deprive many children of their parents,
still God will not shrink from punishing women by making them widows,
and children by making them orphans.” But as it does not greatly affect
the general meaning, I do not dwell upon it. Again, that they may not
accuse God of cruelty, he at the same time shows that there are good
reasons why he is so severe, because they are all wicked, and therefore
that they deserve to be cast headlong to ruin without any distinction.

<span id="xvi.i-p171"></span>*For all are hypocrites and evil-doers.* As
to this word, I was unwilling to depart from the opinion commonly
entertained, though <span id="xvi.i-p171.1"></span>חנף (*chaneph*) means
an ungodly, deceitful, or treacherous and wicked man. He appears to
point out the source of all the evils, that there was no true fear of
God among them. By this he does not mean any slight dissimulation, but
inward contempt seated in the heart, by which consciences are stupified,
so that no instructions produce any effect on them; as if he had said
that they were deeply sunk in their depravity. But as wickedness, when
it has taken possession of the mind, drags the hands and feet, and the
rest of the members of the body along with it, so the Prophet adds, that
they are all *evil-doers*

<span id="xvi.i-p172"></span>*And every mouth speaketh villany.*  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) Thirdly, he adds that they have
proceeded to such a pitch of open wickedness, that they boast of their
crimes without shame. The Hebrew word <span
id="xvi.i-p173.1"></span>נבלה (*niblah*), which is translated *folly*,
has frequently a more extensive meaning; for it denotes baseness,
villany, and madness. (<span id="xvi.i-p173.2"></span>[Ge
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#007)<span id="xvi.i-p173.2"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p173.3"></span>[Jos
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#015)<span id="xvi.i-p173.3"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p173.4"></span>[Jud
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#024)<span id="xvi.i-p173.4"></span>.)
Here, in my opinion, the Prophet means that they are so entirely
abandoned to wicked courses, that we need not seek any other proof of it
than from their tongues.

<span id="xvi.i-p174"></span>*His anger will not be turned away.* He
again repeats this statement, which ought to be frequently repeated; for
it is not enough to have been once informed how dreadful are the
judgments of the Lord against the wicked; so easily and quickly will
there steal upon us that forgetfulness of them which banishes
uneasiness, as well as fear, about the future. Besides, we are led
astray and blinded by that deception, for we think that the infliction
of a single punishment has exhausted the power of God. There can be
nothing better, therefore, than to hold by this principle, that whenever
God chastises us he threatens something more dreadful, if we do not
quickly repent. (<span id="xvi.i-p174.1"></span>[Lev.
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#018),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#021),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#024),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#028)<span id="xvi.i-p174.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p175"></span>*But his hand is stretched out still.*
since the Prophet repeats this warning, let us unceasingly call to our
remembrance, that the indignation of God is not yet appeased, though we
may think that he has already punished us severely for our sins. What
then ought we to conclude, when he has given us but a light
chastisement? At the present day, for instance, we have endured some
punishment; but what is it as compared with those dreadfully severe
calamities which that nation had suffered, when Isaiah foretold that new
chastisements were still awaiting them? What then will become of us? The
Lord will undoubtedly continue to perform what belongs to him, and will
always be like himself. If this dread do not arouse us, our
insensibility is evidently beyond endurance. I have translated the verb
<span id="xvi.i-p175.1"></span>שב (*shab*) in the future sense, *will
not be turned away*, to make the meaning more clear; for though he
speaks as if it had been a past transaction, still he threatens a
continuance of punishments against the rebellious.

<span id="xvi.i-p176"></span><span id="xvi.i-p176.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p177"></span>**18.** *For wickedness burneth as the
fire.* The Prophet attacks the wicked, who are accustomed to defend
themselves by laying the blame on God. Either they practice evasions, in
order to convince themselves that they are innocent, or, when they have
been convicted, they still extenuate their guilt, as if the severity of
God were beyond proper bounds. Never, certainly, do they acknowledge
that God is just in punishing them, till they are compelled to
acknowledge it; and even though they do not venture to excuse themselves
publicly, still they fret and murmur. With the view of repressing such
insolence, the Prophet compares the calamities to *burning*, but shows
that the wickedness of men is the wood and fuel, by which the anger of
God is kindled: as if he had said, “All exclaim and make loud complaints
that the wrath of God *burns* violently, and yet they do not consider
that their own sins are the fans by which it is inflamed, and that those
sins supply the fuel, and that even themselves are consumed by the
inward fire of their crimes.”

<span id="xvi.i-p178"></span>*It shall devour the briers and thorns.*
The meaning is, that this flame will seize every part of Judea. Two
things are here expressed, that the punishment of sin proceeds from the
judgment of God, and yet that the blame lies with the sinners
themselves, that they may not remonstrate with God as if he had dealt
cruelly with them. There is a beautiful gradation; for we perceive that
it usually happens that a fire, kindled in the lowest part of any place,
gathers strength by degrees, spreads wider and wider, and ascends to the
higher parts. Such will the wrath of God be; for Isaiah shows that it
does not all at once seize the wicked, but is gradually kindled, till it
utterly destroy them. At first the Lord proceeds gently, but if a light
chastisement produce no good effect, he increases and doubles the
punishment. If he see that we are obstinate, his wrath burns to the
uttermost, so as to destroy us altogether, and consume us like a thick
forest. Lastly, as the Prophets elsewhere declare, we must be like chaff
and straw as soon as the wrath of God is kindled. (<span
id="xvi.i-p178.1"></span>[Ps. 83:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#014),
[Isa. 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024), [Isa.
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#011), [Isa.
40:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#024), [Isa.
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002), [Isa.
47:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p178.1"></span>)

<span id="xvi.i-p179"></span><span id="xvi.i-p179.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p180"></span>**19.** *Through the anger of the* Lord *of
hosts is the land darkened.* After having shown that the cause of all
our evils proceeds from ourselves, and that therefore the blame of it
should be laid upon us, he at the same time shows that God is a most
righteous avenger. When men draw down upon themselves calamities and
distresses, God does not suffer them to escape his hand; not that he is
inclined to cruelty, for he is *gracious and merciful*, (<span
id="xvi.i-p180.1"></span>[Ex 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)<span
id="xvi.i-p180.1"></span>,) but because he is just, and cannot endure
the wicked. The dreadful nature of God’s vengeance is described by the
metaphor of *darkness*, than which nothing can be more dismal; for
without figures of speech a judgment so revolting cannot be expressed.
And yet he appears to allude to *smoke*, of which he spoke in the former
verse; for when a conflagration extends, and rages with such violence,
the light must be overpowered by the thick *smoke*

<span id="xvi.i-p181"></span>*No man shall spare his brother.* In this
last clause and in the following verse, the Prophet describes the
methods and means, as they are called, by which the Lord will execute
his vengeance, when his wrath has been thus kindled. When no enemies
shall be seen whom we have cause to dread, he will arm ourselves for our
destruction. As if he had said, “The Lord will find no difficulty in
executing the vengeance which he threatens; for though there be none to
give us any annoyance from without, he will ruin us by intestine broils
and civil wars.” It is shocking and monstrous to relate, *No man shall
spare his brother*, “every man shall devour his own flesh;” for *no man
ever hated his own* *flesh*. (<span id="xvi.i-p181.1"></span>[Eph
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#029)<span id="xvi.i-p181.1"></span>.)
But when the Lord hath blinded us, what remains but that we mutually
destroy each other? And though it is monstrous, yet it happens almost
every day.

<span id="xvi.i-p182"></span>We are not restrained by any relationship
either of blood, or of religion, or of the image of God, which we all
bear; though even the heathen, on the contrary, were prevented, by
sharing in this common nature, from injuring each other, because they
perceived that the beasts themselves are restrained by similarity of
nature from cruelty against their own kind; for a wolf does not devour a
wolf, and a bear does not devour a bear. That *human* beings, from whom
the name of *humanity* is derived, should fight with such cruelty and
fierceness against one another as to exceed the rage of wild beasts, is
monstrous; and this evil can arise from no other source than that God
hath blinded them, and *given them up to a reprobate sense*. (<span
id="xvi.i-p182.1"></span>[Ro 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="xvi.i-p182.1"></span>.) Justly hath Isaiah described this kind of
revenge; for when men enjoy peace, they think that they are placed
beyond the reach of danger, and dread nothing. But the Lord laughs at
this indifference, and shows that he will execute his vengeance by their
own hand, which he will arm and direct against them.

<span id="xvi.i-p183"></span><span id="xvi.i-p183.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p184"></span>**20.** *Every one shall snatch on the
right hand.* It is equivalent to a phrase in common use, <span
id="xvi.i-p184.1"></span>*prendre et ravir a toutes mains*, *to take*
*and seize at all hands*. This mode of expression denotes either
insatiable covetousness or insatiable cruelty; for the eagerness to
*snatch* excites to savage cruelty. That they will be insatiable he
expresses more emphatically, by saying that, in consequence of being
impelled by blind fierceness and inconceivable rage, they will suck
their brother’s blood as freely as they would devour the flesh which was
their own property. The bitterness of the vengeance is greatly
heightened by this circumstance, that the children of Abraham, and the
holy posterity of the chosen race, break out into such beastly fury. Let
us therefore remember that it is a dreadful proof of heavenly
punishment, when brothers are hurried on, with irreconcilable eagerness,
to inflict mutual wounds.

<span id="xvi.i-p185"></span><span id="xvi.i-p185.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p186"></span>**21.** *Manasseh, Ephraim.* These tribes
were closely related to each other; for besides their being descended
from the same ancestor, Abraham, a close relationship arose out of their
being descended from one patriarch, his grandson, Joseph. (<span
id="xvi.i-p186.1"></span>[Ge
41:50-52](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#050)<span
id="xvi.i-p186.1"></span>.) But though they were closely allied, still
God threatens that he will cause them to destroy themselves by mutual
conflict, as if they were devouring the flesh of their own arm, and,
consequently, that there will be no need of foreign enemies. He likewise
adds that, after having wearied themselves out by mutual wounds, both
will unite against Judah, in order to destroy it.

<span id="xvi.i-p187"></span>*And for all this his anger shall not be
turned away.* If any one take into consideration those calamities which
Isaiah threatened, he will be amazed and greatly astonished that still
more severe chastisements are foretold. But in this manner God acts
towards the wicked, and does not cease to afflict till he utterly
overwhelm and destroy them, when, after having been frequently invited,
they refuse to be reconciled to him. We need not wonder, therefore, that
he inflicts stroke after stroke, as he also foretold by Moses that he
would *punish seven times more* (<span id="xvi.i-p187.1"></span>[Le
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#018)<span id="xvi.i-p187.1"></span>),
and *bring seven times more plagues upon* (<span
id="xvi.i-p187.2"></span>[Le
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#021)<span id="xvi.i-p187.2"></span>)
those who would not repent; lest they should think that, when they had
been punished once or twice, they would not be punished again.

<span id="xvi.i-p188"></span>*But his hand is stretched out still.* By
this he means that rods are prepared, that he may immediately strike
with them; for it is not with a woman’s passion that the Lord is angry,
but his wrath is immediately followed by revenge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc13015.htm#fr_137) <span
id="xvi.i-p46.4"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p47"></span> The Hebrew particle <span
id="xvi.i-p47.1"></span>כי, (*ki*,) which is placed at the beginning of
this verse, is rendered in the English version by *Nevertheless*; but
Calvin says that he is willing to translate it *for* — *Ed*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc13015.htm#fr_138) <span
id="xvi.i-p51.5"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p52"></span> <span id="xvi.i-p52.1"></span>הקל (*hekal*)
signifies literally *to make light*, and in accordance with an English
idiom, sometimes denotes figuratively, *to make light of*. Stock’s
rendering is, *he made vile*, answering to Lowth’s, *he debased*. Both
agree in rendering <span id="xvi.i-p52.2"></span>הכביד (*hikbid*) *he
hath made it glorious*. The English version concurs with Calvin in
rendering <span id="xvi.i-p52.3"></span>הקל, (*hekal*,) *he lightly
afflicted*, and <span id="xvi.i-p52.4"></span>הבביד, (*hikbid*,) *he
did* *more grievously afflict*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc13015.htm#fr_139) <span
id="xvi.i-p61.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p62"></span> In the original text the reference reads:
<span id="xvi.i-p62.1"></span>[Ho
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#013)<span id="xvi.i-p62.1"></span>
which I assume was a typographical error. — *fj.*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc13015.htm#fr_140) <span
id="xvi.i-p67.4"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p68"></span> The Author’s meaning must be, not that
<span id="xvi.i-p68.1"></span>א (*aleph*) ever becomes the third
singular pronominal affix, but that in <span id="xvi.i-p68.2"></span>[Ex
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008)<span id="xvi.i-p68.2"></span>, to
which he refers, <span id="xvi.i-p68.3"></span>ו and not <span
id="xvi.i-p68.4"></span>א is probably the true reading. A better
illustration might have been found in <span id="xvi.i-p68.5"></span>[Ps
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p68.5"></span>,
on which the reader may consult a valuable note by the editor. (Com. on
the Psalms, vol. 4.) In all the three cases (<span
id="xvi.i-p68.7"></span>[Ex 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008)<span
id="xvi.i-p68.7"></span>; <span id="xvi.i-p68.8"></span>[Ps
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p68.8"></span>;
<span id="xvi.i-p68.9"></span>[Isa
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p68.9"></span>) the
*Keri*, or conjectural emendation, has strong internal evidence to
recommend it above the *Ketib*, or reading that stands in the copies
which have come down to us. Another method of solving the difficulty is
exceedingly ingenious, and consists in turning the first part of the
verse into the form of a question. *Hast thou multiplied the nation,
and* *hast thou not increased the joy*? — *Ed*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc13015.htm#fr_141) <span
id="xvi.i-p84.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p85"></span> See page 244.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc13015.htm#fr_142) <span
id="xvi.i-p104.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p105"></span> <span id="xvi.i-p105.1"></span>Πατὴρ τοῦ
μέλλοντος αἰω̑νος, *Father of the future age*. In the *Messiah*, Pope has
beautifully introduced this passage —

<span id="xvi.i-p106"></span>“Mankind shall thus his guardian care
engage,  
The promised Father of the future age.”

<span id="xvi.i-p107"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p108"></span>That admirable poem appeared originally in
the Spectator, No. 378, where the abundant foot-notes direct the reader
to the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, as the source from which the poet has
drawn his finest strokes and happiest illustrations. It is deeply to be
regretted that the recent editors leave out those references, so
valuable in the estimation of the author, that, in the edition prepared
by his own hand, the finest lines in Virgil’s *Pollio* are placed side
by side with the quotations from Isaiah, “under the mutual disadvantage
of a literal translation,” for the express purpose of showing the
immeasurable superiority of the Hebrew prophet. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc13015.htm#fr_143) <span
id="xvi.i-p119.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p120"></span> This means that what is usually called
*Final Mem* (<span id="xvi.i-p120.1"></span>ם) is here used, instead of
the form which the letter usually takes in the beginning or middle of a
word. A Greek scholar would have been startled at seeing <span
id="xvi.i-p120.2"></span>ς instead of a <span id="xvi.i-p120.3"></span>σ
the beginning of a syllable. The peculiarity now in question must
originally have been accidental, but took place at so early a period,
and was so extensively copied, that no transcriber ventured to replace
the ordinary form of the letter. At length it gave rise to the following
Masoretic note: <span id="xvi.i-p120.4"></span>מ סתומה באמצע תיבה, that
is, *Shut Mem in the middle of the word*. The Jewish Rabbins have
expended on it many conjectures and much useless learning. In their
writings they excite no surprise, but it is impossible not to regret
that they should have had even a momentary influence on the calm and
sober judgment of Calvin, who so heartily despised idle sophistry and
frivolous remarks. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc13015.htm#fr_144) <span
id="xvi.i-p132.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p133"></span> *It hath lighted*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc13015.htm#fr_145) <span
id="xvi.i-p140.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p141"></span> *And join his enemies together*. Margin,
Heb. *mingle*. — Eng. Ver. — Calvin, in his version placed at the
beginning of this Chapter, renders the clause, *and will join his
enemies together*; but when he comes to explain it, he translates the
Hebrew word literally, *he will mingle*. In both renderings the exact
coincidence with our ordinary version deserves notice. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc13015.htm#fr_146) <span
id="xvi.i-p143.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p144"></span> *The Syrians before*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc13015.htm#fr_147) <span
id="xvi.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p147"></span> *With open mouth*. Margin, Heb., *with
whole mouth*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc13015.htm#fr_148) <span
id="xvi.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p148"></span> <span id="xvi.i-p148.1"></span>בכל פה,
(*bechol peh*,) <span id="xvi.i-p148.2"></span>ὁλῷ τῷ στόματι, <span
id="xvi.i-p148.3"></span>*toto ore*, *plenis faucibus*; a metaphor from
beasts of prey eagerly devouring their food. — *Rosenmuller*

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc13015.htm#fr_149) <span
id="xvi.i-p152.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p153"></span> *For the people turneth not*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc13015.htm#fr_150) <span
id="xvi.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p160"></span> *Branch and rush*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc13015.htm#fr_151) <span
id="xvi.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p166"></span> *For the leaders of this people* (margin,
*they that call them* *blessed*) *cause them to err*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc13015.htm#fr_152) <span
id="xvi.i-p166.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p167"></span> See the author’s explanation of this
phrase at page 140. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc13015.htm#fr_153) <span
id="xvi.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p173"></span> *And every mouth speaketh folly* (margin,
*or, villany*). — Eng. Ver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc13016)
