[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc13020)  [Next](cc13022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxii"></span>

<span id="xxii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 15.

<span id="xxii.i"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 15:1-9

<span id="xxii.i-p2"></span>**1.** The burden of Moab. Because in the
night Ar of Moab is laid waste, *and* brought to silence; because in the
night Kir of Moab is laid waste, *and* brought to silence:

<span id="xxii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Onus Moab. Quoniam in nocte vastata
est Ar-Moab, in silentium redacta est; certe in nocte vastata est
Kir-Moab, in silentium redacta.

<span id="xxii.i-p4"></span>**2.** He is gone up to Bajith, and to
Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over
Medeba: on all their heads *shall be* baldness, *and* every beard cut
off.

<span id="xxii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ascendet in domum, et Dibon ad
excelsa, ad fletum super Nebo, et super Medba Moab, ululabit. Super omne
caput ejus calvitium, et omnis barba detonsa.

<span id="xxii.i-p6"></span>**3.** In their streets they shall gird
themselves with sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their
streets, every one shall howl, weeping abundantly.

<span id="xxii.i-p7"></span>**3.** In compitis ejus accincti erunt
sacco; super tecta ejus et in vicis ejus omnis ululabit, descendet ad
fletum.

<span id="xxii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh;
their voice shall be heard *even* unto Jahaz: therefore the armed
soldiers of Moab shall cry out; his life shall be grievous unto him.

<span id="xxii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Vociferabitur Hesbon et Eleale; usque
ad Iahaz audietur vox eorum; propterea expediti Moab ululabunt; anima
cujusque ululabit sibi.

<span id="xxii.i-p10"></span>**5.** My heart shall cry out for Moab; his
fugitives *shall flee* unto Zoar, an heifer of three years old: for by
the mounting up of Luhith with weeping shall they go it up; for in the
way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction.

<span id="xxii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Cor meum propter Moab vociferabitur;
fugitivi ejus ad Zoar, vitulam triennem per ascensum Luhith cum fletu
ascendent: per viam Horonaim clamorem contritionis excitabunt.

<span id="xxii.i-p12"></span>**6.** For the waters of Nimrim shall be
desolate: for the hay is withered away, the grass faileth, there is no
green thing.

<span id="xxii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Aquae Nimrim exinanitae sunt; aruit
gramen, defecit herba, olus non superfuit.

<span id="xxii.i-p14"></span>**7.** Therefore the abundance they have
gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the
brook of the willows.

<span id="xxii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Itaque quod residuum quisque fecit,
et opes suas deferent ad torrentem salicum, (*vel*, Arabes.)

<span id="xxii.i-p16"></span>**8.** For the cry is gone round about the
borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling
thereof unto Beer-elim.

<span id="xxii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Circuivit clamor terminos Moab,
usque in Eglaim ulutatus ejus, et usque in Beer-Elim ululatus ejus.

<span id="xxii.i-p18"></span>**9.** For the waters of Dimon shall be
full of blood: for I will bring more upon Dimon, lions upon him that
escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land.

<span id="xxii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Quia aquae Dimon implebuntur
sanguine; quoniam ponam super Dimon additiones iis qui evaserint de Moab
leones, et reliquiis terrae.

<span id="xxii.i-p20"></span> 

<span id="xxii.i-p21"></span><span id="xxii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p22"></span>**1.** *The burden of Moab.* Here the
Prophet prophesies against the *Moabites*, who were neighbors to the
Jews and related to them by blood; for we know that the *Moabites* were
descended from Lot, who was Abraham’s nephew. (<span
id="xxii.i-p22.1"></span>[Gen. 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031),
[Gen. 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#037)<span
id="xxii.i-p22.1"></span>.) Those nations being so closely related,
humanity at least demanded that they should maintain some friendly
intercourse with each other. But no relationship prevented the
*Moabites* from cherishing hostility towards the Jews, or even from
harassing them whenever it was in their power; which is an evidence of a
savage and barbarous disposition. To them also, on account of their
cruelty towards the people of God, to whom they ought to have conducted
themselves with brotherly love, the Prophet therefore threatens
destruction.

<span id="xxii.i-p23"></span>We ought to remember the design of these
predictions. It cannot be believed that they were of any advantage to
the *Moabites*, even though they had heard from the mouth of the Prophet
himself the words which we read; but he neither addressed them with his
voice, nor sent to them a written communication. It was therefore to
believers, rather than to them, that the Prophet looked, and for two
reasons. The first reason was, that when they saw so many changes taking
place, cities overturned, kingdoms destroyed and succeeding one another,
they might not think that this world is governed by the blind violence
of fortune, but might acknowledge the providence of God. If nothing had
been foretold, the minds of men, having a strong tendency to
foolishness, and being strangely blind to the works of God, might have
been disposed to attribute all this to chance; but when they had been
forewarned by the Prophets, they beheld the judgments of God as from a
lofty watch-tower. To us also in the present day Isaiah has, as it were,
pointed out with the finger what was then hidden. In his predictions we
behold God sitting on his judgment-seat, and regulating everything
according to his pleasure; and although the wicked in various ways
vented their mad rage, still the Lord made use of their agency to
execute his judgments. The second design which the prophets had in view
was, that while the whole world was shaken, the Jews might know that God
took care of their safety, and that he testified the warmth of his
affection for the Church, by taking vengeance on her enemies by whom she
had been barbarously treated.

<span id="xxii.i-p24"></span>*Ar-Moab.* The Hebrew word <span
id="xxii.i-p24.1"></span>ער (*Ar*) means *a city*; as <span
id="xxii.i-p24.2"></span>קיר (*kir*) means *a wall*; but as <span
id="xxii.i-p24.3"></span>ער מואב (*Ar-Moab*) was one of the chief cities
of the *Moabites*, it is supposed to be here a proper name. We might
indeed explain both words as appellatives, to convey a threatening of
the overthrow of the fortified towns of which the *Moabites* are proud;
but I rather adopt the ordinary interpretation. Here therefore Isaiah
has given a description, that we may behold in it the overthrow of the
Moabites, when their chief cities are destroyed.

<span id="xxii.i-p25"></span>*In the night.* By *the night* he means a
sudden and unexpected occurrence, which the Moabites did not dread.
*Night* being appropriated to rest, if anything happen at that time, it
is viewed as sudden and unlooked for, and therefore excites violent
alarm. Besides, he intended to rebuke the Moabites for being free from
anxiety, considering themselves to be fortified by defences on every
hand, and placed beyond the reach of all danger.

<span id="xxii.i-p26"></span>*Is brought to silence.* That is, *is
destroyed*, and hence also *Silence* sometimes means Death. Others
disregard the metaphor, and choose to render it, *She is cut off*; but I
leave that point undecided. What Isaiah declares as to the *Moabites*,
Scripture pronounces as to the reprobate, that destruction is at hand,
and, when they are looking for nothing of that kind, will fearfully
overwhelm them. (<span id="xxii.i-p26.1"></span>[Jer.
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019), [1 Thess.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="xxii.i-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxii.i-p27"></span><span id="xxii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p28"></span>**2.** *He shall go up into the house.*
 <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) So far as relates to the words,
some pass by the Hebrew noun <span id="xxii.i-p41.2"></span>בית,
(*baith*;) but as it signifies *a house* and *a temple*, it is probable
that it was the word commonly used for *a temple*, as in many other
passages *the* *house of God* means *the temple*  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) (<span id="xxii.i-p42.1"></span>[Exod.
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019), [Exod.
34:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#026), [Deut.
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018), [Josh.
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#023)<span id="xxii.i-p42.1"></span>.)
By representing the Moabites as bowing down before their idols, he at
the same time condemns their superstition in worshipping their idol
Chemosh, as may easily be inferred from <span
id="xxii.i-p42.2"></span>[1Ki
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007)<span id="xxii.i-p42.2"></span>,
<span id="xxii.i-p42.3"></span>[Jer.
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#013)<span id="xxii.i-p42.3"></span>.
“The Moabites,” says Isaiah, “shall betake themselves to their god when
matters are so desperate, but to no purpose; for they shall find in him
no assistance.”

<span id="xxii.i-p43"></span>*And to Dibon to the high places.* This
makes it still more evident that he is speaking of the Temple; and it is
beyond a doubt that the Moabites had a fortress remarkable and
celebrated above the rest, in which they had built *high places* in
honor of their idol. Being ignorant of the true God, to whom they might
betake themselves in adversity, we need not wonder that they betake
themselves to an idol, in conformity to their ordinary custom. By doing
this they increased their misery, and brought upon themselves an
accumulation of all distresses; for they inflamed the wrath of God still
more by those very means which they considered to be fitted for
appeasing his wrath. He therefore wished to state more plainly the
condition of the ungodly, who have no refuge in adversity; for as to
those remedies which they think will be adapted to their diseases,
nothing can be more destructive to them, since they excite more and more
the Lord’s indignation.

<span id="xxii.i-p44"></span>*Moab shall howl over Nebo and over
Medeba.* *Nebo* also was one of the cities of the *Moabites*. The
Prophet has already named two of them, *Ar* and *Kir*; he now adds a
third, *Nebo*; and lastly he mentions a fourth, *Medeba*; as if he had
said that this destruction would not only seize the extremities of that
country, but would reach its inmost recesses, so that not one corner
could be exempted.

<span id="xxii.i-p45"></span>*On every head.* Every nation has its
peculiar ceremonies to denote mourning or joy. The Italians and other
western nations allowed the hair and beard to grow when they were in
mourning; and hence arose the phrase, *to lengthen the beard*. On the
other hand, the eastern nations shaved the head and beard, which they
reckoned to be ornamental; and when they reversed their ordinary custom,
that was a token of mourning.  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237)
Nothing else therefore is meant than that the condition of the whole
kingdom will be so mournful, that the indications of mirth will be laid
aside, and all will wear the tokens of grief and lamentation.

<span id="xxii.i-p47"></span><span id="xxii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p48"></span>**3.** *In his streets.*  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) He proceeds with the same subject,
describing more fully the tokens of mourning, in which the eastern
nations abound more than others; for, having quicker understandings and
keener feelings, they express their emotions by outward signs more than
others do, who, being slower in apprehension, are likewise slower in
movement and gesture. It was no doubt faulty in them that they indulged
in so many ceremonies and gesticulations; but the Prophet spoke of them
as what was known and common, only for the purpose of describing the
grief which would follow the desolation of that country.

<span id="xxii.i-p50"></span>*Every one shall howl and descend to
weeping.*  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) It was with good
reason that he added this description; for we are never moved by
predictions, unless the Lord place them, as it were, before our eyes.
Lest the Jews should think that these matters might be lightly passed
by, when he described that destruction, he determined to mention also
*mourning, weeping, and howling*, that they might see almost with their
own eyes those events which appear to be incredible, for the Moabites
were at that time in a state of profound peace, and believers had the
more need of being confirmed, that they might not call this prophecy in
question. By the same means he points out the despair to which
unbelievers are liable in adversity, for the support on which they rely
is insecure.

<span id="xxii.i-p52"></span><span id="xxii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p53"></span>**4.** *And Heshbon shall cry, and
Elealeh.* Here he names other cities; for his design is to bind up, as
it were, in a bundle all the cities of that country, that they may be
involved in the general destruction; as if he had said, that none at all
shall be exempted.

<span id="xxii.i-p54"></span>*Therefore the light-armed soldiers of Moab
shall howl*. Though <span id="xxii.i-p54.1"></span>על כן (*gnal ken*)
literally signifies *therefore*, yet some think that a reason is not
here assigned; but that is of little importance. The Prophet shows that
there will be none that does not *howl*; for he declares that the bold
and courageous shall mourn. Next he adds, *the soul of every one shall
howl to him.*  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) Every one shall
be so engrossed with his own grief, that he will not think of his
neighbors.

<span id="xxii.i-p56"></span><span id="xxii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p57"></span>**5.** *My heart shall cry out for Moab.*
At length he assumes the character of a mourner. But it may be thought
to be strange and inconsistent in him to bewail the calamity of the
Moabites; for he ought rather to have lamented the destruction of the
Church, and to have rejoiced at the ruin of her enemies. It is customary
with the prophets, however, to assume in this manner the character of
those whose calamities they foretell, and thus to exhibit their
condition, as it were, on a stage; by which means they produce a
stronger impression than if they delivered their instruction in a direct
form. Yet there can be no doubt that the prophets shuddered at the
judgments of God, even against the wicked; though the meaning which I
have stated is simpler and more appropriate, and may easily be inferred
from frequent usage.

<span id="xxii.i-p58"></span>*His fugitives to Zoar,*  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) *a heifer of three years old.* He
calls them *fugitives* who shall escape from it; for he means that those
who shall escape from Moab will come even *to Zoar*  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) Now, he compares *Zoar* to *a heifer
of three years old*, which is in full vigor, and has not felt the pangs
of birth, or toil, or the yoke, but revels in the buoyancy of mirth and
wantonness. When men are hard pressed by an invading army, they flee to
cities which have not been attacked, and which appear to be the farthest
removed from danger. Such was *Zoar*, for it had never been attacked by
enemies. Yet, if it be thought better to view it as applying to the
whole country, I have no objection; for Jeremiah appears to speak in
general terms, though he borrows many statements from Isaiah. (<span
id="xxii.i-p60.1"></span>[Jer
48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034)<span id="xxii.i-p60.1"></span>.)
But perhaps in that passage also he names both *Zoar* and *Horonaim*, or
rather the whole of the country between them.

<span id="xxii.i-p61"></span>If you extend it to the whole nation, the
meaning will be, “The Moabites have enjoyed the highest luxury, and
every kind of abundance, and hitherto have suffered no distress. Hence
has arisen their stubbornness, and, in order to subdue them, they must
be banished and driven even to *Zoar*.” Now *Zoar* was a town very far
removed from the Moabites; and, therefore, he means that they cannot
provide for their safety but by *fleeing* to a distance. Here all with
whom the Lord deals tenderly are taught not to exalt themselves, or to
provoke God by their wantonness, but to be modest even amidst the
highest prosperity, and likewise to be prepared for every change, when
the Lord shall be pleased to throw them down from their prosperity.

<span id="xxii.i-p62"></span>*By the going up of Luhith.* He describes
other parts of the country of Moab, and delineates the flight and
mourning of that nature which should spread throughout the whole land.

<span id="xxii.i-p63"></span>*By the way of Horonaim they shall raise
the cry of sorrow.* The words which we have translated, *they shall
raise up a cry*, some render, *they shall bruise* or *break themselves
by crying*, and think there is a transposition of the letters, and that
<span id="xxii.i-p63.1"></span>ע (*ain*) is doubled; and thus the root
of the verb would be <span id="xxii.i-p63.2"></span>רעה, (*ragnah*.) But
as it made little difference in the meaning of the passage, I have
adhered to the commonly received opinion, that <span
id="xxii.i-p63.3"></span>יעערו (*yegnogneru*) is derived from the verb
<span id="xxii.i-p63.4"></span>עור, (*gnur*.) If it be thought better to
make the verb signify *break*, the meaning will be, “There shall be a
shaking, and, as it were, a *breaking* of the members of the body, when
arm is dashed against arm.”

<span id="xxii.i-p64"></span><span id="xxii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p65"></span>**6.** *The waters of Nimrim.* By an
exaggerated form of expression he gives a more enlarged view of this
desolation. He says that *the* *grass is withered*, which takes place
when God leaves any soil destitute of all nourishment. *The waters* will
be taken away, which probably were highly necessary for that dry and
parched country; for soils of that kind produce nothing without
irrigation. Though the style is exaggerated, yet nothing is stated but
what is strictly true; for the Prophet did not go beyond proper bounds,
but found it necessary to use bold expressions to suit the ignorance of
the people, in order to inform them that a land which is deprived of the
blessing of God will be like a desert without any beauty.

<span id="xxii.i-p66"></span><span id="xxii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p67"></span>**7.** *Therefore what every one hath
left.*  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) This corresponds to the
ordinary expression, (<span id="xxii.i-p68.1"></span>*Ce qu’il aura
espargne*,) *Whatever he shall* *have spared*. He means the riches that
are laid up, and describes what usually happens in countries which are
invaded by an enemy. All the inhabitants are wont to convey their riches
elsewhere, and to lay them up in some safe place, that they may
afterwards bring them back when peace has been restored.

<span id="xxii.i-p69"></span>*To the brook of the willows.* He means
that they will have no storehouse, no fortress in which they can lay
them up with safety; so that they will be compelled to hide them among
*the willows*. This certainly is the lowest wretchedness, when the enemy
is attacking us, and we can find no storehouse for laying up those
things which we have collected with great industry. These *willows* were
probably situated in some remote and sequestered place. Others explain
it as referring to enemies, that they will bring the fruits of their
robbery *to the* *brook*, to divide among themselves the general
plunder.

<span id="xxii.i-p70"></span><span id="xxii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p71"></span>**8.** *The cry is gone round about the
borders of Moab.*  <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) <span
id="xxii.i-p72.1"></span>כי, (*ki*,) *for*, is added for the sake of
ornament. He means that every part of that country all around shall be
full of *crying* and *howling*; because that destruction reaches from
one extremity to another. Besides the *crying* he twice mentions the
*howling*, to denote the excess of grief, as men who are in despair
surrender themselves entirely to lamentation.

<span id="xxii.i-p73"></span><span id="xxii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p74"></span>**9.** *For the waters of Dimon shall be
filled with blood.*  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) Here he
describes not only *grief* and *howling*, flight or trembling, or the
covetousness of enemies in plundering their wealth, but the slaughter of
men. How great must this have been, when large and magnificent rivers,
such as *Dimon* was, are *filled with blood*!

<span id="xxii.i-p76"></span>*For I will lay upon Dimon additions.*
 <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) By *additions* he means that
the Lord, in whose name he speaks, will multiply the murders; so that
the dead bodies shall be heaped up, and there shall be no end to cruelty
and slaying. Now, though the Assyrians were cruel in this slaughter, yet
the Lord was not cruel; for he justly punished the barbarity of the
Moabites which they basely exercised towards the Jews, on whom they
ought to have had compassion. It was right that they should suffer the
same punishment which they had inflicted on others.

<span id="xxii.i-p78"></span>*To those who have escaped of Moab lions.*
These also are the *additions* of which he spake, or, at least, a part
of them. This may be regarded as the copestone of that calamity; so that
if any detachments of the enemy attempted to escape, and to rescue
themselves from the slaughter, they had to encounter *lions*  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) and wild beasts, by which they were
devoured. “They will, indeed,” says he, “rescue themselves from the
slaughter, but they will not on that account be safe, nor will they
escape the hand of God.” And this is the true meaning of the Prophet, if
we carefully examine the scope of the whole passage; for he intended to
deepen the picture of that distressing calamity by adding, that even the
small remnant which shall be rescued from the slaughter will fall into
the jaws of *lions*. The hand of the Lord pursues the wicked in such a
manner that they cannot in any way escape; for if they avoid one danger,
they immediately meet with another. Let us remember that these things
are spoken by the Prophet for the consolation of the godly, that they
may fortify their minds by some promise against the cruelty of their
enemies, who shall at length be destroyed, and shall nowhere find a
refuge either in their gods, or in fortresses, or in lurking-places, or
in flight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc13021.htm#fr_235) <span
id="xxii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p29"></span> *He is gone up to Bajith*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxii.i-p30"></span> FT228 *He is gone up to Moab into the
house*. — *Jarchi*. Breithaupt remarks that the Hebrew word <span
id="xxii.i-p30.1"></span>הבית (*habbaith*) is sometimes viewed as a
proper name, and that in the version of Junius and Tremellius it is
rendered *Bajith*. — *Ed*

<span id="xxii.i-p31"></span> FT229 “Shaving the head and face are the
eastern tokens of mourning for the dead. (<span
id="xxii.i-p31.1"></span>[Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024)<span id="xxii.i-p31.1"></span>;
<span id="xxii.i-p31.2"></span>[Jer
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#005)<span id="xxii.i-p31.2"></span>;
<span id="xxii.i-p31.3"></span>[Mic
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016)<span id="xxii.i-p31.3"></span>.)”
— *Rosenmuller*

<span id="xxii.i-p32"></span> FT230 *In their streets*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxii.i-p33"></span> FT231 *Weeping abundantly*. (Heb.
*descending into weeping*, or, *coming down with weeping*.) — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxii.i-p34"></span> FT232 *His life shall be grievous unto
him*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxii.i-p35"></span> FT233 *His fugitives* shall flee *unto
Zoar, an heifer of three* *years old*, (or, *to the borders thereof,
even as an* *heifer*.) — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxii.i-p36"></span> FT234 “Jonathan translates the word <span
id="xxii.i-p36.1"></span>בריחה, (*berechahh*,) as if it had been written
<span id="xxii.i-p36.2"></span>בורחים (*borachim*,) that is, *those who*
*flee*; so that the meaning will be, ‘Some of them shall *flee*, in
order to preserve themselves, *even to Zoar*, as Lot, their father, once
did, (<span id="xxii.i-p36.3"></span>[Ge
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#023)<span id="xxii.i-p36.3"></span>,)
who fled to *Zoar*.’” — *Jarchi*

<span id="xxii.i-p37"></span> FT235 *Therefore the abundance they have
gotten*. — Eng. Ver. *Therefore the substance which they have saved*. —
*Stock* *The riches which they have gained*. — *Lowth*

<span id="xxii.i-p38"></span> FT236 For *the cry is gone round about the
borders of Moab*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxii.i-p39"></span> FT237 “Alluding to the name *Dimon*, which
signifies *Bloodtown*.” — *Rosenmuller*

<span id="xxii.i-p40"></span> FT238 *For I will bring more* (Heb.
*additions*) *upon* *Dimon*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxii.i-p41"></span> FT239 “This I take to be *the plague of
lions*, recorded in <span id="xxii.i-p41.1"></span>[2Ki
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#025)<span id="xxii.i-p41.1"></span>,
which afflicted the new inhabitants of the land of Israel, and the
remnant of the Moabites, suffered to continue there by Shalmanezer.
Other interpretations are proposed; but it is best, in obscure local
prophecies, to adhere to the little light afforded by the records of the
times.” — *Stock*

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc13021.htm#fr_236) <span
id="xxii.i-p41.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p42"></span>

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc13021.htm#fr_237) <span
id="xxii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p46"></span>

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc13021.htm#fr_238) <span
id="xxii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p49"></span>

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc13021.htm#fr_239) <span
id="xxii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p51"></span>

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc13021.htm#fr_240) <span
id="xxii.i-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p55"></span>

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc13021.htm#fr_241) <span
id="xxii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p59"></span>

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc13021.htm#fr_242) <span
id="xxii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p60"></span>

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc13021.htm#fr_243) <span
id="xxii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p68"></span>

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc13021.htm#fr_244) <span
id="xxii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p72"></span>

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc13021.htm#fr_245) <span
id="xxii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p75"></span>

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc13021.htm#fr_246) <span
id="xxii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p77"></span>

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc13021.htm#fr_247) <span
id="xxii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p79"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](cc13022)
