[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc13018)  [Next](cc13020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 13:1-22

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the
son of Amoz did see.

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1.** Onus Babylonis, quod vidit Isaias,
filius Amoz.

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2.** Lift ye up a banner upon the high
mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go
into the gates of the nobles.

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**2.** Super montem excelsum levate signum;
attollite vocem ad eos; agitate manum, ut ingrediantur portas
munificorum.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**3.** I have commanded my sanctified ones, I
have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, *even* them that rejoice
in my highness.

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ego praecepi sanctificatis meis;
adeoque vocavi fortes meos ad iram meam, laetantes gloria mea.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>**4.** The noise of a multitude in the
mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms
of nations gathered together: the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of
the battle.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**4.** Vox multitudinis in montibus instar
populi multi. Vox sonitus regnorum, gentium congregatarum; Iehova
exercituum recenset exercitum belli.

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**5.** They come from a far country, from the
end of heaven, *even* the Lord and the weapons of his indignation, to
destroy the whole land.

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**5.** Venientes e terra longinqua, ab
extremo coelorum, Iehova et vasa furoris ejus, ad vastandam universam
terram.

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**6.** Howl ye; for the day of the Lord *is*
at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty.

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**6.** Ululate; quoniam propinquus est dies
Iehovae; quasi vastitas a robusto (*vel, a vastatore robusto*) veniet.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>**7.** Therefore shall all hands be faint,
and every man’s heart shall melt:

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span>**7.** Propterea omnes manus dissolventur, et
omne cor hominis liquefiet.

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span>**8.** And they shall be afraid: pangs and
sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that
travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces *shall be
as* flames.

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et terrebuntur; angustiae et dolores
apprehendent; instar parturientis dolebunt; quisque ad proximum suum
obstupescet; facies flammarum, facies eorum.

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>**9.** Behold, the day of the Lord cometh,
cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he
shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it.

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>**9.** Ecce dies Iehovae veniet saevus; et
indignatio, et aestus irae, ut redigat terram in solitudinem, et
sceleratos ejus deleat ex ea.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span>**10.** For the stars of heaven, and the
constellations thereof, shall not give their light: the sun shall be
darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to
shine.

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>**10.** Itaque stellae coelorum et sidera non
expandent lumen suum; obtenebratus erit Sol in egressu suo, et Luna non
emittet fulgorem suum.

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span>**11.** And I will punish the world for
*their* evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the
arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the
terrible.

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et visitabo super orbem malitiam, et
super impios iniquitatem eorum; et cessare faciam arrogantiam
superborum, et altitudinem tyrannorum dejiciam.

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span>**12.** I will make a man more precious than
fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir.

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span>**12.** Pretiosiorem reddam mortalem auro
puro, et hominem massa auri ex Ophir.

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span>**13.** Therefore I will shake the heavens,
and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of
hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.

<span id="xx.i-p27"></span>**13.** Propterea concutiam coelos, et
movebitur terra loco suo, in indignatione Iehovae exercituum, et in die
aestus irae ejus.

<span id="xx.i-p28"></span>**14.** And it shall be as the chased roe,
and as a sheep that no man taketh up: they shall every man turn to his
own people, and flee every one into his own land.

<span id="xx.i-p29"></span>**14.** Eritque quasi damula impulsa, et ovis
quam nemo colligit; quisque ad populum suum respiciet, et quisque ad
terram suam confugiet.

<span id="xx.i-p30"></span>**15.** Every one that is found shall be
thrust through; and every one that is joined *unto them* shall fall by
the sword.

<span id="xx.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quisque deprehensus fuerit
confodietur; et omnis aggregatus cadet in gladio.

<span id="xx.i-p32"></span>**16.** Their children also shall be dashed
to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their
wives ravished.

<span id="xx.i-p33"></span>**16.** Parvuli eorum allidentur coram ipsis,
diripientur domus ipsorum, et uxores eorum violabuntur.

<span id="xx.i-p34"></span>**17.** Behold, I will stir up the Medes
against them, which shall not regard silver; and *as for* gold, they
shall not delight in it.

<span id="xx.i-p35"></span>**17.** Ecce, ego contra vos suscito Medos,
qui de argento non cogitabunt, nec aurum ipsum appetent.

<span id="xx.i-p36"></span>**18.** *Their* bows also shall dash the
young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the
womb; their eye shall not spare children.

<span id="xx.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et arcubus pueros allident, fructus
ventris non miserebuntur, nec parcet filiis oculus eorum.

<span id="xx.i-p38"></span>**19.** And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms,
the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency, shall be as when God overthrew
Sodom and Gomorrah.

<span id="xx.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et erit Babel, decor regnorum et
ornamentum splendoris Chaldaeorum, instar subversionis Dei in Sodoma et
Gomorrha.

<span id="xx.i-p40"></span>**20.** It shall never be inhabited, neither
shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the
Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold
there:

<span id="xx.i-p41"></span>**20.** Nunquam amplius sedebit, neque
habitabit in generationem et generationem; neque figet illic
tabernaculum Arabs, neque pastores illic accubare facient gregem.

<span id="xx.i-p42"></span>**21.** But wild beasts of the desert shall
lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls
shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.

<span id="xx.i-p43"></span>**21.** Sed ibi cubabunt Ziim, et domus eorum
implebunt Ohim; illic habitabunt filiae Struthionis, et illic Satyri
saltabunt.

<span id="xx.i-p44"></span>**22.** And the wild beasts of the islands
shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in *their* pleasant
palaces; and her time *is* near to come, and her days shall not be
prolonged.

<span id="xx.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et clamabunt Iim in magnificis
aedibus eorum, et dracones in palatiis voluptuosis; ac tempus quidem
ejus prope est, neque protrahentur dies ejus.

<span id="xx.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p47"></span><span id="xx.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p48"></span><span id="xx.i-p48.1"></span>1.<span
id="xx.i-p48.2"></span> The burden of Babylon <span
id="xx.i-p48.3"></span> From this chapter down to the twenty-fourth, the
Prophet foretells what dreadful and shocking calamities awaited the
Gentiles and those countries which were best known to the Jews, either
on account of their being contiguous to them, or on account of the
transactions of commerce and alliances; and he does so not without
weighty reasons. When various changes are taking place, some think that
God sports with the affairs of men, and others, that everything is
directed by the blind violence of fortune, as profane history
sufficiently testifies; very few are aware that these things are
appointed and regulated by the purpose of God. There is nothing of which
it is more difficult to convince men than that the providence of God
governs this world. Many indeed acknowledge it in words, but very few
have it actually engraven on their heart. We tremble and shudder at the
very smallest change, and we inquire into the causes, as if it depended
on the decision of men. What then shall be done, when the whole world is
thrown into commotion, and the face of affairs is so completely changed
in various places, that it appears as if everything were going to ruin?

<span id="xx.i-p49"></span>It was therefore highly useful that Isaiah
and other prophets should discourse about calamities of this nature,
that all might understand that those calamities did not take place but
by the secret and wonderful purpose of God. If they had uttered no
prediction on those subjects, such a disordered state of affairs might
have shaken and disturbed the minds of the godly; but when they knew
long beforehand that this would happen, they had in the event itself a
mirror of the providence of God. When *Babylon* was taken, which they
had previously learned from the mouth of the Prophet, their own
experience taught them that the prediction had not been made in vain, or
without solid grounds.

<span id="xx.i-p50"></span>But there was also another reason why the
Lord commanded that the destruction of *Babylon* and other nations
should be foretold. These predictions were of no advantage to *Babylon*
or the other nations, and these writings did not reach them; but by this
consolation he intended to alleviate the grief of the godly, that they
might not be discouraged, as if their condition were worse than that of
the Gentiles; which they would have had good reason to conclude, if they
had seen them unpunished escape the hand of God. If the monarchy of
Babylon had remained unshaken, the Jews would not only have thought that
it was in vain for them to worship God, and that his covenant which he
had made with Abraham had not been fulfilled, since it fared better with
strangers and wicked men than with the elect people; but a worse
suspicion might have crept into their minds, that God showed favor to
accursed robbers, who gave themselves up to deeds of dishonesty and
violence, and despised all law both human and divine. Indeed, they might
soon have come to think that God did not care for his people, or could
not assist them, or that everything was directed by the blind violence
of fortune. Accordingly, that they might not faint or be thrown into
despair, the Prophet meets them with the consoling influence of this
prediction, showing that the *Babylonians* also will be punished.

<span id="xx.i-p51"></span>Besides, the comparison taught them how
severe was the punishment that awaited them, which they had knowingly
and willingly brought upon themselves. For if God pronounces such
dreadful threatenings against the unbelieving and irreligious Gentiles,
who wandered in darkness, how much greater will be his rigour and
severity against a rebellious people who have intentionally sinned
against him!

<span id="xx.i-p52"></span>The servant who knoweth his master’s will,
and doeth it not, is justly beaten with many stripes. (<span
id="xx.i-p52.1"></span>[Lu 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span
id="xx.i-p52.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p53"></span>Thus when God threatened such dreadful
punishment against the blind Gentiles, the Jews, who had been instructed
in the law, might behold as in a mirror what they had deserved.

<span id="xx.i-p54"></span>But the chief design which Isaiah had in view
in these predictions was, to point out to the Jews how dear and valuable
their salvation was in the sight of God, when they saw that he undertook
their cause and revenged the injuries which had been done to them. He
spoke first of the desolation and ruin that would befall the kingdom of
Judah and of Israel, because *judgment must begin* at the house of God.
(<span id="xx.i-p54.1"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="xx.i-p54.1"></span>.)
God takes a peculiar care of his own people, and gives his chief
attention to them. Whenever therefore we read these predictions, let us
learn to apply them to our use. The Lord does not indeed, at the present
day, foretell the precise nature of those events which shall befall
kingdoms and nations; but yet the government of the world, which he
undertook, is not abandoned by him. Whenever therefore we behold the
destruction of cities, the calamities of nations, and the overturning of
kingdoms, let us call those predictions to remembrance, that we may be
humbled under God’s chastisements, may learn to gather wisdom from the
affliction of others, and may pray for an alleviation of our own grief.

<span id="xx.i-p55"></span>*The burden.* As to the word *burden*, which
frequently occurs, I shall state briefly in what sense it ought to be
understood. It was generally employed by the prophets of God, whenever
they threatened any afflictive event, in order to inform the people that
no afflictive event happened which the Lord himself did not lay as a
burden on men’s shoulders. The wickedness and obstinacy of the people
having constrained the prophets to preach incessantly about God’s
chastisements, the consequence was, that as a matter of ordinary jesting
they called all the prophecies by the name of *a burden*; as is evident
from <span id="xx.i-p55.1"></span>[Jer
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#036)<span id="xx.i-p55.1"></span>,
where the Lord kindles into fierce indignation, because they not only
spoke of his word contemptuously, but also held it up to dislike. This
word makes known to the godly, that the Lord appoints all calamities and
afflictions, that every one may suffer the punishment of his own sin.

<span id="xx.i-p56"></span>*Which Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw.* He
expressly states that what he is about to utter was revealed to him by a
heavenly *vision*, that the weight which is thus given to it may render
it victorious over all the judgments pronounced by the flesh. It was
difficult to believe that a monarchy so flourishing, and so prodigiously
rich, could be overturned in any way. Their eyes being dazzled by
beholding such vast power, the Prophet draws away their attention from
it to believe the heavenly revelation, that they may expect by faith the
judgment of God which they could not comprehend by the unaided exercise
of their own minds.

<span id="xx.i-p57"></span><span id="xx.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p58"></span>**2.** *Lift ye up a banner upon the high
mountain.* The word *mountain* contains a metaphor; for the discourse
relates to *Babylon*, which, we know, was situated on a plain; but with
a view to its extensive dominion, he has assigned to it an elevated
situation, like a fortress set on high above all nations. But perhaps it
will be thought better to take the word *mountain* as used indefinitely;
as if he had said, “When a signal is given there will be a vast
assemblage from very distant countries, because all men will be
attracted towards it by the wide and extensive influence of the sight;”
and, indeed, I consider this opinion to be more probable, but I chose to
mention at first the opinion which had been commonly received. Yet it
might be thought absurd that the Prophet here enjoins the creatures to
yield, as it were, obedience to him, if God had not fortified the
Prophet by his instructions and authority. A private man here commands
the Medes and Persians, assembles armies, orders *a banner to be lifted
up*, and sounds the trumpet for battle.

<span id="xx.i-p59"></span>This should therefore lead us to consider the
majesty of God, in whose name he spoke, and likewise the power and
efficacy which is always joined with the word. Such modes of expression
are frequently found in the Prophets, that, by placing the events as it
were before our eyes, he may enable us to see that God threatens nothing
by his servants which he is not ready immediately to execute. Isaiah
might indeed have threatened in plain and direct terms, “The Persians
and Medes will come, and will burst through the gates of *Babylon*,
notwithstanding the prodigious strength of its fortifications.” But
those exclamations are far more energetic, when he not only assumes the
character of a herald and proclaims war, but, as if he exercised the
highest authority, orders the Medes and Persians to assemble like hired
soldiers. Not only does he show that they will be ready at the bidding
of God, because they are moved by his secret influence; but, having been
sent by God to announce the ruin of Babylon, he claims for his own voice
the accomplishment of what appeared to be beyond belief. It amounts to
this, “When God hath spoken about what shall happen, we ought to
entertain no doubt concerning it.” It deserves our notice also, that he
describes the Persians and Medes, without mentioning their names; for
that threatening is more emphatic, when he points them out, as it were,
with the finger, as when we say, “This and that man.” This contributes
to the certainty of the prophecy, when he points out such distant events
as if they were at hand.

<span id="xx.i-p60"></span>*Shake the hand, that they may enter within
the gates of the nobles.* When he says, *Shake the hand, and they shall
enter*, he means that the Persians and Medes shall no sooner begin to
advance at the command of God than their road shall be plain and easy in
spite of every obstruction. Though the Hebrews call Princes <span
id="xx.i-p60.1"></span>נדיבים, (*Nedibim*,) that is, *generous and
bountiful*, on which is also founded that saying of Christ, <span
id="xx.i-p60.2"></span>εὐεργέται καλοῦνται, *they are called
benefactors*, (<span id="xx.i-p60.3"></span>[Lu
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#025)<span id="xx.i-p60.3"></span>,)
yet I think that the Prophet draws our attention to the splendor of
power in which the Babylonians gloried. They were furnished above others
with forces and warlike armaments, so that it appeared to be incredible
that they could ever be vanquished. But the Prophet threatens that
nothing shall hinder God from opening up a way and entrance to the
enemies.

<span id="xx.i-p61"></span><span id="xx.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p62"></span>**3.** *I have commanded my sanctified ones.*
 <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) Here the Prophet introduces the
Lord as speaking and issuing his commands. He calls the Medes and
Persians *sanctified ones*, that is, those whom he has *prepared*. The
verb <span id="xx.i-p77.1"></span>קדש (*kadash*) is used in various
senses; for sometimes it refers to the spirit of regeneration, and this
belongs peculiarly to the elect of God. But sometimes it means to *wish*
or *prepare*, and that meaning is more appropriate to this passage. All
who are created by the Lord are likewise *appointed* by him for a fixed
purpose. He does not throw down men at random on the earth, to go
wherever they please, but guides all by his secret purpose, and
regulates and controls the violent passions of the reprobate, so as to
drive them in whatever manner he thinks fit, and to check and restrain
them according to his pleasure. He therefore calls them *sanctified
ones*, “set apart and prepared to execute his will,” though they had no
such intention. Hence also we are taught to ascribe to the secret
judgment of God all violent commotions, and this yields wonderful
consolation; for whatever attempts may be made by wicked men, yet they
will accomplish nothing but what the Lord has decreed.

<span id="xx.i-p78"></span>*I have also called my mighty ones.* The
phrase, *I have called*, conveys more than the phrase, *I have
commanded*, which he had used in the former clause. It means that they
will be roused to action, not only at the bidding of God, but by the
very sound of his voice; as if I were to *call* a person to me, and he
were immediately to follow. He threatens, therefore, that *Babylon*
shall be destroyed by the Medes and Persians, in the same manner as if
they obeyed the call of God; for though they were prompted to battle by
their own ambition, pride, and cruelty, yet God directed them, without
knowing it, to execute his judgment.

<span id="xx.i-p79"></span><span id="xx.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p80"></span>**4.** *The noise of a multitude in the
mountains.* He adds a still more lively representation, (<span
id="xx.i-p80.1"></span>ὑποτύπωσιν,) that is, a description by which he
places the event as it were before our eyes. The prophets are not
satisfied with speaking, without also giving a bold picture of the
events themselves. Words uttered plainly, and in the ordinary manner, do
not strike us so powerfully or move our hearts so much as those figures
which delineate a lively resemblance of the events. As if he had said,
“Now, indeed, you hear a man speaking, but know that this voice will be
so powerful that at the sound of it *nations* shall be roused, *peoples*
shall make a *noise*, and in vast crowds shall shout and roar to bring
destruction on the inhabitants of *Babylon*. This proclamation,
therefore, will be as efficacious, even after that I am dead, as if you
now saw what I foretell to you.”

<span id="xx.i-p81"></span>In this event, therefore, we see how great is
the efficacy of the word, which all the creatures both in heaven and in
earth obey. We ought to be more strongly confirmed in the belief of this
doctrine, by perceiving that every one of the events which had been
predicted many centuries before has taken place. For this reason he
declares that *the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle,* that
the various nations are moved by God’s direction, and that, although
nothing was farther from their intention than to inflict the punishment
which he had appointed, still they do nothing but according to his
command, as if some earthly general were to draw up his forces.

<span id="xx.i-p82"></span><span id="xx.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p83"></span>**5.** *Coming from a distant country.* He
repeats and confirms more fully what I stated a little before, that the
operations of war do not spring up at random from the earth; for though
everything disorderly is vomited out by the passions of men, yet God
rules on high; and therefore Isaiah justly ascribes sovereignty to God.
Next, he adds, that armed men are nothing else than *the weapons of his
indignation*. He says that they will come *from a distant country*, to
overturn the monarchy of *Babylon*, because we are not afraid of dangers
unless when they are close at hand. *Babylon* was so strongly fortified,
and was surrounded by so many kingdoms and provinces which were subject
to it, that it seemed as if there were no way by which an enemy could
approach. In short, as if she had been situated in the clouds, she
dreaded no danger.

<span id="xx.i-p84"></span>*From the end of heaven.* There being no
trouble all around that threatened them, he gives warning that the
calamity will come from a distance. Though everything appears to be calm
and peaceful, and though we are not at variance with our neighbors, God
can bring enemies *from the end of heaven*. There is no reason,
therefore, why we should promise to ourselves a lasting and prosperous
condition, though we are not threatened with any immediate danger. If
this prediction had reached the inhabitants of *Babylon*, they would
undoubtedly have laughed at it as a fable. Even if we should suppose
that they paid some respect to the Prophet, yet, having so strong a
conviction of their safety, they would have despised those threatenings
as idle and groundless. An example may be easily found. When we preach
at the present day about the Turk, all think that it is a fable, because
they think that he is still at a great distance from us. But we see how
quickly he overtook those who were at a greater distance and more
powerful. So great is the insensibility of men that they cannot be
aroused, unless they are chastised and made to feel the blows. Let the
inhabitants of Babylon, therefore, be a warning to us, to dread, before
it is too late, the threatenings which the prophets utter, that the same
thing may not happen to us as happens to those wicked men, who, relying
on their prosperous condition, are so terrified when the hand of God
attacks and strikes them, that they can no longer stand, but sink down
bewildered.

<span id="xx.i-p85"></span>*To destroy the whole land.* When he puts
*the whole land* for *Babylon*, he looks to the extent of the kingdom;
that they may not think that the great number of provinces, by which
they were surrounded on all sides, could ward off the attacks of
enemies. But at the same time he intimates that it will be no slight
calamity affecting a single spot, but will be like a deluge overwhelming
a large portion of the world.

<span id="xx.i-p86"></span>*Jehovah and the vessels of his anger.*
 <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) The Persians and Medes are
called *vessels of anger* in a different sense from that in which Paul
gives that appellation to all the reprobate; for, by contrasting *the
vessels of wrath* with *the vessels of mercy*, (<span
id="xx.i-p87.1"></span>[Rom. 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)<span id="xx.i-p87.1"></span>,) he
shows that the undeserved goodness of God shines in the elect, but that
the reprobate are monuments of severe judgment. But Isaiah means that
the Medes and Persians may be regarded as darts in the hand of God, that
by means of them he may execute his vengeance.

<span id="xx.i-p88"></span><span id="xx.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p89"></span>**6.** *Howl ye.* He continues the same
argument, and bids the inhabitants of Babylon *howl*. Not that he
directs instruction to them, as if he hoped that it would be of any
advantage, but, in foretelling what shall be their condition, he
emphatically employs this form of direct address.

<span id="xx.i-p90"></span>*For the day of the Lord is at hand.* He
calls it *the day of the* *Lord*, according to the usual custom of
Scripture, because when the Lord delays his judgment, he appears to
cease from the discharge of his office, like judges when they do not
ascend the judgment-seat. This mode of expression deserves notice, for
we would gladly subject God to our disposal, that he might immediately
pass sentence against the wicked. But he has his own appointed time, and
knows the seasons when it is proper both to punish the bad and to assist
the good.

<span id="xx.i-p91"></span>*It shall come as destruction from the Strong
One.*  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) He threatens that the
severity of judgment will be such that the inhabitants of *Babylon* will
have good reason not only to *cry* but to *howl*; because God displays
his power to waste and destroy them. <span id="xx.i-p92.1"></span>שדד
(*shadad*) signifies to *lay waste* and *plunder*. From this verb is
derived <span id="xx.i-p92.2"></span>שדי, (*Shaddai*,) one of the names
of God, which some render *Almighty*. There is therefore an elegant
allusion to the derivation of the word; as if he had said, that the
inhabitants of Babylon shall learn by their own destruction how
appropriately God is called <span id="xx.i-p92.3"></span>שדי,
(*Shaddai*,) that is, *strong* and *powerful* to destroy.  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200)

<span id="xx.i-p94"></span><span id="xx.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p95"></span>**7.** *Therefore all hands shall be
weakened.* He shows that the power of the Lord to destroy the
inhabitants of Babylon will be so great, that they shall have no means
of withstanding his anger. Though they stood high in wealth and in
power, yet their *hearts* would be so *faint*, and their *hands* so
*weak*, that they would have neither disposition nor ability to resist.
And thus he indirectly ridicules the cruelty which boiled in the hearts
of the Babylonians; for it is in the power of God to soften *hearts*,
and to crush, loosen, or enfeeble *hands* or *arms*, so that suddenly
all their courage shall fall down, and all their strength shall vanish
away. When the heart quakes, what will be the use of fortifications, or
armies, or wealth, or bulwarks? What avails a well-stocked workshop
without a workman? We see this every day exemplified in those to whom in
other respects the Lord had communicated large resources. Hence we see
how vain is that confidence which we place in outward resources; for
they would be of no use to us, if the Lord should strike our hearts with
any alarm.

<span id="xx.i-p96"></span><span id="xx.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p97"></span>**8.** *Pangs and sorrows shall take hold of
them.* The word <span id="xx.i-p97.1"></span>צירים (*tzirim*) being
ambiguous, the Greek translators render it *ambassadors*. But the
comparison of *a woman that travaileth*, which is added immediately
afterwards, sufficiently proves that it denotes *pangs*; for here, as if
by a single word, he explains what he had previously said, that their
*hearts* shall be *melted* and their *hands* shall be *weakened*;
because, he says, they shall be struck with terror and dismay. Whence
comes this terror? From God. This kind of terror, for which there was no
apparent cause, the ancients called a *panic*;  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) for they gave the name *panes* to
apparitions and objects of this sort, by which men were terrified, even
when there was no outward object that ought to have excited the terror.
It was not without reason that they did so; but still they erred through
gross ignorance, because they did not understand that it proceeded from
God.

<span id="xx.i-p99"></span>*As a woman that travaileth.* So far as
relates to the inhabitants of Babylon, there was, indeed, just ground of
fear, when they saw that they were attacked by valiant and warlike
nations; but yet the Prophet threatens that, though they were able to
resist, still they would be like men who were half dead, because through
the secret operation of God they fainted and fell down. To the same
purpose is what he adds, *Every one shall be amazed at his neighbor;* as
when men are agitated and stare around them in every direction; and not
only so, but when no hope of safety is to be seen, they are like men who
have lost their senses, and abandon themselves to indolence.

<span id="xx.i-p100"></span>*Faces of flames their faces.*  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) This clause, in which he attributes to
them *faces of flames*, expresses still more strongly the violence of
the terror. Some think that it denotes *shame*, as if he had said in a
single word, *They shall blush*; but this is too feeble. Isaiah intended
to express something greater and more dreadful; for when we are in agony
the *face* glows, and the pressure of grief makes us burn. And, indeed,
it would be treating the matter too lightly, when the calamity was so
severe, to interpret these words as denoting *shame*; for he describes a
calamity so distressing, that, on account of its severity, *flames*
burst forth from the countenance, which usually happens when men are
agonized by intense grief.

<span id="xx.i-p102"></span>The comparison of *a* *travailing woman*
denotes not only the intensity of the grief, but likewise the suddenness
with which it seized them. As the calamity would be severe and violent,
so Isaiah threatens that it will be sudden, and not without good reason;
for the inhabitants of Babylon, protected by such strong defences, would
never have thought that it was possible for any annoyance to reach or
distress them.

<span id="xx.i-p103"></span><span id="xx.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p104"></span>**9.** *Behold the day of the Lord will come
cruel.* He repeats what he had slightly noticed a little before, that
though the inhabitants of Babylon are now at ease, and rely on their
wealth, *the day of the Lord* is at hand, to terrify those who are at
ease.

<span id="xx.i-p105"></span>But a question might here be raised, Why is
*the day of the Lord* called *cruel*, since nothing is more desirable
than to have God present with us; for his presence alone makes us truly
happy? I answer, we ought always to consider who they are that are
addressed by the Prophet; for it is customary with the prophets to give
various descriptions of God corresponding to the diversity of the
hearers. In like manner, David also declares that God is

<span id="xx.i-p106"></span>merciful to the merciful, and cruel and
severe to the ungodly. (<span id="xx.i-p106.1"></span>[Ps.
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026)<span id="xx.i-p106.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p107"></span>What could wicked men imagine to be in God
but the utmost severity? And therefore the slightest mention of God
fills them with terror.

<span id="xx.i-p108"></span>The godly, on the other hand, whenever the
name of God is mentioned, derive the greatest delight and joy from
hearing it; so that nothing can be more highly gratifying. Thus, when
the prophets address the godly, as soon as they have mentioned God, they
speak of joy and gladness, because the godly will feel that he is
gracious and merciful to them; but when they address the ungodly, they
hold out the judgment of God, and speak of grief and mourning. As the
godly are cheered by the presence of God, because by faith they behold
his goodness; so the ungodly are terrified, because the testimony of
their conscience reproves and convinces them that he comes as a severe
Judge. Since even hypocrites pretend that they eagerly long for *the day
of the Lord,* and boast that he will assist them, the prophets tear off
from them this disguise, and show that to them *the day of the Lord*
will be dreadful and alarming. (<span id="xx.i-p108.1"></span>[Amos
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#020)<span id="xx.i-p108.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p109"></span>Isaiah applies the usual description to this
prophecy, in order to show more fully how much we ought to dread the
wrath of God; for, being by nature slow, or rather stupid, we would not
be powerfully affected if the Lord spoke in plain terms about his
judgments. Since, therefore, an unadorned style would be too cold, he
contrived new modes of expression, that by means of them he might shake
off our sluggishness. When he says*, and he shall destroy the sinners
thereof out of it,* he means by *sinners* not all men without
distinction, but the ungodly and wicked men who inhabited Babylon.

<span id="xx.i-p110"></span><span id="xx.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p111"></span>**10.** *For the stars of heaven.* In order
to strike our minds with a stronger and more distressing fear of the
judgment of God, the prophets are accustomed to add to their
threatenings extravagant modes of speaking, which place the anger of
God, as it were, before their eyes, and affect all our senses, as if all
the elements were now arising to execute his vengeance. And yet the
expressions, though unusually strong, do not go beyond the dreadful
nature of what took place; for it is impossible to exhibit an image of
the judgment of God so alarming that the reality shall not be felt to be
more revolting and terrible.

<span id="xx.i-p112"></span>*The sun*, and *the moon*, and *the stars*
are mentioned, because they are striking proofs of God’s fatherly
kindness towards us. Hence also Christ shows that it is an eminent proof
of the goodness of God that

<span id="xx.i-p113"></span>he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on
the good. (<span id="xx.i-p113.1"></span>[Mt
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="xx.i-p113.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p114"></span>Accordingly, when the *sun* and *moon* and
*stars* shine in heaven, God may be said to cheer us by his bright and
gracious countenance. Since therefore in the brightness of heaven God
shows a cheerful and friendly countenance, as if he might be said to
smile upon us, the darkness which the Prophet describes conveys the
thought, that God, by hiding his face, cast the men with whom he was
angry into the darkness of sorrow.

<span id="xx.i-p115"></span>A similar description is given by the
Prophet Joel.

<span id="xx.i-p116"></span>The sun shall be turned into darkness, the
moon into blood, before it comes — the day of Jehovah, great and
terrible.  
(<span id="xx.i-p116.2"></span>[Joe
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031)<span id="xx.i-p116.2"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p117"></span>We have already said that this mode of
expression is frequently employed by the prophets, in order to inform us
that everything will tend to our destruction, when God is against us.
Sometimes indeed God gives tokens of his anger by means of *the stars*;
but that is out of the usual course of events, and the *darkness* which
the Prophet now describes will not take place till the second coming of
Christ. But we ought to be satisfied with knowing that all the
creatures, which by discharging their duties to us are proofs and
instruments of God’s fatherly kindness, not only cease to be useful to
us, when God arises to judgment, but in some measure are armed for
vengeance.

<span id="xx.i-p118"></span><span id="xx.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p119"></span>**11.** *And I will visit upon the world
wickedness.* Here the Prophet does not speak of the whole *world*; but
as Babylon was the seat of the most powerful of all monarchies, he gives
to it on that account the name of *the world*, and he does so
emphatically, (<span id="xx.i-p119.1"></span>ἐμφατικῶς,) for Babylon was
a kind of *world*, because it appeared to occupy nearly the whole earth.
And yet he means that there is nothing in this world so lofty that God
cannot easily seize it with one of his fingers. At the same time he
gives warning that God will punish the cruelty which was exercised by
the Chaldeans. Yet we ought also to learn that the wickedness and crimes
of Babylon are brought forward, in order to inform us that the Lord will
not be cruel in punishing her so severely, because he inflicts the
punishment which that people deserved on account of their transgressions
and crimes. Every ground of calumny is therefore taken away, that we may
not think that God delights in the afflictions of men; for when he thus
deals with men according as they deserve, *the mouths* *of all must be
stopped*, (<span id="xx.i-p119.2"></span>[Ro
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)<span id="xx.i-p119.2"></span>,)
since the severity of the afflictions does not proceed from God, but
finds its cause in men themselves.

<span id="xx.i-p120"></span>*And will cause the arrogancy of the proud
to cease.* We must keep in mind what I have already noticed, that the
Prophet yields no small consolation to the godly by assuring them that
God, though he spares the inhabitants of Babylon for a time, will at
length punish them for their injustice and cruelty. He expresses this
still more clearly by taking notice of a particular vice, namely,
*pride*, in consequence of which they loosed the reins, and gave
unbounded freedom to their lawless desires to oppress the wretched. For
this reason also he reproves their *tyranny*. But we ought also to draw
from it a profitable doctrine, that it is impossible for us to escape
punishment from the Lord, if we are puffed up with vain confidence and
flatter ourselves. The Prophet here includes every kind of *pride*;
whether men think that they are something, or admire their riches, and
despise others in comparison of themselves. God cannot endure any
arrogancy, or suffer it to pass unpunished. Seeing therefore, that among
a great variety of other crimes with which Babylon abounded, this was
the greatest and most remarkable, it was chiefly by their pride that the
wrath of God was kindled.

<span id="xx.i-p121"></span>*And will lay low the loftiness of tyrants.*
*Arrogance* was joined, as it usually is, to violence and cruelty; and
therefore he adds *the loftiness of tyrants*; for when men despise
others, this is followed by deeds of violence and injustice and
oppression; and it is impossible for men to abstain from doing harm to
others, if they do not lay aside all conceit and high estimation of
themselves. Let us willingly, therefore, bring down our minds to true
humility, if we do not wish to be cast down and laid low to our
destruction.

<span id="xx.i-p122"></span><span id="xx.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p123"></span>**12.** *I will make a man more precious
than pure gold.* Here he describes in a particular manner how cruel and
savage will be the war that is carried on against Babylon. In like
manner believers, instructed by these predictions, implore in the spirit
of prophecy what is the utmost exertion of the cruelty exercised in
wars, that the Persians and Medes may tear the infants from their
mothers’ breasts, *and dash them* *against the stones*. (<span
id="xx.i-p123.1"></span>[Ps 137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009)<span
id="xx.i-p123.1"></span>.) The general meaning is, that Babylon will not
only be destroyed, but will be devoted to utter extermination; for when
he says that the life of *a man shall be more* *precious than gold*, he
asserts that the enemies will be so eager to shed blood, that it will be
impossible to rescue a man out of their hands at any price, because they
will choose rather to kill than to accept a ransom.

<span id="xx.i-p124"></span>It may be asked, Was this destruction as
cruel as Isaiah here describes it to be? For history gives a different
account, and Daniel himself, who was an eye-witness of this destruction,
relates that the city was only taken, for the Medes and Persians spared
the citizens and inhabitants. This argument has constrained some
commentators to apply allegorically to all the reprobate what is here
related of Babylon; but in doing so they have overstrained the passage,
for shortly afterwards (<span id="xx.i-p124.1"></span>[Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017)<span id="xx.i-p124.1"></span>)
the Prophet names the Medes and Persians. Besides, those threatenings
which will afterwards follow in their proper order, against the
Edomites, Moabites, the inhabitants of Tyre and of Egypt, and other
nations, sufficiently show that the present discourse is directed
literally against the Chaldeans, to whom the Prophet assigns the first
rank; not that their destruction was as close at hand as that of other
nations, but because none of the enemies of the Church were more
dangerous.

<span id="xx.i-p125"></span>It ought to be observed that Isaiah did not
utter this prediction while the monarchy of Nineveh was still
flourishing; but all that he predicted against heathen nations, during
the whole course of his ministry, was collected into one book. Thus the
order of events was not observed, but a similarity of subject was the
reason why all these prophecies were put into one place. How comes it
that Isaiah takes no notice of Nineveh, since he afterwards mentions
that the Assyrians alone attacked the Jews, (for the Babylonians lived
at peace with them,) but because he does not relate the history of his
own time till the <span id="xx.i-p125.1"></span>[Isa
23:1-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p125.1"></span>,
but prophesies about the judgments of God which happened after his
death?

<span id="xx.i-p126"></span>Now, when he declares that Babylon will be
utterly destroyed, it is certain that he does not merely describe a
single calamity, but includes the destruction which followed long
afterwards. After having been subdued by the Persians, Babylon continued
to flourish, and held the name and rank of a very celebrated city. And
although the city Ctesiphon was founded for the purpose of attracting a
portion of its splendor and wealth, yet the convenience of its
situation, the costly buildings, and the fortifications of the city,
rendered it, with the exception of royal rank, not inferior to Persis.
Even after the death of Alexander the Great, when Seleucia was built at
no great distance, still it could not obliterate the name and reputation
of the ancient city. Hence we conclude that those events which are here
foretold cannot be limited to a single period.

<span id="xx.i-p127"></span>It is not without reason, however, that the
Prophet pronounces such fearful threatening against them, since the
revolution of the empire was the forerunner of the various calamities
which followed afterwards. Though the people were not entirely slain,
yet as the city was taken by storm, and by a sudden assault at the hour
of midnight, while the whole court was carousing in drunken revels, it
was impossible but that the Medes and Persians must have slain all that
came in their way. There can be no doubt, therefore, that there was a
great slaughter before the conquerors extended their protection to the
whole of the people as having surrendered at discretion. Who can doubt
that this haughty nation was roughly handled by barbarian conquerors,
for in no other way could it have been reduced to obedience?

<span id="xx.i-p128"></span>Having been gradually weakened, not long
afterwards, Babylon again changed its master, and, after having been
governed for a short period by Alexander, king of Macedon, immediately
passed under the dominion of Seleucus, who endeavored by every method to
degrade it till it was completely ruined. Thus, so long as God permitted
the city to remain in existence, it presented a shameful and revolting
spectacle to the whole world, that the accomplishment of the prophecy
might be more evident and more impressive. Hence the Prophet Isaiah has
good reason for asserting that the anger of God will not be appeased
till that den of robbers be utterly destroyed.

<span id="xx.i-p129"></span>*A mortal and a man.* So far as relates to
the words, some translators render <span id="xx.i-p129.1"></span>אנוש
(*enosh*) a *warlike* or *eminent* man, and <span
id="xx.i-p129.2"></span>אדם (*adam*) an *ordinary* man. But as the
etymology does not correspond to this view, and as I do not think that
it occurred to the Prophet’s mind, I consider it to be rather a
repetition of the same sentiment, such as we know to have been customary
among the Hebrews. The word <span id="xx.i-p129.3"></span>פז, (*paz*,)
which, in common with other translators, I have rendered *pure gold*, is
supposed by some to mean *a pearl*; but from many passages of Scripture
we conclude that it is *the purest and finest gold*

<span id="xx.i-p130"></span><span id="xx.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p131"></span>**13.** *Therefore I will shake the
heavens.* This is another figure of speech which contributes in a
similar manner to heighten the picture. God cannot too earnestly urge
this doctrine, not only to terrify the wicked, but to afford consolation
to the godly, who are often distressed when it is well with the wicked,
and when everything succeeds to their wish. David acknowledges that this
happened to himself; for he says,

<span id="xx.i-p132"></span>Surely in vain have I purified my heart,  
and washed any hands in innocency. (<span id="xx.i-p132.2"></span>[Ps
73:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013)<span id="xx.i-p132.2"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p133"></span>Properly, therefore, are these pictures set
before our eyes, that they may plainly declare to us the destruction of
the wicked. Thus it is as if Isaiah had said, “Though *heaven* and
*earth* be *moved*, that the ungodly may be *shaken* and destroyed,
nevertheless this will take place.” They think that they are out of all
danger, and that they have struck their roots so deep that they cannot
be rooted out; but he shows that they are greatly deceived, for the Lord
will *move both heaven and earth* rather than not cast them down
headlong. Hence it follows that, though the world present to us a
thousand supports both above and below, still there will be no
permanency but through the favor of God. And if this is made known in
judgments of God relating to particular cases, how much more in the
universal judgment, when Christ will ascend his magnificent
judgment-seat, to destroy the ungodly!

<span id="xx.i-p134"></span><span id="xx.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p135"></span>**14.** *And it shall be as the chased roe.*
He shows that auxiliary troops will be of no avail to the Babylonians,
and by these comparisons he describes the fear which shall seize the
soldiers. Babylon employed not only her own soldiers, but likewise
foreign and hired soldiers. He says that they will all be like *roes*,
which are timorous creatures, and like scattered *sheep*, so that they
will neither repair to their *standards* or their *post*, nor preserve
any order.

<span id="xx.i-p136"></span>*Every one to his own land.* Hence it is
easily seen that the Prophet speaks, not only of the natives, or even of
the strangers who had formerly dwelt there, but of foreigners who had
been brought for the protection of the city. We have formerly said that
the hearts of men are in the hand of God in such a manner that,
according to his pleasure, either those who formerly were timid or
cowardly persons suddenly acquire fresh courage, or those who formerly
boasted loudly of being bold and daring lose their fierceness and become
effeminate.

<span id="xx.i-p137"></span><span id="xx.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p138"></span>**15.** *Every one that is found shall be
thrust through.* Here he confirms what he had formerly said, that none
shall escape from Babylon, and that all who shall be there shall perish.
Xenophon also relates that, by the command of Cyrus, they slew every one
that they met in the beginning of the night, and next day all that had
not laid down their arms.  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) But
we have already said that the prediction extends farther; for that
slaughter was only the forerunner of others, for which Babylon was
purposely preserved, that it might frequently be ruined.

<span id="xx.i-p140"></span>*And every one that is joined to them shall
fall by the sword.* Some translators render this clause differently from
what I have done; because the Hebrew verb <span
id="xx.i-p140.1"></span>ספה (*saphah*) signifies to *destroy* or
*consume*, they read it, *Whosoever shall be destroyed*, and explain it
as relating to the old men, who were already worn out with age, and
could not otherwise live longer; as if he had said, “Not even the men of
advanced age, who are sinking into the grave, shall be spared, even
though they are half-dead, and appear to be already giving up the
ghost.” But because that is a feeble interpretation, and the verb <span
id="xx.i-p140.2"></span>ספה (*saphah*) signifies likewise *to add*, I
rather agree with Jonathan  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) and
others, who think that it denotes *companies of soldiers*, as in taking
a city the soldiers are collected together in the form of a wedge, to
ward off the attacks of the enemy. But it will perhaps be thought better
to understand by it the *confederates* or *allies* who were *joined* to
Babylon, and might be said to be united in the same body, in order to
show more fully the shocking nature of this calamity.

<span id="xx.i-p142"></span><span id="xx.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p143"></span>**16.** *Their children shall be dashed in
pieces.* He draws a picture of extreme cruelty. It is the utmost pitch
of ferocity exercised by an invading army, when no age is spared, and
infants, whose age makes it impossible for them to defend themselves,
are slain. He represents it as still more shocking, when he adds, “*in
the sight of* their parents.” To the same purpose is what follows about
*plundering houses* and *ravishing wives*; for these things happen when
the enemies have forgotten all humanity, and are inflamed to cruelty,
and wish that those whom they have subdued, and even their very name,
should be rooted out.

<span id="xx.i-p144"></span><span id="xx.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p145"></span>**17.** *Behold I raise up against them the
Medes.* The Prophet, having predicted the destruction of the
Babylonians, describes also the authors, or says that God will be the
author; and at the same time he explains in what manner, and by means of
whom, it will be accomplished; for he says that *he will raise up the
Medes*. He certainly could not have conjectured this by human reason,
for there were no jealousies and no quarrels between the Babylonians and
the Medes; and if there had been any such, what power did the Medes at
that time possess that they could do the Babylonians any harm? Seeing,
therefore, that no preparations had been made for the Medes carrying on
war against them, it is very certain that this was spoken by divine
inspiration, and more especially since he foretold these events more
than a hundred years before they took place.

<span id="xx.i-p146"></span>*Who shall not think of silver, nor desire
gold.*  <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) When he says that they
shall not be covetous of *silver and gold*, he does not mean that the
Medes were not guilty of plundering and covetousness, as if they were so
generous that they despised *gold and silver*; but, on the contrary, he
means that the battle will be cruel and bloody, that they will aim at
nothing but a general slaughter. For example, the Spaniards of the
present day, making it their chief object in war to plunder, more
readily spare the life of men, and are not so bloodthirsty as the
Germans or the English, who think of nothing but slaying the enemy.

<span id="xx.i-p148"></span>We ought not to think it strange that the
Lord, though he is not cruel, yet makes use of agents who are so cruel,
for he acts righteously even by the agency of wicked men, and is not
stained with their wickedness. It would therefore be improper to form
our judgment of the work of God from the executioners of it, for they
are prompted either by ambition, or by covetousness, or by cruelty; but
we ought to consider God’s righteous punishment which the Babylonians
deserved on account of their transgressions.

<span id="xx.i-p149"></span><span id="xx.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p150"></span>**18.** *And with bows they shall dash in
pieces the children.*  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) Some
render it, *they shall cut*. They think that the language is
exaggerated, as if they made use of the children of the Babylonians in
place of *arrows*, and afterwards dashed them to the ground, that they
might be broken with greater violence. But I choose rather to take a
more simple view of the words, that the cruelty of the Medes will be so
great, that they will not spare even infant children, on whom men do not
commonly lay hands unless where there is the utmost barbarity; and, in
short, that no allowance will be made for age, as we have formerly said.

<span id="xx.i-p152"></span>But we do not read that the Medes exercised
so great cruelty, and Babylon stood and flourished for a very long
period after that calamity; and although the seat of the empire was
removed from it, still it retained its name and reputation. Besides,
after the dawn of the following day, no cruelty was exercised but
against those who bore arms. Though it was the Prophet’s design to
include other judgments of God which awaited the Babylonians, and by
which the first calamity was followed long afterwards, yet it is not
improperly or unseasonably that he describes the barbarous manners of
the nation, that the Jews may be more fully aware that a just reward is
prepared for the tyranny of Babylon. Nor can it be doubted that it was
in reliance on this promise that believers afterwards presented that
prayer;

<span id="xx.i-p153"></span>Blessed is he who shall dash thy little ones
against the stones.  
(<span id="xx.i-p153.2"></span>[Ps
137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009)<span id="xx.i-p153.2"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p154"></span><span id="xx.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p155"></span>**19.** *And Babylon, the glory of
kingdoms.* Here the Prophet intended to give a brief summary of his
prophecy about the Babylonians, but enlarges it by some additions
tending to show more fully that it will be completely destroyed. In this
manner do the prophets speak of the punishment of the wicked, so as to
leave no room for compassion by which they may relieve their minds. But
the godly, though they may sometimes think that they are severely
chastised, are yet supported by the confident hope that the Lord will
have compassion on them, and will not altogether destroy them. Hence we
may conclude that we ought not always to judge from outward appearances;
for we would often think that the children of God are ruined when their
salvation is at hand even in the midst of death.

<span id="xx.i-p156"></span>*Of Sodom and Gomorrah.* This example is
frequently employed by the Prophets, in order to inform us that, though
the mode of punishment be not the same, yet, since the judgment of God
is impartial, that memorable display which he gave in *Sodom* (<span
id="xx.i-p156.1"></span>[Ge 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span
id="xx.i-p156.1"></span>) has a reference to all the reprobate, and that
not less dreadful punishment awaits those who are hardened by similar
obstinacy in their sins. They distinguish between the punishment of the
elect people and the punishment of the wicked by this circumstance, that
God reserves some *seed* for the Israelites, but none for the ungodly,
which agrees with the words which we formerly met with,

<span id="xx.i-p157"></span>Unless the Lord of hosts had left us a
seed,  
we should have been like Sodom. (<span id="xx.i-p157.2"></span>[Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)<span id="xx.i-p157.2"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p158"></span>But he pursues the wicked with vengeance
that cannot be appeased, and therefore he threatens against them the
same destruction which was executed against the inhabitants of *Sodom*,
that is, utter perdition without any hope of escape.

<span id="xx.i-p159"></span>*Shall be like God’s overthrowing.*  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) He says that it is *God’s*
*overthrowing*, that we may not think that it happens by chance, or that
it has proceeded from the will of men. As it was not at random that the
thunderbolt fell from heaven on *Sodom*, so it was not at random that
*Babylon* fell down, but by the righteous vengeance *of God*, who, being
always like himself, executed righteous judgment on them; and in like
manner will execute the same judgment on all the reprobate till the end.

<span id="xx.i-p161"></span>When *Babylon* is called *the glory of
kingdoms and splendid brightness,* this is added for the sake of
amplification, (<span id="xx.i-p161.1"></span>πρὸς αὔξησιν,) in order to
inform us, that no glory or splendor can hinder God from bringing the
wicked to nought; for that overturn, having been incredible, afforded a
more remarkable proof of Divine power.

<span id="xx.i-p162"></span><span id="xx.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p163"></span>**20.** *It shall never be inhabited any
more.* By the verb <span id="xx.i-p163.1"></span>תשב, (*thesheb*,)
*shall sit*, he means continuance; as if he had said, “There is no hope
of restoring Babylon.” All these forms of expression have precisely the
same object, that the Babylonians will be destroyed with such a
destruction that their ruin shall be perpetual. The picture is still
further heightened by adding, that the desolation will be so great that
*in that place neither will the Arabians pitch their tents, nor the
shepherds their folds* That place must have been marvellously forsaken
and uncultivated, when it was disregarded by those roving tribes; for
the *Arabians* were a wandering and unsettled nation, and had no fixed
abode. Having left their native country, because it was barren, and is
therefore called Arabia *Deserta*, (for it is of that country that we
speak,) they devoted themselves to feeding flocks and to hunting, and
wandered without any fixed residence; for which reason also the Greeks
called them <span id="xx.i-p163.2"></span>σκηνήται, (*skenetai*,)
*dwellers in tents*. Now the country around Babylon was exceedingly
fertile before that calamity, which rendered this change the more
astonishing and almost miraculous, either because the place lost its
former fertility, or because the constant slaughter made all men abhor
the sight of it. Undoubtedly the Prophet means that not only will the
buildings be thrown down, but the very soil will be accursed.

<span id="xx.i-p164"></span><span id="xx.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p165"></span>**21.** *But the Ziim shall lie there.*
 <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) He continues the description of
a desert place, and alludes to what he had formerly said, that Babylon
will be destitute of inhabitants. In what way <span
id="xx.i-p166.1"></span>ציים (*tziim*) ought to be translated I cannot
easily say, on account of the diversity in the opinions of translators,
who differ in this, as in various names of animals and herbs. The use of
these things did not continue among them; and the Jews, who are
themselves ignorant and unskilful, do not retain the knowledge of these
things, though there are some of them who know nothing about either
herbs or animals, and yet have the impudence to boast of being
physicians. Of those who think that <span id="xx.i-p166.2"></span>ציים
(*tziim*) is the name of a wild animal, some will have it to be a
quadruped, and others, a bird; but that is a matter of little
importance. For my own part, I have no doubt that the Prophet means
either wild beasts which cannot be tamed, or birds which build their
nests in distant forests.

<span id="xx.i-p167"></span>It will not be amiss to explain what follows
about *Satyrs* or *Pans*, who are called by the French, according to the
various dialects of the provinces, sometimes <span
id="xx.i-p167.2"></span>*Luittons*, sometimes <span
id="xx.i-p167.3"></span>*Follets*, and sometimes <span
id="xx.i-p167.4"></span>*Loups-garouz*  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) As Satan deludes men by various
tricks, so he gives to them various names. It is certain that <span
id="xx.i-p168.1"></span>ציים (*tziim*) is often used in Scripture for
devils; and it is derived from <span id="xx.i-p168.2"></span>ציה,
(*tziyah*,) which means *dryness*, or, *a desert*, as <span
id="xx.i-p168.3"></span>איים (*iyim*) is derived from <span
id="xx.i-p168.4"></span>אים, (*ayam*,) which means *to terrify*. The
Devil performs strange tricks by means of *Fauns* and *Satyrs*, and on
that account their names are given to him.

<span id="xx.i-p169"></span>The design of the Prophet is to show that
the solitude will be so great, that not only will the place be deserted
by men, but even the devils will there deceive by their tricks; for the
devils avail themselves of the tendency of solitary places to produce
terror. As enemies and robbers, by sallying forth from concealed
lurking-places, frighten men the more, so devils take advantage of the
night and the darkness, and of places distant from the view of men, that
they may be able to excite greater terror in those who are naturally
timorous.

<span id="xx.i-p170"></span><span id="xx.i-p170.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p171"></span>**22.** *And Iim shall cry*  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) He expresses the same thing as had
been formerly said, and shows how dreadful that change will be, in order
to make it manifest that it proceeds from the judgment of God, and not
from chance. The picture is even heightened by adding that this will
take place, not in ordinary buildings, but in *delightful palaces*
 <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) While the shortness of time
which is here laid down refers to the approaching calamity, it was at
the same time necessary that the hope of believers should be held longer
in suspense. I have said that Babylon was not so speedily overturned,
and that the Medes did not inflict such a calamity upon it that it could
be compared to a desert. He therefore said that it would quickly happen,
because the beginnings of it were soon afterwards seen; for the Jews
ought to have been satisfied with knowing that the punishment had not
been threatened without good grounds.

<span id="xx.i-p174"></span>*And her time is near.* The Holy Spirit also
keeps in view our ardor and rashness. We would choose that God should
immediately execute his judgments, and punish wicked men whenever we
wish. But God knows what is the proper time, for which our eagerness
does not allow us to wait. Yet if we would take into consideration his
eternity, we should quickly find that by patience we laid the bridle on
excessive haste; but as our eagerness can hardly be restrained in any
other manner, God sometimes deals with us gently to some extent, by
declaring that *He will soon come*. Again, let us not judge of the
shortness of time according to our own views, but, disregarding the
*days* of this life, let us raise our hearts to heaven. Especially let
us learn to bow, whenever we are made to feel, even in a small degree,
the judgments of God, though he delay their full accomplishment for a
longer period.

<span id="xx.i-p175"></span>*And her days shall not be prolonged.* This
second clause is added for confirmation; as if he had said that the Lord
hath appointed a day, and that none shall be admitted to obtain a truce.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc13019.htm#fr_197) <span
id="xx.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p63"></span> “*My appointed ones*.” <span
id="xx.i-p63.1"></span>קדש (*kadash*) is to select and set apart for a
work, particularly for one of God’s appointment. See <span
id="xx.i-p63.2"></span>[Jer 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#007)<span
id="xx.i-p63.2"></span>, <span id="xx.i-p63.3"></span>[Zep
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)<span id="xx.i-p63.3"></span>. —
*Stock*

<span id="xx.i-p64"></span> FT190 *The LORD and the weapons of his
indignation*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xx.i-p65"></span> FT191 *From the Almighty*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xx.i-p66"></span> FT192 “<span id="xx.i-p66.1"></span>שד משדי
(*shod mishshaddai*). This title of God is here employed for the sake of
the alliteration, *destruction from the* *destroyer*, from him who is
all-powerful to destroy (<span id="xx.i-p66.2"></span>שדד) (*shadad*) as
well as to save.” — *Rosenmuller*

<span id="xx.i-p67"></span> FT193 By a happy coincidence, the English
word *panic* conveys exactly the meaning of the Latin adjective <span
id="xx.i-p67.1"></span>*Panicus*, which is here said to be derived from
the name of the heathen God *Pan*, the god of the mountains, cattle, &c.
— *Ed*

<span id="xx.i-p68"></span> FT194 *Their faces* shall be *as flames*.
(Heb. *faces of the* *flames*.) — Eng. Ver. “*Faces of flames shall be
their faces*.” — *Stock*

<span id="xx.i-p69"></span> FT195 See Xen. Cyr., book 7, chapter 5.

<span id="xx.i-p70"></span> FT196 Jarchi quotes the words, *to add the
drunken to the thirsty,* (<span id="xx.i-p70.1"></span>[De
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019)<span id="xx.i-p70.1"></span>,)
*add year to year*, (<span id="xx.i-p70.2"></span>[Isa
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p70.2"></span>,)
and *add burnt-offerings to your sacrifices*, (<span
id="xx.i-p70.3"></span>[Jer 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021)<span
id="xx.i-p70.3"></span>,) and his annotator Breithaupt translates the
verb <span id="xx.i-p70.4"></span>ספה (*saphah*) by a word in his native
French, <span id="xx.i-p70.5"></span>*accueillir*, which means to
*gather*, or *flock together*. — *Ed*

<span id="xx.i-p71"></span> FT197 *Which shall not regard silver; and as
for gold, they shall not* *delight in it*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xx.i-p72"></span> FT198 Their *bows also shall dash the young
men to pieces*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xx.i-p73"></span> FT199 *Shall be as when God overthrew*.
(Heb. *as the* *overthrowing*.)--Eng. Ver.

<span id="xx.i-p74"></span> FT200 *But wild beasts of the desert* (Heb.
*Ziim*) *shall lie* *there*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xx.i-p75"></span> FT201 It is a gratifying proof of the
progress of knowledge and of the decay of superstition, that such words
as *Hobgoblins*, *Hob-thrushes, Robin-goodfellows*, and even *Fairies*,
answering to the grotesque names which Calvin has brought from his own
vernacular, have grown antiquated, and are not likely to be replaced by
terms of modern date. Howell’s definition of <span
id="xx.i-p75.1"></span>*Loup-garou* is a curious record of superstitious
belief. “A mankind Wolfe, such a one as once being flesht on men, and
children, will rather starve than feed on any thing else; also, one
that, possessed with an extream and strange melancholy, beleeves he is
turned Wolfe, and as a Wolfe behaves himselfe,” etc. — *Ed*

<span id="xx.i-p76"></span> FT202 *And the wild beasts of the islands*
(Heb. *Iim*) *shall* *cry*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xx.i-p77"></span> FT203 *And hyoenas shall cry in their
palaces, and jackals in their* *tabernacles of delight*. — *Stock*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc13019.htm#fr_198) <span
id="xx.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p87"></span>

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc13019.htm#fr_199) <span
id="xx.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p92"></span>

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc13019.htm#fr_200) <span
id="xx.i-p92.4"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p93"></span>

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc13019.htm#fr_201) <span
id="xx.i-p97.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p98"></span>

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc13019.htm#fr_202) <span
id="xx.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p101"></span>

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc13019.htm#fr_203) <span
id="xx.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p139"></span>

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc13019.htm#fr_204) <span
id="xx.i-p140.3"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p141"></span>

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc13019.htm#fr_205) <span
id="xx.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p147"></span>

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc13019.htm#fr_206) <span
id="xx.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p151"></span>

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc13019.htm#fr_207) <span
id="xx.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p160"></span>

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc13019.htm#fr_208) <span
id="xx.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p166"></span>

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc13019.htm#fr_209) <span
id="xx.i-p167.5"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p168"></span>

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc13019.htm#fr_210) <span
id="xx.i-p171.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p172"></span>

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc13019.htm#fr_211) <span
id="xx.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p173"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](cc13020)
