[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc13009)  [Next](cc13011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 4:1-6

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And in that day seven women shall take
hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own
apparel; only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach.

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Apprehendent itaque in die illa
septenae mulieres viros singulos, dicentes, Pane nostro vescemur,
vestimentis nostris induemur, tantum invocetur nomen tuum super nos,
(*vel, censeamur tuo nomine,*) tollasque probrum nostrum.

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2.** In that day shall the branch of the
Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth *shall be*
excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2.** In die illa erit germen Iehovae in
pulchritudinem et gloriam; et fructus terrae in praestantiam et decorem;
nempe in liberatis Israelis.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And it shall come to pass, *that he
that is* left in Zion, and *he that* remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be
called holy, *even* every one *that is* written among the living in
Jerusalem:

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et eveniet ut qui reliquus fuerit in
Sion, et residuus manserit in Ierusalem, sanctus vocetur, omnesque
Ierosolymis inter vivos (*vel, ad vitam*,) asscripti erunt;

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>**4.** When the Lord shall have washed away
the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and by the
spirit of burning.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Cum scilicet Dominus eluerit sordes
filiarum Sion, et sanguines Ierusalem expiaverit e medio ejus, et in
Spiritu judicii, et in Spiritu incendii (*vel, ardoris.*)

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the Lord will create upon every
dwelling-place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke
by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the
glory *shall be* a defence.

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et creabit Iehova super totam
habitationem montis Sion, et super omnem coetum ejus, nubem et
obscuritatem interdiu; noctu vero splendorem ignis flammantis; quia
super omnem gloriam erit protectio.

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>**6.** And there shall be a tabernacle for a
shadow in the day-time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for
a covert from storm and from rain.

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Eritque obumbratio per diem in umbram
ab aestu, in refugium et latibulum a nimbo et imbre.

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span><span id="xi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**1.** *In that day shall seven women take
hold of one man* He pursues the same subject, and unquestionably this
discourse is immediately connected with what goes before. This verse
certainly ought not to have been separated from the preceding. By this
circumstance he describes more fully the nature of that desolation and
calamity which he had formerly threatened against the Jews; for
hypocrites; unless the threatening be conceived in strong terms, either
disregard or palliate warnings, so that God’s severity never produces
its proper effect upon them. From the effect, therefore, he describes
the appalling nature of the approaching calamity, that they may not
indulge the hope of making an easy escape. As if he had said, “Do not
imagine that it will be of moderate extent, lessening your numbers in a
small degree; for utter destruction awaits you, so that hardly *one man*
will be found for *seven women*.”

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>The phrase *take hold of* conveys the same
meaning. It is, no doubt, inconsistent with the modesty of the sex that
a woman should, of her own accord, offer herself to a man. But the
Prophet says, that not only will they do this, but that *seven women*
will, as it were, lay hands on a man, and keep hold of him; so small
will be the number of men. The greatness of the calamity is likewise
denoted by what immediately follows: *we will eat our own bread, and
wear our own apparel*; for as it is a duty which belongs to a husband to
support his wife and family, the women ask a husband for themselves on
unreasonable conditions, when they release him from all concern about
supplying them with food. Very great must, therefore, be the scarcity of
men, when a great number of women, laying aside modesty, are not only
constrained to solicit one man, but do not even shrink from the
agreement to procure their own victuals, and request nothing more from a
husband than to receive them within the bond of marriage.

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span>*Let thy name be called on us.* It may be
rendered, *Let us be* *called by thy name*; for when a woman passes into
the family of her husband, she is *called by his name*, and loses her
own, because the husband is her head. (<span id="xi.i-p18.1"></span>[1Co
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="xi.i-p18.1"></span>.)
Hence the vail is a token of subjection, and Abimelech said to Sarah,

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>Thy husband Abraham shall be a covering to
thy head. (<span id="xi.i-p19.1"></span>[Ge
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016)<span id="xi.i-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span>But if she remain unmarried, she is concealed
under the name of her family. That this is the true meaning of that mode
of expression is sufficiently evident from what Jacob says when blessing
his grandchildren,

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span>Let my name, and the name of my fathers,  
Abraham and Isaac, be called on them; (<span id="xi.i-p21.2"></span>[Ge
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)<span id="xi.i-p21.2"></span>;)

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span>that is, “Let them be reckoned as our
descendants, and let them be partakers of the covenant, and never
excluded from it, as were Esau and Ishmael.” In the same manner also do
heathen writers speak; as, in Lucan, Marcia, wishing to return to Cato,
says: “Grant me only the bare name of marriage; let permission be given
that it may be inscribed on my tomb, Marcia the wife of Cato.”  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69)

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span>*And take away our reproach.* Their reason
for saying so is, that women are sometimes treated with disdain, when
they do not obtain husbands, not only because they appear to be despised
as unworthy, but because among the ancient people offspring was reckoned
an important blessing, and therefore the Prophet says that they will be
desirous to wipe away this reproach, and will employ every argument for
that purpose. Lastly, he declares that the calamity will be so great,
that almost all the men will be carried off.

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span><span id="xi.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span>**2.** *In that day shall the branch of the
Lord be for beauty and glory.*  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70)
This consolation is seasonably added; for the announcement of a dreadful
calamity might have alarmed the godly, and led them to doubt as to the
stability of God’s covenant being maintained amidst the destruction of
the people. For there is a wide difference between the two statements,
that the people will be *like the sand of the sea*, (<span
id="xi.i-p27.1"></span>[Ge 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span
id="xi.i-p27.1"></span>; <span id="xi.i-p27.2"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span id="xi.i-p27.2"></span>,)
and yet that they would be cut down by such a frightful massacre, that
in the remnant there would be found no dignity, no magnificence, and
hardly any name. Isaiah, therefore, according to the custom generally
followed by himself and by the prophets, provides against this alarm,
and, by adding a consolation, assuages their excessive terror, that
believers may still rest assured that the Church will be safe, and may
strengthen their hearts by good hope. As he spoke of the restoration of
the Church in the second chapter, so he now promises that a new Church
will arise, as a *bud* or *shoot* springs up in a field which was
formerly uncultivated.

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span>This passage is usually expounded as
referring to Christ; and the opinion, plausible in itself, derives
additional probability from the words of the prophet Zechariah:

<span id="xi.i-p29"></span>Behold the man whose name shall be The
Branch.  
(<span id="xi.i-p29.2"></span>[Zec
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012)<span id="xi.i-p29.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p30"></span>It is still further strengthened by the
consideration, that the Prophet does not barely name this *Branch*, but
mentions it with a title expressive of respect, as if he had intended to
honor the Divinity of Christ. When he afterwards adds *the fruits* *of
the earth*, they consider this as referring to his human nature. But
after a careful examination of the whole, I do not hesitate to regard
the *Branch of God* and *the fruit of the earth* as denoting an unusual
and abundant supply of grace, which will relieve the hungry; for he
speaks as if the earth, barren and exhausted after the desolation, would
hold out no promise of future produce, in order that the sudden
fertility might render the kindness of God the more desirable; as if the
parched and barren fields would yield unexpected herbage.

<span id="xi.i-p31"></span>This metaphor is frequently employed in
Scripture, that the gifts of God *spring up* in the world.

<span id="xi.i-p32"></span>Truth shall spring out of the earth, and  
righteousness shall look down from heaven. (<span
id="xi.i-p32.2"></span>[Ps 85:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011)<span
id="xi.i-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p33"></span>In like manner the Prophet afterwards says:

<span id="xi.i-p34"></span>Let the earth open and bring forth salvation.
(<span id="xi.i-p34.1"></span>[Isa
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#008)<span id="xi.i-p34.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p35"></span>These words unquestionably denote a rich
supply both of spiritual and of earthly blessings. That such is the
meaning of the passage now under consideration is evident from the
context; for Isaiah immediately afterwards adds, that it will be *for
honor and lustre to the delivered of Israel*,  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) that is, to the number left, whom the
Lord will rescue from destruction.

<span id="xi.i-p37"></span>The word <span id="xi.i-p37.1"></span>פליטת
(*pheletath*) is commonly translated *escape*, but here, as in many
other passages, it is a collective noun, denoting *those who have
escaped*. He declares that the elect will enjoy that happy fertility
which he had promised, and therefore (verse 3) that those who shall be
left will be *holy*. The meaning of the Prophet is, that the glory of
God will be illustriously displayed when a new Church shall arise; as if
he would create a people for himself out of nothing, and to enrich it
with every kind of blessings.

<span id="xi.i-p38"></span>They who limit it to the person of Christ
expose themselves to the ridicule of the Jews, as if it were in
consequence of scarcity that they tortured passages of Scripture for
their own convenience. But there are other passages of Scripture from
which it may be more clearly proved that Christ is true God and true
man, so that there is no need of ingenious glosses. Yet I acknowledge
that the Prophet speaks here about the kingdom of Christ, on which the
restoration of the Church is founded. But it ought to be observed, that
the consolation is not addressed indiscriminately to all, but only to
the remnant, which has been marvellously rescued from the jaws of death.

<span id="xi.i-p39"></span>Besides, as it might be deemed a cold
consolation if he had only said that a small number would be saved, he
discourses about the *magnificent glory and dazzling brightness*, to
lead believers to hope that this diminution will do no harm; because the
excellence of the Church does not consist in multitude but in purity
when God bestows splendid and glorious communications of the Spirit of
God on his elect. Hence we ought to draw a very useful doctrine, that
though believers be exceedingly few, when they are like *brands plucked
out of the fire*, (<span id="xi.i-p39.1"></span>[Zec
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002)<span id="xi.i-p39.1"></span>,) yet
that God will glorify himself amongst them, and will display in the
midst of them a proof of his unspeakable greatness not less illustrious
than amidst a large number.

<span id="xi.i-p40"></span><span id="xi.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p41"></span>**3.** *And it shall come to pass that he who
is left in Zion.* He follows out the same statement, that when the
pollution of the people shall have been washed away, what remains will
be pure and *holy*. The explanation given by some, that they who shall
be found written in the book of life will *be called holy*, appears to
me to be too limited. These two clauses ought rather to be read
separately, that *all who shall be left in Zion will be holy,* and that
*they who shall be left in Jerusalem will be written in the book of
life*. And this repetition is very frequent and customary among the
Hebrews, when the prophets set forth under various titles the same gift
of God. Thus, when it is said,

<span id="xi.i-p42"></span>There shall be salvation in Jerusalem,  
and forgiveness of sins in Zion, (<span id="xi.i-p42.2"></span>[Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span id="xi.i-p42.2"></span>,)

<span id="xi.i-p43"></span>both must be viewed as referring to the same
subject; but the grace of God is more fully extolled when the cause of
salvation is declared to consist in a free pardon.  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72)

<span id="xi.i-p45"></span>In this passage the argument is of the same
kind; for he says that, *when the filth shall have been washed away*,
the Church will be clean, and that all who shall have a place in her
will truly be the elect of God. Now, it is certain that this does not
apply universally to the external Church, into which many have been
admitted under the designation of believers who have nothing that
corresponds to their profession, and who even exceed the small number of
good people, as the chaff exceeds the wheat in the barn. And although
the captivity in Babylon had been employed by God, as a sieve, to remove
a large portion of chaff, yet we know that the Church was still very far
from being as pure as she ought to have been. But as at that time there
was displayed, in some measure, a resemblance of that purity which will
be truly and perfectly manifested after that

<span id="xi.i-p46"></span>the lambs shall have been separated from the
kids,  
(<span id="xi.i-p46.2"></span>[Mt
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)<span id="xi.i-p46.2"></span>,)

<span id="xi.i-p47"></span>when Isaiah speaks of those beginnings, he
includes, as his custom is, a period extending to the end, when God will
bring to perfection that which he then began.

<span id="xi.i-p48"></span>It is the same thing which we see every day
going forward; for although chastisements and punishments do not
entirely remove all spots from the Church, yet when spots have been
washed out, she recovers a part of her purity. Thus she suffers no loss
by the strokes inflicted on her; because, while she is diminished, she
is at the same time comforted by casting out many hypocrites; just as it
is only by casting out the offensive or corrupt matter that a diseased
body can be restored to health.

<span id="xi.i-p49"></span>Hence we obtain a most useful consolation;
for we are wont always to desire a multitude, and to estimate by it the
prosperity of the Church. On the contrary, we should rather desire to be
few in number, and that in all of us the glory of God may shine
brightly. But because our own glory leads us in another direction, the
consequence is, that we regard more a great number of men than the
excellence of a few.

<span id="xi.i-p50"></span>We ought also to learn what is the true glory
of a Church; for she is truly prosperous when the saints have a place in
her; though they be few and despised in the world, yet they render her
condition prosperous and desirable. But as it will never happen in the
world that the saints alone will hold a place in the Church, we ought
patiently to endure a mixture, and, in the meantime, we ought to reckon
it a most valuable blessing when she makes a near approach to the
cleanness which ought to be found in her.

<span id="xi.i-p51"></span>*And they shall all be written among the
living \[or, to life\] in Jerusalem.* We have already said that by those
who are written in the book of life are meant the elect of God; as if he
had said that the profane multitude, which have only a name on the
earth, will be cut off. The Prophet alludes to a mode of expression
which often occurs in the Scriptures, as when Moses desires that he
should be *blotted out of* *the book* of life, (<span
id="xi.i-p51.1"></span>[Ex 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span
id="xi.i-p51.1"></span>,) rather than that the whole nation should be
destroyed. Christ also says to the Apostles,

<span id="xi.i-p52"></span>Rejoice because your names are written in
heaven,  
(<span id="xi.i-p52.2"></span>[Lu
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span id="xi.i-p52.2"></span>;)

<span id="xi.i-p53"></span>and Ezekiel says, *They shall not be written
in the catalogue of my* *people*.  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73)
Now, although God has no other book than his eternal counsel, in which
he has predestinated us to salvation by adopting us for his children,
yet this comparison is exceedingly suitable to our weakness, because in
no other way could our mind conceive that God’s flock is known to him,
so that none of the elect can ever be deprived of eternal life. Since,
therefore, God has the names of his people in some manner written down,
the decree of adoption, by which their eternal blessedness is secured,
is called *the book of life*. The reprobate, though for a time they
appear to be on a level with the sons of God, are excluded from this
catalogue, as we see that they are cut off when he collects and
separates his own people. This matter will not be fully completed before
the last day; but as the children of God, by continually persevering,
when the reprobate fall off, have their election made sure, it is no
small consolation amidst their afflictions, when the temptations by
which they are assailed do not cause them to fall from their
steadfastness.

<span id="xi.i-p55"></span><span id="xi.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p56"></span>**4.** *When the* Lord *shall have washed
away the filth of the daughters of Zion.* He still follows out the same
statement; for in consequence of its being generally believed that those
calamities by which the Church is diminished inflict upon her grievous
injury, the Prophet more zealously inculcates the opposite opinion. And
now, for the purpose of refuting that error, he argues, on the contrary,
that by this method God washes away the filth, and removes the
corruptions, of his Church.

<span id="xi.i-p57"></span>*The blood of Jerusalem.* By *blood* I
understand not only murders or other atrocious crimes, but defilements
and stains of every description. This metaphor is a reduplication,
(<span id="xi.i-p57.1"></span>ἀναδίπλωσις,) by which he repeats the same
thing twice; for, having formerly spoken of pollution in general, he now
particularly mentions *blood* as one kind of ceremonial uncleanness. In
short, he shows the fruits which spring from God’s chastisements. By
them our spots are washed away. When abounding iniquity is not punished,
we become corrupted along with others; and therefore it is necessary
that God should earnestly warn us, and, like a physician, apply physic,
and the lancet, and sometimes proceed to *burning*

<span id="xi.i-p58"></span>*By the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit
of burning.* Here *judgment* stands for *uprightness* from its effect;
that is, when they who had deeply fallen are restored to their former
condition. He adds, *the spirit of burning*, by which the filth must be
*burned* and consumed. In this expression there are two things to be
observed; first, that the purification of the Church is accomplished by
the Spirit; and secondly, that from the effects which he produces the
Spirit receives the name, sometimes of *judgment* and sometimes of
*burning*; as if he had said, The *judgment* of the *Spirit*, The
*burning* of the *Spirit*. Whenever, therefore, expressions of this sort
occur in Scripture, “The Lord will do these things by the Spirit of
truth, of power, of righteousness,” we may change the expression thus,
“by the truth, by the power, by the righteousness, of the Spirit.” In
this manner doth the Spirit of God work in us, from whom is both the
beginning and the end of our salvation. From these terms, therefore, we
ought to learn what are the chief effects which he produces. By his
Spirit the Lord purifies our affections that he may renew and sanctify
us. The word *judgment* explains what is of chief importance in the
restoration of the Church; that is, when those things which were
confused or decayed are restored to good order. *Burning* points out the
plan and method by which the Lord restores the Church to her purity.

<span id="xi.i-p59"></span><span id="xi.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p60"></span>**5.** *And Jehovah will create on every
dwelling-place of Mount Zion.* As if he had said that “there will not be
a corner of Mount Zion on which the grace of God does not shine.”
*Dwelling-place* and *assembly* I understand to mean the same thing; for
*assembly* does not here denote a *congregation*, but the place where
men assemble. With the design to express a full blessing, he alludes to
what Moses relates, when the Lord delivered the people from Egyptian
bondage, and sent

<span id="xi.i-p61"></span>pillars of cloud by day and pillars of fire
by night.  
(<span id="xi.i-p61.2"></span>[Ex
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)<span id="xi.i-p61.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p62"></span>It was customary with the prophets, in
describing any remarkable blessing, to remind them of that deliverance
from Egypt as an extraordinary work of God; for on that occasion God
made a remarkable display of the boundless treasures of his grace in
establishing his Church, and left out no proof of his kindness, in order
to make known the happiness of that nation. But what chiefly deserved to
be commemorated was, that by the covering of *a cloud* by day he
protected them from excessive heat, and that by night *a pillar of fire*
went before them, to prevent them from wandering or going astray.

<span id="xi.i-p63"></span>It amounts to this, that when God shall bring
back the Church from the captivity in Babylon, the deliverance will be
of a kind not less striking and magnificent than when, at an early
period, the nation went out of Egypt. Not that during their journey from
Babylon to Judea they would be accompanied, as in the wilderness, by a
*cloud* and a *pillar of* *fire*, but that he would display his grace
and kindness by other methods not less remarkable. Just as if we were to
say at the present day, “God will enlighten us by his Spirit of *fire*;
He will give *cloven tongues*, (<span id="xi.i-p63.1"></span>[Ac
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)<span id="xi.i-p63.1"></span>,) to
spread his Gospel throughout the whole world.” Such expressions ought
not to be understood literally, as if the Spirit would be sent down from
heaven under that visible sign; but by reminding them of the miracle, it
would lead believers to expect that the same power of God, which the
Apostles formerly experienced, will now be displayed in restoring the
Church. Add to this, that the Prophet, by this mode of expression,
points out an uninterrupted continuance of blessing; as if he had said,
“Not only will God for a moment stretch out his hand for your
deliverance, but as he always accompanied your fathers in the
wilderness, so likewise he will deliver and protect you to the end.”

<span id="xi.i-p64"></span>*For on all the glory shall be a defense.*
This is connected with what he formerly said, that the *bud* or *branch*
which should afterwards spring up would be *for glory*. It is as if he
had said, “on all who shall bear the proof and marks of their
deliverance.” Perhaps also he alludes to the passage in which it is
related that the destroying angel passed over the houses which were
marked without doing them any injury, (<span id="xi.i-p64.1"></span>[Ex
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023)<span id="xi.i-p64.1"></span>;)
for as *the sprinkling of blood* at that time protected and saved them,
so Isaiah promises that believers, when God has marked them, will be
safe. This must be carefully observed; for we are reminded that we shall
not become partakers of the grace of God in any other way than by
bearing his image, and by his glory shining in us.

<span id="xi.i-p65"></span><span id="xi.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p66"></span>**6.** *And a covering in the day-time shall
be a shadow from the heat.* Though the Prophet confirms what we have
already noticed, that God will be our perpetual guide till he has
brought us to the end of our journey, yet we are reminded that believers
will always be exposed to numerous calamities. Scorching heat, and
piercing cold, and still heavier distresses, press on them severely;
when they escape from one danger, they meet with another. But the
highest consolation is that against every inconvenience the *shadow* of
the Lord will of itself be sufficient; for it will cover them in such a
manner that nothing can injure or do them any harm. Although, therefore,
various calamities and afflictions surround us on every side, still the
Lord promises that he will assist us; as it is said in the Psalm,

<span id="xi.i-p67"></span>The sun shall not scorch thee by day, nor the
moon by night; for the Lord will preserve thee from all evil. (<span
id="xi.i-p67.1"></span>[Ps. 121:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#007)<span id="xi.i-p67.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p68"></span>Nothing more is necessary than that we follow
our calling, and perform our duty faithfully. It belongs equally to the
condition of the good and of the bad that they suffer many
inconveniencies; but bad men have no refuge, no place of concealment in
which they may hide themselves, and they must be utterly overwhelmed.
But blessed is the condition of the godly; for although they endure heat
and cold, still they have a safe refuge in God. But that glory of which
we formerly spoke must shine in us; otherwise we shall have no share in
these things; and if we carry about with us God’s mark, whenever we
shall be assailed by a tempest, let us rest assured that he will be our
protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc13010.htm#fr_69) <span
id="xi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span> <span id="xi.i-p23.1"></span>Da tantum nomen
inane Connubii: liceat tumulo scripsisse, Catonis Marcia. Luc. Phars.
2:342.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc13010.htm#fr_70) <span
id="xi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span> *In that day shall the branch of the Lord be
beautiful and* *glorious*. — Eng. Ver. The marginal reading is, *beauty
and glory*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc13010.htm#fr_71) <span
id="xi.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p36"></span> *Excellent and comely* \[Heb. *beauty and
glory*\] *for them that are escaped of Israel*, \[Heb. *for the escaping
of Israel*.\] — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc13010.htm#fr_72) <span
id="xi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p44"></span> There is a mistake here. In the verse quoted
the prophet Joel does not speak of *the forgiveness of sins*; but our
Author probably had his eye on the concluding clause, *and in the
remnant whom* *the LORD shall call*, as resembling a part of this verse,
*and he that shall be left in Jerusalem*, and on this ground adduced it
as a *parallel* passage, but was not successful in pointing out where
the parallelism lies. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc13010.htm#fr_73) <span
id="xi.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p54"></span> He appears to refer to <span
id="xi.i-p54.1"></span>[Eze 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009)<span
id="xi.i-p54.1"></span>, where his version is, *And* *they shall not be
written in the writing*, that is, in the catalogue, *of my people*. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc13011)
