[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc13001)  [Next](cc13003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE,

<span id="iii-p2"></span>HENRIE

<span id="iii-p3"></span>PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAIN,  
SON AND HEIRE APPARANT TO OUR

<span id="iii-p4"></span>Sovereign Lord, James King of Great Britain,
etc

<span id="iii-p5"></span>AND TO THE MOST NOBLE AND  
VERTVOVS PRINCESS,

<span id="iii-p6"></span>THE LADY ELIZABETHS

<span id="iii-p7"></span>GRACE, His Highneffe moft deare Sifter; all
honour and happineffe, with eternall glorie through Chrift Iesvs.

<span id="iii-p8"></span>Most gracious and renowned Princes, hauing
translated out of French into our English tongue the booke of the
prophecy of *Isaiah*, interpreted and expounded by Master *John Calvin*,
of reverend memory: I humbly craue that it may be published under your
most Princely names and protection. The reason of this my humble
petition is, that the honour of so noble a work may not be imbased by
the means of my endevours. This Prophet, by birth, was the son of
*Amos*, esteemed by many to have been brother to *Azarias* King of
Judah, and Father in law to King *Manasses*: which being so, this
Prophet was by birth of the blood Royal, and descended of the house of
*David*, which for the promise of Christ to come of him, was the most
noble house of all the Kings of the earth. Being so borne, his education
could not be but Princely, and his bringing up in all good learning,
wisdom, virtue, and honour. His spiritual graces, not attained unto by
ordinary means, but inspired into him immediately by the Spirit of God,
were excellent. This appeareth particularly in the sixth Chapter of this
Prophet, declaring that an Angel of God saith a burning coal taken from
the Lords Altar, and laid to the mouth of the Prophet, refined his lips
and his tongue, that they became pure and precious as the finest Gold.
The same is manifest in all the book of his Prophecy; wherein both the
light and the heat of that heavenly fire appeareth. For he not only
declared the will of God sincerely, according to the law and testimony
delivered to *Moses*, but also foreshewed the future events of the
Kingdom of *Judah*, and of all the flourishing states and Kingdoms of
his time.

<span id="iii-p9"></span>He Prophecied also of the birth of Jesus
Christ, as if he had been taught by the Angel Gabriel; who brought the
annunciation and message of it to the blessed Virgin his mother. Of his
passion and death he spake, as if with the Apostle John he had stood by
when he was crucified. His resurrection he described, as if with all the
Apostles he had stood upon Mount Olive, where the Lord took the cloud of
Gloria as his heavenly Chariot to ascend and goes up to his Father. His
zeal and indignation against sin is evident every where, in his sharp
reproofs of the offenses of all estates.

<span id="iii-p10"></span>Finally, the book of his Prophecy beareth
written in the head of it the names of four Kings, in whose time he
prophesied; and before whom as a vessel of gold he bare the name of God
with great honour. All which things being royal, it seemed to me most
convenient that his book should still bear in the front of it the names
of Princes. And as he foreshewed that Kings should be Fosterfathers, and
Queenes Nurces of the Church of Christ, so my desire was that his book
might be published under the names and protection of Christian Princes.

<span id="iii-p11"></span>Moreover, I was led hereunto by the example of
this Interpreter, whose exposition upon *Isaiahs* prophesie I translate;
namely, of *M. John Calvin*, a man in his time of excellent piety and
learning; and one of the great lights, whereby it hath pleased God both
to chase away the errors of popery, as the darkness of the shadow of
death; and to cause his marvelous and comfortable light of the Gospel to
shine unto this present age. For he dedicated his first exposition of
this book to the young Prince, King *Edward* the sixth, of famous
memory, for the princely graces, for the zealous love of true religion,
and of al heroical virtues, wherewith in his young years he raised an
admirable expectation of future glory, if his precious life had long
continued. He was also most worthily renowned with highest glory, for
that gracious reformation in religion, which was established by his
regal authority, and which our English Church at this day with great
comfort doth enjoy, under the happy government of our Sovereign Lord the
King, your most noble and renowned Father.

<span id="iii-p12"></span>Furthermore, the same Author setting out again
this Commentary, amplified and enlarged, he dedicated this second
edition to our late most gracious Queen *Elizabeth*, worthy of eternal
memory in this Kingdom, for the reestablishing (after a few years
alteration) of the zealous reformation of her most virtuous brother.
Which example hath led me in most humble manner to seek for the same
work, the high patronage and protection of such Princes, like those to
whom he presented this his service.

<span id="iii-p13"></span>To whom I know none so like as your selves,
both in regard of your high estate, and also in like most noble descent
from the united houses of Yorke and Lancaster. Besides which
resemblance, your Highness also is of like years to the young Prince
King *Edward*, and in the eyes of all the kingdom, of like hope of
excellent virtue and zealous proceedings in the advancement of Christian
religion.

<span id="iii-p14"></span>In like manner your Grace resembleth the most
gracious late Queen *Elizabeth,* both in her royal name, and also in the
constant expectation of all men, to express in time all the princely
virtues and graces that shined in that most renowned Princess, from this
Western part of the world, to the furthest East, and to the rising of
the Sun.

<span id="iii-p15"></span>In which respects, esteeming such a
dedication, most like that which my author made of his own work, I have
most humbly craved that this my translation of it might bee vouchsafed
the honour to have your Princely names written in the beginning of it.
For notwithstanding the great difference that is between a reverend
learned writer and expounded of the holy Scriptures, and the translator
of such all expositions yet this mean service hath also his good use in
the Church of God; and is of long and tedious labour to such as take
pains therein; which being graciously accepted, may encourage others to
travel in this kind, and cause many to give thanks to God for you both,
by whose most princely favours and protection, they are made partakers
of such worthy writings. And I shall always pray Almighty God, with this
new year, to multiply many more upon you, and daily replenish your
hearts with all princely and heroical graces, that may enable and adorn
Princes of so his estates, amongst this people.

<span id="iii-p16"></span>Your Highness, and Graces most humbly devoted,
in all loyal and dutiful Affection,

<span id="iii-p17"></span>Clement Cotton

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dr. Herring's Epigram](cc13003)
