<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1008)  [Next](ch1010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 9:1</span></span>

The book - In the publick records, wherein there was an account of that
kingdom, and of the several families in it.

[1 Chronicles 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch1 9:2</span></span>

The first - After the return from Babylon. Dwelt - That took possession
of their own lands and cities, which had been formerly allotted them;
but of late years had been taken from them for their sins, and possessed
by other people. Israelites - The common people of Judah and Israel,
called here by the general name of Israelites, which was given them
before that unhappy division of the kingdoms, and now is restored to
them when the Israelites are united with the Jews in one and the same
commonwealth, that so all the names and signs of their former division
might be blotted out. And though the generality of the ten tribes were
yet in captivity, yet divers of them upon Cyrus's general proclamation,
associated themselves, and returned with those of Judah and Benjamin.
Levites - These took possession of the cities belonging to them, as they
had need and opportunity. Nethinims - A certain order of men, either
Gibeonites or others joined with them, devoted to the service of God,
and of his house, and of the priests and Levites; who, that they might
attend upon their work without distraction, had certain places and
possessions given to them; which they are now said to repossess.

[1 Chronicles 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch1 9:4</span></span>

Ammihud - That there is so great a diversity of names between this
catalogue and that of Neh. 11:4-36, may be ascribed to two causes: to
the custom of the Hebrews, who used frequently to give several names to
one person: and, to the change of times; for here they are named who
came up at the first return but many of those in Nehemiah might be such
as returned afterward, and came and dwelt either instead of the persons
here named, or with them.

[1 Chronicles 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch1 9:9</span></span>

And fifty - six - They are reckoned but nine hundred and twenty - eight
in [Neh 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#008), either because there he
mentions only those that were by lot determined to dwell at Jerusalem,
to whom he here adds those who freely offered themselves to it; or
because some of the persons first placed there were dead, or removed
from Jerusalem upon some emergent occasion.

[1 Chronicles 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch1 9:11</span></span>

The ruler - Or, a ruler in the house of God: not the high - priest, who
was Ezra, [Ezr 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008), but a chief ruler
under him.

[1 Chronicles 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch1 9:13</span></span>

Able men - Heb. mighty men of valour: which is here noted as an
excellent qualification for their place; because the priests might meet
with great opposition in the discharge of their office, in the execution
of the censures upon all impure persons without exception, and in
preserving sacred things from violation by the touch of forbidden hands.

[1 Chronicles 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch1 9:17</span></span>

Porters - Whose office it was to keep all the gates of the temple, that
no unclean person or thing might enter into it.

[1 Chronicles 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch1 9:18</span></span>

King's gate - In the east - gate of the temple, which was so called,
because the kings of Judah used to go to the temple through that gate.
Under this gate he comprehends all the rest, which also were guarded by
these porters. Companies - Or, according to the courses. They kept the
gates successively, according to that method into which the Levites were
distributed, for the more convenient management of their several
offices; among which this of the porters was one.

[1 Chronicles 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch1 9:19</span></span>

Tabernacle - Namely, in time past, when the tabernacle was standing,
before the temple was built. Fathers - The Kohathites. Host - When the
Israelites were in the wilderness, encamped in a military manner round
about the tabernacle, with whom these were then placed. Entry - Of the
veil by which they entered into the tabernacle; which he calls the entry
because then there were no gates. The meaning is, that all things were
now restored to their primitive order; and the several persons took
those offices upon them, which their ancestors had before them.

[1 Chronicles 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch1 9:21</span></span>

Was - In the time of David, as the following verse sheweth. Porter -
Chief porter. The door - Of the door which led out of the priests court
into the tabernacle, in which the ark was placed. Before the temple was
built, they had a mean and moveable tent, which they made use of in the
mean time. They that cannot yet have a temple, let them be thankful for
a tabernacle, and make the best use of it. Never let God's work be left
undone, for want of a place to do it in.

[1 Chronicles 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch1 9:22</span></span>

Villages - Where their usual residence was, and whence they came to
Jerusalem in their courses. Ordain - In the times of the judges there
was much disorder both in the Jewish state and church, and the Levites
came to the tabernacle promiscuously, and as their inclinations or
occasions brought them. But Samuel observing they were greatly
increased, began to think of establishing order in their ministration.
And these intentions of his probably were communicated to David, who
after his own peaceable settlement in his throne, revived and perfected
Samuel's design, and took care to put it in execution.

[1 Chronicles 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ch1 9:23</span></span>

The oversight - Namely, in David's time. Tabernacle - This is added to
explain what he means by the house of the Lord, not that tabernacle
which David had set up for the ark; but that more solemn tabernacle,
which Moses had made by God's express command; which in David's time was
at Gibeon; in which God was worshipped until the temple was built. Wards
- By turns or courses.

[1 Chronicles 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch1 9:25</span></span>

To come - From their several villages to the place of worship. Seven
days - Every seventh day the courses were changed, and the new comers
were to tarry 'till the next sabbath day. With them - To be with them,
with the chief porters, who alway's abode in the place of God's worship.

[1 Chronicles 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ch1 9:26</span></span>

Set office - These were constantly upon the place, in the execution of
their office, that they might oversee the inferior porters in their
work. Treasuries - In which the sacred utensils and other treasures
belonging to the temple, were kept.

[1 Chronicles 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">ch1 9:30</span></span>

The ointment - This is added to shew, that though the Levites were
intrusted with the keeping of this ointment, yet none but the priests
could make it.

[1 Chronicles 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">ch1 9:31</span></span>

The pans - Was to take care that fine flour might be provided, that when
occasion required they might make cakes in pans.

[1 Chronicles 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">ch1 9:33</span></span>

These - Others of the Levites; of whose several offices he had spoken
before. Are - Or rather, were; which is understood, all along in the
foregoing and following verses. Chambers - That they might be ready to
come whensoever they were called to the service of God in the
tabernacle. Free - From all trouble and employment, that they might
wholly attend upon the proper work. That work - Either composing or
ordering sacred songs; or actually singing; or teaching others to sing
them. Day and night - Continually, and particularly in the morning and
evening, the two times appointed for solemn service. Thus was God
continually praised, as it is fit he should be, who is continually doing
us good.

[1 Chronicles 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">ch1 9:34</span></span>

Jerusalem - Upon their return from Babylon they were not suffered to
chuse their habitations in the country, as others were, but were obliged
to settle themselves at Jerusalem, that they might constantly attend
upon God's service there.

[1 Chronicles 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">ch1 9:35</span></span>

Maachah - In this and the following verses, he repeats Saul's genealogy,
that he might make way for the following history.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 10](ch1010)

</div>
