<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1012)  [Next](co1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 13:1</span></span>

Though I speak with all the tongues - Which are upon earth, and with the
eloquence of an angel. And have not love - The love of God, and of all
mankind for his sake, I am no better before God than the sounding
instruments of brass, used in the worship of some of the heathen gods.
Or a tinkling cymbal - This was made of two pieces of hollow brass,
which, being struck together, made a tinkling, but very little variety
of sound.

[1 Corinthians 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 13:2</span></span>

And though I have the gift of prophecy - Of foretelling future events.
And understand all the mysteries - Both of God's word and providence.
And all knowledge - Of things divine and human, that ever any mortal
attained to. And though I have the highest degree of miracle working
faith, and have not this love, I am nothing.

[1 Corinthians 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 13:3</span></span>

And though I - Deliberately, piece by piece. Give all my goods to feed
the poor, yea, though I deliver up my body to be burned - Rather than I
would renounce my religion. And have not the love - Hereafter described.
It profiteth me nothing - Without this, whatever I speak, whatever I
have, whatever I know, whatever I do, whatever I suffer, is nothing.

[1 Corinthians 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 13:4</span></span>

The love of God, and of our neighbour for God's sake, is patient toward,
all men. It, suffers all the weakness, ignorance, errors, and
infirmities of the children of God; all the malice and wickedness of the
children of the world: and all this, not only for a time, but to the
end. And in every step toward overcoming evil with good, it is kind,
soft, mild, benign. It inspires the sufferer at once with the most
amiable sweetness, and the most fervent and tender affection. Love
acteth not rashly - Does not hastily condemn any one; never passes a
severe sentence on a slight or sudden view of things. Nor does it ever
act or behave in a violent, headstrong, or precipitate manner. Is not
puffed up - Yea, humbles the soul to the dust.

[1 Corinthians 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 13:5</span></span>

It doth not behave indecently - Is not rude, or willingly offensive, to
any. It renders to all their due - Suitable to time, person, and all
other circumstances. Seeketh not her own - Ease, pleasure, honour, or
temporal advantage. Nay, sometimes the lover of mankind seeketh not, in
some sense, even his own spiritual advantage; does not think of himself,
so long as a zeal for the glory of God and the souls of men swallows him
up. But, though he is all on fire for these ends, yet he is not provoked
to sharpness or unkindness toward any one. Outward provocations indeed
will frequently occur; but he triumphs over all. Love thinketh no evil -
Indeed it cannot but see and hear evil things, and know that they are
so; but it does not willingly think evil of any; neither infer evil
where it does not appear. It tears up, root and branch, all imagining of
what we have not proof. It casts out all jealousies, all evil surmises,
all readiness to believe evil.

[1 Corinthians 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 13:6</span></span>

Rejoiceth not in iniquity - Yea, weeps at either the sin or folly of
even an enemy; takes no pleasure in hearing or in repeating it, but
desires it may be forgotten for ever. But rejoiceth in the truth -
Bringing forth its proper fruit, holiness of heart and life. Good in
general is its glory and joy, wherever diffused in all the world.

[1 Corinthians 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 13:7</span></span>

Love covereth all things - Whatever evil the lover of mankind sees,
hears, or knows of any one, he mentions it to none; it never goes out of
his lips, unless where absolute duty constrains to speak. Believeth all
things - Puts the most favourable construction on everything, and is
ever ready to believe whatever may tend to the advantage of any one
character. And when it can no longer believe well, it hopes whatever may
excuse or extenuate the fault which cannot be denied. Where it cannot
even excuse, it hopes God will at length give repentance unto life.
Meantime it endureth all things - Whatever the injustice, the malice,
the cruelty of men can inflict. He can not only do, but likewise suffer,
all things, through Christ who strengtheneth him.

[1 Corinthians 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 13:8</span></span>

Love never faileth - It accompanies to, and adorns us in, eternity; it
prepares us for, and constitutes, heaven. But whether there be
prophecies, they shall fail - When all things are fulfilled, and God is
all in all. Whether there be tongues, they shall cease - One language
shall prevail among all the inhabitants of heaven, and the low and
imperfect languages of earth be forgotten. The knowledge likewise which
we now so eagerly pursue, shall then vanish away - As starlight is lost
in that of the midday sun, so our present knowledge in the light of
eternity.

[1 Corinthians 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 13:9</span></span>

For we know in part, and we prophesy in part - The wisest of men have
here but short, narrow, imperfect conceptions, even of the things round
about them, and much more of the deep things of God. And even the
prophecies which men deliver from God are far from taking in the whole
of future events, or of that wisdom and knowledge of God which is
treasured up in the scripture revelation.

[1 Corinthians 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 13:10</span></span>

But when that which is perfect is come - At death and in the last day.
That which is in part shall vanish away - Both that poor, low,
imperfect, glimmering light, which is all the knowledge we now can
attain to; and these slow and unsatisfactory methods of attaining, as
well as of imparting it to others.

[1 Corinthians 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 13:11</span></span>

In our present state we are mere infants in point of knowledge, compared
to what we shall be hereafter. I put away childish things - Of my own
accord, willingly, without trouble.

[1 Corinthians 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 13:12</span></span>

Now we see - Even the things that surround us. But by means of a glass -
Or mirror, which reflects only their imperfect forms, in a dim, faint,
obscure manner; so that our thoughts about them are puzzling and
intricate, and everything is a kind of riddle to us. But then - We shall
see, not a faint reflection, but the objects themselves. Face to face -
Distinctly. Now I know in part - Even when God himself reveals things to
me, great part of them is still kept under the veil. But then I shall
know even as also I am known - In a clear, full, comprehensive manner;
in some measure like God, who penetrates the centre of every object, and
sees at one glance through my soul and all things.

[1 Corinthians 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 13:13</span></span>

Faith, hope, love - Are the sum of perfection on earth; love alone is
the sum of perfection in heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 14](co1014)

</div>
