<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1010)  [Next](co1012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 11:2</span></span>

I praise you - The greater part of you.

[1 Corinthians 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 11:3</span></span>

I would have you know - He does not seem to have given them any order
before concerning this. The head of every man - Particularly every
believer. Is Christ, and the head of Christ is God - Christ, as he is
Mediator, acts in all things subordinately to his Father. But we can no
more infer that they are not of the same divine nature, because God is
said to be the head of Christ, than that man and woman are not of the
same human nature, because the man is said to be the head of the woman.

[1 Corinthians 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 11:4</span></span>

Every man praying or prophesying - Speaking by the immediate power of
God. With his head - And face. Covered - Either with a veil or with long
hair. Dishonoureth his head - St. Paul seems to mean, As in these
eastern nations veiling the head is a badge of subjection, so a man who
prays or prophesies with a veil on his head, reflects a dishonour on
Christ, whose representative he is.

[1 Corinthians 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 11:5</span></span>

But every woman - Who, under an immediate impulse of the Spirit, (for
then only was a woman suffered to speak in the church,) prays or
prophesies without a veil on her face, as it were disclaims subjection,
and reflects dishonour on man, her head. For it is the same, in effect,
as if she cut her hair short, and wore it in the distinguishing form of
the men. In those ages, men wore their hair exceeding short, as appears
from the ancient statues and pictures.

[1 Corinthians 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 11:6</span></span>

Therefore if a woman is not covered - If she will throw off the badge of
subjection, let her appear with her hair cut like a man's. But if it be
shameful far a woman to appear thus in public, especially in a religious
assembly, let her, for the same reason, keep on her veil.

[1 Corinthians 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 11:7</span></span>

A man indeed ought not to veil his head, because he is the image of God
- In the dominion he bears over the creation, representing the supreme
dominion of God, which is his glory. But the woman is only matter of
glory to the man, who has a becoming dominion over her. Therefore she
ought not to appear, but with her head veiled, as a tacit acknowledgment
of it.

[1 Corinthians 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 11:8</span></span>

The man is not - In the first production of nature.

[1 Corinthians 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 11:10</span></span>

For this cause also a woman ought to be veiled in the public assemblies,
because of the angels - Who attend there, and before whom they should be
careful not to do anything indecent or irregular.

[1 Corinthians 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 11:11</span></span>

Nevertheless in the Lord Jesus, there is neither male nor female -
Neither is excluded; neither is preferred before the other in his
kingdom.

[1 Corinthians 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 11:12</span></span>

And as the woman was at first taken out of the man, so also the man is
now, in the ordinary course of nature, by the woman; but all things are
of God - The man, the woman, and their dependence on each other.

[1 Corinthians 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 11:13</span></span>

Judge of yourselves - For what need of more arguments if so plain a
case? Is it decent for a woman to pray to God - The Most High, with that
bold and undaunted air which she must have, when, contrary to universal
custom, she appears in public with her head uncovered?

[1 Corinthians 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 11:14</span></span>

For a man to have long hair, carefully adjusted, is such a mark of
effeminacy as is a disgrace to him.

[1 Corinthians 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 11:15</span></span>

Given her - Originally, before the arts of dress were in being.

[1 Corinthians 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 11:16</span></span>

We have no such custom here, nor any of the other churches of God - The
several churches that were in the apostles' time had different customs
in things that were not essential; and that under one and the same
apostle, as circumstances, in different places, made it convenient. And
in all things merely indifferent the custom of each place was of
sufficient weight to determine prudent and peaceable men. Yet even this
cannot overrule a scrupulous conscience, which really doubts whether the
thing be indifferent or no. But those who are referred to here by the
apostle were contentious, not conscientious, persons.

[1 Corinthians 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 11:18</span></span>

In the church - In the public assembly. I hear there are schisms among
you; and I partly believe it - That is, I believe it of some of you. It
is plain that by schisms is not meant any separation from the church,
but uncharitable divisions in it; for the Corinthians continued to be
one church; and, notwithstanding all their strife and contention, there
was no separation of any one party from the rest, with regard to
external communion. And it is in the same sense that the word is used,
[Co1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010); [Co1
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#025); which are the only places in
the New Testament, beside this, where church schisms are mentioned.
Therefore, the indulging any temper contrary to this tender care of each
other is the true scriptural schism. This is, therefore, a quite
different thing from that orderly separation from corrupt churches which
later ages have stigmatized as schisms; and have made a pretence for the
vilest cruelties, oppressions, and murders, that have troubled the
Christian world. Both heresies and schisms are here mentioned in very
near the same sense; unless by schisms be meant, rather, those inward
animosities which occasion heresies; that is, outward divisions or
parties: so that whilst one said, "I am of Paul," another, "I am of
Apollos," this implied both schism and heresy. So wonderfully have later
ages distorted the words heresy and schism from their scriptural
meaning. Heresy is not, in all the Bible, taken for "an error in
fundamentals," or in anything else; nor schism, for any separation made
from the outward communion of others. Therefore, both heresy and schism,
in the modern sense of the words, are sins that the scripture knows
nothing of; but were invented merely to deprive mankind of the benefit
of private judgment, and liberty of conscience.

[1 Corinthians 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 11:19</span></span>

There must be heresies - Divisions. Among you - In the ordinary course
of things; and God permits them, that it may appear who among you are,
and who are not, upright of heart.

[1 Corinthians 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 11:20</span></span>

Therefore - That is, in consequence of those schisms. It is not eating
the Lord's supper - That solemn memorial of his death; but quite another
thing.

[1 Corinthians 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 11:21</span></span>

For in eating what ye call the Lord's supper, instead of all partaking
of one bread, each person brings his own supper, and eats it without
staying for the rest. And hereby the poor, who cannot provide for
themselves, have nothing; while the rich eat and drink to the full just
as the heathens use to do at the feasts on their sacrifices.

[1 Corinthians 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 11:22</span></span>

Have ye not houses to eat and drink your common meals in? or do ye
despise the church of God - Of which the poor are both the larger and
the better part. Do ye act thus in designed contempt of them?

[1 Corinthians 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 11:23</span></span>

I received - By an immediate revelation.

[1 Corinthians 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 11:24</span></span>

This is my body, which is broken for you - That is, this broken bread is
the sign of my body, which is even now to be pierced and wounded for
your iniquities. Take then, and eat of, this bread, in an humble,
thankful, obediential remembrance of my dying love; of the extremity of
my sufferings on your behalf, of the blessings I have thereby procured
for you, and of the obligations to love and duty which I have by all
this laid upon you.

[1 Corinthians 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 11:25</span></span>

After supper - Therefore ye ought not to confound this with a common
meal. Do this in remembrance of me - The ancient sacrifices were in
remembrance of sin: this sacrifice, once offered, is still represented
in remembrance of the remission of sins.

[1 Corinthians 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 11:26</span></span>

Ye show forth the Lord's death - Ye proclaim, as it were, and openly
avow it to God, and to all the world. Till he come - In glory.

[1 Corinthians 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 11:27</span></span>

Whosoever shall eat this bread unworthily - That is, in an unworthy,
irreverent manner; without regarding either Him that appointed it, or
the design of its appointment. Shall be guilty of profaning that which
represents the body and blood of the Lord.

[1 Corinthians 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 11:28</span></span>

But let a man examine himself - Whether he know the nature and the
design of the institution, and whether it be his own desire and purpose
throughly to comply therewith.

[1 Corinthians 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 11:29</span></span>

For he that eateth and drinketh so unworthily as those Corinthians did,
eateth and drinketh judgment to himself - Temporal judgments of various
kinds, [Co1 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030). Not distinguishing
the sacred tokens of the Lord's body - From his common food.

[1 Corinthians 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 11:30</span></span>

For this cause - Which they had not observed. Many sleep - In death.

[1 Corinthians 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 11:31</span></span>

If we would judge ourselves - As to our knowledge, and the design with
which we approach the Lord's table. We should not be thus judged - That
is, punished by God.

[1 Corinthians 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">co1 11:32</span></span>

When we are thus judged, it is with this merciful design, that we may
not be finally condemned with the world.

[1 Corinthians 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">co1 11:33</span></span>

The rest - The other circumstances relating to the Lord's supper.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 12](co1012)

</div>
