<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan003)  [Next](dan005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)

[Daniel 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 4:1</span></span>

Nebuchadnezzar the king - Daniel here sets down another strange relation
in the words of the king's own proclamation, sent to all his vast
kingdoms, and questionless put into the king's archives, and court -
rolls. Peace be multiplied - All health and happiness; this was always
the form of salutation among the eastern nations.

[Daniel 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 4:3</span></span>

How great are his signs - Nothing less than a real change of heart could
cause such a confession as this! Nebuchadnezzar was now old, had reigned
above forty years, and seen as much of the world as most men ever did.
And yet never 'till now, did he admire surprizing events, as the signs
and wonders of the high God!

[Daniel 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 4:4</span></span>

Was at rest - When my wars were over, I sat down quiet, enjoying the
spoils of my enemies.

[Daniel 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 4:13</span></span>

A watcher - A holy angel, the instrument of God, to execute God's
judgments which the angels watch constantly to perform.

[Daniel 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 4:17</span></span>

Of the holy ones - The decree was God's, and the demand was of the holy
angels; if God enact it, the angels had the dispensation of it put into
their hands, and they all consent to it as a just judgment of God to be
executed by them according to the will of God. The most high ruleth -
Nebuchadnezzar and his flatterers conceded he was a god in earth
unaccountable to any. But the great God will make all men know he rules
all in earth too, and sets up at his pleasure whom he will, and plucks
them down again.

[Daniel 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 4:19</span></span>

Troubled him - Because he fore - saw such troubles coming upon the king
for whom he had a high reverence. Let not the dream trouble thee - Speak
out, let the event be what it will. Belteshazzar said - What address and
how excellent a spirit is shewn in this short preface.

[Daniel 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 4:22</span></span>

Reacheth unto heaven - Thou art high and mighty in the in majesty which
God hath given thee. To the end of the earth - To the Caspian sea north,
to the Euxine and Aegean sea west, to the Mediterranean south.

[Daniel 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 4:25</span></span>

They shall drive thee - This was such a thundering peal, that it was
wonderful the king could endure to hear it without fury boiling in his
heart, yet the Lord with - held him. Seven times - Seven years. 'Till
thou know - How hard is it for lofty princes to learn this lesson.

[Daniel 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 4:26</span></span>

The heavens do rule - That God, who sits in heaven rules over all.

[Daniel 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 4:27</span></span>

If it may be - Daniel was not certain of pardon for him, nor did he
altogether despair of it. With what wisdom and tenderness does he speak:
and yet with what plainness?

[Daniel 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 4:28</span></span>

King Nebuchadnezzar - With how admirable propriety is the person changed
here! These six verses speaking in the third person. But in the thirty
fourth, Nebuchadnezzar having recovered his reason, speaks in the first
person again.

[Daniel 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">dan 4:33</span></span>

Was driven from men - Being bereft of his understanding, as a man
distracted he fled, and betook himself to the woods.

[Daniel 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">dan 4:34</span></span>

Mine understanding returned - God shined upon his soul, and gave him
understanding to consider his sad state, and the causes of it. And
honoured him - By prayer and praise, adoring the justice and mercy of
God, giving God the glory of his sovereignty and unchangeableness.

[Daniel 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">dan 4:35</span></span>

As nothing - A due consideration of God's infinite greatness, makes the
creature appear as nothing; creatures are nothing to help, nothing to
hurt, nothing in duration, nothing solid and substantial, nothing
without dependence, and influence, and support from God. His will -
Being the Lord of hosts, and the only absolute and universal monarch of
the world.

[Daniel 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">dan 4:36</span></span>

Brightness - I had again the majesty of a king in my countenance. I was
established - In wonted power and place, owned and obeyed, by all.
Majesty was added - He was the most august and magnificient prince on
earth, much more so than before.

[Daniel 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">dan 4:37</span></span>

Now I praise - Thus can the Lord make the stoutest hearts to stoop, and
do him homage. This doxology proceeds from his heart. Are truth - God is
truth essentially: he is the rule and standard of truth, his words are
truth, his ways are truth, and they are judgment: he is wise, and hath
dealt justly with me for my pride, and in very faithfulness hath
afflicted me, and in very tenderness hath restored me; I do, and ever
shall adore him for it. Able to abase - As he hath declared upon me, in
stupendous changes, which I proclaim to all the world. He had a just
controversy with me, and I have no ground to quarrel with him, but to
give him glory by this confession. What authority had any one to say,
That this man "was no convert?" We can no more doubt of his salvation
than of Solomon's.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 5](dan005)

</div>
