<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu028)  [Next](deu030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 29:1</span></span>

These are the terms or conditions upon which God hath made, that is
renewed his covenant with you. The covenant was but one in substance,
but various in the time and manner of its dispensation.

[Deuteronomy 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 29:4</span></span>

Yet the Lord - That is, you have perceived and seen them with the eyes
of your body, but not with your minds and hearts; you have not yet
learned rightly to understand the word and works of God, so as to know
them for your good, and to make a right use of them, and to comply with
them: which he expresseth thus, the Lord hath not given you, &c. not to
excuse their wickedness, but to direct them to whom they must have
recourse for a good understanding of God's works; and to intimate that
although the hearing ear, and the seeing eye, be the workmanship of God,
yet their want of his grace was their own fault, and the just punishment
of their former sins; their present case being like theirs in Isaiah's
time, who first shut their own eyes and ears that they might not see and
hear, and would not understand, and then by the righteous judgment of
God, had their eyes and ears closed that they should not see and hear,
and understand. God's readiness to do us good in other things, is a
plain evidence, that if we have not grace, that best of gifts, 'tis our
own fault and not his: he would have gathered us, and we would not.

[Deuteronomy 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 29:6</span></span>

Ye have not eaten bread - Common bread purchased by your own money, or
made by your own hands, but heavenly and angelical bread. Neither drank
wine - But only water out of the rock. The Lord - Omnipotent and all -
sufficient for your provision without the help of any creatures, and
your God in covenant with you who hath a true affection to you, and
fatherly care of you.

[Deuteronomy 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 29:11</span></span>

Thy stranger - Such strangers as had embraced their religion: all sorts
of persons, yea, even the meanest of them.

[Deuteronomy 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 29:12</span></span>

Into covenant and into his oath - Into covenant, confirmed by a solemn
oath.

[Deuteronomy 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 29:13</span></span>

That he may establish thee - Here is the summary of that covenant
whereof Moses was the mediator, and in the covenant relation between God
and them, all the precepts and promises of the covenant are included.
That they should be established for a people to him, to fear, love,
obey, and be devoted to him, and that he should be to them a God, to
make them holy and happy; and a due sense of the relation we stand in to
God as our God, and the obligation we are under to him as his people, is
enough to bring us to all the duties, and all the comforts of the
covenant. And does this covenant include nothing spiritual? nothing that
refers to eternity?

[Deuteronomy 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 29:15</span></span>

So also - With your posterity. For so the covenant was made at first
with Abraham and his seed, by which as God engaged himself to continue
the blessing of Abraham upon his posterity, so he also engaged them to
the same duties which were required of Abraham. So it is even among men,
where a king confers an estate upon a subject and his heirs for ever,
upon some certain conditions, all his heirs who enjoy that benefit, are
obliged to the same conditions. It may likewise include those who were
then constrained to be absent, by sickness, or any necessary occasion.
Nay one of the Chaldee pharaphrasts reads it, all the generations that
have been from the first days of the world, and all that shall arise to
the end of the whole world, stand with us here this day. And so taking
this covenant as a typical dispensation of the covenant of grace, 'tis a
noble testimony to the Mediator of that covenant, who is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever.

[Deuteronomy 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 29:16</span></span>

Egypt - Where you have seen their idolatries, and learned too much of
them, as the golden calf shewed, and therefore have need to renew your
covenant with God; where also we were in dreadful bondage whence God
alone hath delivered us, to whom therefore we are deeply obliged, and
have all reason to renew our covenant with him. Through the nations -
With what hazard, if God had not appeared for us!

[Deuteronomy 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 29:18</span></span>

A root - An evil heart inclining you to such cursed idolatry, and
bringing forth bitter fruits.

[Deuteronomy 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 29:19</span></span>

Of this curse - Of that oath where - in he swore he would keep covenant
with God, and that with a curse pronounced against himself if he did not
perform it. Bless himself - Flatter himself in his own eyes, with vain
hopes, as if God did not mind such things, and either could not, or
would not punish them. Peace - Safety and prosperity. My own heart -
Though I do not follow God's command, but my own devices. To add
drunkenness to thirst - The words may be rendered, to add thirst to
drunkenness, and so the sense may be, that when he hath multiplied his
sins, and made himself as it were drunk with them, yet he is not
satisfied therewith, but still whets his appetite, and provokes his
thirst after more, as drunkards often use means to make themselves
thirst after more drink.

[Deuteronomy 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 29:20</span></span>

Shall smoke - Shall burn and break forth with flame and smoke as it were
from a furnace.

[Deuteronomy 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 29:21</span></span>

Unto evil - Unto some peculiar and exemplary plague; he will make him a
monument of his displeasure to the whole land.

[Deuteronomy 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 29:23</span></span>

Salt and burning - Is burnt up and made barren, as with brimstone and
salt.

[Deuteronomy 29:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 29:26</span></span>

Whom God had not given to them - For their worship, but hath divided
them unto all nations, for their use and service. So he speaks here of
the sun and moon and stars, which were the principal gods worshipped by
the neighbouring nations.

[Deuteronomy 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 29:29</span></span>

The secret things - Having mentioned the amazing judgments of God upon
the whole land and people of Israel, and foreseeing the utter
extirpation which would come upon them for their wickedness, he breaks
out into this pathetic exclamation, either to bridle their curiosity,
who would be apt to enquire into the time and manner of so great an
event; or to quiet his own mind, and satisfy the scruples of others, who
perceiving God to deal so severely with his own people, when in the
meantime he suffered those nations which were guilty of grosser atheism
and idolatry, might thence take occasion to deny his providence or
question the equity of his proceedings. To this he answers, that the
ways and judgments of God, tho' never unjust, are often times hidden
from us, unsearchable by our shallow capacities, and matter for our
admiration, not our enquiry. But the things which are revealed by God
and his word, are the proper object of our enquiries, that thereby we
may know our duty, and be kept from such terrible calamities as these
now mentioned.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 30](deu030)

</div>
