<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu029)  [Next](deu031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 30:1</span></span>

The blessing - When thou art obedient. The curse - When thou becomest
rebellious.

[Deuteronomy 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 30:6</span></span>

And the Lord - Or, For the Lord will circumcise thine heart, will by his
word and spirit change and purge thy heart from all thine idolatry and
wickedness, and incline thy heart to love him. God will first convert
and sanctify them, the fruit whereof shall be, that they shall return
and obey God's commandments, [Deu
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#008), and then shall prosper in all
things, [Deu 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#009). This promise
principally respects the times of the gospel, and the grace which was to
be then imparted to all Israel by Christ.

[Deuteronomy 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 30:9</span></span>

For good - Whereas thou did formerly receive these mercies for thy hurt,
now thou shalt have them for thy good, thy heart shall be so changed
that thou shalt not now abuse them, but employ them to the service of
God the giver. Over thee for good - To do thee good; as he did rejoice
to destroy thee.

[Deuteronomy 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 30:10</span></span>

If thou wilt hearken - This is added to warn them that they should not
receive the grace of God in vain, and to teach them that the grace of
God doth not discharge man's obligation to his duty, nor excuse him for
the neglect of it. It is observable, that Moses calls God, the Lord thy
God twelve times in these ten verses. In the threatnings of the former
chapter, he is all along called the Lord, a God of power, and the judge
of all. But in the promises of this chapter, the Lord thy God, a God of
grace, and in covenant with thee.

[Deuteronomy 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 30:11</span></span>

This commandment - The great command of loving and obeying God, which is
the sum of the law, of which yet he doth not here speak, as it is in
itself, but as it is molified and accompanied with the grace of the
gospel. The meaning is, that tho' the practice of God's laws be now far
from us, and above our strength, yet, considering the advantage of
gospel grace, whereby God enables us to do our duty, it is near and easy
to us, who believe. And so this well agrees with [Rom
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006), &c. where St. Paul applies this
place to the righteousness of faith. Is not hidden - Heb. Is not too
wonderful for thee, not too hard for thee to know and do. The will of
God, which is but darkly manifested to other nations, [Act
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027), is clearly and fully revealed
unto thee: thou canst not pretend ignorance or invincible difficulty.

[Deuteronomy 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 30:12</span></span>

In heaven - Shut up there, but it hath been thence delivered and
published in thy hearing.

[Deuteronomy 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 30:13</span></span>

Neither beyond the sea - The knowledge of this commandment is not to be
fetched from far distant places, to which divers of the wise Heathens
travelled for their wisdom; but it was brought to thy very doors and
ears, and declared to thee in this wilderness.

[Deuteronomy 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 30:14</span></span>

In thy mouth - Thou knowest it so well, that it is the matter of thy
common discourse. In thy heart - In thy mind, (as the heart is very
commonly taken) to understand and believe it. In a word, the Law is
plain and easy: but the gospel is much more so.

[Deuteronomy 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 30:19</span></span>

Chuse life - They shall have life that chuse it: they that chuse the
favour of God, and communion with him, shall have what they chuse. They
that come short of life and happiness, must thank themselves only. They
had had them, if they had chosen them, when they were put to their
choice: but they die, because they will die.

[Deuteronomy 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 30:20</span></span>

That thou mayest love the Lord thy God - Here he shews them in short,
what their duty is; To love God as the Lord, a being most amiable, and
as their God, a God in covenant with them: as an evidence of their love,
to obey his voice in every thing, and by constancy in this love and
obedience, to cleave to him all their days. And what encouragement had
they to do this? For he is thy life and the length of thy days - He
gives life, preserves life, restores life, and prolongs it, by his
power, tho' it be a frail life, and by his presence, tho' it be a
forfeited life. He sweetens life by his comforts, and compleats all in
life everlasting.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 31](deu031)

</div>
