<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu010)  [Next](deu012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 11:2</span></span>

Know - That is, acknowledge and consider it with diligence and
thankfulness.

[Deuteronomy 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 11:4</span></span>

Unto this day - The effect of which destruction continueth to this day,
in their weakness and fear, and our safety from their farther attempts
against us.

[Deuteronomy 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 11:7</span></span>

Your eyes have seen - All of them had seen some, and some of them had
seen all the great things done in Egypt and at the Red - sea, and in the
Wilderness. What our eyes have seen, especially in our early days,
should be improved by us long after.

[Deuteronomy 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 11:10</span></span>

With thy foot - That is, with great pains and labour of thy feet, partly
by going up and down to fetch water and disperse it, and partly by
digging furrows with thy foot, and using engines for distributing the
water, which engines they thrust with their feet. For tho' the river
Nile did once in a year overflow the grounds, and made them fruitful,
yet often it failed them, at least in part, and then they were put to
great pains about their ground. And when it did overflow sufficiently,
and left its mud upon the earth, yet that mud was in a little time
hardened, and needed another watering, and much digging and labour both
of the hand and feet, especially in places more remote from that river;
which inconvenience Canaan was free from.

[Deuteronomy 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 11:11</span></span>

Of hills and valleys - And therefore much more healthful than Egypt was,
which as it was enriched, so it was annoyed with the Nile, which
overflowed the land in summer time, and thereby made the country both
unpleasant and unhealthful. And health being the greatest of all outward
blessings, Canaan must therefore needs be a more desirable habitation
than Egypt. The rain of heaven - Which is more easy, being given thee
without thy charge or pains; more sweet and pleasant, not hindering thy
going abroad upon thy occasions, as the overflow of the Nile did,
whereby the Egyptians were confined in a great measure to their houses;
more safe and healthful, being free from that mud which attends upon the
waters of the Nile; and more certain too, the former and the latter rain
being promised to be given to them in their several seasons, upon
condition of their obedience, which condition, tho' it may seem a clog
and inconvenience, yet indeed was a great benefit, that by their own
necessities and interest they might be obliged to that obedience, upon
which their happiness depended both for this life and the next.

[Deuteronomy 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 11:12</span></span>

Careth for - In a special manner watering it immediately as it were by
his own hand, without man's help, and giving peculiar blessings to it,
which Egypt enjoys not. To the end of the year - To give it the rain,
and other blessings proper to the several seasons. But all these
mercies, and the fruitfulness of the land consequent upon them, were
suspended upon their disobedience. And therefore it is not at all
strange that some later writers, describe the land of Canaan as a barren
soil, which is, so far from affording ground to question the authority
of the scriptures, that it doth much more confirm it, this, being an
effect of that threatning that God would turn a fruitful land into
barrenness for the wickedness of these that dwell in it, [Psa
107:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#034).

[Deuteronomy 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 11:14</span></span>

The ruin of your land - Which is, proper to your land, not common to
Egypt, where, as all authors agree, there is little rain. The first rain
fell in seed time, to make the corn spring, the other a little before
harvest, to ripen it.

[Deuteronomy 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 11:15</span></span>

I will send grass in thy fields - So godliness has here the promise of
the life which now is. But the favour of God puts gladness into the
heart, more than the increase of corn, wine and oil.

[Deuteronomy 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 11:17</span></span>

Shut up the heaven - Which is compared sometimes to a great store -
house wherein God lays up his treasures of rain, [Job
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022), the doors whereof God is said
to open when he gives rain, and to shut when he witholds it.

[Deuteronomy 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 11:18</span></span>

Lay up - Let us all observe these three rules, Let our hearts be filled
with the word of God. Lay up these words in your hearts, as in a store -
house, to be used upon all occasions. Let our eyes be fixed upon the
word of God: Bind them for a sign upon your hand, which is always in
view, and as frontlets between your eyes, which you cannot avoid the
sight of. Let our tongues be employed about the word of God, especially
with our children, who must be taught this, as far more needful than the
rules of decency, or the calling they are to live by.

[Deuteronomy 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 11:21</span></span>

As the days of heaven - As long as the heaven keeps its place and
continues its influences upon earth.

[Deuteronomy 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 11:24</span></span>

Every place - Not absolutely, as the Rabbins fondly conceit, but in the
promised land, as it is restrained in the following words; either by
possession, or by dominion, namely, upon condition of your obedience.
The wilderness - Of Sin, on the south - side. To Lebanon - Which was on
the north border. Euphrates - On the east. So far the right of dominion
extended, but that their sins cut them short: and so far Solomon
extended his dominion. The uttermost sea - The western or midland sea.

[Deuteronomy 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 11:26</span></span>

I set before you - I propose them to your choice.

[Deuteronomy 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 11:28</span></span>

Which ye have not known - Which you have no acquaintance with, nor
experience of their power, or wisdom, or goodness, as you have had of
mine.

[Deuteronomy 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 11:29</span></span>

Put - Heb. Thou shalt give, that is, speak or pronounce, or cause to be
pronounced. So the word to give is used, [Deu
13:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001); [Job
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#003); [Pro
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#009). This is, more particularly
expressed, [Deu 27:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012).

[Deuteronomy 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 11:30</span></span>

Over against - Looking toward Gilgal, tho' at some considerable distance
from it. Beside the plains of Moreh - This was one of the first places
that Abram came to in Canaan. So that in sending them thither to hear
the blessing and the curse, they were minded of the promise made to
Abram in that very place, [Gen 12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 12](deu012)

</div>
