<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu031)  [Next](deu033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 32:1</span></span>

O heavens, O earth - You lifeless and senseless creatures, which he
calls upon partly to accuse the stupidity of Israel, that were more dull
of hearing than these: and partly as witnesses of the truth of his
sayings and the justice of God's proceedings against them.

[Deuteronomy 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 32:2</span></span>

As the rain - Look what effect rain and dew have upon herbs and grass
which they make fresh and fragrant and growing, the same effect may my
discourse have upon your hearts, that is, to make them soft and pliable
and fruitful.

[Deuteronomy 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 32:3</span></span>

The name of the Lord - His glorious excellencies and righteous actions,
by which he hath made himself known as a man is known by his name, and
by which it will appear both that there is no blame to be laid upon him
whatsoever befals you, and that it is gross madness to forsake such a
God for dumb idols. Ascribe ye - As I am about to publish the majesty
and glory of God, so do you also acknowledge it.

[Deuteronomy 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 32:4</span></span>

A rock - As for the stability of his nature, and invincibleness of his
power, so also for his fixedness and immutability in his counsels and
promises and ways; so that is there shall be a sad change in your
affairs, remember that this proceeds from yourselves and from the change
of your ways towards God, and not from God, in whom there is no
variableness or shadow of change, [Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017). His work - All his works and
actions are unblameable, perfect, wise and righteous. His ways - All his
administrations in the world and particularly with you are managed with
wisdom and justice. A God of truth - Constant to his promises: you
cannot accuse him of any unfaithfulness to this day.

[Deuteronomy 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 32:5</span></span>

They - The Israelites. Their spot - The wickedness with which they are
stained, is not of his children - Plainly shews they are not his
children, but the devil's. God's children have no such spot. Indeed this
text does not affirm, they have any spot at all. Perverse - Froward and
untractable: Crooked - Irregular and disorderly.

[Deuteronomy 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 32:6</span></span>

O foolish people and unwise! - Fools and double fools! Fools indeed, to
disoblige one, on whom you so entirely depend! Who hath bewitched you!
To forsake your own mercies for lying vanities! Bought thee - That hath
redeemed thee from Egyptian bondage. Made thee - Not only in a general
by creation, but in a peculiar manner by making thee his peculiar
people. Established - That is, renewed and confirmed his favour to thee,
and not taken it away, which thou hast often provoked him to do.

[Deuteronomy 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 32:7</span></span>

The days of old - The events of ancient days or former ages, and thou
wilt find that I had a respect unto thee not only in Abraham's time, but
long before it.

[Deuteronomy 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 32:8</span></span>

Their inheritance - When God by his providence allotted the several
parts of the world to several people, which was done Gen. 10:1-32, [Gen
11:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001). When he separated - Divided
them in their languages and habitations according to their families. He
set the bounds - That is, he disposed of the several lands and limits of
the people so as to reserve a sufficient place for the great numbers of
the people of Israel. And therefore he so guided the hearts of several
people, that the posterity of Canaan, which was accursed of God, and
devoted to ruin, should be seated in that country which God intended for
the children of Israel, that so when their iniquities were ripe, they
might be rooted out, and the Israelites come in their stead.

[Deuteronomy 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 32:9</span></span>

His people - It is no wonder God had so great a regard to this people,
for he chose them out of all mankind to be his peculiar portion.

[Deuteronomy 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 32:10</span></span>

He found him - Not by chance, but as it were looking out and seeking for
him. He did indeed manifest himself to him in Egypt, but it was in the
wilderness at Sinai, God found him in an eminent manner, and revealed
his will to him, and entered into covenant with him, and imparted
himself and his grace and blessing to him. By this word he also
signifies both their lost condition in themselves, and that their
recovery was not from themselves, but only from God who sought and found
them out by his grace. In the waste howling wilderness - In a place
destitute of all the necessaries and comforts of life, which also was a
type of that desolate and comfortless condition in which all men are
before the grace of God finds them out; where instead of the voices of
men, is nothing heard but the howlings and yellings of ravenous birds
and beasts. He led them - He conducted them frons place to place by his
cloudy pillar and providence. Or, he compassed him about, by his
provident care, watching over him and preserving him on every side. As
the apple of his eye - As men use to keep the apple of their eye, that
is, with singular care and diligence, this being as a most tender, so a
most useful part.

[Deuteronomy 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 32:11</span></span>

Her nest - Her young ones in the nest; which she by her cry and motion
provoketh to fly. Her wings - As preparing herself to fly. On her wings
- Or, as on her wings, that is, gently, and tenderly and safely too, as
if she carried them not in her claws for fear of hurting them, but upon
her wings. Some say, the eagle doth usually carry her young ones upon
her wings.

[Deuteronomy 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 32:12</span></span>

Did lead them - When they were shut up in Egypt as in their nest whence
they durst not venture to fly nor stir, he taught and encouraged and
enabled them to fly out from that bondage, he dealt tenderly with them,
bearing with their infirmities, keeping them from all harms. With him -
To assist him at that work or to deliver them. The more unworthy they in
giving to idols a share in that worship which they owe to God only.

[Deuteronomy 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 32:13</span></span>

The high places - To conquer their strongest holds, which often are in
the mountains, and their cities fenced with walls of greatest height and
strength. To ride upon, in scripture phrase, is to subdue or conquer.
Out of the rock - This being a land flowing with honey, where the bees
made honey in the holes of rocks, or in the trees that grew upon or
among the rocks. Out of the flinty rocks - The olive - trees grow and
bear most fruit in rocky or hilly places.

[Deuteronomy 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 32:14</span></span>

Fat of lambs - For though the fat wherewith the inward parts were
covered was not to be eaten by them, but offered to God, yet that fat
which was mixed with the flesh they might eat, as the Jewish doctors
note. Basham - A place famous for excellent cattle. Fat of kidneys of
wheat - With the finest of the grains of wheat; compared to kidneys for
their shape and largeness.

[Deuteronomy 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 32:15</span></span>

Jeshurun - Israel whom he calls right or upright, (as the word
signifies) partly by way of instruction to mind them what they professed
and ought to be; and partly by way of exprobration, to shew them what a
shame it was to degenerate so much from their name and profession.
Kicked - As well fed cattle use to do: he grew insolent and rebellious
against God and against his word and spirit.

[Deuteronomy 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 32:16</span></span>

To jealousy - To anger and fury, for jealousy is the rage of a man. And
withall it implies the ground of his anger, their falseness to God whom
they had accepted as their husband, and their spiritual whoredom with
other gods.

[Deuteronomy 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 32:17</span></span>

Unto devils - Unto idols, which the devils brought into the world in
opposition to God, in and by which the devils often manifested
themselves to men, and gave them answers, and received their worship.
The Gentiles pretended to worship God in those idols, and the devils
which inspired them, deluded the nations with pretences that they were a
sort of lower gods. Moses takes off this mark, and shews the Israelites
that these pretended gods were really devils, and therefore that it was
the height of madness to honour or worship them. Not to God - For God
utterly rejected those sacrifices which they offered to him together
with idols. They knew not - Or, who never knew them, that is, never
shewed any kindness to them, or did them any good: New gods - Not simply
or absolutely, for some of these had been worshipped for many
generations, but comparatively to the true God, who is the ancient of
days, [Deu 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#009), and who was worshipped
from the beginning of the world. Feared not - Served not, worshipped
not.

[Deuteronomy 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 32:18</span></span>

Of the rock - Of God, one of whose titles this is, or of Christ, who is
called the rock, [Co1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004), whom the
Israelites tempted.

[Deuteronomy 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 32:19</span></span>

His sons and daughters - Such they were by calling and profession.

[Deuteronomy 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 32:20</span></span>

I will see - I will make them and others see, what the fruit of such
actions shall be. No faith - No fidelity: perfidious, that have broken
their covenant so solemnly made with me.

[Deuteronomy 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 32:21</span></span>

I will move them to jealousy with those that are not a people - With the
Heathen nations, who are none of my people, who scarce deserve the name
of a people, as being without the knowledge and fear of God, which is
the foundation of all true policy and government, and many of them
destitute of all government, laws and order. And yet these people I will
take in your stead, receive them and reject you; which, when it came to
pass how desperately did it provoke the Jews to jealousy? A foolish
nation - So the Gentiles were both in the opinion of the Jews and in
truth and reality, notwithstanding all their pretences to wisdom, there
being nothing more foolish or brutish than the worship of idols.

[Deuteronomy 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 32:22</span></span>

A fire is kindled - Great and grievous judgments shall be inflicted,
which often come under the name of fire. Are they proud of their plenty?
It shall burn up the increase of the earth. Are they confident of their
strength? It shall destroy the very foundations of the mountains. It
shall burn unto the lowest hell: it shall bring them to the very depth
of misery in this world, which yet will he but a faint resemblance of
their endless misery in the next.

[Deuteronomy 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 32:23</span></span>

Spend mine arrows - Even empty my quiver, and send upon them all my
plagues, which, like arrows shot by a skilful and strong hand, shall
speedily reach and certainly hit and mortally wound them.

[Deuteronomy 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 32:24</span></span>

With hunger - With famine, which burns and parches the inward parts, and
make the face black as a coal, [Lam
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#008). Burning heat - From fevers or
carbuncles, or other inflaming distempers.

[Deuteronomy 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 32:27</span></span>

The wrath - Their rage against me, as it is expressed, [Isa
37:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#028), their furious reproaches
against my name, as if I were cruel to my people or unable to deliver
them. The fear hereof is ascribed to God after the manner of men.
Strangely - Insolenty and arrogantly above what they used to do.

[Deuteronomy 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 32:28</span></span>

Void of counsel - Their enemies are foolish people, and therefore make
so false and foolish a judgment upon things.

[Deuteronomy 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 32:29</span></span>

They - Israel. Latter end - What their end will be, and that tho' God
spare them long, yet at last judgment will certainly overtake them.

[Deuteronomy 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 32:30</span></span>

One - Israelite. Their rock - Their God, who was their refuge and
defence. Sold them - Namely, for bond - slaves, had given themselves up
into their enemies hands. Shut them up - As it were in the net which
their enemies had laid for them.

[Deuteronomy 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">deu 32:31</span></span>

Being judges - Who by their dear bought experience have been forced to
acknowledge that our God was far stronger than they and their false gods
together.

[Deuteronomy 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">deu 32:32</span></span>

For - As if he had said, This is the reason why their rock hath shut
them up. Their vine is of the vine of Sodom - The people of Israel,
which I planted as a choice vine, are now degenerated and become like
the vine of Sodom, their principles and practices are all corrupt and
abominable. Bitter - Their fruits are loathsome to me, mischievous to
others, and at last will be pernicious to themselves.

[Deuteronomy 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">deu 32:34</span></span>

This - All their wickedness mentioned before. My long suffering towards
them may make them think I have forgotten their sins, but I remember
them punctually, they are sealed up as in a bag, [Job
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017), and as men seal up their
treasures.

[Deuteronomy 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">deu 32:35</span></span>

Their feet shall slide - They who now think they stand fast and
unmoveable, shall fall into utter destruction. In due time - Though not
so soon as some may expect, yet in that time when it shall be most
proper, when they have filled up the measure of their sins. At hand -
Heb. is near. So the scripture often speaks of those things which are at
many hundred years distance, to signify, that though they may be afar
off as to our measures of time, yet in God's account they are near, they
are as near as may be, when the measure of their sins is once full, the
judgment shall not be deferred.

[Deuteronomy 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">deu 32:36</span></span>

For - Or, nevertheless, having spoken of the dreadful calamity which
would come upon his people, he now turns his discourse into a more
comfortable strain, and begins to shew that after God had sorely
chastised his people, he would have mercy upon them and turn their
captivity. Judge his people - Shall plead their cause, shall protect and
deliver them. Repent - Of the evils he hath brought upon them. None shut
up - Either in their strong cities or castles or other hiding places, or
in the enemies hands or prisons, whence there might be some hope or
possibility of redemption; and none left, as the poor and contemptible
people are neglected and usually left by the conquerors in the conquered
land, but all seem to be cut off and destroyed.

[Deuteronomy 32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">deu 32:37</span></span>

He shall say - The Lord, before he deliver his people, will first
convince them of their former folly in forsaking him and following
idols.

[Deuteronomy 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">deu 32:38</span></span>

Which did eat - That is, to whom you offered sacrifices and oblations
after the manner of the Gentiles. Help you - If they can.

[Deuteronomy 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">deu 32:39</span></span>

See now - Learn by your own sad experience what vain and impotent things
idols are. I am he - The only true, omnipotent and irresistible God.

[Deuteronomy 32:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">deu 32:40</span></span>

I lift up my hand - I solemnly swear, that I will do what here follows.
I live - As sure as I live.

[Deuteronomy 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">deu 32:41</span></span>

If I whet my sword - If once I begin to prepare for war and for the
execution of my sentence. Judgment - Of the instruments of judgment, of
the weapons of war. A metaphor from warriors, that take their weapons
into their hand, when they intend to fight.

[Deuteronomy 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">deu 32:42</span></span>

Captives - Whom my sword hath sorely wounded, though not utterly killed.
From the beginning - When once I begin to revenge myself and my people
upon mine and their enemies, I will go on and make a full end.

[Deuteronomy 32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">deu 32:43</span></span>

Rejoice - He calls upon the nations to rejoice and bless God for his
favours, and especially for the last wonderful deliverance which shall
be given to the Jews, when they shall be converted to the gospel in the
last days; which they have all reason to do, because of that singular
advantage which all nations will have at that time and upon that
occasion.

[Deuteronomy 32:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">deu 32:44</span></span>

He and Hoshea - Or Joshua. Probably Moses spoke it to as many as could
hear him, while Joshua in another assembly at the same time delivered it
to as many as his voice would reach. Thus Joshua, as well as Moses,
would be a witness against them, if ever they forsook God.

[Deuteronomy 32:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">deu 32:47</span></span>

Not vain - It is not an unprofitable or contemptible work I advise you
to, but well worthy of your most serious care.

[Deuteronomy 32:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">deu 32:48</span></span>

That self - same day - Now he had finished his work, why should he
desire to live a day longer? He had indeed formerly desired and prayed,
that he might go over Jordan: but now he is entirely satisfied, and
saith no more of that matter.

[Deuteronomy 32:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">deu 32:49</span></span>

Nebo - A ridge or top of the mountains of Abarim.

[Deuteronomy 32:51](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">deu 32:51</span></span>

Because ye trespassed - God reminds him of the sin he had committed long
before. It is good for the holiest of men to die repenting, even of
their early sins.

[Deuteronomy 32:52](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">deu 32:52</span></span>

Yet thou shalt see the land - And see it as the earnest of that better
country, which is only seen with the eye of faith. What is death to him
who has a believing prospect and a steadfast hope of eternal life?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 33](deu033)

</div>
