<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu026)  [Next](deu028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 27:2</span></span>

On that day - About that time, for it was not done 'till some days after
their passing over.

[Deuteronomy 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 27:3</span></span>

This law - The law properly so called, that is, the sum and substance of
the precepts or laws of Moses, especially such as were moral,
particularly the decalogue. Write it, that thou mayest go in - As the
condition of thy entering into the land. For since Canaan is given only
by promise, it must be held by obedience.

[Deuteronomy 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 27:4</span></span>

Mount Ebal - The mount of cursing. Here the law is written, to signify
that a curse was due to the violators of it, and that no man could
expect justification from the works of the law, by the sentence whereof
all men are justly accused, as being all guilty of the transgression of
it in one kind and degree or other. Here the sacrifices are to be
offered, to shew that there is no way to be delivered from this curse,
but by the blood of Christ, which all these sacrifices did typify, and
by Christ's being made a curse for us.

[Deuteronomy 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 27:6</span></span>

Whole stones - Rough, not hewed or polished. By the law written on the
stones, God spake to them: by the altar and sacrifices upon it, they
spake to God: and thus was communion kept up between them and God.

[Deuteronomy 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 27:9</span></span>

The people of the Lord - By thy solemn renewing of thy covenant with
him.

[Deuteronomy 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 27:12</span></span>

Upon mount Gerizzim - These words may be rendered beside or near to
mount Gerizzim. There were in Canaan two mountains that lay near
together, with a valley between, one called Gerizzim, the other Ebal. On
the sides of these which faced each other, all the tribes were to be
drawn up, six on a side, so that in the valley they came near each
other, so near that the priests standing between them, might be heard by
them that were next them on both sides. Then one of the priests, or
perhaps more, at some distance from each other, pronounced with a loud
voice, one of the curses following. And all the people who stood on the
foot and side of mount Ebal, (those farther off taking the signal from
those who were nearer) said Amen! Then the contrary blessing was
pronounced, "Blessed is he that doth so or so:" To which all who stood
on the foot and side of mount Gerizzim, said, Amen! Simeon - All these
were the children of the free - women, Leah and Rachel, to shew both the
dignity of the blessings above the curses, and that the blessings belong
only to those who are evangelically such, as this is expounded and
applied, [Gal 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022), even to those that
receive the Spirit of adoption and liberty. Joseph is here put for both
his sons and tribes Manasseh and Ephraim, which are reckoned as one
tribe, because Levi is here numbered; but when Levi is omitted, as it is
where the division of the land is made, there Manasseh and Ephraim pass
for two tribes.

[Deuteronomy 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 27:13</span></span>

To curse - Of the former tribes, 'tis said, they stood to bless the
people: of these, that they stood to curse. Perhaps the different way of
speaking intimates, That Israel in general were an happy people, and
should ever be so, if they were obedient. And to that blessing, they on
mount Gerizzim said, Amen! But the curses come in, only as exceptions to
the general rule: "Israel is a blessed people: but if there be any even
among them, that do such and such things, they have no part or lot in
this matter, but are under a curse." This shews how ready God is to
bestow the blessing: if any fall under the curse, they bring it on their
own head. Four of these are children of the bond - woman, to shew that
the curse belongs to those of servile and disingenuous spirits. With
these are joined Reuben, who by his shameful sin fell from his dignity,
and Zebulun, the youngest of Leah's children, that the numbers might be
equal.

[Deuteronomy 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 27:14</span></span>

The Levites - Some of the Levites, namely, the priests, who bare the
ark, as it is expressed [Jos 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033), for
the body of the Levites stood upon mount Gerizzim, [Deu
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012). But these stood in the valley
between Gerizzim and Ebal, looking towards the one or the other mountain
as they pronounced either the blessings or the curses.

[Deuteronomy 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 27:15</span></span>

Cursed - The curses are expressed, but not the blessings. For as many as
were under the law, were under the curse. But it was an honour reserved
for Christ to bless us; to do that which the law could not do. So in his
sermon on the mount, the true mount Gerizzim, we have blessings only.
The man - Under this particular he understands all the gross violations
of the first table, as under the following branches he comprehends all
other sins against the second table. Amen - 'Tis easy to understand the
meaning of Amen to the blessings. But how could they say it to the
curses? It was both a profession of their faith in the truth of it, and
an acknowledgment of the equity of these curses. So that when they said
Amen, they did in effect Say, not only, it is certain it shall be so,
but it is just it should be so.

[Deuteronomy 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 27:16</span></span>

Light - Or, despiseth in his heart: or reproacheth or curseth, secretly:
for if the fact was notorious, it was punished with death.

[Deuteronomy 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 27:17</span></span>

Out of the way - That misleadeth simple souls, giving them pernicious
counsel, either for this life, or for the next.

[Deuteronomy 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 27:24</span></span>

Smiteth - That is, killeth. This includes murder under colour of law,
which is of all others the greatest affront to God. Cursed therefore is
he that any ways contributes to accuse, or convict, or condemn an
innocent person.

[Deuteronomy 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 27:26</span></span>

Confirmeth not - Or, performeth not. To this we must all say, Amen!
Owning ourselves to be under the curse, and that we must have perished
for ever, if Christ had not redeemed us from the curse of the law, by
being made a curse for us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 28](deu028)

</div>
