<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](gal006)  [Next](eph002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

[Ephesians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 1:1</span></span>

By the will of God - Not by any merit of my own. To the saints who are
at Ephesus - And in all the adjacent places. For this epistle is not
directed to the Ephesians only, but likewise to all the other churches
of Asia.

[Ephesians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 1:3</span></span>

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed
us - God's blessing us is his bestowing all spiritual and heavenly
blessings upon us. Our blessing God is the paying him our solemn and
grateful acknowledgments, both on account of his own essential
blessedness, and of the blessings which he bestows upon us. He is the
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, as man and Mediator: he is his Father,
primarily, with respect to his divine nature, as his only begotten Son;
and, secondarily, with respect to his human nature, as that is
personally united to the divine. With all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things - With all manner of spiritual blessings, which are
heavenly in their nature, original, and tendency, and shall be completed
in heaven: far different from the external privileges of the Jews, and
the earthly blessings they expected from the Messiah.

[Ephesians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 1:4</span></span>

As he hath chosen us - Both Jews and gentiles, whom he foreknew as
believing in Christ, [Pe1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002).

[Ephesians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 1:5</span></span>

Having predestinated us to the adoption of sons - Having foreordained
that all who afterwards believed should enjoy the dignity of being sons
of God, and joint - heirs with Christ. According to the good pleasure of
his will - According to his free, fixed, unalterable purpose to confer
this blessing on all those who should believe in Christ, and those only.

[Ephesians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 1:6</span></span>

To the praise of the glory of his grace - His glorious, free love
without any desert on our part.

[Ephesians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 1:7</span></span>

By whom we - Who believe. Have - From the moment we believe. Redemption
- From the guilt and power of sin. Through his blood - Through what he
hath done and suffered for us. According to the riches of his grace -
According to the abundant overflowings of his free mercy and favour.

[Ephesians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 1:8</span></span>

In all wisdom - Manifested by God in the whole scheme of our salvation.
And prudence - Which he hath wrought in us, that we may know and do all
his acceptable and perfect will.

[Ephesians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 1:9</span></span>

Having made known to us - By his word and by his Spirit. The mystery of
his will - The gracious scheme of salvation by faith, which depends on
his own sovereign will alone. This was but darkly discovered under the
law; is now totally hid from unbelievers; and has heights and depths
which surpass all the knowledge even of true believers.

[Ephesians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 1:10</span></span>

That in the dispensation of the fullness of the times - In this last
administration of God's fullest grace, which took place when the time
appointed was fully come. He might gather together into one in Christ -
Might recapitulate, re - unite, and place in order again under Christ,
their common Head. All things which are in heaven, and on earth - All
angels and men, whether living or dead, in the Lord.

[Ephesians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 1:11</span></span>

Through whom we - Jews. Also have obtained an inheritance - The glorious
inheritance of the heavenly Canaan, to which, when believers, we were
predestinated according to the purpose of him that worketh all things
after the counsel of his own will - The unalterable decree, "He that
believeth shall be delivered;" which will is not an arbitrary will, but
flowing from the rectitude of his nature, else, what security would
there be that it would be his will to keep his word even with the elect?

[Ephesians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 1:12</span></span>

That we - Jews. Who first believed - Before the gentiles. So did some of
them in every place. Here is another branch of the true gospel
predestination: he that believes is not only elected to salvation, (if
he endures to the end,) but is fore - appointed of God to walk in
holiness, to the praise of his glory.

[Ephesians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 1:13</span></span>

In whom ye - Gentiles. Likewise believed, after ye had heard the gospel
- Which God made the means of your salvation; in whom after ye had
believed - Probably some time after their first believing. Ye were
sealed by that Holy Spirit of promise - Holy both in his nature and in
his operations, and promised to all the children of God. The sealing
seems to imply, A full impression of the image of God on their souls. A
full assurance of receiving all the promises, whether relating to time
or eternity.

[Ephesians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 1:14</span></span>

Who, thus sealing us, is an earnest - Both a pledge and a foretaste of
our inheritance. Till the redemption of the purchased possession - Till
the church, which he has purchased with his own blood, shall be fully
delivered from all sin and sorrow, and advanced to everlasting glory. To
the praise of his glory - Of his glorious wisdom, power, and mercy.

[Ephesians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 1:15</span></span>

Since I heard of your faith and love - That is, of their perseverance
and increase therein.

[Ephesians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eph 1:16</span></span>

I cease not - In all my solemn addresses to God. To give thanks for you,
making mention of you in my prayers - So he did of all the churches,
[Col 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009).

[Ephesians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 1:17</span></span>

That the Father of that infinite glory which shines in the face of
Christ, from whom also we receive the glorious inheritance, [Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018), may give you the Spirit of
wisdom and revelation - The same who is the Spirit of promise is also,
in the progress of the faithful, the Spirit of wisdom and revelation;
making them wise unto salvation, and revealing to them the deep things
of God. He is here speaking of that wisdom and revelation which are
common to all real Christians.

[Ephesians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 1:18</span></span>

The eyes of your understanding - It is with these alone that we discern
the things of God. Being first opened, and then enlightened - - By his
Spirit. That ye may know what is the hope of his calling - That ye may
experimentally and delightfully know what are the blessings which God
has called you to hope for by his word and his Spirit. And what is the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints - What an immense
treasure of blessedness he hath provided as an inheritance for holy
souls.

[Ephesians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 1:19</span></span>

And what the exceeding greatness of his power toward us who believe -
Both in quickening our dead souls, and preserving them in spiritual
life. According to the power which he exerted in Christ, raising him
from the dead - By the very same almighty power whereby he raised
Christ; for no less would suffice.

[Ephesians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 1:20</span></span>

And he hath seated him at his own right hand - That is, he hath exalted
him in his human nature, as a recompence for his sufferings, to a quiet,
everlasting possession of all possible blessedness, majesty, and glory.

[Ephesians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 1:21</span></span>

Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion - That
is, God hath invested him with uncontrollable authority over all demons
in hell, all angels in heaven, and all the princes and potentates on
earth. And every name that is named - We know the king is above all,
though we cannot name all the officers of his court. So we know that
Christ is above all, though we are not able to name all his subjects.
Not only in this world, but also in that which is to come - The world to
come is so styled, not because it does not yet exist, but because it is
not yet visible. Principalities and powers are named now; but those also
who are not even named in this world, but shall be revealed in the world
to come, are all subject to Christ.

[Ephesians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eph 1:22</span></span>

And he hath given him to be head over all things to the church - An head
both of guidance and government, and likewise of life and influence, to
the whole and every member of it. All these stand in the nearest union
with him, and have as continual and effectual a communication of
activity, growth, and strength from him, as the natural body from its
head.

[Ephesians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eph 1:23</span></span>

The fulness of him that filleth all in all - It is hard to say in what
sense this can be spoken of the church; but the sense is easy and
natural, if we refer it to Christ, who is the fulness of the Father.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 2](eph002)

</div>
