<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est007)  [Next](est009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001)

[Esther 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 8:1</span></span>

The house - With all his goods and estate, which being justly forfeited
to the king, he no less justly bestows it upon the queen, to compensate
the danger to which Haman had exposed her. Came - Was by the queen's
desire admitted into the king's presence, and family, and, as it seems,
made one of the seven princes. Had told - How nearly he was related to
her: which 'till this time she had wisely concealed.

[Esther 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 8:2</span></span>

Ring - That ring which he had formerly given to Haman he now gives to
Mordecai, and with it that power whereof this ring was a sign, making
him, as Haman had been, the keeper of his signet. Set - As her steward,
to manage that great estate for her as he thought fittest.

[Esther 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 8:3</span></span>

To put - To repeal that cruel decree.

[Esther 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 8:5</span></span>

If &c. - She uses various expressions, that she might confirm the king's
favour, by such a full submission to his good pleasure. Haman - She
prudently takes off the hatefulness of the action from the king, and
lay's it upon Haman, who had for his own ends contrived the whole
business, and circumvented the king in it.

[Esther 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 8:8</span></span>

Reverse - For this reason he could not recall the former letters,
because they were irrevocable by the law of the Medes and Persians. How
much more prudent is our constitution, that no law whatever can be
established as to be unrepealable? It is God's prerogative, not to
repent, and to say what can never be altered.

[Esther 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 8:9</span></span>

Then - Which was above two months after the former decree. All which
time God suffered the Jews to lie under the error of this dreadful day,
that they might be more throughly humbled for, and purged from those
many and great sins under which they lay; that they might be convinced
of their great sin and folly in the many offers they had had of
returning to their native country, by which means being dispersed in the
several parts of this vast dominion, they were like to be a very easy
prey to their enemies, whereas their brethren in Judea were in a better
capacity to preserve themselves: and for the greater illustration of
God's glorious power, and wisdom, and goodness, in giving his people
such an admirable and unexpected deliverance.

[Esther 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 8:10</span></span>

Riders - Which were not employed in sending the former letter: but this
coming later required more care and speed, that the Jews might be eased
from their present fears, and have time to provide for their own
defence.

[Esther 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 8:11</span></span>

To stand - To fight for the defence of their lives against all that
should seek to destroy them. The power - Either governors or governed,
without any exception either of age, dignity, or sex, Both little ones
and women - Which is here added, to strike the greater terror into their
enemies; and according to the laws and customs of this kingdom; whereby
children were punished for their parents offences: yet we read nothing
in the execution of this decree of the slaughter of women or children,
nor is it probable, they would kill their innocent children, who were so
indulgent to their families, as not to meddle with the spoil.

[Esther 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 8:15</span></span>

Great crown - Which the chief of the Persian princes were permitted to
wear but with sufficient distinction from the king's crown. The city -
Not only Jews, but the greatest number of the citizens, who by the law
of nature abhorred bloody counsels, and had a complacency in acts of
mercy.

[Esther 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">est 8:16</span></span>

Joy - This explains the former metaphor by two words expressing the same
thing, to denote the greatness of the joy. Honour - Instead of that
contempt under which they had lain.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 9](est009)

</div>
