<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo026)  [Next](exo028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001)

[Exodus 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 27:1</span></span>

As God intended in the tabernacle to manifest his presence among his
people, so there they were to pay their devotions to him; not in the
tabernacle itself, into that only the priests entered as God's domestic
servants, but in the court before the tabernacle, where, as common
subjects they attended. There an altar was ordered so be set up, to
which they must bring their sacrifices; and this altar was to sanctify
their gifts; from hence they were to present their services to God, as
from the mercy - seat he gave his oracles to them; and thus a communion
was settled between God and Israel.

[Exodus 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 27:2</span></span>

The horns of it, were for ornament and for use; the sacrifices were
bound with cords to the horns of the altar, and to them malefactors fled
for refuge.

[Exodus 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 27:4</span></span>

The grate was set into the hollow of the altar, about the middle of it,
in which the fire was kept, and the sacrifice burnt; it was made of net
- work like a sieve, and hung hollow, that the fire might burn the
better, and that the ashes might fall through. Now, this brazen altar
was a type of Christ dying to make atonement for our sins. Christ
sanctified himself for his church as their altar, [Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019), and by his mediation sanctifies
the daily services of his people. To the horns of this altar poor
sinners fly for refuge, and are safe in virtue of the sacrifice there
offered.

[Exodus 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 27:9</span></span>

Before the tabernacle there was to be a court, enclosed with hangings of
fine linen. This court, according to the common computation, was 50
yards long, and 25 broad. Pillars were set up at convenient distances,
in sockets of brass, the pillars filleted with silver, and silver
tenterhooks in them, on which the linen hangings were fastened: the
hanging which served for the gate was finer than the rest. This court
was a type of the church, enclosed, and distinguished from the rest of
the world; the inclosure supported by pillars, noting the stability of
the church hung with the clean linen, which is said to be the
righteousness of saints, [Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008).
Yet this court would contain but a few worshippers; thanks be to God,
now the inclosure is taken down; and there is room for all that in every
place call on the name of Christ.

[Exodus 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 27:20</span></span>

We read of the candlestick in the 25th chapter; here is order given for
the keeping of the lamps constantly burning in it. The pure oil
signified the gifts and graces of the Spirit, which are communicated to
all believers from Christ the good olive, of whose fulness we receive,
[Zac 4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#011). The priests were to
light the lamps, and to tend them; to cause the lamp to burn always,
night and day. Thus it is the work of ministers to preach and expound
the scriptures, which are as a lamp to enlighten the church. This is to
be a statute for ever, that the lamps of the word be lighted as duly as
the incense of prayer and praise is offered.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 28](exo028)

</div>
