<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo009)  [Next](exo011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#001)

[Exodus 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 10:1</span></span>

These plagues are standing monuments of the greatness of God, the
happiness of the church, and the sinfulness of sin; and standing
monitors to the children of men in all ages, not to provoke the Lord to
jealousy, nor to strive with their Maker. The benefit of these
instructions to the world doth sufficiently balance the expence.

[Exodus 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 10:3</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to
humble thyself before me? - It is justly expected from the greatest of
men, that they humble themselves before the great God, and it is at
their peril if they refuse to do it. Those that will not humble
themselves, God will humble.

[Exodus 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 10:10</span></span>

Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones
- He now curses and threatens them, in case they offered to remove their
little ones, telling them it was at their peril. Satan doth all he can
to hinder those that serve God themselves, from bringing their children
in to serve him. He is a sworn enemy to early piety, knowing how
destructive it is to the interests of his kingdom.

[Exodus 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 10:13</span></span>

The east - wind brought the locusts - From Arabia, where they are in
great numbers: And God miraculously increased them.

[Exodus 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 10:15</span></span>

They covered the face of the earth, and eat up the fruit of it - The
earth God has given to the children of men; yet when God pleaseth he can
disturb his possession even by locusts or caterpillars. Herb grows for
the service of man; yet, when God pleaseth, those contemptible insect's
shall not only be fellow - commoners with him, but shall eat the bread
out of his mouth.

[Exodus 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 10:17</span></span>

Pharaoh desires their prayers that this death only might be taken away,
not this sin: he deprecates the plague of locusts, not the plague of a
hard heart.

[Exodus 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 10:19</span></span>

An east - wind brought the locusts and now a west - wind carried them
off. Whatever point of the compass the wind is in, it is fulfilling
God's word, and turns about by his counsel; the wind blows where it
listeth for us, but not where it listeth for him; he directeth it under
the whole heaven.

[Exodus 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 10:21</span></span>

We may observe concerning this plague. That it was a total darkness. We
have reason to think, not only that the lights of heaven were clouded,
but that all their fires and candles were put out by the damps or clammy
vapours which were the cause of this darkness, for it is said, they saw
not one another. That it was darkness which might be felt, felt in its
causes by their finger - ends, so thick were the fogs, felt in its
effects, (some think) by their eyes which were pricked with pain, and
made the more sore by their rubbing them. Great pain is spoken of as the
effect of that darkness, [Rev 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010),
which alludes to this. No doubt it was very frightful and amazing. The
tradition of the Jews is, that in this darkness they were terrified by
the apparition of evil spirits, or rather by dreadful sounds and murmurs
which they made; and this is the plague which some think is intended
(for otherwise it is not mentioned at all there) [Psa
78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049). He poured upon them the
fierceness of his anger, by sending evil angels among them; for those to
whom the devil has been a deceiver, he will at length be a terror to. It
continued three days; six nights in one; so long they were imprisoned by
those chains of darkness. No man rose from his place - They were all
confined to their houses; and such a terror seized them, that few of
them had the courage to go from the chair to the bed, or from the bed to
the chair. Thus were they silent in darkness, [Sa1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#009). Now Pharaoh had time to consider,
if he would have improved it.

[Exodus 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 10:23</span></span>

But the children of Israel had light in their dwellings - Not only in
the land of Goshen, where most of them inhabited, but in the particular
dwellings which in other places the Israelites had dispersed among the
Egyptians, as it appears they had by the distinction afterwards
appointed to be put on their door - posts. And during these three days
of darkness to the Egyptians, if God had so pleased, the Israelites by
the light which they had, might have made their escape, and have asked
Pharaoh no leave; but God would bring them out with a high hand, and not
by stealth or in haste.

[Exodus 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 10:29</span></span>

I will see thy face no more - Namely, after this time, for this
conference did not break off till [Exo
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#008), when Moses went out in great
anger and told Pharaoh how soon his proud stomach would come down; which
was fulfilled [Exo 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031), when Pharaoh
became an humble supplicant to Moses to depart. So that after this
interview Moses came no more till he was sent for.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 11](exo011)

</div>
