<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo037)  [Next](exo039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001)

[Exodus 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 38:1</span></span>

The altar of burnt - offering - On this all their sacrifices were
offered. Christ was himself the altar to his own sacrifice of atonement,
and so he is to all our sacrifices of acknowledgment. We must have an
eye to him in offering them, as God hath in accepting them.

[Exodus 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 38:8</span></span>

This laver signified the provision that is made in the gospel for
cleansing our souls from the pollution of sin by the merit of Christ,
that we may be fit to serve the holy God in holy duties. This is here
said to be made of the looking - glasses of the women that assembled at
the door of the tabernacle. It should seem these women were eminent for
devotion, attending more constantly at the place of public worship than
others, and notice is here taken of it to their honour. These looking -
glasses were of the finest brass, burnished for that purpose. In the
laver, either they were artfully joined together, or else molten down
and cast anew; but it is probable the laver was so brightly burnished
that the sides of it still served for looking - glasses, that the
priests when they came to wash might there see their faces, and so
discover the spots to wash them clean.

[Exodus 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 38:9</span></span>

And he made the court - The walls of the court, were like the rest,
curtains, or hangings. This represented the state of the Old Testament
church, it was a garden enclosed; the worshippers were then confined to
a little compass. But the inclosure being of curtains only, intimated
that that confinement of the church to one particular nation was not to
be perpetual. The dispensation itself was a tabernacle - dispensation,
moveable and mutable, and in due time to be taken down and folded up,
when the place of the tent should be enlarged, and its cords lengthened,
to make room for the Gentile world.

[Exodus 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 38:21</span></span>

By the hand of Ithamar - Here we have a breviate of the account which by
Moses's appointment the Levites took and kept of the gold, silver, and
brass, that was brought in for the tabernacle's use, and how it was
employed. Ithamar the son of Aaron was appointed to draw up this
account. All the gold amounted to twenty nine talents, and seven hundred
and thirty shekels over; Which some compute to be about one hundred and
fifty thousand pounds worth of gold, according to the present value of
it. The silver amounted to about thirty - four thousand pounds of our
money. The raising of the gold by voluntary contribution, and of the
silver by way of tribute, shews that either way may be taken for the
defraying of public expences, provided that nothing be done with
partiality.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 39](exo039)

</div>
