<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo029)  [Next](exo031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001)

[Exodus 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 30:1</span></span>

The altar of incense was to be about a yard high, and half a yard
square, with horns at the corners, a golden cornish round it, with rings
and staves of gold for the convenience of carrying it, [Exo
30:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001). It doth not appear that there
was any grate to this altar for the ashes to fall into, that they might
be taken away; but when they burn incense, a golden censer was brought,
with coals in it, and placed upon the altar, and in that censer the
incense was burnt, and with it all the coals were taken away, so that no
coals or ashes fell upon the altar. The altar of incense in Ezekiel's
temple is double to what it is here, [Eze
41:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#022), and it is there called an altar
of wood, and there is no mention of gold, to signify that the incense in
gospel times should be spiritual, the worship plain, and the service of
God enlarged. It was placed before the veil, on the outside of that
partition, but before the mercy - seat, which was within the veil. For
though he that ministered at that altar could not see the mercy - seat,
the veil interposing, yet he must look towards it, and direct his
incense that way, to teach us, that though we cannot with our bodily
eyes see the throne of grace, that blessed mercy - seat, yet we must in
prayer by faith set ourselves before it, direct our prayer and look up.

[Exodus 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 30:7</span></span>

Aaron was to burn sweet incense upon this altar every morning and every
evening, which was intended not only to take away the ill smell of the
flesh that was burnt daily on the brazen altar, but for the honour of
God, and to shew the, acceptableness of his people's services to him. As
by the offerings on the brazen altar satisfaction was made for what had
been done displeasing to God, so by the offering on this what they did
well was, as it were, recommended to the divine acceptance.

[Exodus 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 30:10</span></span>

This altar was purified with the blood of the sin - offering put upon
the horns of it every year, upon the day of atonement. See [Lev
16:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#018). The high priest was to take
this in his way as he came out from the holy of holies. This was to
intimate, that the sins of the priests who ministered at this altar, and
of the people for whom they ministered, put a ceremonial impurity upon
it, from which it must be cleansed by the blood of atonement. This altar
typified the mediation of Christ: the brazen altar in the court was a
type of Christ dying on earth; the golden altar in the sanctuary was a
type of Christ interceding in heaven. This altar was before the mercy -
seat, for Christ always appears in the presence of God for us; and his
intercession is unto God of a sweet smelling savour. And it typified the
devotions of the saints, whose prayers are said to be set forth before
God as incense, [Psa 141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002). As the
smoke of the incense ascended, so must our desires, being kindled with
the fire of holy love. When the priest was burning incense the people
were praying, [Luk 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#010), to signify
that prayer is the true incense. This incense was a perpetual incense,
for we must pray always. The lamps were dressed or lighted at the same
time that the incense was burnt, to teach us that the reading of the
scriptures (which are our light and lamp) is a part of our daily work,
and should ordinarily accompany our prayers and praises. The devotions
of sanctified souls are well - pleasing to God, of a sweet - smelling
savour; the prayers of saints are compared to sweet odours, [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008), but it is the incense which
Christ adds to them that makes them acceptable; and his blood that
atones for the guilt which cleaves to our best services. Yet if the
heart and life be not holy, even incense is an abomination, [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013).

[Exodus 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 30:11</span></span>

Perhaps the repetition of those words, the Lord spake unto Moses, here
and afterwards, [Exo 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#017), [Exo
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#022), [Exo
30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034), intimates, that God did not
deliver these precepts to Moses, in a continued discourse, but with many
intermissions, giving him time either to write what was said to him, or
at least to charge his memory with it.

[Exodus 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 30:12</span></span>

Some think this refers only to the first numbering of them, when the
tabernacle was set up, and that this tax was to make up what was wanting
in the voluntary contributions. Others think it was to be always when
the people were numbered; and that David offended in not demanding it
when he numbered the people. But many of the Jewish writers are of
opinion, it was to be an annual tribute; only it was begun when Moses
first numbered the people. This was that tribute - money which Christ
paid lest he should offend his adversaries. The tribute to be paid was
half a shekel, about fifteen - pence of our money. In other offerings
men were to give according to their ability, but this, which was the
ransom of the soul, must be alike for all; for the rich have as much
need of Christ as the poor, and the poor are as welcome to him as the
rich. And this was to be paid as a ransom of the soul, that there might
be no plague among them - Hereby they acknowledged that they received
their lives from God, that they had forfeited their lives to him, and
that they depended upon his power and patience for the continuance of
them; and thus they did homage to the God of their lives, and deprecated
those plagues which their sins had deserved. This money was employed in
the service of the tabernacle; with it they bought sacrifices, flour,
incense wine, oil, fuel, salt, priests garments, and all other things
which the whole congregation was interested in.

[Exodus 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 30:18</span></span>

The laver, or font was a large vessel, that would contain a good
quantity of water. The foot of brass, it is supposed, was so contrived
as to receive the water, which was let out of the laver, by spouts or
cocks. They then had a laver for the priests only to wash in, but to us
now there is a fountain opened for Judah and Jerusalem, [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001), an inexhaustible fountain of
living water, so that it is our own fault if we remain in our pollution.
Aaron and his sons were to wash their hands and feet at this laver every
time they went in to minister. For this purpose clean water was put into
the laver, fresh every day. Though they washed themselves ever so clean
at their own houses, that would not serve, they must wash at the laver.
This was designed, to teach them purity in all their ministrations, and
to possess them with a reverence of God's holiness, and a dread of the
pollutions of sin. They must not only wash and be made clean when they
were first consecrated, but they must wash and be kept clean, whenever
they went in to minister. He only shall stand in God's holy place that
hath clean hands and a pure heart, [Psa
24:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003). And it was to teach us, who
are daily to attend upon God, daily to renew our repentance for sin, and
our believing application of the blood of Christ to our souls for
remission.

[Exodus 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 30:23</span></span>

Interpreters are not agreed concerning these ingredients: the spices,
which were in all near half a hundred weight, were to be infused in the
oil, which was to be about five or six quarts, and then strained out,
leaving an admirable smell in the oil. With this oil God's tent and all
the furniture of it were to be anointed; it was to be used also in the
consecration of the priests. It was to be continued throughout their
generations, [Exo 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#031). Solomon was
anointed with it, [Kg1 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#039), and some
other of the kings, and all the high priests, with such a quantity of
it, as that it ran down to the skirts of the garments; and we read of
the making it up, [Ch1 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#030). Yet all
agree that in the second temple there was none of this holy oil, which
was probably owing to a notion they had, that it was not lawful to make
it up; Providence over - ruling that want as a presage of the better
unction of the Holy Ghost in gospel - times, the variety of whose gifts
was typified by these sweet ingredients.

[Exodus 30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 30:34</span></span>

The incense which was burned upon the golden altar was prepared of sweet
spices likewise, though not so rare and rich as those which the
anointing oil was compounded of. This was prepared once a year, (the
Jews say) a pound for each day of the year, and three pound over for the
day of atonement. When it was used it was to be beaten very small; thus
it pleased the Lord to bruise the Redeemer, when he offered himself for
a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savour. Concerning both these
preparations the same law is here given, that the like should not be
made for any common use. Thus God would preserve in the peoples minds a
reverence for his own institutions, and teach us not to profane or abuse
any thing whereby God makes himself known.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 31](exo031)

</div>
