<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo011)  [Next](exo013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)

[Exodus 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 12:1</span></span>

The Lord spake - Had spoken, before the three days darkness. But the
mention of it was put off to this place, that the history of the plagues
might not be interrupted.

[Exodus 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 12:2</span></span>

This shall be to you the beginning of months - They had hitherto begun
their year from the middle of September, but hence - forward they were
to begin it from the middle of March, at least in all their
ecclesiastical computations. We may suppose that while Moses was
bringing the ten plagues upon the Egyptians, he was directing the
Israelites to prepare for their departure at an hour's warning. Probably
he had, by degrees, brought them near together from their dispersions,
for they are here called the congregation of Israel; and to them, as a
congregation, orders are here sent.

[Exodus 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 12:3</span></span>

Take every man a lamb - In each of their families, or two or three
families, if they were small, join for a lamb. The lamb was to be got
ready four days before. and that afternoon they went, they were to kill
it, ([Exo 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006),) as a sacrifice, not
strictly, for it was not offered upon the altar, but as a religious
ceremony, acknowledging God's goodness to them, not only in preserving
them from, but in delivering them by the plagues inflicted on the
Egyptians. The lamb so slain they were to eat roasted (we may suppose in
its several quarters) with unleavened bread and bitter herbs; they were
to eat it in haste, [Exo 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011), and to
leave none of it until the morning; for God would have them to depend
upon him for their daily bread. Before they eat the flesh of the lamb,
they were to sprinkle the blood upon the door - posts; by which their
houses were to be distinguished from the houses of the Egyptians, and so
their first - born secured from the sword of the destroying angel.
Dreadful work was to be made this night in Egypt; all the first - born
both of man and beast were to be slain; and judgment executed upon the
gods of Egypt, [Num 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#004). It is
probable the idols which the Egyptians worshipped were defaced, those of
metal melted, those of wood consumed, and those of stone broke to
pieces. This was to be annually observed as a feast of the Lord in their
generations, to which the feast of unleavened bread was annexed, during
which, for seven days, they were to eat no bread but what was
unleavened, in remembrance of their being confined to such bread for
many days after they came out of Egypt, [Exo
12:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014). There was much of the gospel
in this ordinance: The paschal lamb was typical. Christ is our passover,
[Co1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007), and is the Lamb of God, [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029). It was to be a male of the first
year; in its prime. Christ offered up himself in the midst of his days.
It notes the strength and sufficiency of the Lord Jesus, on whom our
help was laid. It was to be without blemish, noting the purity of the
Lord Jesus, a lamb without spot, [Pe1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019). It was to be set apart four days
before, noting the designation of the Lord Jesus to be a Saviour, both
in the purpose and in the promise. It is observable, that as Christ was
crucified at the passover, so he solemnly entered into Jerusalem four
days before, the very day that the paschal lamb was set apart. It was to
be slain and roasted with fire, noting the exquisite sufferings of the
Lord Jesus, even unto death, the death of the cross. It was to be killed
by the whole congregation between the two evenings, that is, between
three o'clock and six. Christ suffered in the latter end of the world,
[Heb 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026), by the hand of the Jews,
the whole multitude of them, [Luk
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#018). Not a bone of it must be
broken, [Exo 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046), which is expressly
said to be fulfilled in Christ, [Joh
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033), [Joh
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036). The sprinkling of the blood was
typical. 1st, It was not enough that the blood of the lamb was shed, but
it must be sprinkled, noting the application of the merits of Christ's
death to our souls; 2dly, It was to be sprinkled upon the door - posts,
noting the open profession we are to make of faith in Christ, and
obedience to him. The mark of the beast may be received in the forehead,
or in the right hand, but the seal of the lamb is always in the
forehead, [Rev 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003). 3dly, The blood
thus sprinkled was a means of the preservation of the Israelites from
the destroying angel. If the blood of Christ be sprinkled upon our
consciences, it will be our protection from the wrath of God, the curse
of the law, and the damnation of hell. The solemn eating of the lamb was
typical of our gospel duty to Christ. 1st, The paschal lamb was killed
not to be looked upon only, but to be fed upon; so we must by faith make
Christ ours, as we do that which we eat, and we must receive spiritual
strength and nourishment from him, as from our food, and have delight in
him, as we have in eating and drinking when we are hungry or thirsty.
2dly, It was to be all eaten: those that, by faith, feed upon Christ,
must feed upon a whole Christ. They must take Christ and his yoke,
Christ and his cross, as well as Christ and his crown. 3dly, It was to
be eaten with bitter herbs, in remembrance of the bitterness of their
bondage in Egypt; we must feed upon Christ with brokenness of heart, in
remembrance of sin. 4thly, It was to be eaten in a departing posture
[Exo 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011), when we feed upon Christ
by faith, we must sit loose to the world, and every thing in it. The
feast of unleavened bread was typical of the Christian life, [Co1
5:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007). Having received Christ Jesus
the Lord, 1st. We must keep a feast, in holy joy, continually delighting
ourselves in Christ Jesus; If true believers have not a continual feast,
it is their own fault. 2dly, It must be a feast of unleavened bread,
kept in charity, without the leaven of malice, and in sincerity, without
the leaven of hypocrisy. All the old leaven of sin must be put far from
us, with the utmost caution, if we would keep the feast of a holy life
to the honour of Christ. 3dly, It was to be an ordinance forever. As
long as we live we must continue feeding upon Christ, and rejoicing in
him always, with thankful mention of the great things he has done for
us.

[Exodus 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 12:9</span></span>

Raw - Half roasted, but throughly drest.

[Exodus 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 12:10</span></span>

Ye shall burn with fire - To prevent the profane abuse of it.

[Exodus 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 12:11</span></span>

The Lord's passover - A sign of his passing over you, when he destroyed
the Egyptians.

[Exodus 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 12:16</span></span>

An holy convocation - A solemn day for the people to assemble together.

[Exodus 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 12:19</span></span>

A stranger - A proselyte. Heathens were not concerned in the passover.

[Exodus 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 12:22</span></span>

Out of the door of his house - Of that house, wherein he ate the
passover: Until the morning - That is, till towards morning, when they
would be called for to march out of Egypt. They went out very early in
the morning.

[Exodus 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 12:23</span></span>

The destroyer - The destroying angel, whether this was a good or an evil
angel, we have not light to determine.

[Exodus 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 12:27</span></span>

The people bowed the head and worshipped - They hereby signified their
submission to this institution as a law, and their thankfulness for it
as a favour and privilege.

[Exodus 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 12:31</span></span>

Rise up, and get you forth - Pharaoh had told Moses he should see his
face no more, but now he sent for him; those will seek God in their
distress, who before had set him at defiance. Such a fright he was now
in that he gave orders by night for their discharge, fearing lest if he
delay'd, he himself should fall next. And that he sent them out, not as
men hated (as the Pagan historians have represented this matter) but as
men feared, is plain by his request to them.

[Exodus 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 12:32</span></span>

Bless me also - Let me have your prayers, that I may not be plagued for
what is past when you are gone.

[Exodus 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 12:33</span></span>

We be all dead men - When death comes unto our houses, it is seasonable
for us to think of our own mortality.

[Exodus 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 12:34</span></span>

Their kneading - troughs - Or rather, their lumps of paste unleavened.

[Exodus 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">exo 12:37</span></span>

About six hundred thousand men - The word means strong and able men fit
for wars, beside women and children, which we cannot suppose to make
less than twelve hundred thousand more. What a vast increase was this to
arise from seventy souls, in little more than two hundred years.

[Exodus 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">exo 12:38</span></span>

And a mixed multitude went up with them - Some perhaps willing to leave
their country, because it was laid waste by the plagues. But probably
the greatest part was but a rude unthinking mob, that followed they knew
not why: It is likely, when they understood that the children of Israel
were to continue forty years in the wilderness, they quitted them, and
returned to Egypt again. And flocks and herds, even very much cattle -
This is taken notice of, because it was long ere Pharaoh would give them
leave to remove their effects, which were chiefly cattle.

[Exodus 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">exo 12:39</span></span>

Thrust out - By importunate entreaties.

[Exodus 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">exo 12:40</span></span>

It was just four hundred and thirty years from the promise made to
Abraham (as the Apostle explains it, [Gal
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017),) at his first coming into
Canaan, during all which time the Hebrews, were sojourners in a land
that was not theirs, either Canaan or Egypt. So long the promise God
made to Abraham lay dormant and unfulfilled, but now, it revived, and
things began to work towards the accomplishment of it. The first day of
the march of Abraham's seed towards Canaan was four hundred and thirty
years (it should seem, to a day) from the promise made to Abraham, [Gen
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002). I will make of thee a great
nation.

[Exodus 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">exo 12:42</span></span>

This first passover night was a night of the Lord, much to be observed;
but the last passover night, in which Christ was betrayed, was a night
of the Lord, much more to be observed, when a yoke heavier than that of
Egypt was broke from off our necks, and a land better than that of
Canaan set before us. That was a temporal deliverance, to be celebrated
in their generations; this an eternal redemption to be celebrated world
without end.

[Exodus 12:45](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">exo 12:45</span></span>

An hired servant - Unless he submit to be circumcised.

[Exodus 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">exo 12:47</span></span>

All the congregation of Israel must keep it - Though it was observed in
families apart, yet it is looked upon as the act of the whole
congregation. And so the new testament passover, the Lord's supper,
ought not to be neglected by any that are capable of celebrating it.

[Exodus 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">exo 12:48</span></span>

No stranger that was uncircumcised might eat of it. Neither may any now
approach the Lord's supper who have not first submitted to baptism; nor
shall any partake of the benefit of Christ's sacrifice, who are not
first circumcised in heart. Any stranger that was circumcised might eat
of the passover, even servants. Here is an indication of favour to the
poor Gentiles, that the stranger, if circumcised, stands upon the same
level with the home - born Israelite; one law for both. This was a
mortification to the Jews, and taught them that it was their dedication
to God, not their descent from Abraham, that entitled them to their
privileges.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 13](exo013)

</div>
