<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo018)  [Next](exo020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)

[Exodus 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 19:1</span></span>

In the third month after they came out of Egypt. It is computed that the
law was given just fifty days after their coming out of Egypt, in
remembrance of which the feast of Pentecost was observed the fiftieth
day after the passover, and in compliance with which the spirit was
poured out upon the apostles, at the feast of Pentecost, fifty days
after the death of Christ. Mount Sinai was a place which nature, not
art, had made conspicuous, for it was the highest in all that range of
mountains. Thus God put contempt upon cities and palaces, setting up his
pavilion on the top of a mountain, in a barren desert. It is called
Sinai, from the multitude of thorny bushes that over - spread it.

[Exodus 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 19:3</span></span>

Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and the children of Israel -
The people are called by the names both of Jacob and Israel, to mind
them that they who had lately been as low as Jacob when he went to Padan
- aram, were now grown as great as God made him when he came from
thence, and was called Israel.

[Exodus 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 19:4</span></span>

Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on
Eagle's wings - An high expression of the wonderful tenderness God
shewed for them. It notes great speed; God not only came upon the wing
for their deliverance, but he hastened them out, as it were upon the
wing. Also that he did it with great ease, with the strength as well as
with the swiftness of an eagle. They that faint not, nor are weary, are
said to mount up with wings as eagles, [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031). Especially it notes God's
particular care of them, and affection to them. Even Egypt was the nest
in which these young ones were first formed as the embryo of a nation:
when by the increase of their numbers they grew to some maturity, they
were carried out of that nest. I brought you unto myself - They were
brought not only into a state of liberty, but into covenant and
communion with God. This, God aims at in all the gracious methods of his
providence and grace, to bring us back to himself, from whom we have
revolted, and to bring us home to himself, in whom alone we can be
happy.

[Exodus 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 19:5</span></span>

Then ye shall be a peculiar treasure to me - He doth not instance in any
one particular favour, but expresseth it in that which was inclusive of
all happiness, that he would be to them a God in covenant, and they
should be to him a people. Nay you shall be a peculiar treasure: not
that God was enriched by them, as a man is by his treasure, but he was
pleased to value and esteem them as a man doth his treasure; they were
precious in his sight. He took them under his special care and
protection, as a treasure that is kept under lock and key. He
distinguished them from, and dignified them above all people, as a
people devoted to him, and to his service.

[Exodus 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 19:6</span></span>

A kingdom of priests, a holy nation - All the Israelites, if compared
with other people, were priests unto God, so near were they to him, so
much employed in his immediate service, and such intimate communion they
had with him. The tendency of the laws given them was to distinguish
them from others, and engage them for God as a holy nation. Thus all
believers are, through Christ, made to our God kings and priests, [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006), a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, [Pe1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009).

[Exodus 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 19:7</span></span>

And Moses laid before their faces all these words - He not only
explained to them what God had given him in charge, but put it to their
choice, whether they would accept these promises upon these terms or no.
His laying it to their faces speaks his laying it to their consciences.

[Exodus 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 19:8</span></span>

And they answered together; all that the Lord hath spoken we will do -
Thus accepting the Lord to be to them a God, and giving up themselves to
be to him a people.

[Exodus 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 19:10</span></span>

Sanctify the people - As Job before sent and sanctified his sons, [Job
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005). Sanctify them, that is, call them
off from their worldly business, and call them to religious exercises,
meditation and prayer, that they may receive the law from God's mouth
with reverence and devotion. Two things particularly were prescribed as
instances of their preparation. 1st, In token of cleansing of themselves
from all sinful pollutions, they must wash their clothes. Not that God
regards our clothes, but while they were washing their clothes, he would
have them think of washing their souls by repentance. It becomes us to
appear in clean clothes when we wait upon great men; so clean hearts are
required in our attendance on the great God. 2dly, In token of their
devoting themselves entirely to religious exercises upon this occasion
they must abstain even from lawful enjoyments during these three days,
and not come at their wives.

[Exodus 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 19:11</span></span>

In the sight of all the people - Though they should see no manner of
similitude, yet they should see so much as would convince them, that God
was among them of a truth. And so high was the top of Mount Sinai, that
it is supposed not only the camp of Israel, but even the countries about
might discern some extraordinary appearance of glory upon it.

[Exodus 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 19:12</span></span>

Set bounds - Probably he drew a ditch round at the foot of the hill,
which none were to pass upon pain of death. This was to intimate, 1st,
That awful reverence which ought to possess the minds of all that
worship God. 2dly, The distance which worshippers were kept at under
that dispensation, which we ought to take notice of, that we may the
more value our privilege under the gospel, having boldness to enter into
the holiest by the blood of Jesus, [Heb
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019).

[Exodus 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 19:13</span></span>

When the trumpet soundeth long - Then let them take their places at the
foot of the mount. Never was so great a congregation called together and
preached to at once as this was here. No one man's voice could have
reached so many, but the voice of God did.

[Exodus 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 19:16</span></span>

Now at length is come that memorable day, in which Israel heard the
voice of the Lord God speaking to them out of the midst of the fire and
lived, [Deu 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033). Never was there such
a sermon preached before or since, as this, which was here preached to
the church in the wilderness. For, the preacher was God himself, [Exo
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017), The Lord descended in fire; and
[Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018). The Lord came down upon
mount Sinai. The Shechinah, or glory of the Lord, appeared in the sight
of all the people; he shined forth from mount Paran with ten thousand of
his saints, attended with a multitude of the holy angels. Hence the law
is said to be given by the disposition of angels, [Act
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053). He spake from mount Sinai, hung
with a thick cloud, [Exo 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016),
covered with smoke, [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018), and
made to quake greatly. Now it was that the earth trembled at the
presence of the Lord, and the mountains skipped like rams, [Psa
114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004), [Psa
114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007), that Sinai itself, though rough
and rocky, melted from before the Lord God of Israel, [Jdg
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#005). The congregation was called
together by the sound of a trumpet exceeding loud, [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016), and waxing louder and louder,
[Exo 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019). This was done by the
ministry of the angels, and made all the people tremble. The
introductions to the service were thunders and lightnings, [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016). These have natural causes; but
the scripture directs us in a particular manner to take notice of the
power of God, and his terror in them. Thunder is the voice of God, and
lightning the fire of God, proper to engage both the learning senses of
seeing and hearing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 20](exo020)

</div>
