<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo023)  [Next](exo025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001)

[Exodus 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 24:1</span></span>

Worship ye afar off - Before they came near, they must worship. Thus we
must enter into God's gates with humble and solemn adorations.

[Exodus 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 24:2</span></span>

And Moses alone shall come near - Being therein a type of Christ, who as
the high priest entered alone into the most holy place. In the following
verses we have the solemn covenant made between God and Israel and the
exchanging of the ratifications: typifying the covenant of grace between
God and believers through Christ.

[Exodus 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 24:3</span></span>

Moses told the people all the words of the Lord - He laid before them
all the precepts, in the foregoing chapters, and put it to them, whether
they were willing to submit to these laws or no? And all the people
answered, All the words which the Lord hath said we will do - They had
before consented in general to be under God's government; here they
consent in particular to these laws now given.

[Exodus 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 24:4</span></span>

And Moses wrote the words of the Lord - That there might be no mistake;
as God dictated them on the mount, where, it is highly probable, God
taught him the use of letters. These Moses taught the Israelites, from
whom they afterwards travelled to Greece and other nations. As soon as
God had separated to himself a peculiar people, he governed them by a
written word, as he has done ever since, and will do while the world
stands. Pillars according to the number of the tribes - These were to
represent the people, the other party to the covenant; and we may
suppose they were set up over against the altar, and that Moses as
mediator passed to and fro between them. Probably each tribe set up and
knew its own pillar, and their elders stood by it. He then appointed
sacrifices to be offered upon the altar.

[Exodus 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 24:6</span></span>

1\. The blood of the sacrifice which the people offered was (part of it)
sprinkled upon the altar, which signified the people's dedicating
themselves to God, and his honour. In the blood of the sacrifices, all
the Israelites were presented unto God as living sacrifices, [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001). 2. The blood of the sacrifice
which God had owned and accepted was (the remainder of it) sprinkled,
either upon the people themselves, or upon the pillars that represented
them, which signified God's conferring his favour upon them, and all the
fruits of that favour, and his giving them all the gifts they could
desire from a God reconciled to them, and in covenant with them. This
part of the ceremony was thus explained, Behold the blood of the
covenant; see here how God sealed to you to be a God, and you seal to be
to him a people; his promises to you, and yours to him, are yea and
amen. Thus our Lord Jesus, the Mediator of the new covenant (of whom
Moses was a type) having offered up himself a sacrifice upon the cross,
that his blood might be indeed the blood of the covenant, sprinkled it
upon the altar in his intercession ([Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012),) and sprinkles it upon his
church by his word and ordinances, and the influences and operations of
the Spirit of promise by whom we are sealed.

[Exodus 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 24:10</span></span>

They saw the God of Israel - That is, they had some glimpse of his
glory, in light and fire, though they saw no manner of similitude. They
saw the place where the God of Israel stood, so the seventy, something
that came near a similitude, but was not; whatever they saw it was
certainly something of which no image or picture could be made, and yet
enough to satisfy them that God was with them of a truth. Nothing is
described but that which was under his feet, for our conceptions of God
are all below him. They saw not so much as God's feet, but at the bottom
of the brightness they saw (such as they never saw before or after, and
as the foot - stool or pedestal of it) a most rich and splendid
pavement, as it had been of sapphires, azure, or sky - coloured. The
heavens themselves are the pavement of God's palace, and his throne is
above the firmament.

[Exodus 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 24:11</span></span>

Upon the nobles or elders of Israel he laid not his hand - Though they
were men, the splendour of his glory did not overwhelm them, but it was
so moderated ([Job 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#009),) and they
were so strengthened ([Dan 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019),)
that they were able to bear it: nay, though they were sinful men, and
obnoxious to God's justice, yet he did not lay his avenging hand upon
them, as they feared he would. When we consider what a consuming fire
God is, and what stubble we are before him, we shall have reason to say,
in all our approaches to him, It is of the Lord's mercies we are not
consumed. They saw God, and did eat and drink; They had not only their
lives preserved, but their vigour, courage, and comfort; it cast no damp
upon their joy, but rather increased it. They feasted upon the sacrifice
before God, in token of their chearful consent to the covenant, their
grateful acceptance of the benefits of it, and their communion with God
in pursuance of that covenant.

[Exodus 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 24:12</span></span>

Come up to the mount and be there - Expect to continue there for some
time.

[Exodus 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 24:13</span></span>

Joshua was his minister or servant, and it would be a satisfaction to
him to have him with him as a companion during the six days that he
tarried in the mount before God called to him. Joshua was to be his
successor, and therefore thus he was honoured before the people, and
thus he was prepared by being trained up in communion with God. Joshua
was a type of Christ, and (as the learned Bishop Peirson well observes
Moses takes him with him into the mount, because without Jesus, in whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, there is no looking
into the secrets of heaven, nor approaching the presence of God.

[Exodus 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 24:16</span></span>

A cloud covered the mount six days - A visible token of God's special
presence there, for he so shews himself to us, as at the same time to
conceal himself from us, he lets us know so much as to assure us of his
power and grace, but intimates to us that we cannot find him out to
perfection. During these six days Moses staid waiting upon the mountain,
for a call into the presence - chamber. And on the seventh day -
Probably the sabbath - day, he called unto Moses. Now the thick cloud
opened in the sight of all Israel, and the glory of the Lord broke forth
like devouring fire.

[Exodus 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 24:18</span></span>

Moses went into the midst of the cloud - It was an extraordinary
presence of mind, which the grace of God furnished him with, else he
durst not have ventured into the cloud, especially when it broke out in
devouring fire. And Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights -
It should seem the six days, were not part of the forty; for during
those six days, Joshua was with Moses, who did eat of the manna, and
drink of the brook mentioned, [Deu
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021), and while they were together, it
is probable Moses did eat and drink with him; but when Moses was called
into the midst of the cloud, he left Joshua without, who continued to
eat and drink daily while he waited for Moses's return, but from
thenceforward Moses fasted.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 25](exo025)

</div>
