<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo006)  [Next](exo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

[Exodus 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 7:1</span></span>

I have made thee a god to Pharaoh - That is, my representative in this
affair, as magistrates are called gods, because they are God's
vicegerents. He was authorized to speak and act in God's name, and
endued with a divine power, to do that which is above the ordinary
course of nature. And Aaron shall be thy prophet - That is, he shall
speak from thee to Pharaoh, as prophets do from God to the children of
men. Thou shalt as a god inflict and remove the plagues, and Aaron as a
prophet shall denounce them.

[Exodus 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 7:7</span></span>

Moses was fourscore years old - Joseph, who was to be only a servant to
Pharaoh, was preferred at thirty years old; but Moses, who was to be a
god to Pharaoh, was not so dignified till he was eighty years old. It is
fit he should long wait for such an honour, and be long in preparing for
such a service.

[Exodus 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 7:9</span></span>

Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod - This Moses ordinarily held in his hand,
and delivered it to Aaron upon occasion, for the execution of his
commands.

[Exodus 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 7:10</span></span>

And Aaron cast his rod down, and it became a serpent - This was proper
not only to affect Pharaoh with wonder, but to strike a terror upon him.
This first miracle, though it was not a plague, yet amounted to the
threatening of a plague; if it made not Pharaoh feel, it made him fear;
this is God's method of dealing with sinners he comes upon them
gradually.

[Exodus 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 7:11</span></span>

Moses had been originally instructed in the learning of the Egyptians,
and was suspected to have improved in magical arts in his long
retirement. The magicians are therefore sent for to vie with him. The
two chief of them were Jannes and Jambres. Their rods became serpents;
probably by the power of evil angels artfully substituting serpents in
the room of the rods, God permitting the delusion to be wrought for wise
and holy ends. But the serpent which Aaron's rod was turned into,
swallowed up the others, which was sufficient to have convinced Pharaoh
on which side the right lay.

[Exodus 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 7:13</span></span>

And he harden'd Pharaoh's heart - That is, permitted it to be hardened.

[Exodus 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 7:20</span></span>

The waters that were in the river were turned into blood - This was a
plague justly inflicted upon the Egyptians; for Nilus the river of Egypt
was their idol; they and their land had so much benefit by that
creature, that they served and worshipped it more than the creator. Also
they had stained the river with the blood of the Hebrew children, and
now God made that river all bloody; thus he gave them blood to drink,
for they were worthy, [Rev 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#006). See
the power of God. Every creature is that to us which he makes it to be,
water or blood. See the mutability of all things under the sun, and what
changes we may meet with in them. That which is water to day may be
blood to morrow; what is always vain may soon become vexatious. And see
what mischievous work sin makes! It is sin that turns our waters into
blood.

[Exodus 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 7:22</span></span>

And the magicians did so - By God's permission with their enchantments;
and this served Pharaoh for an excuse not to set his heart to this also,
([Exo 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#023),) and a poor excuse it was.
Could they have turned the river of blood into water again, it had been
something; then they had proved their power, and Pharaoh had been
obliged to them as his benefactors.

[Exodus 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 7:25</span></span>

Seven days were fulfilled - Before this plague was removed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 8](exo008)

</div>
