<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo001)  [Next](exo003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)

[Exodus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 2:1</span></span>

And there went a man - Amram, from the place of his abode to another
place. A daughter - That is, grand - daughter of Levi.

[Exodus 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 2:2</span></span>

Bare a son - It seems just at the time of his birth that cruel law was
made for the murder of all the male - children of the Hebrews, and many
no doubt perished by the execution of it. Moses's parents had Miriam and
Aaron, both elder than he, born to them before that edict came out.
Probably his mother had little joy of her being with child of him, now
this edict was in force. Yet this child proves the glory of his father's
house. Observe the beauty of providence: just when Pharaoh's cruelty
rose to this height, the deliverer was born. She hid him three months -
In some private apartment of their own house, though probably with the
hazard of their lives had he been discovered. It is said, [Heb
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#023). That Moses's parents hid him by
faith: some think they had a special revelation that the deliverer
should spring from their loins; however, they believed the general
promise of Israel's preservation, and in that faith hid their child.

[Exodus 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 2:3</span></span>

And when she could no longer hide him, she put him in an ark of
bulrushes - By the river side. God put it into their hearts to do this,
to bring about his own purposes: that Moses might by this means be
brought into the hands of Pharaoh's daughter, and that by his
deliverance, a specimen might be given of the deliverance of God's
church.

[Exodus 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 2:5</span></span>

And the daughter of Pharaoh came - Providence brings no less a person
than Pharaoh's daughter just at that juncture, guides her to the place
where this poor infant lay, inclines her heart to pity it, which she
dares do, when none else durst. Never did poor child cry so seasonably,
as this did; the babe wept, which moved her compassion, as no doubt his
beauty did.

[Exodus 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 2:10</span></span>

And he became her son - The tradition of the Jews is, that Pharaoh's
daughter had no child of her own, and that she was the only child of her
father, so that when he was adopted for her son, he stood fair for the
crown: however, it is certain he stood fair for the best preferments of
the court in due time, and in the mean time had the advantage of the
best education, with the help of which, he became master of all the
lawful learning of the Egyptians [Act
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022). Those whom God designs for great
services he finds out ways for to qualify them. Moses, by having his
education in a court, is the fitter to be a prince, and king in
Jeshurun; by having his education in a learned court, (for such the
Egyptian then was) is the fitter to be an historian; and by having his
education in the court of Egypt, is the fitter to be employed as an
ambassador to that court in God's name. The Jews tell us, that his
father at his circumcision called him Joachim, but Pharaoh's daughter
called him Moses, Drawn out of the water, so it signifies in the
Egyptian language, The calling of the Jewish lawgiver by an Egyptian
name is a happy omen to the Gentile world, and gives hopes of that day
when it should be said, Blessed be Egypt my people, [Isa
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025). And his tuition at court was an
earnest of the performance of that promise, [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023). Kings shall be thy nursing
fathers, and queens thy nursing mothers.

[Exodus 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 2:11</span></span>

When Moses was grown he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their
burdens - He looked on their burdens as one that not only pitied them,
but was resolved to venture with them, and for them.

[Exodus 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 2:12</span></span>

He slew the Egyptian - Probably it was one of the Egyptian task -
masters, whom he found abusing his Hebrew slave. By special warrant from
heaven (which makes not a precedent in ordinary cases) Moses slew the
Egyptian, and rescued his oppressed brother. The Jew's tradition is,
that he did not slay him with any weapon, but as Peter slew Ananias and
Sapphira, with the word of his mouth.

[Exodus 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 2:14</span></span>

He said, Who made thee a prince? - He challengeth his authority; Who
made thee a prince? - A man needs no great authority for giving a
friendly reproof; it is an act of kindness; yet this man needs will
interpret it an act of dominion, and represents his reprover as
imperious and assuming. Thus, when people are sick of good discourse, or
a seasonable admonition, they will call it preaching, as if a man could
not speak a word for God, and against sin, but he took too much upon
him. Yet Moses was indeed a prince, and a judge, and knew it, and
thought the Hebrews would have understood it; but they stood in their
own light, and thrust him away. [Act
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#025), [Act
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#027). Intendest thou to kill me? - See
what base constructions malice puts upon the best words and actions.
Moses, for reproving him, is presently charged with a design to kill
him.

[Exodus 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 2:15</span></span>

Moses fled from Pharaoh - God ordered this for wise ends. Things were
not yet ripe for Israel's deliverance. The measure of Egypt's iniquity
was not yet full; the Hebrews were not sufficiently humbled, nor were
they yet increased to such a multitude as God designed: Moses is to be
farther fitted for the service, and therefore is directed to withdraw
for the present, till the time to favour Israel, even the set time,
come. God guided Moses to Midian, because the Midianites were of the
seed of Abraham, and retained the worship of the true God; so that he
might have not only a safe, but a comfortable settlement among them; and
through this country he was afterwards to lead Israel, which, that he
might do the better, he now had opportunity of acquainting himself with
it. Hither he came, and sat down by a well; tired and thoughtful,
waiting to see which way Providence would direct him. It was a great
change with him, since he was but the other day at ease in Pharaoh's
court.

[Exodus 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 2:17</span></span>

Stood up and helped them - This be did, because wherever he was, as
occasion offered itself, he loved to be doing justice, and appearing in
the defence of such as he saw injured. He loved to be doing good:
wherever the Providence of God call us, we should desire and endeavour
to be useful; and when we cannot do the good we would, we must be ready
to do the good we can.

[Exodus 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 2:18</span></span>

Reul or Raguel (see [Num 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029),) seems
to have been their grandfather and father of Hobab or Jethro, their
immediate father.

[Exodus 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 2:22</span></span>

Gershom - That is, A stranger there. Now this settlement of Moses in
Midian was designed by Providence. To shelter him for the present; God
will find hiding places for his people in the day of their distress. It
was also designed to prepare him for the services he was farther
designed to. His manner of life in Midian, where he kept the flock of
his father - in - law would be of use to him, to inure him to hardship
and poverty; and to inure him to contemplation and devotion. Egypt
accomplished him for a scholar, a gentleman, a statesman, a soldier, all
which accomplishments would be afterwards of use to him; but yet lacketh
he one thing, in which the court of Egypt could not befriend him. He
that was to do all by divine revelation must know, what it was to live a
life of communion with God, and in this he would be greatly furthered by
the retirement of a shepherd's life in Midian. By the former he was
prepared to rule in Jeshurun, but by the latter he was prepared to
converse with God in mount Horeb. Those that know what it is to be alone
with God, are acquainted with better delights than ever Moses tasted in
the court of Pharaoh.

[Exodus 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 2:23</span></span>

The king of Egypt died - And after him, one or two more of his sons or
successors. And the children of Israel sighed by reason of bondage -
Probably the murdering of their infants did not continue, that part of
their affliction only attended the birth of Moses, to signalize that.
And now they were content with their increase, finding that Egypt was
enriched by their labour; so they might have them for their slaves, they
cared not how many they were. On this therefore they were intent, to
keep them all at work, and make the best hand they could of their
labour. When one Pharaoh died, another rose up in his place, that was as
cruel to Israel as his predecessors. And they cried - Now at last they
began to think of God under their troubles, and to return to him from
the idols they had served, [Eze 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#008).
Hitherto they had fretted at the instruments of their trouble, but God
was not in all their thoughts. But before God unbound them, he put it
into their hearts to cry unto him. It is a sign God is coming towards us
with deliverance, when he inclines us to cry to him for it.

[Exodus 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 2:24</span></span>

And God heard their groaning - That is, he made it to appear that he
took notice of their complaints. The groans of the oppressed cry loud in
the ears of the righteous God, to whom vengeance belongs; especially the
groans of God's children, the burdens they groan under, and the
blessings they groan after. And God remembered his covenant - Which he
seemed to have forgotten, but really is ever mindful of. This God had an
eye to, and not to any merit of theirs in what he did for them. And God
looked upon the children of Israel - Moses looked upon them and pitied
them, but now God looked upon them and helped them. And God had respect
unto them - A favourable respect to them as his own. The frequent
repetition of the name of God intimates, that now we are to expect
something great. His eyes which run to and fro through the earth, are
now fixed on Israel, to shew himself strong, to shew himself a God in
their behalf.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 3](exo003)

</div>
