<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo019)  [Next](exo021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001)

[Exodus 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 20:1</span></span>

God spake all these words - The law of the ten commandments is a law of
God's making; a law of his own speaking. God has many ways of speaking
to the children of men by his spirit, conscience, providences; his voice
in all which we ought carefully to attend to: but he never spake at any
time upon any occasion so as he spake the ten commandments, which
therefore we ought to hear with the more earnest heed. This law God had
given to man before, it was written in his heart by nature; but sin had
so defaced that writing, that it was necessary to revive the knowledge
of it.

[Exodus 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 20:2</span></span>

I am the Lord thy God - Herein, God asserts his own authority to enact
this law; and proposeth himself as the sole object of that religious
worship which is enjoined in the four first commandments. They are here
bound to obedience. Because God is the Lord, Jehovah, self - existent,
independent, eternal, and the fountain of all being and power; therefore
he has an incontestable right to command us. He was their God; a God in
covenant with them; their God by their own consent. He had brought them
out of the land of Egypt - Therefore they were bound in gratitude to
obey him, because he had brought them out of a grievous slavery into a
glorious liberty. By redeeming them, he acquired a farther right to rule
them; they owed their service to him, to whom they owed their freedom.
And thus, Christ, having rescued us out of the bondage of sin, is
entitled to the best service we can do him. The four first commandments,
concern our duty to God (commonly called the first - table.) It was fit
those should be put first, because man had a Maker to love before he had
a neighbour to love, and justice and charity are then only acceptable to
God when they flow from the principles of piety.

[Exodus 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 20:3</span></span>

The first commandment is concerning the object of our worship, Jehovah,
and him only, Thou shalt have no other gods before me - The Egyptians,
and other neighbouring nations, had many gods, creatures of their own
fancy. This law was pre - fixed because of that transgression; and
Jehovah being the God of Israel, they must entirely cleave to him, and
no other, either of their own invention, or borrowed from their
neighbours. The sin against this commandment, which we are most in
danger of, is giving that glory to any creature which is due to God
only. Pride makes a God of ourselves, covetousness makes a God of money,
sensuality makes a God of the belly. Whatever is loved, feared,
delighted in, or depended on, more than God, that we make a god of. This
prohibition includes a precept which is the foundation of the whole law,
that we take the Lord for our God, accept him for ours, adore him with
humble reverence, and set our affections entirely upon him. There is a
reason intimated in the last words before me. It intimates, That we
cannot have any other god but he will know it. That it is a sin that
dares him to his face, which he cannot, will not, overlook. The second
commandment is concerning the ordinances of worship, or the way in which
God will be worshipped, which it is fit himself should appoint. Here is,
\[1.\] The prohibition; we are forbidden to worship even the true God by
images, [Exo 20:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004). First, The Jews
(at least after the captivity) thought themselves forbidden by this to
make any image or picture whatsoever. It is certain it forbids making
any image of God, for to whom can we liken him? [Isa
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018), [Isa
40:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#025). It also forbids us to make
images of God in our fancies, as if he were a man as we are. Our
religious worship must be governed by the power of faith, not by the
power of imagination. Secondly, They must not bow down to them - Shew
any sign of honour to them, much less serve them by sacrifice, or any
other act of religious worship. When they paid their devotion to the
true God, they must not have any image before them for the directing,
exciting, or assisting their devotion. Though the worship was designed
to terminate in God, it would not please him if it came to him through
an image. The best and most ancient lawgivers among the Heathen forbad
the setting up of images in their temples. It was forbidden in Rome by
Numa a Pagan prince, yet commanded in Rome by the Pope, a Christian
bishop. The use of images in the church of Rome, at this day, is so
plainly contrary to the letter of this command, that in all their
catechisms, which they put into the hand of the people, they leave out
this commandment, joining the reason of it to the first, and so the
third commandment they call the second, the fourth the third, &c. only
to make up the number ten, they divide the tenth into two. For I the
Lord Jehovah, thy God, am a jealous God, especially in things of this
nature. It intimates the care he has of his own institutions, his
displeasure against idolaters, and that he resents every thing in his
worship that looks like, or leads to, idolatry: visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation -
Severely punishing. Nor is it an unrighteous thing with God if the
parents died in their iniquity, and the children tread in their steps,
when God comes, by his judgments, to reckon with them, to bring into the
account the idolatries their fathers were guilty of. Keeping mercy for
thousands of persons, thousands of generations, of them that love me and
keep my commandments - This intimates, that the second commandment,
though in the letter of it is only a prohibition of false worship, yet
includes a precept of worshipping God in all those ordinances which he
hath instituted. As the first commandment requires the inward worship of
love, desire, joy, hope, so this the outward worship of prayer and
praise, and solemn attendance on his word. This mercy shall extend to
thousands, much further than the wrath threatened to those that hate
him, for that reaches but to the third or fourth generation.

[Exodus 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 20:7</span></span>

The third commandment is concerning the manner of our worship; Where we
have,

\[1.\] A strict prohibition. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain - Supposing that, having taken Jehovah for their God,
they would make mention of his name, this command gives a caution not to
mention it in vain, and it is still as needful as ever. We take God's
name in vain, First, By hypocrisy, making profession of God's name, but
not living up to that profession. Secondly, By covenant breaking. If we
make promises to God, and perform not to the Lord our vows, we take his
name in vain. Thirdly, By rash swearing, mentioning the name of God, or
any of his attributes, in the form of an oath, without any just occasion
for it, but to no purpose, or to no good purpose. Fourthly, By false -
swearing, which some think is chiefly intended in the letter of the
commandment. Fifthly, By using the name of God lightly and carelessly.
The profanation of the form of devotion is forbidden, as well as the
profanation of the forms of swearing; as also, the profanation of any of
those things whereby God makes himself known. For the Lord will not hold
him guiltless - Magistrates that punish other offences, may not think
themselves concerned to take notice of this; but God, who is jealous for
his honour, will not connive at it. The sinner may perhaps hold himself
guiltless, and think there is no harm in it; to obviate which
suggestion, the threatening is thus expressed, God will not hold him
guiltless - But more is implied, that God will himself be the avenger of
those that take his name in vain; and they will find it a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God.

[Exodus 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 20:8</span></span>

The fourth commandment concerns the time of worship; God is to be served
and honoured daily; but one day in seven is to be particularly dedicated
to his honour, and spent in his service. Remember the sabbath day, to
keep it holy; in it thou shalt do no manner of work - It is taken for
granted that the sabbath was instituted before. We read of God's
blessing and sanctifying a seventh day from the beginning, [Gen
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003), so that this was not the enacting
of a new law, but the reviving of an old law. 1st. They are told what is
the day, they must observe, a seventh after six days labour, whether
this was the seventh by computation from the first seventh, or from the
day of their coming out of Egypt, or both, is not certain. A late pious
Writer seems to prove, That the sabbath was changed, when Israel came
out of Egypt; which change continued till our Lord rose again: But that
then the Original Sabbath was restored. And he makes it highly probable,
at least, That the sabbath we observe, is the seventh day from the
creation. 2dly, How it must be observed; As a day of rest; they were to
do no manner of work on this day, in their worldly business. As a holy
day, set apart to the honour of the holy God, and to be spent in holy
exercises. God, by his blessing it, had made it holy; they, by solemn
blessing him, must keep it holy, and not alienate it to any other
purpose than that for which the difference between it and other days was
instituted. 3dly, Who must observe it? Thou and thy son and thy daughter
- The wife is not mentioned, because she is supposed to be one with the
husband, and present with him, and if he sanctify the sabbath, it is
taken for granted she will join with him; but the rest of the family is
instanced in it, children and servants must keep it according to their
age and capacity. In this, as in other instances of religion, it is
expected that masters of families should take care, not only to serve
the Lord themselves, but that their houses also should serve him. Even
the proselyted strangers must observe a difference between this day and
other days, which, if it laid some restraint upon them then, yet proved
a happy indication of God's gracious design, to bring the Gentiles into
the church. By the sanctification of the sabbath, the Jews declared that
they worshipped the God that made the world, and so distinguished
themselves from all other nations, who worshipped gods which they
themselves made. God has given us an example of rest after six days
work; he rested the seventh day - Took a complacency in himself, and
rejoiced in the work of his hand, to teach us on that day, to take a
complacency in him, and to give him the glory of his works. The sabbath
begun in the finishing of the work of creation; so will the everlasting
sabbath in the finishing of the work of providence and redemption; and
we observe the weekly sabbath in expectation of that, as well as in
remembrance of the former, in both conforming ourselves to him we
worship. He hath himself blessed the sabbath day and sanctified it. He
hath put an honour upon it; it is holy to the Lord, and honourable; and
he hath put blessings into it which he hath encouraged us to expect from
him in the religious observation of that day. Let us not profane,
dishonour, and level that with common time, which God's blessing hath
thus dignified and distinguished.

[Exodus 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 20:12</span></span>

We have here the laws of the second table, as they are commonly called;
the six last commandments which concern our duty to ourselves, and one
another, and are a comment upon the second great commandment, Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself. As religion towards God is, an essential
branch of universal righteousness, so righteousness towards men is an
essential branch of true religion: godliness and honesty must go
together. The fifth commandment is concerning the duties we owe to our
relations; that of children to their parents is only instanced in,
honour thy father and thy mother, which includes, an inward esteem of
them, outwardly expressed upon all occasions in our carriage towards
them; fear them, [Lev 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#003), give them
reverence, [Heb 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009). The contrary to
this is mocking at them or despising them, Obedience to their lawful
commands; so it is expounded, [Eph
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001). Children obey your parents;
come when they call you, go where they send you, do what they bid you,
do not what they forbid you; and this chearfully, and from a principle
of love. Though you have said you will not, yet afterwards repent and
obey. Submission to their rebukes, instructions and corrections, not
only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. Disposing of
themselves with the advice, direction and consent of parents, not
alienating their property, but with their approbation. Endeavouring in
every thing to be the comfort of their parents, and to make their old
age easy to them; maintaining them if they stand in need of support.
That thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee
- This promise, (which is often literally fulfilled) is expounded in a
more general sense [Eph 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#003). That it
may be well with thee, and thou mayst live long on the earth - Those
that in conscience towards God keep this and other of God's
commandments, may be sure it shall be well with them, and they shall
live as long on the earth as infinite wisdom sees good for, them, and
what they may seem to be cut short of on earth, shall be abundantly made
up in eternal life, the heavenly Canaan which God will give them.

[Exodus 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 20:13</span></span>

Thou shalt not kill - Thou shalt not do any thing hurtful to the health,
or life of thy own body, or any other's. This doth not forbid our own
necessary defence, or the magistrates putting offenders to death; but it
forbids all malice and hatred to any, for he that hateth his brother is
a murderer, and all revenge arising therefrom; likewise anger and hurt
said or done, or aimed to be done in a passion; of this our Saviour
expounds this commandment, [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022).

[Exodus 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 20:14</span></span>

Thou shalt not commit adultery - This commandment forbids all acts of
uncleanness, with all those desires, which produce those acts and war
against the soul.

[Exodus 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 20:15</span></span>

Thou shalt not steal - This command forbids us to rob ourselves of what
we have, by sinful spending, or of the use and comfort of it by sinful
sparing; and to rob others by invading our neighbour's rights, taking
his goods, or house, or field, forcibly or clandestinely, over -
reaching in bargains, not restoring what is borrowed or found, with -
holding just debts, rents or wages; and, which is worst of all, to rob
the public in the coin or revenue, or that which is dedicated to the
service of religion.

[Exodus 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 20:16</span></span>

Thou shalt not bear false witness - This forbids, Speaking falsely in
any matter, lying, equivocating, and any way devising and designing to
deceive our neighbour. Speaking unjustly against our neighbour, to the
prejudice of his reputation; And (which is the highest offence of both
these kinds put together) Bearing false witness against him, laying to
his charge things that he knows not, either upon oath, by which the
third commandment, the sixth or eighth, as well as this, are broken, or
in common converse, slandering, backbiting, tale - bearing, aggravating
what is done amiss, and any way endeavouring to raise our own reputation
upon the ruin of our neighbor's.

[Exodus 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 20:17</span></span>

Thou shalt not covet - The foregoing commands implicitly forbid all
desire of doing that which will be an injury to our neighbour, this
forbids all inordinate desire of having that which will be a
gratification to ourselves. O that such a man's house were mine! such a
man's wife mine! such a man's estate mine! This is certainly the
language of discontent at our own lot, and envy at our neighbour's, and
these are the sins principally forbidden here. God give us all to see
our face in the glass of this law, and to lay our hearts under the
government of it!

[Exodus 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 20:18</span></span>

They removed and stood afar off - Before God began to speak, they were
thrusting forward to gaze, but now they were effectually cured of their
presumption, and taught to keep their distance.

[Exodus 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 20:19</span></span>

Speak thou with us - Hereby they obliged themselves to acquiesce in the
mediation of Moses, they themselves nominating him as a fit person to
deal between them and God, and promising to hearken to him as to God's
messenger.

[Exodus 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 20:20</span></span>

Fear not - That is, Think not that this thunder and fire is, designed to
consume you. No; it was intended, To prove them, to try how they could
like dealing with God immediately, without a mediator, and so to
convince them how admirably well God had chosen for them in putting
Moses into that office. Ever since Adam fled upon hearing God's voice in
the garden, sinful man could not bear either to speak to God, or hear
from him immediately. To keep them to their duty, and prevent their
sinning against God. We must not fear with amazement; but we must always
have in our minds a reverence of God's majesty, a dread of his
displeasure, and an obedient regard to his sovereign authority.

[Exodus 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 20:21</span></span>

While the people continued to stand afar off - Afraid of God's wrath,
Moses drew near unto the thick darkness; he was made to draw near, so
the word is: Moses of himself durst not have ventured into the thick
darkness if God had not called him, and encouraged him, and, as some of
the Rabbins suppose, sent an angel to take him by the hand, and lead him
up.

[Exodus 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 20:22</span></span>

Moses being gone into the thick darkness where God was, God there spoke
in his hearing only, all that follows from hence to the end of chap. 23,
which is mostly an exposition of the ten commandments; and he was to
transmit it to the people. The laws in these verses relate to God's
worship. Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven - Such was
his wonderful condescension; ye shall not make gods of silver - This
repetition of the second commandment comes in here, because they were
more addicted to idolatry than to any other sin.

[Exodus 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 20:24</span></span>

An altar of earth - It is meant of occasional altars, such as they
reared in the wilderness before the tabernacle was erected, and
afterwards upon special emergencies, for present use. They are appointed
to make these very plain, either of earth or of unhewn stones. That they
might not be tempted to think of a graven image, they must not so much
as hew the stones into shape, that they made their altars of, but pile
them up as they were in the rough. In all places where I record my name
- Or where my name is recorded, that is, where I am worshipped in
sincerity, I will come unto thee, and will bless thee.

[Exodus 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 20:26</span></span>

Neither shall thou go at by steps unto mine altar - Indeed afterwards
God appointed an altar ten cubits high. But it is probable, they went
not up to that by steps, but by a sloping ascent.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 21](exo021)

</div>
