<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](lam005)  [Next](eze002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

[Ezekiel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 1:1</span></span>

Thirtieth year - From the finding the book of the law in the eighteenth
year of Josiah, from which date to the fifth year of the captivity are
thirty years. Fifth day - Probably it was the sabbath - day, when the
Jews were at leisure to hear the prophet. River - Perhaps retiring
thither to lament their own sins, and Jerusalem's desolation. Chebar - A
river now called Giulap, arising out of the mountain Masius, and falling
into Euphrates, somewhat below a city called by the same name.

[Ezekiel 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 1:2</span></span>

The month - Thamus, as [Eze 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001),
answering to our June and July. Fifth year - This account observed will
guide us in computing the times referred to [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001). These five of Jehoiachin, and the
eleven of his predecessor, added to fourteen of Josiah's reign, after he
found the law, make up thirty years, [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001). Jehoiachin - Who is also called
Jechoniah, and Coniah. It may be of use to keep an account, when and
where God has manifested himself to us in a peculiar manner. Remember, O
my soul, what thou didst receive at such a time, at such a place: tell
others what God did for thee.

[Ezekiel 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 1:3</span></span>

The word - What was visions, [Eze 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001),
is here the word, both as signifying and declaring the mind of God, what
he would do, and as continuing his commands to Ezekiel and to the
people. Ezekiel - He speaks of himself in a third person. Priest - He
was of the priests originally; he was a prophet by an extraordinary
call. The hand - He felt the power of God opening his eyes to see the
visions, opening his ear to hear the voice, and his heart to receive
both. When the hand of the Lord goes along with his word, then it
becomes effectual.

[Ezekiel 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 1:4</span></span>

Looked - I very diligently surveyed the things that were represented to
me in the vision. Whirlwind - This denotes the indignation and judgments
of God; a quick, impetuous and irresistible vengeance. North - From
Babylon, which lay northward from Judea; and the prophet, tho' now in
Babylon, speaks of the Jews, as if they were in Jerusalem. A fire - An
orb or wheel of fire: God being his own cause, his own rule, and his own
end. Brightness - Yet round about it was not smoak and darkness, but a
clear light. The midst - Of the fire.

[Ezekiel 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 1:5</span></span>

The likeness - Such a representation of the holy angels as God saw fit
to make use of, came out of the midst of the fire: for angels derive
their being and power from God: their glory is a ray of his.

[Ezekiel 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 1:6</span></span>

Wings - With two they flew, denoting the speed of their obedience; and
with two they covered their body, denoting their reverence.

[Ezekiel 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 1:7</span></span>

Feet - Their thighs, legs and feet, were of a human shape. Straight -
Not bowed to this or that part, which argues weakness. The sole - That
which is properly the foot. A calf's - A divided hoof spake the
cleanness of the creature. They - Their feet.

[Ezekiel 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 1:8</span></span>

Under - Their power and manner of exerting it is secret and invisible.
Sides - On each side of the chariot one of these living creatures flood,
and so on each side hands were ready to act as they were moved. They
four - It is doubled to confirm the truth and certainty of the thing.

[Ezekiel 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 1:9</span></span>

Their wings - The wings of the two cherubim which went foremost, and the
wings of the two hindermost, were joined together when they moved. Went
- This explains the former words, assuring us, that every one of those
living creatures are ready, and unwearied in doing the pleasure of their
Creator.

[Ezekiel 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 1:10</span></span>

A man - Each face is compared to what is most excellent in its kind, man
excels in wisdom, lions in strength, the ox in patience and constancy of
labour, the eagle in speed and high flight.

[Ezekiel 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 1:11</span></span>

Divided - So each face appeared distinct above the shoulders, and there
the wings divided from each other were united to the body of the living
creature.

[Ezekiel 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 1:12</span></span>

Straight - Which way soever they went, each living creature had one face
looking straight forward. The spirit - The will, command, and breathing
of the Spirit of God, both gave and guided their motions. Was to go -
Going is attributed here to the Spirit of God, by allusion, for he who
is in every place cannot properly be said to go from or to any place.
Turned not - They looked not back, they turned not out of the way, they
gave not over, 'till they had compleated their course.

[Ezekiel 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 1:13</span></span>

The fire - This fire stood not still, but as the Hebrew is, Made itself
walk up and down. It moved itself, which is too much to ascribe to
creatures: God only moved all these living creatures.

[Ezekiel 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 1:14</span></span>

Ran - They ran into the lower world, to do what was to be done there:
and when they had done, returned as a flash of lightning, to the upper
world, to the vision of God. Thus we should be in the affairs of this
world: though we run into them we must not repose in them, but our souls
must presently return like lightning, to God, their rest and center.

[Ezekiel 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 1:15</span></span>

Living creatures - By each of the living creatures stood one wheel, so
that they were four in number, according to the number of living
creatures. Four faces - By this it appears, each wheel had its four
faces. While he was contemplating the glory of the former vision, this
other was presented to him: wherein the dispensations of providence are
compared to the wheels of a machine, which all contribute to the regular
motion of it. Providence orders, changes: sometimes one spoke of the
wheel is uppermost, sometimes another. But the motion of the wheel on
its own axle - tree, is still regular and steady. And the wheel is said
to be by the living creatures, who attend to direct its motion. For all
inferior creatures are, and move, and act, as the Creator, by the
ministration of angels directs and influences them: visible effects are
managed and governed by invisible causes.

[Ezekiel 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 1:16</span></span>

Work - All that was wrought, whether engraved or otherwise was of one
colour. Beryl - A sea green. One likeness - The same for dimensions,
colour, frame, and motion. In the middle - It is probable, the wheels
were framed so as to be an exact sphere, which is easily rolled to any
side.

[Ezekiel 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 1:17</span></span>

They - The wheels. Four sides - The wheels being supposed round every
way as a globe, by an exact framing of two wheels one in the other; the
four semi - circles which are in two whole wheels, may be well taken for
these four sides on which these wheels move, and such a wheel will
readily be turned to all points of the compass. Returned not - They
returned not 'till they came to their journey's end; nothing could
divert them, or put them out of their course. So firm and sure are the
methods, so unalterable and constant the purposes of God, and so
invariable the obedience and observance of holy angels. So subject to
the sovereign will of God are all second causes.

[Ezekiel 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 1:18</span></span>

The rings - The circumference of the wheels. Dreadful - Their very
height imprest a fear on the beholder. Them four - Every one of the four
wheels. How fitly do the wheels, their motion, their height, and eyes,
signify the height, unsearchableness, wisdom, and vigilance of the
Divine Providence.

[Ezekiel 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 1:20</span></span>

The spirit - The Spirit of God. These angels in their ministry
punctually observed both his impulse and conduct. They - The wheels,
inferior agents and second causes. Their spirit - The wheels concurred
with the spirit of the living creatures, so that there was an hearty
accord between those superior and inferior causes. For - An undiscerned,
yet divine, mighty, wise, and ever - living power, spirit, and being,
actuated all, and governed all.

[Ezekiel 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 1:21</span></span>

For - The same wisdom, power, and holiness of God, the same will and
counsel of his, that guides and governs the angels, does by them order
and dispose all the motions of the creatures in this lower world.

[Ezekiel 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 1:22</span></span>

Likeness - The appearance or resemblance. As crystal - For splendor,
purity, and solidity, all that was above these creatures and wheels was
beautiful and very majestic, and 'tis therefore called terrible, because
it impressed a veneration upon the mind of the beholders.

[Ezekiel 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 1:23</span></span>

Under - Below at a great distance, stood these living creatures.
Straight - Stretched forth, ready for motion. One - Each of the four had
two other wings with which they covered their bodies.

[Ezekiel 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 1:24</span></span>

The voice - Thunder. Speech - The prophet heard the voice in an
articulate manner. An host - A tumultuous voice of men. Stood - Having
done their office they present themselves before God, waiting for the
commands of their Lord.

[Ezekiel 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 1:26</span></span>

A man - Christ, God - man, who here appears as king and judge.

[Ezekiel 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 1:27</span></span>

Amber - In this colour does Christ appear against the rebellious Jews;
he that would have visited them clothed with the garments of salvation,
now puts on the garments of vengeance, expressed by such metaphors.
Brightness - Majesty, justice, and unstained holiness, shine round about
him.

[Ezekiel 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 1:28</span></span>

The bow - A like appearance of Christ in a surrounding brightness, as of
the rainbow you have, [Rev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). Mercy,
and truth, and both according to covenant are about the throne of
Christ. Glory - It was not the full glory of God, but such as the
prophet might bear. I fell - With deep humility and reverence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 2](eze002)

</div>
