<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](co2013)  [Next](gal002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

[Galatians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 1:1</span></span>

Paul, an apostle - Here it was necessary for St. Paul to assert his
authority; otherwise he is very modest in the use of this title. He
seldom mentions it when he mentions others in the salutations with
himself, as in the Epistles to the Philippians and Thessalonians; or
when he writes about secular affairs, as in that to Philemon; nor yet in
writing to the Hebrews because he was not properly their apostle. Not of
men - Not commissioned from them, but from God the Father. Neither by
man - Neither by any man as an instrument, but by Jesus Christ. Who
raised him from the dead - Of which it was the peculiar business of an
apostle to bear witness.

[Galatians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 1:2</span></span>

And all the brethren - Who agree with me in what I now write.

[Galatians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 1:4</span></span>

That he might deliver us from the present evil world - From the guilt,
wickedness, and misery wherein it is involved, and from its vain and
foolish customs and pleasures. According to the will of God - Without
any merit of ours. St. Paul begins most of his epistles with
thanksgiving; but, writing to the Galatians, he alters his style, and
first sets down his main proposition, That by the merits of Christ
alone, giving himself for our sins, we are justified: neither does he
term them, as he does others, either saints," elect," or churches of
God."

[Galatians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 1:5</span></span>

To whom be glory - For this his gracious will.

[Galatians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 1:6</span></span>

I marvel that ye are removed so soon - After my leaving you. From him
who called you by the grace of Christ - His gracious gospel, and his
gracious power.

[Galatians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 1:7</span></span>

Which, indeed, is not properly another gospel. For what ye have now
received is no gospel at all; it is not glad, but heavy, tidings, as
setting your acceptance with God upon terms impossible to be performed.
But there are some that trouble you - The same word occurs, [Act
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024). And would - If they were able.
Subvert or overthrow the gospel of Christ - The better to effect which,
they suggest, that the other apostles, yea, and I myself, insist upon
the observance of the law.

[Galatians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 1:8</span></span>

But if we - I and all the apostles. Or an angel from heaven - If it were
possible. Preach another gospel, let him be accursed - Cut off from
Christ and God.

[Galatians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 1:9</span></span>

As - He speaks upon mature deliberation; after pausing, it seems,
between the two verses. We - I and the brethren who are with me. Have
said before - Many times, in effect, if not in terms. So I say - All
those brethren knew the truth of the gospel. St. Paul knew the Galatians
had received the true gospel.

[Galatians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 1:10</span></span>

For - He adds the reason why he speaks so confidently. Do I now satisfy
men - Is this what I aim at in preaching or writing? If I still - Since
I was an apostle. Pleased men - Studied to please them; if this were my
motive of action; nay, if I did in fact please the men who know not God.
I should not be the servant of Christ - Hear this, all ye who vainly
hope to keep in favour both with God and with the world!

[Galatians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 1:11</span></span>

But I certify you, brethren - He does not till now give them even this
appellation. That the gospel which was preached by me among you is not
according to man - Not from man, not by man, not suited to the taste of
man.

[Galatians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 1:12</span></span>

For neither did I receive it - At once. Nor was I taught it - Slowly and
gradually, by any man. But by the revelation of Jesus Christ - Our Lord
revealed to him at first, his resurrection, ascension, and the calling
of the gentiles, and his own apostleship; and told him then, there were
other things for which he would appear to him.

[Galatians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 1:13</span></span>

I Persecuted the church of God - That is, the believers in Christ.

[Galatians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 1:14</span></span>

Being zealous of the unwritten traditions - Over and above those written
in the law.

[Galatians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 1:15</span></span>

But when it pleased God - He ascribes nothing to his own merits,
endeavours, or sincerity. Who separated me from my mother's womb - Set
me apart for an apostle, as he did Jeremiah for a prophet. [Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005). Such an unconditional
predestination as this may consist, both with God's justice and mercy.
And called me by his grace - By his free and almighty love, to be both a
Christian and an apostle.

[Galatians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 1:16</span></span>

To reveal his Son in me - By the powerful operation of his Spirit, [Co2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006); as well as to me, by the heavenly
vision. That I might preach him to others - Which I should have been ill
qualified to do, had I not first known him myself. I did not confer with
flesh and blood - Being fully satisfied of the divine will, and
determined to obey, I took no counsel with any man, neither with my own
reason or inclinations, which might have raised numberless objections.

[Galatians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 1:17</span></span>

Neither did I go up to Jerusalem - The residence of the apostles. But I
immediately went again into Arabia, and returned again to Damascus - He
presupposes the journey to Damascus, in which he was converted, as being
known to them all.

[Galatians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 1:18</span></span>

Then after three years - Wherein I had given full proof of my
apostleship. I went to visit Peter - To converse with him.

[Galatians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 1:19</span></span>

But other of the apostles I saw none, save James the brother (that is,
the kinsman) of the Lord - Therefore when Barnabas is said to have
"brought him into the apostles," [Act
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027), only St. Peter and St James are
meant.

[Galatians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gal 1:24</span></span>

In me - That is, on my account.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 2](gal002)

</div>
