<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen004)  [Next](gen006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001)

[Genesis 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 5:1</span></span>

The first words of the chapter are the title of argument of the whole
chapter; it is the book of the generations of Adam - It is the list or
catalogue of the posterity of Adam, not of all, but only of the holy
seed, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came; the names, ages,
and deaths of those that were the successors of the first Adam in the
custody of the promise, and the ancestors of the second Adam.

Where we have a brief rehearsal of what was before at large related
concerning the creation of man. This is what we have need frequently to
hear of, and carefully to acquaint ourselves with. Observe here. 1. That
God created man. Man is not his own maker, therefore he must not be his
own master; but the author of his being must be the director of his
motions, and the center of them. 2. That there was a day in which God
created man, he was not from eternity, but of yesterday; he was not the
first - born, but the junior of the creation. 3. That God made him in
his own likeness, righteous and holy, and therefore undoubtedly happy;
man's nature resembled the divine nature more than that of any of the
creatures of this lower world. 4. That God created them male and female,
[Gen 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#002), for their mutual comfort, as
well as for the preservation and increase of their kind. Adam and Eve
were both made immediately by the hand of God, both made in God's
likeness; and therefore between the sexes there is not that great
difference and inequality which some imagine. 5. That God blessed them.
It is usual for parents to bless their children, so God the common
Father blessed his; but earthly parents can only beg a blessing, it is
God's prerogative to command it. It refers chiefly to the blessing of
increase, not excluding other blessings.

[Genesis 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 5:2</span></span>

Where we have a brief rehearsal of what was before at large related
concerning the creation of man. This is what we have need frequently to
hear of, and carefully to acquaint ourselves with. Observe here. 1. That
God created man. Man is not his own maker, therefore he must not be his
own master; but the author of his being must be the director of his
motions, and the center of them. 2. That there was a day in which God
created man, he was not from eternity, but of yesterday; he was not the
first - born, but the junior of the creation. 3. That God made him in
his own likeness, righteous and holy, and therefore undoubtedly happy;
man's nature resembled the divine nature more than that of any of the
creatures of this lower world. 4. That God created them male and female,
[Gen 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#002), for their mutual comfort, as
well as for the preservation and increase of their kind. Adam and Eve
were both made immediately by the hand of God, both made in God's
likeness; and therefore between the sexes there is not that great
difference and inequality which some imagine. 5. That God blessed them.
It is usual for parents to bless their children, so God the common
Father blessed his; but earthly parents can only beg a blessing, it is
God's prerogative to command it. It refers chiefly to the blessing of
increase, not excluding other blessings.

He called their name Adam - He gave this name both to the man and the
woman. Being at first one by nature, and afterwards one by marriage; it
was fit they should both have the same name, in token of their union.

[Genesis 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 5:3</span></span>

Seth was born in the 130th year of Adam's life, and probably the murder
of Abel was not long before. Many other sons and daughters were born to
Adam besides Cain and Abel before this; but no notice is taken of them,
because an honourable mention must be made of his name only, in whose
loins Christ and the church were. But that which is most observable here
concerning Seth, is, that Adam begat him in his own likeness after his
image - Adam was made in the image of God; but when he was fallen and
corrupted, he begat a son in his own image, sinful and defiled, frail
and mortal, and miserable like himself; not only a man like himself,
consisting of body and soul; but a sinner like himself, guilty and
obnoxious, degenerate and corrupt. He was conceived and born in sin,
[Psa 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005). This was Adam's own
likeness, the reverse of that Divine likeness in which Adam was made;
but having lost it himself he could not convey it to his seed.

[Genesis 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 5:5</span></span>

In the day Adam ate forbidden fruit, he became mortal, he began to die;
his whole life after was but a forfeited condemned life, nay it was a
wasting dying life; he was not only like a criminal sentenced, but as
one already crucified, that dies slowly and by degrees.

[Genesis 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 5:6</span></span>

We have here all that the Holy Ghost thought fit to leave upon record
concerning five of the patriarchs before the flood, Seth, Enos, Cainan,
Mahalaleel, and Jared. There is nothing observable concerning any of
those particularly, tho' we have reason to think they were men of
eminency, both for prudence and piety: But in general, observe how
largely and expressly their generations are recorded. We are told how
long they lived that lived in God's fear, and when they died, that died
in his favour; but as for others it is no matter: the memory of the just
is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. That which is
especially observable, is, that they all lived very long; not one of
them died 'till he had seen the revolution of almost eight hundred
years, and some of them much longer; a great while for an immortal soul
to be imprisoned in an house of clay. The present life surely was not to
them such a burden as commonly it is now, else they would have been
weary of it; nor was the future life so clearly revealed then, as it is
now under the gospel, else they would have been impatient to remove it.
Some natural causes may be assigned for their long life in those first
ages. It is very probable that the earth was more fruitful, the products
of it more strengthening, the air more healthful, and the influences of
the heavenly bodies more benign before the flood than they were after.
Though man was driven out of paradise, yet the earth itself was then
paradisaical; a garden in comparison with its present state: and some
think, that their knowledge of the creatures and their usefulness both,
for their food and medicine, together with their sobriety and
temperance, contributed much to it; yet we do not find that those who
were intemperate, as many were, [Luk
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#027), as short - lived as temperate
men generally are now. It must therefore chiefly be resolved into the
power and providence of God; he prolonged their lives, both for the more
speedy replenishing of the earth, and for the more effectual
preservation of the knowledge of God and religion, then when there was
no written word, but tradition was the channel of its conveyance. All
the patriarchs here (except Noah) were born before Adam died, so that
from him they might receive a full account of the creation, paradise,
the fall, the promise, and those divine precepts which concerned
religious worship and a religious life: and if any mistake arose, they
might have recourse to him while he lived, as to an oracle, for the
rectifying of it, and after his death to Methuselah, and others that had
conversed with him; so great was the care of Almighty God to preserve in
his church the knowledge of his will, and the purity of his worship.

[Genesis 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 5:22</span></span>

And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah - To walk with God,
is to set God always before us, and to act as those that are always
under his eye. It is to live a life of communion with God, both in
ordinances and providences; it is to make God's word our rule, and his
glory our end, in all our actions; it is to make it our constant care
and endeavour in every thing to please God, and in nothing to offend
him; it is to comply with his will, to concur with his designs, and to
be workers together with him. He walked with God after he begat
Methuselah, which intimates, that he did not begin to be eminent for
piety 'till about that time.

[Genesis 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 5:24</span></span>

He was not, for God took him - That is, as it is explained, [Heb
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#005), he was translated that he should
not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him. But
why did God take him so soon? Surely because the world, which was now
grown corrupt, was not worthy of him. Because his work was done, and
done the sooner for his minding it so closely. He was not, for God took
him - He was not any longer in this world: it was not the period of his
being, but of his being here. He was not found; so the apostle explains
it from the seventy; not found by his friends, who sought him, as the
sons of the prophets sought Elijah, [Kg2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#017). God took him body and soul to
himself in the heavenly paradise, by the ministry of angels, as
afterwards he took Elijah. He was changed, as those saints shall be that
will be found alive at Christ's second coming.

[Genesis 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 5:25</span></span>

Methuselah signifies, He dies, there is a sending forth, viz. of the
deluge, which came the very year that Methuselah died. If his name was
so intended, it was a fair warning to a careless world long before the
judgment came. However, this is observable, that the longest liver that
ever was, carried death in his name, that he might be minded of its
coming surely, tho' it came slowly. He lived nine hundred sixty and nine
years, the longest we read of that ever any man lived on earth, and yet
he died: the longest liver must die at last. Neither youth nor age will
discharge from that war, for that is the end of all men: none can
challenge life by long prescription, nor make that a plea against the
arrests of death. 'Tis commonly supposed, that Methuselah died a little
before the flood; the Jewish writers say, seven days before, referring
to [Gen 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#010), and that he was taken
away from the evil to come.

[Genesis 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 5:29</span></span>

This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands,
because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed - Very probably there
were some prophecies that went before of him, as a person that should be
wonderfully serviceable to his generation.

[Genesis 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 5:32</span></span>

And Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth - These Noah begat (the eldest of
these) when he was six hundred years old. It should seem that Japheth
was the eldest, [Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021), but Shem
is put first, because on him the covenant was entailed, as appears by
[Gen 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#026), where God is called the
Lord God of Shem. To him 'tis probable the birthright was given, and
from him 'tis certain both Christ the head, and the church the body,
were to descend; therefore he is called Shem, which signifies a name,
because in his posterity the name of God should always remain, 'till He
should come out of his loins, whose name is above every name; so that in
putting Shem first, Christ was in effect put first, who in all things
must have the pre - eminence. For the glory of God's justice, and for
warning to a wicked world, before the history of the ruin of the old
world we have a full account of its degeneracy, its apostacy from God,
and rebellion against him. The destroying of it was an act not of
absolute sovereignty, but of necessary justice for the maintaining of
the honour of God's government.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 6](gen006)

</div>
