<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen039)  [Next](gen041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)

[Genesis 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 40:1</span></span>

We should not have had this story of Pharaoh's butler and baker recorded
in scripture, if it had not been serviceable to Joseph's preferment. The
world stands for the sake of the church, and is governed for its good.
Observe, \[1.\] Two of the great officers of Pharaoh's court having
offended the king are committed to prison. Note, High places are
slippery places; nothing more uncertain than the favour of princes.
Those that make God's favour their happiness, and his service their
business, will find him a better master than Pharaoh was, and not so
extreme to mark what they do amiss. Many conjectures there are
concerning the offence of these servants of Pharaoh; some make it no
less than an attempt to take away his life; others no more but the
casual lighting of a fly into his cup, and a little sand in his bread:
whatever it was, Providence, by this means, brought them into the prison
where Joseph was.

[Genesis 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 40:4</span></span>

The captain of the guard, which was Potiphar, charged Joseph with them -
Which intimates that he began now to be reconciled to him.

[Genesis 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 40:6</span></span>

They were sad - It was not the prison that made them sad; they were
pretty well used to that, but the dream. God has more ways than one to
sadden the spirits of those that are to be made sad. Those sinners that
are hardy enough under outward trouble, yet God can find a way to
trouble them, and take off their wheels, by wounding their spirits, and
laying a load upon them.

[Genesis 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 40:8</span></span>

Do not interpretations belong to God? - He means the God whom he
worshipped, to the knowledge of whom he endeavours hereby to lead them.
And if interpretations belong to God, he is a free agent, and may
communicate the power to whom he pleases, therefore tell me your dreams.

[Genesis 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 40:14</span></span>

Think on me, when it shall be well with thee - Though the respect paid
to Joseph, made the prison as easy to him as a prison could be, yet none
can blame him to be desirous of liberty. See what a modest
representation he makes of his own case. He doth not reflect upon his
brethren that sold him, only saith, I was stolen out of the land of the
Hebrews. Nor doth he reflect on the wrong done him in this imprisonment
by his mistress that was his persecutor, and his master that was his
judge, but mildly avers his own innocency. Here have I done nothing that
they should put me into the dungeon - When we are called to vindicate
ourselves, we should carefully avoid as much as may be speaking ill of
others. Let us be content to prove ourselves innocent, and not fond of
upbraiding others with their guilt.

[Genesis 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 40:20</span></span>

He lifted up the head of these two prisoners - That is, arraigned and
tried them; and he restored the chief butler, and hanged the chief
baker.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 41](gen041)

</div>
