<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen029)  [Next](gen031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

[Genesis 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 30:1</span></span>

Rachel envied her sister - Envy is grieving at the good of another, than
which no sin is more injurious both to God, our neighbour, and
ourselves. But this was not all, she said to Jacob, give me children or
else I die - A child would not content her; but because Leah has more
than one, she must have more too; Give me children: her heart is set
upon it. Give them me, else I die, That is, I shall fret myself to
death. The want of this satisfaction will shorten my days. Observe a
difference between Rachel's asking for this mercy, and Hannah's, [Sa1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#010), &c. Rachel envied, Hannah wept:
Rachel must have children, and she died of the second; Hannah prayed for
this child, and she had four more: Rachel is importunate and peremptory,
Hannah is submissive and devout, If thou wilt give me a child, I will
give him to the Lord. Let Hannah be imitated, and not Rachel; and let
our desires be always under the conduct and check of reason and
religion.

[Genesis 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 30:2</span></span>

And Jacob's anger was kindled - He was angry, not at the person, but at
the sin: he expressed himself so as to shew his displeasure. It was a
grave and pious reply which Jacob gave to Rachel, Am I in God's stead? -
Can I give thee that which God denies thee? He acknowledges the hand of
God in the affliction: He hath withheld the fruit of the womb. Whatever
we want, it is God that with - holds it, as sovereign Lord, most wise,
holy, and just, that may do what he will with his own, and is debtor to
no man: that never did, nor ever can do, any wrong to any of his
creatures. The key of the clouds, of the heart, of the grave, and of the
womb, are four keys which God has in his hand, and which (the Rabbins
say) he intrusts neither with angel nor seraphin. He also acknowledges
his own inability to alter what God appointed, Am I in God's stead?
What, dost thou make a God of me? There is no creature that is, or can
be, to us in God's stead. God may be to us, instead of any creature, as
the sun instead of the moon and stars; but the moon and all the stars
will not be to us instead of the sun. No creature's wisdom, power, and
love will be to us instead of God's. It is therefore our sin and folly
to place that confidence in any creature, which is to be placed in God
only.

[Genesis 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 30:3</span></span>

Behold my maid, Bilhah - At the persuasion of Rachel he took Bilhah her
handmaid to wife, that, according to the usage of those times, his
children by her might be adopted and owned as her mistresses children.
She would rather have children by reputation than none at all; children
that she might call her own, though they were not so. And as an early
instance of her dominion over the children born in her apartment, she
takes a pleasure in giving them names, that carry in them nothing but
marks of emulation with her sister. As if she had overcome her, At law,
she calls the flrst son of her handmaid, Dan, Judgment, saying, God hath
Judged me - That is, given sentence in my favour. In battle, she calls
the next Naphtali, Wrestlings, saying, I have wrestled with my sister,
and have prevailed - See what roots of bitterness envy and strife are,
and what mischief they make among relations!

[Genesis 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 30:9</span></span>

Rachel had done that absurd and preposterous thing of putting her maid
into her husband's bed, and now Leah (because she missed one year in
bearing children) doth the same, to be even with her. See the power of
rivalship, and admire the wisdom of the divine appointment, which joins
together one man and one woman only. Two sons Zilpah bare to Jacob, whom
Leah looked upon herself as intitled to, in token of which she called
one Gad, promising herself a little troop of children. The other she
called Asher, Happy, thinking herself happy in him, and promising
herself that her neighbours would think so too.

[Genesis 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 30:14</span></span>

Reuben, a little lad of five or six years old, playing in the field,
found mandrakes. It is uncertain what they were; the critics are not
agreed about them: we are sure they were some rarities, either fruits or
flowers that were very pleasant to the smell, [Sol
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013). Some think these mandrakes were
Jessamin flowers. Whatever they were, Rachel, could not see them in
Leah's hands, but she must covet them.

[Genesis 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 30:17</span></span>

And God hearkened unto Leah - Perhaps the reason of this contest between
Jacob's wives for his company, and their giving him their maids to be
his wives, was the earnest desire they had to fulfil the promise made to
Abraham (and now lately renewed to Jacob) that his seed should be as the
stars of heaven for multitude, and that, in one seed of his, the
Messiah, all the nations of the earth shall be blessed. Two sons Leah
was now blessed with; the flrst she called Issachar, a hire, reckoning
herself well repaid for her mandrakes; nay, (which is a strange
construction of the providence) rewarded for giving her maid to her
husband. The other she called Zebulun, dwelling, owning God's bounty to
her, God has endowed me with a good dowry. Jacob had not endowed her
when he married her; but she reckons a family of children, a good dowry.

[Genesis 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 30:21</span></span>

Mention is made, of Dinah, because of the following story concerning
her, Gen. 34:1-16, &c. Perhaps Jacob had other daughters, though not
registered.

[Genesis 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 30:22</span></span>

God remembered Rachel, whom he seemed to have forgotten, and hearkened
to her, whose prayers had been long denied, and then she bare a son.
Rachael called her son Joseph, which, in Hebrew, is a - kin to two words
of a contrary signification: Asaph, abstulit, he has taken away my
reproach, as if the greatest mercy she had in this son were, that she
had saved her credit: and Joseph, addidit, the Lord shall add to me
another son: which may be looked upon as the language of her faith; she
takes this mercy as an earnest of further mercy: hath God given me this
grace? I may call it Joseph, and say, he shall add more grace.

[Genesis 30:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 30:34</span></span>

Laban was willing to consent to this bargain, because he thought if
those few he had that were now speckled and spotted were separated from
the rest, which was to be done immediately, the body of the flock which
Jacob was to tend, being of one colour, either all black or all white,
would produce few or none of mixt colours, and so he should have Jacob's
service for nothing, or next to nothing. According to this bargain,
those few that were party - coloured were separated, and put into the
hands of Laban's sons, and sent three days journey off: so great was
Laban's jealouly lest any of those should mix with the rest of the flock
to the advantage of Jacob.

[Genesis 30:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">gen 30:37</span></span>

Here is Jacob's policy to make his bargain more advantageous to himself
than it was likely to be: and if he had not taken some course to help
himself, it would have been an ill bargain indeed; which he knew Laban
would never have considered, who did not consult any one's interest but
his own. Now Jacob's contrivances were, He set pilled sticks before the
cattle where they were watered, that looking much at those unusual party
- coloured sticks, by the power of imagination, they might bring forth
young ones in like manner party - coloured. Probably this custom was
commonly used by the shepherds of Canaan, who coveted to have their
cattle of this motly colour. When he began to have a flock of ring -
straked and brown, he contrived to set them first, and to put the faces
of the rest towards them, with the same design as he did the former.
Whether this was honest policy, or no, may admit of a question. Read
[Gen 31:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007), and the question is
resolved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 31](gen031)

</div>
