<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen002)  [Next](gen004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)

[Genesis 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 3:1</span></span>

We have here an account of the temptation wherewith Satan assaulted our
first parents, and which proved fatal to them. And here observe, The
tempter, the devil in the shape of a serpent. Multitudes of them fell;
but this that attacked our first parents, was surely the prince of the
devils. Whether it was only the appearance of a serpent, or a real
serpent, acted and possessed by the devil, is not certain. The devil
chose to act his part in a serpent, because it is a subtle creature. It
is not improbable, that reason and speech were then the known properties
of the serpent. And therefore Eve was not surprised at his reasoning and
speaking, which otherwise she must have been. That which the devil aimed
at, was to persuade Eve to eat forbidden fruit; and to do this, he took
the same method that he doth still. 1. He questions whether it were a
sin or no, [Gen 3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001). He denies that
there was any danger in it, [Gen 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#004).
3. He suggests much advantage by it, [Gen
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005). And these are his common topics.

As to the advantage, he suits the temptation to the pure state they were
now in, proposing to them not any carnal pleasure, but intellectual
delights. Your eyes shall be opened - You shall have much more of the
power and pleasure of contemplation than now you have; you shall fetch a
larger compass in your intellectual views, and see farther into things
than now you do. You shall be as gods - As Elohim, mighty gods, not only
omniscient but omnipotent too: You shall know good and evil - That is,
everything that is desirable to be known. To support this part of the
temptation, he abuseth the name given to this tree. 'Twas intended to
teach the practical knowledge of good and evil, that is, of duty and
disobedience, and it would prove the experimental knowledge of good and
evil, that is, of happiness and misery. But he perverts the sense of it,
and wrests it to their destruction, as if this tree would give them a
speculative notional knowledge of the natures, kinds, and originals of
good and evil. And, All this presently, In the day you eat thereof - You
will find a sudden and immediate change for the better.

[Genesis 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 3:6</span></span>

Here we see what Eve's parley with the tempter ended in: Satan at length
gains his point. God tried the obedience of our first parents by
forbidding them the tree of knowledge, and Satan doth as it were join
issue with God, and in that very thing undertakes to seduce them into a
transgression; and here we find how he prevailed, God permitting it for
wise and holy ends.

\[1.\] We have here the inducements that moved them to transgress. The
woman being deceived, was ring - leader in the transgression, [Ti1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014) She saw that the tree was - It
was said of all the rest of the fruit trees wherewith the garden of Eden
was planted, that they were pleasant to the sight, and good for food.
She imagined a greater benefit by this tree than by any of the rest,
that it was a tree not only not to be dreaded, but to be desired to make
one wise, and therein excelling all the rest of the trees. This she saw,
that is, she perceived and understood it by what the devil had said to
her. She gave also to her husband with her - 'Tis likely he was not with
her when she was tempted; surely if he had, he would have interposed to
prevent the sin; but he came to her when she had eaten, and was
prevailed with by her to eat likewise. She gave it to him; persuading
him with the same arguements that the serpent had used with her; adding
this to the rest, that she herself had eaten of it, and found it so far
from being deadly that it was extremely pleasant and grateful. And he
did eat - This implied the unbelief of God's word, and confidence in the
devil's; discontent with his present state, and an ambition of the
honour which comes not from God. He would be both his own carver, and
his own master, would have what he pleased, and do what he pleased; his
sin was in one word disobedience, [Rom
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019), disobedience to a plain, easy
and express command, which he knew to be a command of trial. He sins
against light and love, the clearest light and the dearest love that
ever sinner sinned against. But the greatest aggravation of his sin was,
that he involved all his posterity in sin and ruin by it. He could not
but know that he stood as a public person, and that his disobedience
would be fatal to all his seed; and if so, it was certainly both the
greatest treachery and the greatest cruelty that ever was. Shame and
fear seized the criminals, these came into the world along with sin, and
still attend it. The Eyes of them both were opened - The eyes of their
consciences; their hearts smote them for what they had done Now, when it
was too late, they saw the happiness they were fallen from, and the
misery they were fallen into. They saw God provoked, his favour
forfeited, his image lost; they felt a disorder in their own spirits,
which they had never before been conscious of; they saw a law in their
members warring against the law of their minds, and captivating them
both to sin and wrath; they saw that they were naked, that is, that they
were stripped, deprived of all the honours and joys of their paradise
state, and exposed to all the miseries that might justly be expected
from an angry God; laid open to the contempt and reproach of heaven and
earth, and their own consciences. And they sewed or platted fig leaves
together, and, to cover, at least, part of their shame one from another,
made themselves aprons. See here what is commonly the folly of those
that have sinned: they are more solicitous to save their credit before
men, than to obtain their pardon from God. And they heard the voice of
the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day - Tis supposed
he came in a human shape; in no other similitude than that wherein they
had seen him when he put them into paradise; for he came to convince and
humble them, not to amaze and terrify them. He came not immediately from
heaven in their view as afterwards on mount Sinai, but he came in the
garden, as one that was still willing to be familiar with them. He came
walking, not riding upon the wings of the wind, but walking
deliberately, as one slow to anger. He came in the cool of the day, not
in the night, when all fears are doubly fearful; nor did he come
suddenly upon them, but they heard his voice at some distance, giving
them notice of his coming; and probably it was a still small voice, like
that in which he came to enquire after Elijah. And they hid themselves
from the presence of the Lord God - A sad change! Before they had
sinned, if they heard the voice of the Lord God coming towards them,
they would have run to meet him, but now God was become a terror to
them, and then no marvel they were become a terror to themselves.

[Genesis 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 3:9</span></span>

Where art thou? - This enquiry after Adam may be looked upon as a
gracious pursuit in order to his recovery. If God had not called to him
to reduce him, his condition had been as desperate as that of fallen
angels.

[Genesis 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 3:10</span></span>

I heard thy voice in the garden: and I was afraid - Adam was afraid
because he was naked; not only unarmed, and therefore afraid to contend
with God, but unclothed and therefore afraid so much as to appear before
him.

[Genesis 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 3:11</span></span>

Who told thee that thou wast naked? - That is, how camest thou to be
sensible of thy nakedness as thy shame? Hast thou eaten of the tree? -
Tho' God knows all our sins, yet he will know them from us, and requires
from us an ingenuous confession of them, not that he may be informed,
but that we may be humbled. Whereof I commanded thee not to eat of it, I
thy maker, I thy master, I thy benefactor, I commanded thee to the
contrary. Sin appears most plain and most sinful in the glass of the
commandment.

[Genesis 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 3:13</span></span>

What is this that thou hast done? - Wilt thou own thy fault? Neither of
them does this fully. Adam lays all the blame upon his wife: She gave me
of the tree - Nay, he not only lays the blame upon his wife, but tacitly
on God himself. The woman thou gavest me, and gavest to be with me as my
companion, she gave me of the tree. Eve lays all the blame upon the
serpent; the serpent beguiled me. The prisoners being found guilty by
their own confession, besides the infallible knowledge of the Judge, and
nothing material being offered in arrest of judgment, God immediately
proceeds to pass sentence, and in these verses he begins (where the sin
began) with the serpent. God did not examine the serpent, nor ask him
what he had done, but immediately sentenced him, (1.) Because he was
already convicted of rebellion against God. (2.) Because he was to be
for ever excluded from pardon; and why should any thing be said to
convince and humble him, who was to find no place for repentance?

[Genesis 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 3:14</span></span>

To testify a displeasure against sin, God fastens a curse upon the
serpent, Thou art cursed above all cattle - Even the creeping things,
when God made them, were blessed of him, [Gen
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#022), but sin turned the blessing into
a curse. Upon thy belly shalt thou go - No longer upon feet, or half
erect, but thou shalt crawl along, thy belly cleaving to the earth. Dust
thou shalt eat - Which signifies a base and despicable condition.

[Genesis 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 3:15</span></span>

And I will put enmity between thee and the woman - The inferior
creatures being made for man, it was a curse upon any of them to be
turned against man, and man against them. And this is part of the
serpent's curse. A perpetual reproach is fastened upon him. Under the
cover of the serpent he is here sentenced to be, (1.) Degraded and
accursed of God. It is supposed, pride was the sin that turned angels
into devils, which is here justly punished by a great variety of
mortifications couched under the mean circumstances of a serpent,
crawling on his belly, and licking the dust. (2.) Detested and abhorred
of all mankind: even those that are really seduced into his interest,
yet profess a hatred of him. (3.) Destroyed and ruined at last by the
great Redeemer, signified by the bruising of his head; his subtle
politics shall be all baffled, his usurped power entirely crushed. A
perpetual quarrel is here commenced between the kingdom of God, and the
kingdom of the devil among men; war proclaimed between the seed of the
woman, and the seed of the serpent, [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007). It is the fruit of this enmity,
(1.) That there is a continual conflict between God's people and him.
Heaven and hell can never be reconciled, no more can Satan and a
sanctified soul. (2.) That there is likewise a continual struggle
between the wicked and the good. And all the malice of persecutors
against the people of God is the fruit of this enmity, which will
continue while there is a godly man on this side heaven, and a wicked
man on this side hell. A gracious promise is here made of Christ as the
deliverer of fallen man from the power of Satan. By faith in this
promise, our first parents, and the patriarchs before the flood, were
justified and saved; and to this promise, and the benefit of it,
instantly serving God day and night they hoped to come. Notice is here
given them of three things concerning Christ. (1.) His incarnation, that
he should be the seed of the woman. (2.) His sufferings and death,
pointed at in Satan's bruising his heel, that is, his human nature. (3.)
His victory over Satan thereby. Satan had now trampled upon the woman,
and insulted over her; but the seed of the woman should be raised up in
the fulness of time to avenge her quarrel, and to trample upon him, to
spoil him, to lead him captive, and to triumph over him, [Col
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015).

[Genesis 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 3:16</span></span>

We have here the sentence past upon the woman; she is condemned to a
state of sorrow and a state of subjection: proper punishments of a sin
in which she had gratified her pleasure and her pride. She is here put
into a state of sorrow; one particular of which only is instanced in,
that in bringing forth children, but it includes all those impressions
of grief and fear which the mind of that tender sex is most apt to
receive, and all the common calamities which they are liable to. It is
God that multiplies our sorrows, I will do it: God, as a righteous
Judge, doth it, which ought to silence us under all our sorrows; as many
as they are we have deserved them all, and more: nay, God as a tender
Father doth it for our necessary correction, that we may be humbled for
sin, and weaned from it. She is here put into a state of subjection: the
whole sex, which by creation was equal with man, is for sin made
inferior.

[Genesis 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 3:17</span></span>

Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife - He excused the
fault, by laying it on his wife, but God doth not admit the excuse; tho'
it was her fault to persuade him to eat it, it was his fault to hearken
to her. Cursed is the ground for thy sake - And the effect of that curse
is, Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee - The ground or
earth, by the sin of man, is made subject to vanity, the several parts
of it being not so serviceable to man's comfort and happiness, as they
were when they were made. Fruitfulness was its blessing for man's
service, Gen. 1:11-29, and now barrenness was its curse for man's
punishment.

[Genesis 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 3:19</span></span>

In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread - His business before he
sinned was a constant pleasure to him; but now his labour shall be a
weariness. Unto dust shalt thou return - Thy body shall be forsaken by
thy soul, and become itself a lump of dust, and then it shall be lodged
in the grave, and mingle with the dust of the earth.

[Genesis 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 3:20</span></span>

God having named the man, and called him Adam, which signifies red
earth, he in farther token of dominion named the woman, and called her
Eve - That is, life. Adam bears the name of the dying body, Eve of the
living soul. The reason of the name is here given, some think by Moses
the historian, others by Adam himself, because she was - That is, was to
be the mother of all living. He had called her Isha, woman, before, as a
wife; here he calls her Evah, life, as a mother. Now, 1. If this was
done by divine direction, it was an instance of God's favour, and, like
the new naming of Abraham and Sarah, it was a seal of the covenant, and
an assurance to them, that notwithstanding their sin, he had not
reversed that blessing wherewith he had blessed them, Be fruitful and
multiply: it was likewise a confirmation of the promise now made, that
the seed of the woman, of this woman, should break the serpent's head.
2. If Adam did of himself, it was an instance of his faith in the word
of God.

[Genesis 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 3:21</span></span>

These coats of skin had a significancy. The beasts whose skins they
were, must be slain; slain before their eyes to shew them what death is.
And probably 'tis supposed they were slain for sacrifice, to typify the
great sacrifice which in the latter end of the world should be offered
once for all. Thus the first thing that died was a sacrifice, or Christ
in a figure.

[Genesis 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 3:22</span></span>

Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil - See what
he has got, what advantages, by eating forbidden fruit! This is said to
humble them, and to bring them to a sense of their sin and folly, that
seeing themselves thus wretchedly deceived by following the devil's
counsel, they might henceforth pursue the happiness God offers, in the
way he prescribes.

[Genesis 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 3:23</span></span>

He sent him forth - Bid him go out, told him he should no longer occupy
and enjoy that garden; but he was not willing to part with it.

[Genesis 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 3:24</span></span>

God drove him out - This signified the exclusion of him and his guilty
race from that communion with God which was the bliss and glory of
paradise. But whether did he send him when he turned him out of Eden? He
might justly have chased him out of the world, [Job
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#018), but he only chased him out of
the garden: he might justly have cast him down to hell, as the angels
that sinned were, when they were shut out from the heavenly paradise,
[Pe2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004), but man was only sent to
till the ground out of which he was taken. He was only sent to a place
of toil, not to a place of torment. He was sent to the ground, not to
the grave; to the work - house, not to the dungeon, not to the prison -
house; to hold the plough, not to drag the chain: his tilling the ground
would be recompensed by his eating its fruits; and his converse with the
earth, whence he was taken, was improveable to good purposes, to keep
him humble, and to mind him of his latter end. Observe then, That though
our first parents were excluded from the privileges of their state of
innocency, yet they were not abandoned to despair; God's thoughts of
love designing them for a second state of probation upon new terms. And
he placed at the east of the garden of Eden, a detachment of cherubim,
armed with a dreadful and irresistible power, represented by flaming
swords which turned every way, on that side the garden which lay next to
the place whither Adam was sent, to keep the way that led to the tree of
life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 4](gen004)

</div>
