<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen024)  [Next](gen026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)

[Genesis 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 25:1</span></span>

Five and thirty years Abraham lived after the marriage of Isaac, and all
that is recorded concerning him during that time lies here in a very few
verses: we hear no more of God's extraordinary appearances to him, or
trials of him; for all the days even of the greatest saints are not
eminent days, some slide on silently, and neither come nor go with
observation: such were these last days of Abraham. We have here an
account of his children by Keturah, another wife, which be married after
the death of Sarah. He had buried Sarah, and married Isaac, the two dear
companions of his life, and was now solitary; his family wanted a
governess and it was not good for him to he thus alone; he therefore
marries Keturah, probably the chief of his maid servants, born in his
house, or bought with money. By her he had six sons, in whom the promise
made to Abraham concerning the great increase of his posterity was in
part fulfilled. The strength he received by the promise still remained
in him, to shew how much the virtue of the promise exceeds the power of
nature.

[Genesis 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 25:5</span></span>

And Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac - As he was bound to do in
justice to Sarah his first wife, and to Rebekah who married Isaac upon
the assurance of it.

[Genesis 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 25:6</span></span>

He gave gifts - Or portions to the rest of his children, both to
Ishmael, though at first he was sent empty away, and to his sons by
Keturah. It was justice to provide for them; parents that do not that,
are worse than infidels. It was prudence to settle them in places
distant from Isaac, that they might not pretend to divide the
inheritance with him. He did this while he yet lived, lest it should not
have been done, or not so well done afterwards. In many cases it is
wisdom for men to make their own hands their executors, and what they
find to do, to do it while they live. These sons of the concubines were
sent into the country that lay east from Canaan, and their posterity
were called the children of the east, famous for their numbers. Their
great increase was the fruit of the promise made to Abraham, that God
would multiply his seed.

[Genesis 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 25:7</span></span>

And these are the days of Abraham - He lived one hundred and seventy -
five years; just a hundred years after he came to Canaan; so long he was
a sojourner in a strange country.

[Genesis 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 25:8</span></span>

He died in a good old age, an old man - So God had promised him. His
death was his discharge from the burdens of his age: it was also the
crown of the glory of his old age. He was full of years - A good man,
though he should not die old, dies full of days, satisfied with living
here, and longing to live in a better place. And was gathered to his
people - His body was gathered to the congregation of the dead, and his
soul to the congregation of the blessed. Death gathers us to our people.
Those that are our people while we live, whether the people of God, or
the children of this world, to them death will gather us.

[Genesis 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 25:9</span></span>

Here is nothing recorded of the pomp or ceremony of his funeral; only we
are told, his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him - It was the last office
of respect they had to pay to their good father. Some distance there had
formerly been between Isaac and Ishmael, but it seems either Abraham had
himself brought them together while he lived, or at least his death
reconciled them. They buried him, in his own burying - place which he
had purchased and in which he had buried Sarah. Those that in life have
been very dear to each other, may not only innocently, but laudably,
desire to be buried together, that, in their deaths, they may not be
divided, and in token of their hopes of rising together.

[Genesis 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 25:11</span></span>

And God blessed Isaac - The blessing of Abraham did not die with him,
but survived to all the children of the promise. But Moses presently
digresseth from the story of Isaac, to give a short account of Ishmael,
for as much as he also was a son of Abraham; and God had made some
promises concerning him, which it was requisite we should know the
accomplishment of. He had twelve sons, twelve princes they are called,
[Gen 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#016), heads of families, which,
in process of time, became nations, numerous and very considerable. They
peopled a very large continent that lay between Egypt and Assyria,
called Arabia. The names of his twelve sons are recorded: Midian and
Kedar we oft read of in scripture. And his posterity had not only tents
in the fields wherein they grew rich in times of peace, but they had
towns and castles, [Gen 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#016), where
in they fortified themselves in time of war. Their number and strength
was the fruit of the promise made to Hagar concerning Ishmael, [Gen
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#010). and to Abraham, [Gen
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020), [Gen
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#013).

[Genesis 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 25:17</span></span>

He lived an hundred and thirty and seven years - Which is recorded to
shew the efficacy of Abraham's prayer for him, [Gen
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#018). O that Ishmael might live
before thee! Then he also was gathered to his people. And he died in the
presence of all his brethren - With his friends about him. Who would not
wish so to do?

[Genesis 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 25:20</span></span>

And Isaac was forty years old - Not much is related concerning Isaac,
but what had reference to his father, while he lived, and to his sons
afterward; for Isaac seems not to have been a man of action, nor much
tried, but to have spent his day, in quietness and silence.

[Genesis 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 25:21</span></span>

And Isaac intreated the Lord for his wife - Though God had promised to
multiply his family, he prayed for it; for God's promises must not
supersede but encourage our prayers, and be improved as the ground of
our faith. Though he had prayed for this mercy many years, and it was
not granted, yet he did not leave off praying for it.

[Genesis 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 25:22</span></span>

The children struggled within her - The commotion was altogether extra -
ordinary, and made her very uneasy: If it be so, or, since it is so, why
am I thus? - Before the want of children was her trouble, now the
struggle of the children is no less so. And she went to enquire of the
Lord - Some think Melchizedek was now consulted as an oracle, or perhaps
some Urim or Teraphim were now used to enquire of God by, as afterwards
in the breast - plate of judgment. The word and prayer, by which we now
enquire of the Lord, give great relief to those that are upon any
account perplexed: it is a mighty ease to spread our case before the
Lord, and ask council at his mouth.

[Genesis 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 25:23</span></span>

Two nations are in thy womb - She was now big not only with two
children, but two nations, which should not only in their manners
greatly differ from each other, but in their interest contend with each
other, and the issue of the contest should be that the elder should
serve the younger, which was fulfilled in the subjection of the Edomites
for many ages to the house of David.

[Genesis 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 25:25</span></span>

Esau when he was born was red and hairy, as if he had been already a
grown man, whence he had his name Esau, made, reared already. This was
an indication of a very strong constitution, and gave cause to expect
that he would be a very robust, daring, active man. But Jacob was smooth
and tender as other children.

[Genesis 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 25:26</span></span>

His hand took hold on Esau's heel - This signified, Jacob's pursuit of
the birth - right and blessing; from the first he reached forth to have
catched hold of it, and if possible to have prevented his brother. His
prevailing for it at last: that in process of time he should gain his
point. This passage is referred to [Hos
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#003), and from hence he had his name
Jacob, a supplanter.

[Genesis 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 25:27</span></span>

Esau was an hunter - And a man that knew how to live by his wits, for he
was a cunning hunter. A man of the field - All for the game, and never
so well but as when he was in pursuit of it. And Jacob was a plain man -
An honest man, that dealt fairly. And dwelt in tents - Either, As a
shepherd, loving that safe and silent employment of keeping sheep, to
which also he bred up his children, [Gen
46:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#034). Or, As a student, he frequented
the tents of Melchizedek or Heber, as some understand it, to be taught
by them divine things.

[Genesis 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 25:28</span></span>

And Isaac loved Esau - Isaac though he was not a stirring man himself,
yet he loved to have his son active. Esau knew how to please him, and
shewed a great respect for him, by treating him often with venison,
which won upon him more than one would have thought. But Rebekah loved
him whom God loved.

[Genesis 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 25:29</span></span>

Sod - That is, boiled.

[Genesis 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 25:30</span></span>

Edom - That is, red.

[Genesis 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 25:31</span></span>

Sell me this day thy birth - right - He cannot be excused in taking
advantage of Esau's necessity, yet neither can Esau be excused who is
profane, [Heb 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#016), because for one
morsel of meat he sold his birth - right. The birth - right was typical
of spiritual privileges, those of the church of the first - born: Esau
was now tried how he would value those, and he shews himself sensible
only of present grievances: may he but get relief against them, he cares
not for his birth - right. If we look on Esau's birth - right as only a
temporal advantage, what he said had something of truth in it, that our
worldly enjoyments, even those we are most fond of, will stand us in no
stead in a dying hour. They will not put by the stroke of death, nor
ease the pangs, nor remove the sting. But being of a spiritual nature,
his undervaluing it, was the greatest profaneness imaginable. It is
egregious folly to part with our interest in God, and Christ, and
heaven, for the riches, honours, and pleasures of this world.

[Genesis 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 25:34</span></span>

He did eat and drink, and rise up and went his way - Without any serious
reflections upon the ill bargain he had made, or any shew of regret.
Thus Esau despised his birth - right - He used no means to get the
bargain revoked, made no appeal to his father about it but the bargain
which his necessity had made, (supposing it were so) his profaneness
confirmed, and by his subsequent neglect and contempt, he put the
bargain past recall.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 26](gen026)

</div>
