<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen049)  [Next](exo001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#001)

[Genesis 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 50:1</span></span>

And Joseph fell upon his father's face and wept upon him, and kissed him
- Joseph shewed his faith in God, and love to his father, by kissing his
pale and cold lips, and so giving an affectionate farewell. Probably the
rest of Jacob's sons did the same, much moved, no doubt, with his dying
words.

[Genesis 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 50:2</span></span>

He ordered the body to be embalmed, not only because he died in Egypt,
and that was the manner of the Egyptians, but because he was to be
carried to Canaan, which would be a work of time.

[Genesis 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 50:3</span></span>

He observed the ceremony of solemn mourning for him. Forty days were
taken up in embalming the body, which the Egyptians had an art of doing
so curiously, as to preserve the very features of the face unchanged.
All this time, and thirty days more, seventy in all, they either
confined themselves and sat solitary, or when they went out, appeared in
the habit of close mourners, according to the decent custom of the
country. Even the Egyptians, many of them, out of the respect they had
for Joseph, put themselves into mourning for his father.

[Genesis 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 50:5</span></span>

He asked and obtained leave of Pharaoh to go to Canaan, to attend the
funeral of his father. It was a piece of necessary respect to Pharaoh,
that he would not go without leave; for we may suppose, though his
charge about the corn was long since over, yet he continued a prime
minister of state, and therefore would not be so long absent from his
business without license.

[Genesis 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 50:11</span></span>

The solemn mourning for Jacob gave a name to the place; Abel - mizraim -
The mourning of the Egyptians: which served for a testimony against the
next generation of the Egyptians, who oppressed the posterity of this
Jacob, to whom their ancestors shewed such respect.

[Genesis 50:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 50:15</span></span>

Joseph will peradventure hate us - While their father lived, they
thought themselves safe under his shadow; but now he was dead, they
feared the worst. A guilty conscience exposeth men to continual frights;
those that would be fearless must keep themselves guiltless.

[Genesis 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 50:16</span></span>

Thy father did command - Thus in humbling ourselves to Christ by faith
and repentance, we may plead that it is the command of his father and
our father we should do so.

[Genesis 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 50:17</span></span>

We are the servants of the God of thy father - Not only children of the
same Jacob, but worshippers of the same Jehovah. Though we must be ready
to forgive all that injure us, yet we must especially take heed of
bearing malice towards any that are the servants of the God of our
father; those we should always treat with a peculiar tenderness, for we
and they have the same master. He wept when they spake to him - These
were tears of sorrow for their suspicion of him, and tears of tenderness
upon their submission.

[Genesis 50:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 50:19</span></span>

Am I in the place of God? - He in his great humility thought they shewed
him too much respect, and faith to them in effect, as Peter to
Cornelius, Stand up, I myself also am a man. Make your peace with God,
and then you will find it an easy matter to make your peace with me.

[Genesis 50:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 50:20</span></span>

Ye thought evil, but God meant it unto good - In order to the making
Joseph a greater blessing to his family than otherwise he could have
been.

[Genesis 50:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 50:21</span></span>

Fear not, I will nourish you - See what an excellent spirit Joseph was
of, and learn of him to render good for evil. He did not tell them they
were upon their good behaviour, and he would be kind to them if he saw
they carried themselves well: no, he would not thus hold them in
suspence, nor seem jealous of them, though they had been suspicious of
him. He comforted them, and, to banish all their fears, he spake kindly
to them. Those we love and forgive we must not only do well for, but
speak kindly to.

[Genesis 50:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 50:24</span></span>

I die, but God will surely visit you - To this purpose Jacob had spoken
to him, [Gen 48:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#021). Thus must we
comfort others with the same comforts wherewith we ourselves have been
comforted of God, and encourage them to rest on those promises which
have been our support. Joseph was, under God, both the protector and
benefactor of his brethren, and what would become of them now he was
dying? Why let this be their comfort, God will surely visit you. God's
gracious visits will serve to make up the loss of our best friends, and
bring you out of this land - And therefore, they must not hope to settle
there, nor look upon it as their rest for ever; they must set their
hearts upon the land of promise, and call that their home.

[Genesis 50:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 50:25</span></span>

And ye shall carry up my bones from hence - Herein he had an eye to the
promise, [Gen 15:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013), and in God's
name assures them of the performance of it. In Egypt they buried their
great men very honourably, and with abundance of pomp; but Joseph
prefers a plain burial in Canaan, and that deferred almost two hundred
years, before a magnificent one in Egypt. Thus Joseph by faith in the
doctrine of the resurrection, and the promise of Canaan, gave
commandment concerning his bones, [Heb
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#022). He dies in Egypt; but lays his
bones at stake, that God will surely visit Israel, and bring them to
Canaan.

[Genesis 50:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 50:26</span></span>

He was put in a coffin in Egypt - But not buried till his children had
received their inheritance in Canaan, [Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032). If the soul do but return to
its rest with God, the matter is not great, though the deserted body
find not at all, or not quickly, its rest in the grave. Yet care ought
to be taken of the dead bodies of the saints, in the belief of their
resurrection; for there is a covenant with the dust which shall be
remembered, and a commandment given concerning the bones.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 1](exo001)

</div>
