<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen037)  [Next](gen039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)

[Genesis 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 38:1</span></span>

Judah went down from his brethren - Withdrew for a time from his
father's family, and got intimately acquainted with one Hirah an
Adullamite. When young people that have been well educated begin to
change their company, they will soon change their manners, and lose
their good education. They that go down from their brethren, that
forsake the society of the seed of Israel, and pick up Canaanites for
their companions, are going down the hill apace.

[Genesis 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 38:2</span></span>

He took her - To wife. His father, it should seem, was not consulted,
but by his new friend Hirah.

[Genesis 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 38:7</span></span>

And Er was wicked in the sight of the Lord - That is, in defiance of God
and his law. And what came of it? Why God cut him off presently, The
Lord slew him. The next brother Onan was, according to the ancient
usage, married to the widow, to preserve the name of his deceased
brother that died childless. This custom of marrying the brother's widow
was afterward made one of the laws of Moses, [Deu
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005). Onan, though he consented to
marry the widow, yet to the great abuse of his own body, of the wife he
had married, and the memory of his brother that was gone, he refused to
raise up seed unto his brother. Those sins that dishonour the body are
very displeasing to God, and the evidence of vile actions. Observe, the
thing which he did displeased the Lord - And it is to be feared,
thousands, especially of single persons, by this very thing, still
displeased the Lord, and destroy their own souls.

[Genesis 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 38:11</span></span>

Shelah the third son was reserved for the widow, yet with design that he
should not marry so young as his brothers had done, lest he die also.
Some think that Judah never intended to marry Shelah to Tamar, but
unjustly suspected her to have been the death of her two former
husbands, (whereas it was their own wickedness that slew them) and then
sent her to her father's house, with a charge to remain a widow. If so,
it was an inexcusable piece of prevarication; however Tamar acquiesced,
and waited for the issue.

[Genesis 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 38:14</span></span>

Some excuse this by suggesting that she believed the promise made to
Abraham and his seed, particularly that of the Messiah, and that she was
therefore desirous to have a child by one of that family, that she might
have the honour, or at least stand fair for the honour of being the
mother of the Messiah. She covered her with a veil - It was the custom
of harlots in those times to cover their faces, that tho' they were not
ashamed, yet they might seem to be so: the sin of uncleanness did not
then go so bare - faced as it now doth.

[Genesis 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 38:17</span></span>

A kid from the flock - A goodly price at which her chastity and honour
were valued! Had the consideration been thousands of rams, and ten
thousand rivers of oil, it had not been a valuable consideration. The
favour of God, the purity of the soul, the peace of the conscience, and
the hope of heaven: are too precious to be exposed to sale at any such
rates. He lost his Jewels by the bargain: He sent the kid according to
his promise, to redeem his pawn, but the supposed harlot could not be
found. He sent it by his friend, (who was indeed his back - friend,
because he was aiding and abetting in his evil deeds) the Adullamite;
who came back without the pledge. 'Tis a good account, if it be but
true, of any place that which they here gave, that there is no harlot in
this place, for such sinners are the scandals and plagues of any place.
Judah sits down content to lose his signet and his bracelets, and
forbids his friend to make any farther enquiry.

[Genesis 38:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 38:23</span></span>

Lest we be shamed - Either, Lest his sin should come to be known
publicly, Or Lest he should be laughed at as a fool for trusting a whore
with his signet and his bracelets. He expresses no concern about the
sin, only about the shame. There are many who are more solicitous to
preserve their reputation with men, than to secure the savour of God,
lest we be shamed goes farther with them than lest we be damned.

[Genesis 38:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 38:28</span></span>

It should seem the birth was hard to the mother, by which she was
corrected for her sin: the children also, like Jacob and Esau, struggled
for the birth - right, and Pharez who got it, is ever named first, and
from him Christ descended. He had his name from his breaking forth
before his brother; this breach be upon thee - The Jews, as Zarah, bid
fair for the birth - right, and were marked with a scarlet thread, as
those that come out first; but the Gentiles, like Pharez, or a son of
violence got the start of them, by that violence which the kingdom of
heaven suffers, and attained to the righteousness which the Jews came
short of: yet when the fulness of time is come, all Israel shall be
saved. Both these sons are named in the genealogy of our Saviour, [Mat
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003), to perpetuate the story, as an
instance of the humiliation of our Lord Jesus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 39](gen039)

</div>
