<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen013)  [Next](gen015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)

[Genesis 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 14:1</span></span>

We have here an account of the first war that ever we read of in
scripture, in which we may observe. \[1.\] The parties engaged in it.
The invaders were four kings; two of them no less than kings of Shinar
and Elam - That is, Chaldea and Persia; yet probably not the sovereign
princes of those great kingdoms, but rather the heads of some colonies
which came out thence, and settled themselves near Sodom, but retained
the names of the countries from which they had their original. The
invaded were the kings of five cities that lay near together in the
plain of Jordan, Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboiim, and Zoar. \[2.\]
The occasion of this war was, the revolt of the five kings from under
the government of Chedorlaomer.

[Genesis 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 14:4</span></span>

Twelve years they served him - The Sodomites were the posterity of
Canaan, whom Noah had pronounced a servant to Shem, from whom Elam
descended. Thus soon did that prophecy begin to be fulfilled. In the
thirteenth year, beginning to be weary of their subjection, they
rebelled - Denied their tribute, and attempted to shake off the yoke.

[Genesis 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 14:5</span></span>

In the fourteenth year - After some pause and preparation, Chedorlaomer,
in conjunction with his allies, set himself to reduce the revolters.

\[3.\] The progress of the war. The four kings laid the neighbouring
countries waste, and enriched themselves with the spoil of them, [Gen
14:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005). Upon the alarm of which, the
king of Sodom and his allies went out and were routed.

[Genesis 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 14:13</span></span>

We have here an account of the only military action we ever find Abram
engaged in; and this he was not prompted to by avarice or ambition, but
purely by a principle of charity.

[Genesis 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 14:14</span></span>

He armed his trained servants, born in his house - To the number of
three hundred and eighteen: a great family, but a small army; about as
many as Gideon's that routed the Midianites, [Jdg
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#007). He drew out his trained servants,
or his catechized servants; not only instructed in the art of war, but
instructed in the principles of religion; for Abram commanded his
household to keep the way of the Lord.

[Genesis 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 14:16</span></span>

His brother Lot - That is, his kinsman.

[Genesis 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 14:18</span></span>

The Rabbins say, that Melchizedek was Shem the son of Noah, who was king
and priest to those that descended from him, according to the
patriarchal model. Many Christian writers have thought that this was an
appearance of the Son of God himself, our Lord Jesus, known to Abram at
this time by this name. But as nothing is expressly revealed concerning
it, we can determine nothing. He brought forth bread and wine - For the
refreshment of Abram and his soldiers, and in congratulation of their
victory. This he did as a king. As priest of the most high God he
blessed Abram, which we may suppose a greater refreshment to Abram than
his bread and wine were.

[Genesis 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 14:19</span></span>

Blessed be Abram, of the most high God - Observe the titles he here
gives to God, which are very glorious. The most high God, which speaks
his absolute perfections in himself, and his sovereign dominion over all
the creatures. Possessor of heaven and earth - That is, rightful owner
and sovereign Lord of all the creatures; because he made them.

[Genesis 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 14:20</span></span>

And blessed be the most high God - Note, In all our prayers we must
praise God, and join hallelujahs with all our hosannas. These are the
spiritual sacrifices we must offer up daily, and upon particular
occasions. God as the most high God must have the glory of all our
victories. In them he shews himself higher than our enemies, and higher
than we, for without him we could do nothing. And he gave him tithes of
all - That is, of the spoils, [Heb
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004). This may be looked upon, As a
gratuity presented to Melchizedek, by way of return for his respects. As
an offering dedicated to the most high God, and therefore put into the
hands of Melchizedek his priest. Jesus Christ, our great Melchizedek, is
to be humbly acknowledged by every one of us as our king and priest, and
not only the tithe of all, but all we have, must be given up to him.

[Genesis 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 14:21</span></span>

Give me the souls, and take thou the substance - So the Hebrew reads it.
Here he fairly begs the persons, but as freely bestows the goods on
Abram. Gratitude teaches us to recompense to the utmost of our power
those that have undergone fatigues, or been at expence for our service.

[Genesis 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 14:22</span></span>

I have lift up mine hand to the Lord that I will not take anything -
Here Observe, The titles he gives to God, the most high God, the
possessor of heaven and earth - The same that Melchizedek had just now
used. It is good to learn of others how to order our speech concerning
God, and to imitate those who speak well in divine things. The ceremony
used in this oath; I have lift up my hand - In religious swearing we
appeal to God's knowledge of our truth and sincerity, and imprecate his
wrath if we swear falsely; and the lifting up of the hands is expressive
of both. Lest thou shouldst say, I have made Abram rich - Probably,
Abram knew the king of Sodom to be a proud and scornful man, and one
that would be apt to turn such a thing as this to his reproach
afterwards, and when we have to do with such men, we have need to act
with particular caution.

[Genesis 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 14:23</span></span>

From a thread to a shoe - latchet - Not the least thing that had ever
belonged to the king of Sodom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 15](gen015)

</div>
