<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen036)  [Next](gen038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001)

[Genesis 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 37:2</span></span>

These are the generations of Jacob - It is not a barren genealogy, as
those of Esau, but a memorable useful history. Joseph brought to his
father their evil report - Jacob's sons did that when they were from
under his eye, which they durst not have done if they had been at home
with him; but Joseph gave his father an account of their ill carriage,
that he might reprove and restrain them.

[Genesis 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 37:3</span></span>

He made him a coat of divers colours - Which probably was significant of
farther honours intended him.

[Genesis 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 37:5</span></span>

Though he was now very young, about seventeen years old, yet he was
pious and devout, and this fitted him for God's gracious discoveries to
him. Joseph had a great deal of trouble before him, and therefore God
gave him betimes this prospect of his advancement, to support and
comfort him.

[Genesis 37:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 37:8</span></span>

Shalt thou indeed reign over us? - See here, How truly they interpreted
his dream? The event exactly answered this interpretation, [Gen
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#006), &c. How scornfully they resented
it, Shalt thou that art but one, reign over us that are many? Thou that
art the youngest, over us that are elder? The reign of Jesus Christ, our
Joseph, is despised and striven against by an unbelieving world, who
cannot endure to think that this man should reign over them. The
dominion also of the upright in the morning of the resurrection is
thought of with the utmost disdain.

[Genesis 37:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 37:10</span></span>

His father rebuked him - Probably to lessen the offence which his
brethren would take at it; yet he took notice of it more than he seemed
to do.

[Genesis 37:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 37:18</span></span>

And when they saw him afar off they conspired against him - It was not
in a heat, or upon a sudden provocation, that they thought to slay him,
but from malice propense, and in cold blood.

[Genesis 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 37:21</span></span>

And Reuben heard it - God can raise up friends for his people, even
among their enemies. Reuben of all the brothers had most reason to be
jealous of Joseph, for he was the first - born, and so entitled to those
distinguishing favours which Jacob was conferring on Joseph, yet he
proves his best friend. Reuben's temper seems to have been soft and
effeminate, which had betrayed him to the sin of uncleanness, while the
temper of the two next brothers, Simeon and Levi, was fierce, which
betrayed them to the sin of murder, a sin which Reuben startled at the
thought of. He made a proposal which they thought would effectually
destroy Joseph, and yet which he designed should answer his intention of
rescuing Joseph out of their hands, probably hoping thereby to recover
his father's favour which he had lately lost; but God over - ruled all
to serve his own purpose of making Joseph an instrument to save much
people alive. Joseph was here a type of Christ. Though he was the
beloved Son of his Father, and hated by a wicked world; yet the Father
sent him out of his bosom to visit us; he came from heaven to earth to
seek and save us; yet then malicious plots were laid against him; he
came to his own, and his own not only received him not, but consulted,
This is the heir, come let us kill him. This he submitted to, in
pursuance of his design to save us.

[Genesis 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 37:24</span></span>

They call him into a pit - To perish there with hunger and cold; so
cruel were their tender mercies.

[Genesis 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 37:25</span></span>

They sat down to eat bread - They felt no remorse of conscience, which
if they had, would have spoiled their stomach to their meat. A great
force put upon conscience commonly stupifies it, and for the time
deprives it both of sense and speech.

[Genesis 37:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 37:26</span></span>

What profit is it if we slay our brother? - It will be less guilt and
more gain to sell him. They all agreed to this. And as Joseph was sold
by the contrivance of Judah for twenty pieces of silver, so was our Lord
Jesus for thirty, and by one of the same name too, Judas. Reuben it
seems, was gone away from his brethren when they sold Joseph, intending
to come round some other way to the pit, and to help Joseph out of it.
But had this taken effect, what had become of God's purpose concerning
his preferment, in Egypt? There are many devices of the enemies of God's
people to destroy them, and of their friends to help them, which perhaps
are both disappointed, as these here; but the counsel of the Lord that
shall stand. Reuben thought himself undone because the child was sold;
I, whither shall I go? He being the eldest, his father would expect from
him an account of him; but it proved they had all been undone, if he had
not been sold.

[Genesis 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">gen 37:35</span></span>

He refused to be comforted - He resolved to go down to the grave
mourning; Great affection to any creature doth but prepare for so much
the greater affliction, when it is either removed from us, or embittered
to us: inordinate love commonly ends in immoderate grief.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 38](gen038)

</div>
