<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa052)  [Next](isa054) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 53](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)

[Isaiah 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 53:1</span></span>

Who - Who, not only of the Gentiles, but even of the Jews, will believe
the truth of what I say? And this premonition was highly necessary, both
to caution the Jews that they should not stumble at this stone, and to
instruct the Gentiles that they should not be seduced with their
example. The arm - The Messiah, called the arm or power of God, because
the almighty power of God was seated in him. Revealed - Inwardly and
with power.

[Isaiah 53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 53:2</span></span>

As a root - And the reason why the Jews will generally reject their
Messiah, is, because he shall not come into the world with secular pomp,
but he shall grow up, (or spring up, out of the ground) before him,
(before the unbelieving Jews, of whom he spake [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), and that in the singular number,
as here, who were witnesses of his mean original; and therefore despised
him) as a tender plant (small and inconsiderable) and as a root, or
branch, grows out of a dry, barren ground. No form - His bodily presence
shall be mean and contemptible. No beauty - This the prophet speaks in
the person of the unbelieving Jews. We - Our people, the Jewish nation.

[Isaiah 53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 53:3</span></span>

We hid - We scorned to look upon him.

[Isaiah 53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 53:4</span></span>

Yet - Our people believed that he was thus punished by the just judgment
of God.

[Isaiah 53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 53:5</span></span>

Wounded - Which word comprehends all his pains and punishments. For our
iniquities - For the guilt of their sins, which he had voluntarily taken
upon himself, and for the expiation of their sins, which was hereby
purchased. The chastisement - Those punishments by which our peace, our
reconciliation to God, was to be purchased, were laid upon him by God's
justice with his own consent. Healed - By his sufferings we are saved
from our sins.

[Isaiah 53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 53:6</span></span>

We - All mankind. Astray - From God. Have turned - In general, to the
way of sin, which may well be called a man's own way, because sin is
natural to us, inherent in us, born with us; and in particular, to those
several paths, which several men chuse, according to their different
opinions, and circumstances. Hath laid - Heb. hath made to meet, as all
the rivers meet in the sea. The iniquity - Not properly, for he knew no
sin; but the punishment of iniquity, as that word is frequently used.
That which was due for all the sins of all mankind, which must needs be
so heavy a load, that if he had not been God as well as man, he must
have sunk under the burden.

[Isaiah 53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 53:7</span></span>

He opened not - He neither murmured against God, nor reviled men.

[Isaiah 53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 53:8</span></span>

Taken away - Out of this life. By distress and judgment - By oppression
and violence. and a pretence of justice. His generation - His posterity.
For his death shall not be unfruitful; when he is raised from the dead,
he shall have a spiritual seed, a numberless multitude of those who
shall believe in him. Cut off - By a violent death. And this may be
added as a reason of the blessing of a numerous posterity conferred upon
him, because he was willing to be cut off for the transgression of his
people.

[Isaiah 53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 53:9</span></span>

With the wicked - This was a farther degree of humiliation. He saith, he
made his grave, because this was Christ's own act, and he willingly
yielded up himself to death and burial. And that which follows, with the
wicked, does not denote the sameness of place, as if he should be buried
in the same grave with other malefactors, but the sameness of condition.

[Isaiah 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 53:10</span></span>

He - God was the principal cause of all his sufferings, tho' mens sins
were the deserving cause. When - When thou, O God, shalt have made, thy
son a sacrifice, by giving him up to death for the atonement of mens
sins. His soul is here put for his life, or for himself. Shall see - He
shall have a numerous issue of believers reconciled by God, and saved by
his death. Prolong - He shall live and reign with God for ever. The
pleasure - God's gracious decree for the salvation of mankind shall be
effectually carried on by his ministry and mediation.

[Isaiah 53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 53:11</span></span>

Shall see - He shall enjoy. The travel - The blessed fruit of all his
labours, and sufferings. Satisfied - He shall esteem his own and his
father's glory, and the salvation of his people, an abundant recompence.
By his knowledge - By the knowledge of him. Justify - Acquit them from
the guilt of their sins, and all the dreadful consequences thereof. And
Christ is said to justify sinners meritoriously, because he purchases
and procures it for us. Many - An innumerable company of all nations.
For - For he shall satisfy the justice of God, by bearing the punishment
due to their sins.

[Isaiah 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 53:12</span></span>

I - God the father. A portion - Which is very commodiously supplied out
of the next clause. With the strong - God will give him happy success in
his glorious undertaking: he shall conquer all his enemies, and set up
his universal and everlasting kingdom in the world. Because - Because he
willingly laid down his life. Transgressors - He prayed upon earth for
all sinners, and particularly for those that crucified him, and in
heaven he still intercedes for them, by a legal demand of those good
things which he purchased; by the sacrifice of himself, which, though
past, he continually represents to his father, as if it were present.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 54](isa054)

</div>
