<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa053)  [Next](isa055) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 54](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)

[Isaiah 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 54:1</span></span>

Sing - The prophet having largely discoursed of the sufferings of
Christ, and of the blessed fruits thereof, and here foreseeing that
glorious state of the church, he breaks forth into this song of triumph.
And as the foregoing chapter literally speaks of Christ, so doth this of
the church of Christ. This church, consisting at first of the Jews, and
afterwards of the Gentiles, had been barren, 'till the coming of Christ.
The desolate - The church of the Gentiles, which in the times of the Old
Testament was desolate, does now bring forth to God a more numerous
posterity than that of the Jews.

[Isaiah 54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 54:2</span></span>

Enlarge - That it may be capable of the Gentiles, who shall flock to
thee in great numbers. Strengthen - That they may be able to support
that great weight which the tents thus enlarged, shall be upon them.

[Isaiah 54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 54:3</span></span>

For - Thou shalt bring forth a multitude of children; for this word is
commonly used of any extraordinary propagation of living creatures. On
the left - On every side, in all the parts of the world. Thy seed - Thy
spiritual seed, the church of the New Testament, which is accounted
Abraham's seed, or children.

[Isaiah 54:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 54:4</span></span>

Ashamed - For the barrenness and widowhood, which once was the matter of
thy grief and shame. Forget - Thou shalt not be upbraided with thy
former barrenness in thy youthful state.

[Isaiah 54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 54:5</span></span>

Thy maker - Will own thee for his spouse. The Lord - Who hath the
sovereign command of all men and creatures, and therefore can subdue the
Gentiles to thee, and can make thee to increase and multiply in so
prodigious a measure, even in thine old age, notwithstanding thy
barrenness in the days of thy youth, of which he speaks in the foregoing
verse. The God - The God and father of all nations, whereas formerly he
was called only the God of Israel.

[Isaiah 54:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 54:6</span></span>

Called thee - To return to him. As forsaken - When thou wast like a
woman forsaken. And grieved - For the loss of her husband's favour. Of
youth - As affectionately as an husband recalls his wife which he
married in his youth.

[Isaiah 54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 54:7</span></span>

For a moment - In comparison of God's everlasting kindness. Gather thee
- From all the places where thou art dispersed, from all parts of the
world.

[Isaiah 54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 54:8</span></span>

With everlasting kindness - With kindness to thee and thy seed through
all succeeding generations.

[Isaiah 54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 54:9</span></span>

This - This covenant of grace and peace made with thee shall be as
certain and perpetual as that which I made with Noah, that there should
never be another flood to drown the world. Wrath - So as to forsake thee
utterly.

[Isaiah 54:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 54:10</span></span>

The mountains - Shall sooner depart from their places than any kindness
shall depart from thee. The covenant - That covenant whereby I have made
peace and friendship with thee, and have promised to thee all manner of
happiness. God will not cast off his Christian church, as he cast off
the church of the Jews, the New covenant is established upon better and
surer promises than the Old. The Lord - Who doth this not for thine own
merits, but merely for his own grace and mercy.

[Isaiah 54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 54:11</span></span>

O thou - Who hast been, in a most afflicted and comfortless condition.
With sapphires - I will make thee exceeding beautiful and glorious, by a
plentiful effusion of excellent gifts, and graces.

[Isaiah 54:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 54:12</span></span>

Agates - The proper signification of the Hebrew names of precious stones
is unknown to the Jews themselves. It may suffice us to know that this
was some very clear and transparent, and precious stone. Thy borders -
The utmost parts or walls.

[Isaiah 54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 54:13</span></span>

Taught - Not only outwardly by his word, but inwardly by his spirit. The
peace - Inward peace arising from the clear discoveries of God's love
and reconciliation to us, and wrought by the spirit of adoption, which
is more abundantly given to believers under the gospel, than under the
law. Outward peace, safety, and happiness.

[Isaiah 54:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 54:14</span></span>

Established - Thine affairs shall be managed with righteousness, which
is the glory of any society. Oppression - Either by thine own governors,
or by foreign powers.

[Isaiah 54:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 54:15</span></span>

Behold - It is true some will combine and make an attempt against thee.
But - Without any such commission from me, as Sennacherib and
Nebuchadnezzar had.

[Isaiah 54:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 54:16</span></span>

The smith - Both the smith that makes warlike instruments, and the
soldier that uses them, are my creatures, and totally at my command, and
therefore they cannot hurt you without my leave. The waster - To destroy
only whom and when I please.

[Isaiah 54:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 54:17</span></span>

Condemn - And I will deliver thee not only from the fury of war, but
also from the strife of tongues. This - This blessed condition, is the
portion allotted them by me. Righteousness - The reward of their
righteousness. Of me - I give it, and I will continue it to them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 55](isa055)

</div>
