<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa057)  [Next](isa059) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 58](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)

[Isaiah 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 58:2</span></span>

Yet - They cover all their wickedness with a profession of religion.
Delight - There are many men who take some pleasure in knowing God's
will and word, and yet do not conform their lives to it. As - As if they
were a righteous people. Forsook - As if they were not guilty of any
apostacy from God, or disobedience to God's precepts. Ask - As if they
resolved to observe them. In approaching - In coming to my temple to
hear my word, and to offer sacrifices.

[Isaiah 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 58:3</span></span>

Afflicted - Defrauded our appetites with fasting, of which this phrase
is used, [Lev 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029). Ye find - Either
you indulge yourselves in sensuality, as they did, [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013). But this does not agree with
that afflicting of their souls which they now professed, and which God
acknowledges; or you pursue and satisfy your own desires: though you
abstain from bodily food, you do not mortify your sinful inclinations.
Exact - Your money, got by your labour, and lent to others, either for
their need or your own advantage, which you require either with usury,
or at least with rigour, when either the general law of charity, or
God's particular law, commanded the release, or at least the forbearance
of them.

[Isaiah 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 58:4</span></span>

Behold - Your fasting days, wherein you ought in a special manner to
implore the mercy of God, and to shew compassion to men, you employ in
injuring or quarrelling with your brethren, your servants or debtors, or
in contriving mischief against them. Heard - In strife and debate. By
way of ostentation.

[Isaiah 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 58:5</span></span>

Chosen - Approve of, accept, or delight in, by a metonymy, because we
delight in what we freely chuse. For a day - This may be understood,
either for a man to take a certain time to afflict his soul in, and that
either from even to even, [Lev 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#032),
or from morning to evening, or for a little time. Wilt thou call - Canst
thou suppose it to be so? A fast - It being such an one as has nothing
in it, but the dumb signs of a fast, nothing of deep humiliation
appearing in it, or, real reformation proceeding from it. Acceptable day
- A day that God will approve of.

[Isaiah 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 58:6</span></span>

The bands - The cruel obligations of usury and oppression.

[Isaiah 58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 58:7</span></span>

Cast out - And thereby become wanderers, having no abiding place. To thy
house - That thou be hospitable, and make thy house a shelter to them
that have none of their own left. Hide not - That seek no occasion to
excuse thyself. Thy own flesh - Some confine this to our own kindred;
but we can look on no man, but there we contemplate our own flesh, and
therefore it is barbarous, not only to tear, but not to love and succour
him. Therefore feed him as thou wouldest feed thyself, or be fed;
shelter him as thou wouldest shelter thyself, or be sheltered; clothe
him as thou wouldest clothe thyself, or be clothed; if in any of these
respects thou wert in his circumstances.

[Isaiah 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 58:8</span></span>

Thy light - Happiness and prosperity. Break forth - It shall not only
appear, but break forth, dart itself forth, notwithstanding all
difficulties, as the sun breaks, and pierces through a cloud. Thy health
- Another metaphor to express the same thing. Righteousness - The reward
of thy righteousness. Before thee - As the morning - star goes before
the sun. The glory - His glorious power and providence. Thy rereward -
Thus the angel of his presence secured the Israelites when they came up
out of Egypt.

[Isaiah 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 58:9</span></span>

Answer - He will give an effectual demonstration, that he hears thee.
Here l am - A phrase that notes a person to be ready at hand to help.
Take away - From among you. The yoke - All those pressures and
grievances before mentioned. Putting forth - Done by way of scoff, or
disdainful insulting. Vanity - Any kind of evil words.

[Isaiah 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 58:10</span></span>

Draw out - Or, open, as when we open a store, to satisfy the wants of
the needy. Thy soul - Thy affection, thy pity and compassion. Thy
darkness - In the very darkness of the affliction itself thou shalt have
comfort.

[Isaiah 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 58:11</span></span>

Guide thee - Like a shepherd. And he adds continually to shew that his
conduct and blessing shall not be momentary, or of a short continuance,
but all along as it was to Israel in the wilderness. Satisfy - Thou
shalt have plenty, when others are in scarcity. Make fat - This may be
spoken in opposition to the sad effects of famine, whereby the flesh is
consumed away, that it cannot be seen, and the bones that were not seen,
stick out. A garden - If thou relieve the poor, thou shalt never be
poor, but as a well - watered garden, always flourishing. Fail not -
Heb. deceive not, a metaphor which farther notes also the continuance of
this flourishing state, which will not be like a land - flood, or
brooks, that will soon be dried up with drought. Thou shalt be fed with
a spring of blessing, that will never fail.

[Isaiah 58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 58:12</span></span>

They shall be of thee - Thy posterity. Waste places - Cities which have
lain long waste; that shall continue for many generations to come. The
breach - Breach is put for breaches, which was made by God's judgment
breaking in upon them in suffering the walls of their towns and cities
to be demolished. Paths - Those paths that led from city to city, which
being now laid desolate, and uninhabited, were grown over with grass,
and weeds. To dwell in - These accommodations being recovered, their
ancient cities might be fit to be re - inhabited.

[Isaiah 58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 58:13</span></span>

If - If thou take no unnecessary journeys, or do any servile works on
the sabbath - day. A delight - Performing the duties of it with
chearfulness, delighting in the ordinances of it. Holy - Dedicated to
God, consecrated to his service.

[Isaiah 58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 58:14</span></span>

In the Lord - In his goodness and faithfulness to thee, and in the
assurance of his love and favour. To ride - Thou shalt be above the
reach of danger. Feed thee - Thou shalt enjoy the good of the land of
Canaan, which God promised as an heritage to Jacob, and his seed, [Gen
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#012).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 59](isa059)

</div>
