<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa008)  [Next](isa010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)

[Isaiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 9:1</span></span>

Nevertheless - The calamity of this land and its inhabitants shall be
great, yet not such as that which was brought upon it by the king of
Assyria, who at first indeed dealt more gently with them, but afterwards
rooted them out. He - God. Zebulun - These parts are particularly
mentioned, because this storm fell most heavily upon them; but under
them the other parts of the land are understood. Afterward - By
Shalmaneser, who took Samaria, and carried Israel into captivity, [Kg2
17:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#005). Of which calamity, though yet
to come, he speaks as if it were past, as the manner of the prophet is.
The sea - In that part of the land which borders upon the sea, the lake
Genesareth, upon which the portions of Zebulun and Naphtali bordered.
Galilee - Or, Galilee of the Gentiles, namely, the upper Galilee, so
called because it bordered upon the Gentiles.

[Isaiah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 9:2</span></span>

The people - Israel and Judah. Darkness - The expression is general and
so may well comprehend both calamity and ignorance, idolatry and
profaneness, in which those parts were eminently involved. Have seen -
Shall see at the coming of the Messiah.

[Isaiah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 9:3</span></span>

Thou hast - Thou hast made good thy promise to Abraham concerning the
multiplication of his seed, by gathering in the Gentiles to the Jews.
Before thee - In thy presence, and in the place of thy worship.

[Isaiah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 9:4</span></span>

The yoke - His burdensome yoke. The staff - The staff or staves by which
he was forced to carry burdens upon his shoulders. The rod - Wherewith
he beat him. Oppressor - Of all his oppressors, but especially of sin
and the devil. As - When God destroyed the Midianites in so admirable a
manner by three hundred men.

[Isaiah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 9:5</span></span>

Noise - With the triumphant exclamations of the conqueror, and the
bitter lamentations of the conquered, and the different cries of the
same persons, sometimes conquering, and sometimes conquered. Blood -
With great difficulty and slaughter. But - But this victory which God's
people shall have over all their enemies, shall be more terrible to
their adversaries, whom God will utterly consume, as it were by fire.

[Isaiah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 9:6</span></span>

For - Having spoken of the glorious light, and joy, and victory of God's
people, he now proceeds to shew the ground of it. Us - Unto us Jews, of
whom Christ was born, and to whom he was primarily sent. A child - The
Messiah by the consent of interpreters, not only Christian, but Jewish:
for so the ancient Hebrew doctors understood the place, and particularly
the Chaldee paraphrast; although the latter Jews, out of opposition to
Christ, wrest it to Hezekiah. Which extravagant conceit, as it hath no
foundation in this or any other text of scripture, so it is fully
confuted by the following titles, which are such as cannot without
blasphemy and nonsense be ascribed to Hezekiah, nor indeed to any mere
mortal man, as we shall see. Is born - Or, shall be born, as the
prophets generally speak. The government - Of God's people, to whom he
is given. Shoulders - Upon him, or in his hands. He mentions shoulders,
because great burdens are commonly laid upon men's shoulders. His name -
This is not to be taken for a description of his name, but of his
glorious nature and qualities. Wonderful counsellor - And so Christ is,
because he hath been the counsellor of his church in all ages, and the
author and giver of all those excellent counsels delivered not only by
the apostles, but also by the prophets, and hath gathered and enlarged,
and preserved his church, by admirable counsels and methods of his
providence, and, in a word, hath in him all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, [Col 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003). Mighty God - This
title can agree to no man but Christ, who was God as well as man, to
whom the title of God or Jehovah is given, both in the Old and New
Testament. And it is a true observation, that this Hebrew word El is
never used in the singular number, of any creature, but only of the
almighty God. The father - The father of eternity. Who, though as man he
was then unborn, yet was and is from everlasting to everlasting.

[Isaiah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 9:7</span></span>

No end - His peaceable and happy government shall be extended to all the
ends of the earth. The throne - Which was promised to David, and to his
seed for ever. For ever - From the beginning of it to all eternity. The
zeal - This great work shall be brought to pass by almighty God, out of
that fervent affection which he hath to his own glory, to the honour of
his son, and to his people.

[Isaiah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 9:8</span></span>

The Lord - The prophet, having inserted some consolatory passages for
God's faithful people, returns to his former comminution against the
rebellious Israelites. And - Heb. it fell, that is, it shall fall, in
the prophetical style. It shall certainly be accomplished.

[Isaiah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 9:9</span></span>

Know - They shall know whether my word be true or false. Even - The
people of the ten tribes, and particularly Ephraim, the proudest of them
all. Samaria - The strongest place, and the seat of the king and court.

[Isaiah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 9:10</span></span>

Stones - We have received some damage; but, we doubt not we shall
quickly repair it with advantage.

[Isaiah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 9:11</span></span>

Therefore - To chastise your pride, and defeat your hopes. Set up - The
Assyrians, who, presently after this prophecy, prevailed against him,
[Kg2 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007). He mentions Rezin, because
he was confederate with Ephraim. Join - So that they shall invade him
from several quarters. His - Not Rezin's, but Ephraim.

[Isaiah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 9:12</span></span>

Syrians - For though Rezin, king of Syria was destroyed, yet the body of
the nation survived, and submitted themselves to the king of Assyria,
and upon his command invaded Israel afterwards. Before - Heb. on the
east: for Syria stood eastward from Israel. Behind - On the western side
of the land of Israel. Devour - Like wild beasts.

[Isaiah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 9:13</span></span>

Him - To God.

[Isaiah 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 9:14</span></span>

Head - High and low. Branch - The goodly branches of tall trees, the
mighty and noble. Rush - The bulrush, the weakest and meanest persons.
One day - All together, one as well as another.

[Isaiah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 9:15</span></span>

The prophet - Whose destruction he mentions, not as if it were a
punishment to them to be deprived of such persons, but partly to shew
the extent of the calamity, that it should reach all sorts of persons;
and partly to beat down their vain presumptions of peace and prosperity,
by shewing that those false prophets, which had fed their vain hopes,
should perish, and their false prophecies with them. Tail - The basest
part of the whole people.

[Isaiah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 9:16</span></span>

The leaders - Their false prophets. Cause - By false doctrines and evil
counsels and persuasions. Destroyed - Shall certainly perish.

[Isaiah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 9:17</span></span>

No joy - Shall not rejoice over them to do them good. Fatherless - Who
are the special objects of his care and pity, and much less upon others.
Every one - Not precisely; for there were seven thousand elect persons
among them, when they seemed to Elijah to be universally corrupt, but
the body of the people. Hypocrite - For though they professed to worship
God, yet indeed they had forsaken him. Folly - Wickedness.

[Isaiah 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 9:18</span></span>

Burneth - Shall burn you, as it follows, shall devour. Thorns - The low
and mean persons; for these are opposed to the thickets of the forest,
in the next clause. Forest - In the wood, where the trees are tall, and
stand thick, having their bows entangled together, which makes them more
ready both to catch and to spread the fire. Smoak - Sending up smoak
like a vast furnace.

[Isaiah 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 9:21</span></span>

Manasseh - Though more near and dear to one another than any other
tribe, being both sons of Joseph.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 10](isa010)

</div>
