<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa051)  [Next](isa053) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 52](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)

[Isaiah 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 52:1</span></span>

Awake - This is a prediction and promise what she should do, that she
should awake or arise out of her low estate, and be strong and
courageous. Beautiful garments - Thy sorrows shall be ended, and thou
shalt be advanced into a glorious condition. O Zion - O my church. Come
- Either to molest thee, or defile thee. The uncircumcised - Heathens or
infidels. Unclean - Nor any others, who are unholy.

[Isaiah 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 52:2</span></span>

The dust - In which thou hast sat as a mourner. The bands - The yoke of
thy captivity shall be taken off from thee.

[Isaiah 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 52:3</span></span>

Sold yourselves - By your sins, without any valuable consideration paid
by them either to you, or to your Lord and owner. Without money -
Without paying any ransom.

[Isaiah 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 52:4</span></span>

Egypt - Where they had protection and sustenance, and therefore owed
subjection to the king of Egypt. And yet when he oppressed them, I
punished him severely, and delivered them out of his hands. The Assyrian
- The king of Babylon, who is called the king of Assyria, [Kg2
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029), as also the Persian emperor is
called, [Ezr 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#022), because it was one
and the same empire which was possessed, first by the Assyrians, then by
the Babylonians, and afterwards by the Persians. Without cause - Without
any such ground or colour, by mere force invading their land, and
carrying them away into captivity.

[Isaiah 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 52:5</span></span>

What have I - Why do I sit still here, and not go to Babylon to punish
the Babylonians, and to deliver my people? For nought - Without any
provocation, or pretence of right. Howl - By their unmerciful usage.
Blasphemed - The Babylonians blasphemed me as if I wanted either power
or good will to save my people out of their hands.

[Isaiah 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 52:6</span></span>

Shall know - They shall experience my power and goodness in fighting for
them. In that day - When I shall redeem my people: which work was begun
by the return of the Jews from Babylon, and perfected by the coming of
the Messiah. Behold - That all these promises are the words of the
omnipotent, unchangeable God.

[Isaiah 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 52:7</span></span>

The mountains - Of Judea, to which these glad tidings were brought, and
from which they were spread abroad into other countries. Of him - Or, of
them; the singular number being put for the plural. Returneth - In the
days of the Messiah, God did discover and exercise his dominion over the
world far more eminently than ever he had done from the beginning of the
world until that time.

[Isaiah 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 52:8</span></span>

Thy watchmen - Thy ministers, who descry the approach of this heavenly
king. Lift up thy voice - To give notice to all people of these glad
tidings; and by way of exultation, to sing forth the praises of God for
this glorious day. Eye - Distinctly and familiarly, their eyes beholding
the eyes of this king of glory. They shall be eye and ear - witnesses of
the words and works of Christ, and therefore their testimony shall be
more certain and valuable. Bring again - When God shall complete the
work of bringing his church out of captivity.

[Isaiah 52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 52:11</span></span>

Depart - Out of Babylon. Touch - Carry not along with you any of their
superstitions or idolatries. Ye - And especially your priests and
Levites, who minister in holy things, and carry the holy vessels of the
temple, keep yourselves from all pollution.

[Isaiah 52:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 52:12</span></span>

Not by flight - But securely, and in triumph, being conducted by your
great captain the Lord of hosts. Rereward - So that none shall be able
either to oppose you in your march, or to fall upon you in the rear.

[Isaiah 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 52:13</span></span>

Behold - This is the beginning of a new prophecy, which is continued
from hence to the end of the next chapter. My servant - That it is
Christ who is here spoken of, is so evident, that the Chaldee
paraphrast, and other ancient, and some later Hebrew doctors, understand
it directly of him, and that divers Jews have been convinced and
converted to the Christian faith, by the evidence of this prophecy.
Prosper - This is fitly put in the first place to prevent those scandals
which otherwise might arise from the succeeding passages, which describe
his state of humiliation. Very high - Here are three words signifying
the same thing to express the height and glory of his exaltation.

[Isaiah 52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 52:14</span></span>

Astonished - At his humiliation. Thee - At thee, O my servant. His form
- Christ, in respect of his birth, breeding, and manner of life, was
most obscure and contemptible. His countenance also was so marred with
frequent watchings, and fastings, and troubles, that he was thought to
be near fifty years old when he was but about thirty, [Joh
8:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#057), and was farther spoiled with
buffetings, and crowning with thorns, and other cruel and despiteful
usages.

[Isaiah 52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 52:15</span></span>

So - His exaltation shall be answerable to his humiliation. Sprinkle -
With his word or doctrine; which being often compared to rain or water,
may be said to be sprinkled, as it is said to be dropped, [Deu
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002); [Eze
20:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#046). Kings - Shall be silent before
him out of profound humility, reverence, and admiration of his wisdom.
For - They shall hear from his mouth many excellent doctrines, which
will be new and strange to them. And particularly that comfortable
doctrine of the salvation of the Gentiles, which was not only new to
them, but strange and incredible to the Jews themselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 53](isa053)

</div>
