<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa005)  [Next](isa007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)

[Isaiah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 6:1</span></span>

I saw - In a vision. The Lord - The Divine Majesty as he subsisteth in
three persons. His train - His royal and judicial robe; for he is
represented as a judge.

[Isaiah 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 6:2</span></span>

Stood - As ministers attending upon their Lord. Seraphim - An order of
holy angels, thus called from fire and burning, which this word properly
signifies; to represent either their nature, which is bright and
glorious, subtile, and pure; or their property, of fervent zeal for
God's service and glory. Covered - Out of profound reverence.

[Isaiah 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 6:3</span></span>

Cried - Singing in consort. Holy - This is repeated thrice, to intimate
the Trinity of persons united in the Divine essence. Glory - Of the
effects and demonstrations of his glorious holiness, as well as of his
power, wisdom, and goodness.

[Isaiah 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 6:4</span></span>

The posts - Together with the door itself. Such violent motions were
commonly tokens of God's anger. Smoak - Which elsewhere is a token of
God's presence and acceptance, but here of his anger.

[Isaiah 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 6:5</span></span>

l am - I am a great sinner, as many other ways, so particularly by my
lips. I am an unclean branch of an unclean tree; besides my own
uncleanness, I have both by my omissions and commissions involved myself
in the guilt of their sins. Have seen - The sight of this glorious and
holy God gives me cause to fear that he is come to judgment against me.

[Isaiah 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 6:6</span></span>

Flew - By God's command. A coal - Both a token and an instrument of
purification. The altar - Of burnt - offering.

[Isaiah 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 6:7</span></span>

Laid it - So as only to touch my lips, and not to burn them; which God
could easily effect. Lo - This is a sign that I have pardoned and purged
the uncleanness of thy lips.

[Isaiah 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 6:8</span></span>

Who - To deliver the following message. The change of the number, I and
us, is very remarkable; and both being meant of one and the same Lord,
do sufficiently intimate a plurality of persons in the Godhead.

[Isaiah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 6:9</span></span>

Perceive not - The Hebrew words are imperative; yet they are not to be
taken as a command what the people ought to do, but only as a prediction
what they would do. The sense is, because you have so long heard my
words, and seen my works, to no purpose, and have hardened your hearts,
and will not learn nor reform, I will punish you in your own kind, your
sin shall be your punishment. I will still continue my word and works to
you, but will withdraw my Spirit, so that you shall be as unable, as now
you are unwilling, to understand.

[Isaiah 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 6:10</span></span>

Fat - Stupid and senseless. This making of their hearts fat, is here
ascribed to the prophet, as it is ascribed to God in the repetition of
this prophecy, [Joh 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040), because God
inflicted this judgment upon them by the ministry of the prophet, partly
by way of prediction, foretelling that this would be the effect of his
preaching; and partly by withdrawing the light and help of his Spirit.
Heavy - Make them dull of hearing. Lest - That they may not be able, as
before they were not willing to see. Convert - Turn to God.

[Isaiah 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 6:11</span></span>

Lord - An abrupt speech, arising from the prophet's great passion and
astonishment: how long shall this dreadful judgment last? Until - Until
this land be totally destroyed, first by the Babylonians, and afterward
by the Romans.

[Isaiah 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 6:12</span></span>

Removed - Hath caused this people to be carried away captive into far
countries. A forsaking - 'Till houses and lands be generally forsaken of
their owners.

[Isaiah 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 6:13</span></span>

A tenth - A small remnant reserved, that number being put indefinitely.
Return - Out of the Babylonish captivity, into their own land. Eaten -
That remnant shall be devoured a second time, by the kings of Syria, and
afterwards by the Romans. Yet - Yet there shall be another remnant, not
such an one as that which came out of Babylon, but an holy seed, who
shall afterwards look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn over
him. When - Who when their leaves are cast in winter, have a substance
within themselves, a vital principle, which preserves life in the root
of the tree, and in due time sends it forth into all the branches. The
support - Of the land or people, which, were it not for the sake of
these, should be finally rooted out.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 7](isa007)

</div>
