<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam004)  [Next](pe1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

[James 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 5:1</span></span>

Come now, ye rich - The apostle does not speak this so much for the sake
of the rich themselves, as of the poor children of God, who were then
groaning under their cruel oppression. Weep and howl for your miseries
which are coming upon you - Quickly and unexpectedly. This was written
not long before the siege of Jerusalem; during which, as well as after
it, huge calamities came on the Jewish nation, not only in Judea, but
through distant countries. And as these were an awful prelude of that
wrath which was to fall upon them in the world to come, so this may
likewise refer to the final vengeance which will then be executed on the
impenitent.

[James 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 5:2</span></span>

The riches of the ancients consisted much in large stores of corn, and
of costly apparel.

[James 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 5:3</span></span>

The canker of them - Your perishing stores and motheaten garments. Will
be a testimony against you - Of your having buried those talents in the
earth, instead of improving them according to your Lord's will. And will
eat your flesh as fire - Will occasion you as great torment as if fire
were consuming your flesh. Ye have laid up treasure in the last days -
When it is too late; when you have no time to enjoy them.

[James 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 5:4</span></span>

The hire of your labourers crieth - Those sins chiefly cry to God
concerning which human laws are silent. Such are luxury, unchastity, and
various kinds of injustice. The labourers themselves also cry to God,
who is just coming to avenge their cause. Of sabaoth - Of hosts, or
armies.

[James 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 5:5</span></span>

Ye have cherished your hearts - Have indulged yourselves to the
uttermost. As in a day of sacrifice - Which were solemn feast - days
among the Jews.

[James 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 5:6</span></span>

Ye have killed the just - Many just men; in particular, "that Just One,"
[Act 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014). They afterwards killed
James, surnamed the Just, the writer of this epistle. He doth not resist
you - And therefore you are secure. But the Lord cometh quickly, [Jam
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008).

[James 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 5:7</span></span>

The husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit - Which will recompense
his labour and patience. Till he receives the former rain - Immediately
after sowing. And the latter - Before the harvest.

[James 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 5:8</span></span>

Stablish your hearts - In faith and patience. For the coming of the Lord
- To destroy Jerusalem. Is nigh - And so is his last coming to the eye
of a believer.

[James 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 5:9</span></span>

Murmur not one against another - Have patience also with each other. The
judge standeth before the door - Hearing every word, marking every
thought.

[James 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 5:10</span></span>

Take the prophets for an example - Once persecuted like you, even for
speaking in the name of the Lord. The very men that gloried in having
prophets yet could not bear their message: nor did either their holiness
or their high commission screen them from suffering.

[James 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 5:11</span></span>

We count them happy that endured - That suffered patiently. The more
they once suffered, the greater is their present happiness. Ye have seen
the end of the Lord - The end which the Lord gave him.

[James 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 5:12</span></span>

Swear not - However provoked. The Jews were notoriously guilty of common
swearing, though not so much by God himself as by some of his creatures.
The apostle here particularly forbids these oaths, as well as all
swearing in common conversation. It is very observable, how solemnly the
apostle introduces this command: above all things, swear not - As if he
had said, Whatever you forget, do not forget this. This abundantly
demonstrates the horrible iniquity of the crime. But he does not forbid
the taking a solemn oath before a magistrate. Let your yea be yea; and
your nay, nay - Use no higher asseverations in common discourse; and let
your word stand firm. Whatever ye say, take care to make it good.

[James 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 5:14</span></span>

Having anointed him with oil - This single conspicuous gift, which
Christ committed to his apostles, [Mar
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013), remained in the church long
after the other miraculous gifts were withdrawn. Indeed, it seems to
have been designed to remain always; and St. James directs the elders,
who were the most, if not the only, gifted men, to administer at. This
was the whole process of physic in the Christian church, till it was
lost through unbelief. That novel invention among the Romanists, extreme
unction, practised not for cure, but where life is despaired of, bears
no manner of resemblance to this.

[James 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 5:15</span></span>

And the prayer offered in faith shall save the sick - From his sickness;
and if any sin be the occasion of his sickness, it shall be forgiven
him.

[James 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 5:16</span></span>

Confess your faults - Whether ye are sick or in health. To one another -
He does not say, to the elders: this may, or may not, be done; for it is
nowhere commanded. We may confess them to any who can pray in faith: he
will then know how to pray for us, and be more stirred up so to do. And
pray one for another, that ye may be healed - Of all your spiritual
diseases.

[James 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 5:17</span></span>

Elijah was a man of like passions - Naturally as weak and sinful as we
are. And he prayed - When idolatry covered the land.

[James 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 5:18</span></span>

He prayed again - When idolatry was abolished.

[James 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 5:19</span></span>

As if he had said, I have now warned you of those sins to which you are
most liable; and, in all these respects, watch not only over yourselves,
but every one over his brother also. Labour, in particular, to recover
those that are fallen. If any one err from the truth - Practically, by
sin.

[James 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 5:20</span></span>

He shall save a soul - Of how much more value than the body! [Jam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014). And hide a multitude of sins -
Which shall no more, how many soever they are, be remembered to his
condemnation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 1](pe1001)

</div>
