<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg020)  [Next](rut001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001)

[Judges 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 21:1</span></span>

Had sworn - In the beginning of this war, after the whole tribe had
espoused the quarrel of the men of Gibeah. Saying - They do not here
swear the utter extirpation of the tribe, which fell out beyond their
expectation, but only not to give their daughters to those men who
should survive; justly esteeming them for their villainy, to be as bad
as Heathens, with whom they were forbidden to marry.

[Judges 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 21:4</span></span>

An altar - Not for a monument of the victory, but for sacrifices, as the
next words shew. There might be in that place more altars than one, when
the multitude of sacrifices be required, which was the case, [Kg1
8:64](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#064), and probably at this time, when
all the tribes being met, they had many sacrifices to offer, some in
common for all, and some peculiar to every tribe.

[Judges 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 21:5</span></span>

Great oath - That is a solemn oath joined with some terrible execration
against the offenders herein. Put to death - Because by refusing to
execute the vengeance due to such malefactors, they were justly presumed
guilty of the crime, and therefore liable to the same punishment, as was
the case of that city that would not deliver up an Idolater dwelling
among them, to justice.

[Judges 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 21:6</span></span>

Repented - Not for the war, which was just and necessary, but for their
immoderate severity in the execution of it. That is no good divinity
which swallows up humanity. Even necessary justice is to be done with
compassion.

[Judges 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 21:15</span></span>

The Lord, &c. - The Benjamites were the only authors of the sin, but God
was the chief author of the punishment, and the Israelites were but his
executioners.

[Judges 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 21:17</span></span>

An inheritance - The inheritance promised by Jacob and Moses, and given
by Joshua to the tribe of Benjamin, doth all of it belong to those few
who remain of that tribe, and cannot be possessed by any other tribe;
and therefore we are obliged to procure wives for them all, that they
may make up this breach, and be capable of possessing and managing all
their land: that this tribe, and their inheritance may not be confounded
with, or swallowed up by any of the rest.

[Judges 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 21:19</span></span>

A feast - Probably it was the feast of tabernacles, which they
celebrated with more than ordinary joy. And that feast was the only
season, at which the Jewish virgins were allowed to dance. But even this
was not mixed dancing. No men danced with these daughters of Shiloh. Nor
did the married women so forget their gravity, as to join with them.
However their dancing thus in public, made them an easy prey: whence
Bishop Hall observes, "The ambushes of evil spirits carry away many
souls from dancing to a fearful desolation."

[Judges 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 21:21</span></span>

Daughters of Shiloh - By whom we may understand not those only who were
born or settled inhabitants there, but all those who were come thither
upon this occasion, and for a time sojourned there: for although only
the males were obliged to go up to the three solemn feasts; yet the
women had liberty to go, and those who were most devout did usually go.
Vineyards - Which were near to the green where they danced. Catch - Take
them away by force, which they might the better do, because the women
danced by themselves.

[Judges 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 21:23</span></span>

And took, &c. - That is, each man his wife. By which we may see, they
had no very favourable opinion of polygamy, because they did not allow
it in this case, when it might seem most necessary for the reparation of
a lost tribe. Repaired - By degrees, increasing their buildings as their
number increased.

[Judges 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 21:25</span></span>

Right in his own eyes - What wonder was it then, if all wickedness
overflowed the land? Blessed be God for magistracy!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 1](rut001)

</div>
