<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg019)  [Next](jdg021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001)

[Judges 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 20:1</span></span>

All - That is, a great number, and especially the rulers of all the
tribes, except Benjamin, [Jdg 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#003),
[Jdg 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#012). One man - That is, with
one consent. Dan, &c. - Dan was the northern border of the land, near
Lebanon; and Beersheba the southern border. Gilead - Beyond Jordan,
where Reuben, Gad, and half Manasseh were. To the Lord - As to the
Lord's tribunal: for God was not only present in the place where the ark
and tabernacle was, but also in the assemblies of the gods, or judges,
[Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001), and in all places where
God's name is recorded, [Exo 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024),
and where two or three are met together in his name. Mizpeh - A place on
the borders of Judah and Benjamin. This they chose, as a place they used
to meet in upon solemn occasions, for its convenient situation for all
the tribes within and without Jordan; and the being near the place where
the fact was done, that it might be more throughly examined; and not far
from Shiloh, where the tabernacle was, whither they might go or send.

[Judges 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 20:2</span></span>

Four hundred thousand - The number is here set down, to shew their zeal
and forwardness in punishing such a villainy; the strange blindness of
the Benjamites that durst oppose so great and united a Body; and that
the success of battles depends not upon great numbers, seeing this great
host was twice defeated by the Benjamites.

[Judges 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 20:3</span></span>

Heard - Like persons unconcerned and resolved, they neither went nor
sent thither: partly for their own pride, and stubbornness; partly
because as they were loth to give up any of their brethren to justice,
so they presumed the other tribes would never proceed to war against
them; and partly, from a Divine infatuation hardening that wicked tribe
to their own destruction. Tell us - They speak to the Levite, and his
servant, and his host, who doubtless were present upon this occasion.

[Judges 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 20:5</span></span>

Slain me - Except I would either submit to their unnatural lust, which I
was resolved to withstand even unto death: or deliver up my concubine to
them, which I was forced to do.

[Judges 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 20:6</span></span>

Folly - That is, a lewd folly; most ignominious and impudent wickedness.

[Judges 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 20:7</span></span>

Ye are - The sons of that holy man, who for one filthy action left an
eternal brand upon one of his own sons: a people in covenant with the
holy God, whose honour you are obliged to vindicate, and who hath
expressly commanded you to punish all such notorious enormities.

[Judges 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 20:8</span></span>

His tent - That is, his habitation, until we have revenged this injury.

[Judges 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 20:10</span></span>

According, &c. - That we may punish them as such a wickedness deserves.
In Israel - This is added as an aggravation, that they should do that in
Israel, or among God's peculiar people, which was esteemed abominable
even among the Heathen.

[Judges 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 20:12</span></span>

All the tribe - They take a wise and a just course, in sending to all
the parts of the tribe, to separate the innocent from the guilty, and to
give them a fair opportunity of preventing their ruin, by doing what
their duty, honour, and interest obliged them to; by delivering up those
vile malefactors, whom they could not keep without bringing the curse of
God upon themselves.

[Judges 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 20:13</span></span>

Evil - Both the guilt and the punishment, wherein all Israel will be
involved, if they do not punish it. Would not hearken - From the pride
of their hearts, which made them scorn to submit to their brethren; from
a conceit of their own valour; and from God's just judgment.

[Judges 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 20:15</span></span>

Were numbered - "How does this agree with the following numbers? For all
that were slain of Benjamin were twenty - five thousand and one hundred
men, [Jdg 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#035), and there were only
six hundred that survived, [Jdg 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#047),
which make only twenty - five thousand and seven hundred." The other
thousand men were either left in some of their cities, where they were
slain, [Jdg 20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048), or were cut off in
the two first battles, wherein it is unreasonable to think they had an
unbloody victory: and as for these twenty - five thousand and one
hundred men, they were all slain in the third battle.

[Judges 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 20:16</span></span>

Not miss - An hyperbolical expression, signifying, that they could do
this with great exactness. And this was very considerable and one ground
of the Benjamites confidence.

[Judges 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 20:17</span></span>

Men of Israel - Such as were here present, for it is probable they had a
far greater number of men, being six hundred thousand before their
entrance into Canaan.

[Judges 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 20:18</span></span>

Children of Israel - Some sent in the name of all. House of God - To
Shiloh, which was not far from Mizpeh. Which - This was asked to prevent
emulations and contentions: but they do not ask whether they should go
against them, or no, for that they knew they ought to do by the will of
God already revealed: nor yet do they seek to God for his help by
prayer, and fasting, and sacrifice, as in all reason they ought to have
done; but were confident of success, because of their great numbers, and
righteous cause.

[Judges 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 20:21</span></span>

Destroyed, &c. - Why would God suffer them to have so great a loss in so
good a cause? Because they had many and great sins reigning among
themselves, and they should not have come to so great a work of God,
with polluted hands, but should have pulled the beam out of their own
eye, before they attempted to take that out of their brother Benjamin's
eye: which because they did not, God doth it for them, bringing them
through the fire, that they might he purged from their dross; it being
probable that the great God who governs every stroke in battle, did so
order things, that their worst members should be cut off, which was a
great blessing to the whole common - wealth. And God would hereby shew,
that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong. We must
never lay that weight on an arm of flesh, which only the Rock of Ages
will bear.

[Judges 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 20:22</span></span>

Encouraged - Heb. strengthened themselves, supporting themselves with
the consciousness of the justice of their cause, and putting themselves
in better order for defending themselves, and annoying their enemies.

[Judges 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 20:23</span></span>

Wept - Not so much for their sins, as for their defeat and loss. My
brother - They impute their ill success, not to their own sins, but to
their taking up arms against their brethren. But still they persist in
their former neglect of seeking God's assistance in the way which he had
appointed, as they themselves acknowledged presently, by doing those
very things which now they neglected.

[Judges 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 20:26</span></span>

Fasted - Sensible of their not being truly humbled for their sins, which
now they discover to be the cause of their ill success. Burnt, &c. - To
make atonement to God for their own sins. Peace - offerings - To bless
God for sparing so many of them, whereas he might justly have cut off
all of them when their brethren were slain: to implore his assistance,
yea and to give thanks for the victory, which now they were confident he
would give them.

[Judges 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 20:28</span></span>

Phinehas - This is added to give us light about the time of this
history, and to shew it was not done in the order in which it is here
placed, after Samson's death, but long before. Stood - That is
ministered as high - priest. The Lord said - When they sought God after
the due order, and truly humbled themselves for their sins, he gives
them a satisfactory answer.

[Judges 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 20:29</span></span>

Liers in wait - Though they were assured of the success, by a particular
promise, yet they do not neglect the use of means; as well knowing that
the certainty of God's promises doth not excuse, but rather require
man's diligent use of all fit means for the accomplishment of them.

[Judges 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 20:30</span></span>

The children of Israel - That is, a considerable part of them, who were
ordered to give the first onset, and then to counterfeit flight, to draw
the Benjamites forth from their strong - hold. See [Jdg
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#032).

[Judges 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 20:34</span></span>

Chosen men - Selected out of the main body, which was at Baal - tamar;
and these were to march directly to Gibeah on the one side, whilst the
liers in wait stormed it on the other side, and whilst the great body of
the army laboured to intercept the Benjamites, who having pursued the
Israelites that pretended to flee, now endeavoured to retreat to Gibeah.

[Judges 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jdg 20:37</span></span>

Drew along - Or, extended themselves; whereas before they lay close and
contracted into a narrow compass, now they spread themselves, and
marched in rank and file as armies do.

[Judges 20:44](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">jdg 20:44</span></span>

There fell - Namely, in the field, of battle.

[Judges 20:45](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jdg 20:45</span></span>

Gleaned - That is, a metaphor from those who gather grapes or corn so
clearly and fully, that they leave no relicks for those who come after
them.

[Judges 20:46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">jdg 20:46</span></span>

Twenty and five thousand - Besides the odd hundred expressed [Jdg
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#035), but here only the great number
is mentioned, the less being omitted, as inconsiderable. Here are also a
thousand more omitted, because he speaks only of them who fell in that
third day of battle.

[Judges 20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">jdg 20:48</span></span>

Turned again - Having destroyed those that came to Gibeah, and into the
field, now they follow them home to their several habitations. Men -
Comprehensively taken, so as to include women and children. If this seem
harsh and bloody, either it may be ascribed to military fury; or perhaps
it may be partly justified, from that command of God in a parallel case,
[Deu 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#015), and from that solemn oath
by which they had devoted to death all that came not up to Mizpeh, [Jdg
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005), which none of the Benjamites
did.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 21](jdg021)

</div>
