<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](isa066)  [Next](jer002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 1:1</span></span>

Anathoth - Was a city three miles from Jerusalem, allotted out of the
tribe of Benjamin for the priests.

[Jeremiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 1:2</span></span>

The word - That commission from God that authorized him to his prophetic
work, for the space of forty - one years successively in Judea, viz.
from the 13th year of Josiah to the 11th year of Zedekiah, besides the
time that he prophesied in Egypt. In the days - During his reign.
Thirteenth - By which it appears that Jeremiah prophesied the last
eighteen years of Josiah's reign; for he reigned thirty - one years,
[Kg2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001).

[Jeremiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 1:3</span></span>

It - The word of the Lord. Jehoiakim - Called at first by Josiah,
Eliakim. Jehoahaz and Jehoiakin, whereof the former reigned before him,
the latter succeeded, are conceived not to be mentioned, because they
reigned each of them but three months, and therefore not considerable.
Of Jerusalem - The inhabitants of Jerusalem, under Zedekiah, during all
which time Jeremiah prophesied. Captive - This does not terminate the
time of his prophecies; for he prophesied also both in Judea, and in
Egypt afterwards: but only relates to what he prophesied while the city
and temple were standing, the rest seeming to be added as a supplement.
Fifth month - Of that present year; for, tho' the year end not at the
fifth month, yet it might end the year of Zedekiah's reign, because he
might begin his reign at the fifth month of the year.

[Jeremiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 1:4</span></span>

Then - When he was first called to his office.

[Jeremiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 1:5</span></span>

I sanctified - I ordained thee for this public service. He speaks thus
to Jeremiah, not to the other prophets, because he stood in need of
greater encouragement than they, both in respect of the tenderness of
his years, and the difficulties which he was to encounter with. The
nations - To other nations besides the Jews.

[Jeremiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 1:7</span></span>

Thou shalt speak - Fear not, I will make thee eloquent and courageous.

[Jeremiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 1:9</span></span>

Then - God having excited the prophet by command and promise, now in a
vision confirms him, either by the hand of an angel, or by himself in
some visible shape.

[Jeremiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 1:10</span></span>

The kingdoms - Having now received his commission, he is directed to
whom he is to go; to the greatest, not only single persons, but whole
nations, as the Babylonians, Persians, and Egyptians. To pull down -
That is, to prophecy that I will pull down; which I will as certainly
effect, as if thou hadst done it thyself: for, according to scripture -
usage, the prophets are said to do that which they foretell shall come
to pass. To plant - Metaphors taken from architects and gardeners:
either the former words relate to the enemies of God, and the latter to
his friends; or rather to both conditionally: if they repent, he will
build them up, he will increase their families, and settle them in the
land; if they do not, he will root them up, and pull them down.

[Jeremiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 1:11</span></span>

Came unto me - This and the boiling caldron, [Jer
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013), is thought to be at the same
time, and in the same vision, when he was first appointed to the work.
Almond - tree - That had leaves, and probably blossoms on it like
Aaron's. This is a tree that blossoms early, and speedily, and so it may
point at either God's readiness, to smite, [Jer
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#012), or Israel's ripeness to be
smitten; this rod being like a portentous comet, shewing to Jeremiah the
miseries that were at hand, at the death of Josiah, which soon followed
this vision, the taxing them by Pharaoh Necho, presently after the
breaking in of the Chaldees, Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites, and then
the Babylonian captivity.

[Jeremiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 1:12</span></span>

Well seen - Or thou hast seen and judged right. Hasten - Word for word,
I will almond - tree it, that is, I will be upon them speedily, in a
short time. My word - My threatening against Judah and its inhabitants.

[Jeremiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 1:13</span></span>

Seething - Pot - I see a pot coming, meaning the Babylonian army, who
would besiege Jerusalem as a fire plays round the pot, when it is to be
made boil; and reduce the inhabitants to miserable extremities. Face -
Or front of the pot, or furnace, the place where the fire was put in, or
blowed up to make it boil. North - Indicating from whence their misery
should come, namely, from Chaldea, which lay north from Jerusalem.

[Jeremiah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 1:14</span></span>

North - From Babylon.

[Jeremiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 1:15</span></span>

The families - Those nations that were under one lord. Kingdoms - The
Babylonians, and their assistants; the Medes also being in confederacy
with them, whose king's daughter Nebuchadnezzar married. His throne -
Their seats, pavilions or tents shall be pitched, which shall be as so
many thrones. Entering - Of the gates, or way leading to them.

[Jeremiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 1:17</span></span>

Gird up - It is a speech taken from the custom of the countries where
they wore long garments; and therefore they girt them up about them,
that they might not hinder them in any work that required expedition.
Consume thee - Lest I destroy thee even in their sight, to become their
reproach.

[Jeremiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 1:18</span></span>

This whole land - All its inhabitants in general; intimating, that
though men of all degrees should set themselves against him, yet God
would support him against their all, and would carry him thro' his work,
tho' his troubles would not be only great, but long; passing thro'
several king's reigns.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 2](jer002)

</div>
