<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job008)  [Next](job010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#001)

[Job 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 9:2</span></span>

I know - That God is just in all his ways, that he doth ordinarily bless
the righteous, and punish the wicked. Before God - And I know that no
man is absolutely just, if God be severe to mark what is amiss in him.

[Job 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 9:3</span></span>

One - One accusation among a thousand which God shall produce against
him.

[Job 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 9:4</span></span>

He - He is infinitely wise, and searcheth all mens hearts and ways, and
discovers a multitude of sins which mens short sighted - eyes cannot
see; and therefore can charge them with innumerable evils, where they
thought themselves innocent, and sees far more malignity than men could
discern in their sins. Mighty - So that whether men contend with God by
wisdom or by strength: God will be conqueror. Hardened himself -
Obstinately contended with him. The devil promised himself that Job in
the day of his affliction, would curse and speak ill of God. But instead
of that, he sets himself to honour God, and speak highly of him. As ill
pained as he is, and as much as he is taken up with his own miseries,
when he has occasion to mention the wisdom and power of God, he forgets
his complaints and expatiates with a flood of eloquence on that glorious
subject.

[Job 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 9:5</span></span>

Who - He proceeds to give evidence of the Divine power and wisdom.
Removeth - Suddenly and unexpectedly. They - The mountains, to which he
ascribes sense and knowledge figuratively. In anger - In token of his
displeasure with the men that live upon them.

[Job 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 9:6</span></span>

The earth - Great portions of it, by earthquakes, or by removing
islands. Pillars - The deep and inward parts of it, which like pillars
supported those parts that appear to our view.

[Job 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 9:8</span></span>

Who. &c. - A farther description of a black and tempestuous season,
wherein the heavens seem to be brought down nearer to the earth.
Treadeth - Represseth and ruleth them when they rage and are
tempestuous: for treading upon any thing, signifies in scripture using
power and dominion over it.

[Job 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 9:9</span></span>

Ordereth - Disposeth them, governeth their rising and setting, and all
their influences. These he names as constellations of greatest eminency;
but under them he seems to comprehend all the stars, which as they were
created by God, so are under his government. Arcturus is a northern
constellation, near that called the Bear. Orion is a more southerly
constellation, that rises to us in December. The Pleiades is a
constellation not far from Orion, which we call the seven stars: by the
chambers, (or inmost chambers, as the word signifies) of the south, he
seems to understand those stars and constellations which are toward the
southern pole, which are called inward chambers, because they are for
the most part hid and shut up from these parts of the world.

[Job 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 9:10</span></span>

Doth great things, &c. - Job here says the same that Eliphaz had said,
[Job 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009), and in the original, in the
very same words, with design to shew his full agreement with him,
touching the Divine perfections.

[Job 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 9:11</span></span>

Goeth - He works by his providence in ways of mercy or judgment. Passeth
- He goeth from place to place: from one action to another: he speaks of
God after the manner of men.

[Job 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 9:12</span></span>

Taketh - If he determines to take away from any man his children or
servants, or estate, who is able to restrain him from doing it? Or who
dare presume to reprove him for it? And therefore far be it from me to
quarrel with God, whereof you untruly accuse me.

[Job 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 9:13</span></span>

Helpers - Those who undertake to uphold and defend one another against
him. Stoop - Fall and are crushed by him.

[Job 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 9:14</span></span>

How shall I - Since no creature can resist his power, and no man can
comprehend his counsels and ways; how can I contend with him? Answer his
allegations and arguments, produced against me.

[Job 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 9:15</span></span>

Tho' - Though I were not conscious to myself of any sin. Would not - I
durst not undertake to plead my cause against him; or maintain my
integrity before him, because he knows me better than I know myself.
Supplication - That he would judge favourably of me and my cause, and
not according to the rigour of his justice.

[Job 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 9:16</span></span>

Yet - I could not believe that God had indeed granted my desire, because
I am still full of the tokens of his displeasure; and therefore should
conclude that it was but a pleasant dream, and not a real thing.

[Job 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 9:17</span></span>

Breaketh - Unexpectedly, violently, and irrecoverably. Cause - Not
simply without any desert of his, but without any special cause of such
singular afflictions; and peculiar and extraordinary guilt, such as his
friends charged him with.

[Job 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 9:18</span></span>

Breath - My pains are continual, and I have not so much as a breathing
time free from them.

[Job 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 9:19</span></span>

If - If my cause were to be decided by power. Is Strong - Stronger than
I. Judgment - If I would contend with him in a way of right. Who - There
is no superior judge that can summon him and me together.

[Job 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 9:20</span></span>

Justify - If I plead against God mine own righteousness and innocency.

[Job 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 9:21</span></span>

Perfect - If I should think myself perfect, yet I would not know, not
acknowledge, my soul; I could not own nor plead before God the integrity
of my soul, but would only make supplication to my judge, I would abhor,
or condemn my life, I would not trust to the integrity either of my soul
and heart, or of my life, so as to justify myself before the pure and
piercing eyes of the all - seeing God.

[Job 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 9:22</span></span>

This - In the other things which you have spoken of God's greatness, and
justice, I do not contend with you, but this one thing I do, and must
affirm against you. He - God sends afflictions promiscuously upon good
and bad men.

[Job 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 9:23</span></span>

Suddenly - If some common judgment come upon a people. Laugh - God will
be well pleased, to see how the same scourge, which is the perdition of
the wicked, is the trial of the innocent, and of their faith, which will
be found unto praise and honour and glory.

[Job 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 9:24</span></span>

The earth - The dominion over it. Into - Into their power. As good men
are frequently scourged, so the wicked are advanced. Faces - Meantime he
covers the faces of wise and good men, fit to be judges, and buries them
alive in obscurity, perhaps suffers them to be condemned, and their
faces covered as criminals, by those to whom the earth is given. This is
daily done: if it be not God that doth it, where and who is he that
doth?

[Job 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 9:25</span></span>

Now - What he had said of the calamities which God frequently inflicts
upon good men, he now exemplifies in himself. My days - The days of my
life. Post - Who rides upon swift horses. See - I enjoy no good in them.
Seeing is often put for experiencing either good or evil.

[Job 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 9:26</span></span>

Eagle - Which flies swiftly, especially when in the sight of his prey.
See here how swift the motion of time is! It is always upon the wing,
hastening to its period. What little need have we of past - times! What
great need to redeem time, which runs out, runs on so fast toward
eternity! And how vain are the enjoyments of time, which we may be
deprived of, even while time continues! Our day may be longer than our
sunshine: and when that is gone, it is as if it had never been.

[Job 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 9:28</span></span>

Afraid - I find all such endeavours vain; for if my griefs be suspended
for a time, yet my fears continue. Will not - I plainly perceive thou, O
God, (to whom he makes a sudden address, as he doth also, [Job
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#031),) wilt not clear my innocency by
removing those afflictions which make them judge me guilty of some great
crime. Words proceeding from despair and impatience.

[Job 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 9:29</span></span>

I shall - I shall be used like a wicked man still. Why - Why then should
I comfort myself with vain hopes of deliverance, as thou advisest me.

[Job 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 9:30</span></span>

If - If I clear myself from all imputations, and fully prove my
innocency before men.

[Job 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 9:31</span></span>

Yet - God would prove him to be a most guilty creature, notwithstanding
all his purity before men. Abhor - I shall be so filthy, that my own
clothes, if they had any sense in them, would abhor to touch me.

[Job 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 9:32</span></span>

A man - But one infinitely superior to me in majesty, and power, and
wisdom, and justice. That - That I should presume to debate my cause
with him. Come - Face to face, to plead upon equal terms.

[Job 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 9:33</span></span>

Days - man - Or, umpire. Lay his hand - Order and govern us in pleading;
and oblige us to stand to his decision. Our Lord Jesus is now the
blessed days - man, who has mediated between heaven and earth, has laid
his hand upon us both: to him the father hath committed all judgment.
But this was not made so clear then, as it is now by the gospel, which
leaves no room for such a complaint as this.

[Job 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">job 9:34</span></span>

Fear - The fear and dread of his majesty and justice. Let him not deal
with me according to his perfect justice, but according to his grace and
clemency.

[Job 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">job 9:35</span></span>

Then - I would speak freely for myself, being freed from that dread,
which takes away my spirit and courage. It is not - I am not free from
his terror, and therefore cannot plead my cause with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 10](job010)

</div>
