<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](est010)  [Next](job002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

[Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 1:1</span></span>

Uz - Part of Arabia. Perfect - Not legally or exactly, but as to his
sincere intentions, hearty affections, and diligent endeavours to
perform all his duties to God and men. Upright - Heb. right, exact and
regular in all his dealings, with men; one of an unblameable
conversation. Feared - One truly pious, and devoted to God. Eschewed -
Carefully avoiding all sin against God or men.

[Job 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 1:3</span></span>

Camels - Camels in these parts were very numerous, and very useful, both
for carrying burdens in these hot and dry countries, as being able to
endure thirst much better than other creatures, and for service in war.
Asses - He - asses also may be included in this expression, because the
greatest part of them (from which the denomination is usually taken)
were she asses. The greatest - That lived in those parts. The account of
his piety and prosperity comes before the account of his afflictions, to
shew that neither of these will secure us from the common, no, nor from
the uncommon calamities of human life.

[Job 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 1:4</span></span>

Feasted - To testify and maintain their brotherly love. His day - Each
his appointed day, perhaps his birth - day, or the first day of the
month.

[Job 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 1:5</span></span>

When - When each of them had had his turn. Satisfied - He exhorted them
to examine their own consciences, to repent of any thing, which had been
amiss in their feasting, and compose their minds for employments of a
more solemn nature. Early - Thereby shewing his ardent zeal in God's
service. May be - His zeal for God's glory, and his true love to his
children, made him jealous. Cursed - Not in a gross manner, which it is
not probable either that they should do, or that Job should suspect it
concerning them, but despised or dishonoured God; for both Hebrew and
Greek words signifies cursing, are sometimes used to note only, reviling
or setting light by a person. Hearts - By slight and low thoughts of
God, or by neglecting to give God the praise for the mercies which they
enjoyed. Thus - It was his constant course at the end of every feasting
time, to offer a sacrifice for each. Parents should be particular in
their addresses to God, for the several branches of their family;
praying for each child, according to his particular temper, genius and
disposition.

[Job 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 1:6</span></span>

A day - A certain time appointed by God. The sons - The holy angels, so
called, [Job 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007); [Dan
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025), [Dan
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028), because of their creation by
God, for their resemblance of him in power, and dignity, and holiness,
and for their filial affection and obedience, to him. Before - Before
his throne, to receive his commands, and to give him an account of their
negotiations. But you must not think that these things are to be
understood literally; it is only a parabolical representation of that
great truth, that God by his wise and holy providence governs all the
actions of men and devils: It being usual with the great God to
condescend to our shallow capacities, and to express himself, as the
Jews phrase it, in the language of the sons of men. And it is likewise
intimated, that the affairs of earth are much the subject of the
counsels of the unseen world. That world is dark to us: but we lie open
to it.

[Job 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 1:9</span></span>

For nought - Out of pure love and respect to thee? No. It is policy, not
piety, that makes him good; he doth not serve thee, but serveth himself
of thee, serving thee for his own ends.

[Job 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 1:12</span></span>

Behold, &c. - It seems strange, that, God should give Satan such a
permission as this. But he did it for his own glory, for the honour of
Job, for the explanation of providence, and the encouragement of his
afflicted people in all ages.

[Job 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 1:14</span></span>

Messenger, &c. - One messenger immediately followed another; Satan so
ordering by God's permission, that there might seem to be more than
ordinary displeasure of God against him in his troubles, and that he
might not have leisure to recollect himself, but be overwhelmed by a
complication of calamities.

[Job 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 1:15</span></span>

Sabeans - A people of Arabia, who led a wandering life, and lived by
robbery and spoil. I - Whom Satan spared, that Job might have speedy and
certain intelligence of his calamity.

[Job 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 1:16</span></span>

The fire of God - As thunder is the voice of God, so lightning is his
fire. How terrible then were the tidings of this destruction, which came
immediately from the hand of God! And seemed to shew, that God was angry
at his very offerings, and would receive no more from his hands.

[Job 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 1:17</span></span>

Chaldeans - Who also lived upon spoil, as Xenephon and others observe.

[Job 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 1:19</span></span>

The young men - This was the greatest of Job's losses, and therefore
Satan reserved it to the last, that if the other provocations failed,
this might make him curse God. They died by a wind of the devils
raising, but which seemed to be the immediate hand of God. And they were
taken away, when he had the most need of them, to comfort him under all
his other losses. Such miserable comforters are creatures: in God we
have a constant and sufficient help.

[Job 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 1:20</span></span>

Shaved - Caused his hair to be shaved or cut off, which was then an
usual ceremony in mourning. Worshipped - Instead of cursing God, which
Satan said he would do, he adored him, and gave him the glory of his
sovereignty, of his justice, and of his goodness also, in this most
severe dispensation.

[Job 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 1:21</span></span>

Naked - I brought none of these things with me, when I came out of my
mother's womb into the world, but I received them from the hand of God,
who hath now required his own again. Return thither - I shall be as rich
when I die as I was when I was born, and therefore have reason to be
contented with my condition, which also is the common lot of all men.
Into the lap of our common mother, the earth, as the weary child lays
its head in its mother's bosom. We go out of the world naked; the body
doth, tho' the sanctified soul goes clothed. ([Co2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#003).) Death strips us of all our
enjoyments: clothing can neither warm nor adorn a dead body. Taken - He
hath taken away nothing but his own, and what he so gave that he
reserved the supreme disposal of in his own hand. And what is it to me,
by what hand he that gives, resumes what he gave?

[Job 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 1:22</span></span>

Charged - Heb. not imputed folly to God; so far was he from blaspheming
God, that he did not entertain any dishonourable thought of God, as if
he had done anything unworthy of his infinite wisdom, or justice, or
goodness, but heartily acquiesced in his good pleasure, and in his
righteous though sharp proceedings against him. Discontent and
impatience do in effect impute folly to God. Against the workings of
these we should carefully watch, acknowledging that God has done well,
but we have done foolishly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 2](job002)

</div>
