<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job003)  [Next](job005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001)

[Job 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 4:2</span></span>

If we, &c. - He speaks with great modesty. He will not undertake the
cause alone, but joins his friends with him. He will not promise much,
but only assay, or try if he could propose any thing pertinent to Job's
case. Withhold - When he hears such words from such a person as thou
art.

[Job 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 4:4</span></span>

Feeble knees - Such as were weak hearted, and fainting under their
trials.

[Job 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 4:6</span></span>

Thy fear - We now plainly see what was the nature of thy fear of God,
thy confidence in him, the uprightness of thy ways, and thy hope in
God's mercy. Thy present carriage discovers that it was but mere talk
and appearance.

[Job 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 4:7</span></span>

Innocent - Therefore thou art guilty of some great, though secret
crimes, and thy sin hath now found thee out. Cut off - By the sickle of
Divine vengeance before his time, which is like to be thy case. Eliphaz
here advances another argument to prove Job an hypocrite; taken not only
from his impatience under afflictions, but from his afflictions
themselves.

[Job 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 4:8</span></span>

Even - As thou hast never seen any example of a righteous man cut off,
so I have seen many of wicked men cut off for their wickedness. They -
They that designedly work wickedness, first preparing themselves for it,
and then continuing to execute it, as husbandmen first plow the ground,
and then cast in the feed. Reap - The fruit of their iniquity, the just
punishment of it.

[Job 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 4:9</span></span>

The blast - Of his nostrils, as it follows; by his anger, which in men
shews itself, in the nostrils, by hot and frequent breathings there, by
a secret, but mighty judgment of God, they are blown away as chaff by
the wind.

[Job 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 4:10</span></span>

The roaring - Nor can they escape, even were they strong as lions, yea,
as the strongest and fiercest of them. Broken - Which is true literally;
the lions when taken having most commonly their teeth broken, as ancient
and modern writers relate. But this is meant of powerful tyrants, who
are fitly compared to lions, [Eze
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002), [Eze
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#013), who though for a time they
persecute and oppress other men, yet in due time they are restrained,
and broken, and crushed in pieces by the mighty power of God. Possibly
he may secretly accuse Job, or his children, that being persons of great
wealth and power, they had abused it to ruin their neighbours, and
therefore were justly cut off.

[Job 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 4:11</span></span>

Scattered - Gone from their dens several ways to hunt for prey, and can
find none.

[Job 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 4:12</span></span>

Now - To convince Job of the sin and folly of impatience, Eliphaz
relates a vision he had had, perhaps since he came to him. Which in that
age and state of the church, before the holy scriptures were written,
was the usual way of God's discovering his mind to those that sought
him. A thing - Heb. a word, from God, a message. Secretly - Heb. was
stolen, or brought by stealth unto me, privately and secretly, as the
word of God used to come to the prophets, being spoken in their ear, as
it was to Samuel, with a low and still voice. He does not pretend to
have understood it fully; but something of it he perceived. How little a
portion is heard of God! How little do we know of him in this world.

[Job 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 4:13</span></span>

In thoughts - These thoughts arose from the visions of the night, which
it is probable he had seen before. Visions differed from dreams herein,
that God imparted his mind to men in dreams when asleep, but in visions,
when they were awake. And these visions sometimes happened by day, but
most frequently by night. Sleep - In the dead of the night, when men
usually are in a deep sleep; though Eliphaz was not now asleep.

[Job 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 4:15</span></span>

A spirit - An angel in visible shape, otherwise he could not have
discerned it. Stood up - Through that excessive horror caused by so
glorious, unusual, and terrible a presence.

[Job 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 4:16</span></span>

Stood - Having passed by him to, and again, he made a stand, and
addressed himself to speak. The form - Exactly and distinctly. An image
- I saw some visible resemblance, though in a confused manner. Silence -
The spirit, which possibly had made some noise with his motion, now
standing still made no noise; all other persons and things about me were
silent, and I also kept in my voice and breath, that I might distinctly
hear. In the Hebrew, the words run thus, silence and a voice I heard.

[Job 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 4:17</span></span>

More just - Pretend more strictly to observe the laws of justice? Shall
(enosh) mortal, miserable man (so the word signifies) be thus insolent?
Nay, shall geber, the strongest and most eminent man, stand in
competition with God? Those that find fault with the directions of the
Divine law, the dispensations of the Divine grace, or the disposal of
the Divine providence, do make themselves more just and pure than God:
who being their maker, is their Lord and owner: and the author of all
the justice and purity that is in man.

[Job 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 4:18</span></span>

Servants - They are called his servants by way of eminency, that general
name being here appropriated to the chief of the kind, to intimate that
sovereign dominion which the great God hath over the angels, and much
more over men. With folly - Without all doubt, this refers to those
angels who foolishly and wickedly fell from God.

[Job 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 4:19</span></span>

How, &c. - The sense is, what strange presumption then is it for a
foolish and mortal man, to make himself more just than God. In them -
Who though they have immortal spirits, yet those spirits dwell in mortal
bodies, which are great clogs, and incumbrances, and snares to them.
These are called houses, (because they are the receptacles of the soul,
and the places of its settled abode) and houses of clay, because they
were made of clay, or earth, and to note their great frailty and
mutability; whereas the angels are free spirits, unconfined to such
carcasses, and dwell in celestial, and glorious, and everlasting
mansions. Whose - Whose very foundation, no less than the rest of the
building, is in the dust; had their original from it, and must return to
it. We stand but upon the dust: some have an higher heap of dust to
stand upon than others. But still it is the earth that stays us up, and
will shortly swallow us up. Before - Sooner than a moth is crushed,
which is easily done by a gentle touch of the finger. Or, at the face of
a moth. No creature is so contemptible, but one time or other it may
have the body of man in its power.

[Job 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 4:20</span></span>

Destroyed - All the day long, there is not a moment wherein man is not
sinking towards death and corruption. Perish - In reference to this
present worldly life, which when once lost is never recovered. Regarding
- Heb. without putting the heart to it, this is so common a thing for
all men, though never so high and great, to perish in this manner, that
no man heeds it, but passes it by as a general accident not worthy of
observation.

[Job 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 4:21</span></span>

Excellency - Whatsoever is by common estimation excellent in men, all
their natural, and moral, and civil accomplishments, as high birth,
great riches, power and wisdom, these are so far from preserving men
from perishing, that they perish themselves, together with those houses
of clay in which they are lodged. Without wisdom - Even without having
attained that only wisdom for which they came into the world. Shall such
mean, weak, foolish, sinful, dying creatures as this, pretend to be more
just than God, more pure than his maker? No: instead of quarrelling with
his afflictions, let him admire that he is out of hell.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 5](job005)

</div>
