<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job002)  [Next](job004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)

[Job 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 3:1</span></span>

His day - His birth - day, in vain do some endeavour to excuse this and
the following speeches of Job, who afterwards is reproved by God, and
severely accuseth himself for them, [Job
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#002), [Job
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004), [Job
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003), [Job
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#006). And yet he does not proceed so
far as to curse God, but makes the devil a liar: but although he does
not break forth into direct reproaches of God, yet he makes indirect
reflections upon his providence. His curse was sinful, both because it
was vain, being applied to a thing, which was not capable of blessing
and cursing, and because it cast a blame upon God for bringing that day,
and for giving him life on that day.

[Job 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 3:3</span></span>

Let the day - Let the remembrance of that day be utterly lost.

[Job 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 3:4</span></span>

Darkness - I wish the sun had never risen upon that day, or, which is
all one, that it had never been; and whensoever that day returns, I wish
it may be black, and gloomy, and uncomfortable. Regard - From heaven, by
causing the light of the sun which is in heaven to shine upon it.

[Job 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 3:5</span></span>

Death - A black and dark shadow like that of the place of the dead,
which is a land of darkness. Slain - Take away its beauty and glory.
Terrify - That is, men in it. Let it be always observed as a frightful
and dismal day.

[Job 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 3:6</span></span>

Darkness - Constant and extraordinary darkness, without the least
glimmering of light from the moon or stars. Be joined - Reckoned as one,
or a part of one of them.

[Job 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 3:8</span></span>

The day - Their birth - day: when their afflictions move them to curse
their own birth - day, let them remember mine also, and bestow some
curses upon it. Mourning - Who are full of sorrow, and always ready to
pour out their cries, and tears, and complaints.

[Job 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 3:9</span></span>

The stars - Let the stars, which are the glory and beauty of the night,
be covered with thick darkness, and that both in the evening twilight,
when the stars begin to shine; and also in the farther progress of the
night, even 'till the morning dawns. Look - Let its darkness be
aggravated with the disappointment of its expectations of light. He
ascribes sense or reasoning to the night, by a poetical fiction, usual
in all writers. Dawning - Heb. the eye - lids of the day, the morning -
star which ushers in the day, and the beginning, and progress of the
morning light, let this whole natural day, consisting of night and day,
be blotted out of the catalogue of days.

[Job 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 3:10</span></span>

It - The night or the day: to which those things are ascribed which were
done by others in them, as is frequent in poetical writings. Womb - That
it might never have brought me forth. Nor hid - Because it did not keep
me from entering into this miserable life, and seeing, or experiencing,
these bitter sorrows.

[Job 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 3:12</span></span>

The knees - Why did the midwife or nurse receive and lay me upon her
knees, and not suffer me to fall upon the bare ground, 'till death had
taken me out of this miserable world, into which their cruel kindness
hath betrayed me? Why did the breasts prevent me from perishing through
hunger, or supply me that should have what to suck? Thus Job
unthankfully despises these wonderful mercies of God towards poor
helpless infants.

[Job 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 3:14</span></span>

Kings - I had then been as happy as the proudest monarchs, who after all
their great achievements and enjoyments, go down into their graves.
Built - Who to shew their wealth and power, or to leave behind them a
glorious name, rebuilt ruined cities, or built new cities and palaces,
in places where before there was mere solitude and wasteness.

[Job 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 3:16</span></span>

Hidden - Undiscerned and unregarded. Born before the due time. Been - In
the land of the living.

[Job 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 3:17</span></span>

There - In the grave. The wicked - The great oppressors and troublers of
the world cease from their vexations, rapins and murders. Weary - Those
who were here molested and tired out with their tyrannies, now quietly
sleep with them.

[Job 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 3:18</span></span>

The oppressor - Or, taskmaster, who urges and forces them to work by
cruel threatenings and stripes. Job meddles not here with their eternal
state after death, of which he speaks hereafter, but only their freedom
from worldly troubles, which is the sole matter of his present
discourse.

[Job 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 3:19</span></span>

Small and great - Persons of all qualities and conditions. Are there -
In the same place and state, all those distinctions being forever
abolished. A good reason, why those who have power should use it
moderately, and those that are in subjection should take it patiently.

[Job 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 3:20</span></span>

Light - The light of life. Bitter - Unto those to whom life itself is
bitter and burdensome. Life is called light, because it is pleasant and
serviceable for walking and working; and this light is said to be given
us, because it would be lost, if it were not daily renewed to us by a
fresh gift.

[Job 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 3:21</span></span>

Dig - Desire with as much earnestness as men dig for treasure: but it is
observable, Job durst not do anything to hasten or procure his death:
notwithstanding all his miseries, he was contented to wait all the days
of his appointed time, 'till his change came, [Job
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014).

[Job 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 3:22</span></span>

Glad, &c. - To be thus impatient of life, for the sake of the trouble we
meet with, is not only unnatural in itself, but ungrateful to the giver
of life, and shews a sinful indulgence of our own passion. Let it be our
great and constant care, to get ready for another world: and then let us
leave it to God, to order the circumstances of our removal thither.

[Job 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 3:23</span></span>

Hid - From him; who knows not his way, which way to turn himself, what
course to take to comfort himself in his miseries. Hedged in - Whom God
hath put as it were in a prison, so that he can see no way or
possibility of escape.

[Job 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 3:24</span></span>

Before, &c. - Heb. before the face of my bread, all the time I am
eating, I fall into sighing and weeping, because I am obliged to eat,
and to support this wretched life, and because of my uninterrupted pains
of body and of mind, which do not afford me one quiet moment. Roarings -
My loud outcries, more befitting a lion than a man. Poured out - With
great abundance, and irresistible violence, and incessant continuance,
as waters flow in a river, or as they break the banks, and overflow the
ground.

[Job 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 3:25</span></span>

Feared - Even in the time of my prosperity, I was full of fears,
considering the variety of God's providences, the changeableness of this
vain world, God's justice, and the sinfulness of all mankind. And these
fears of mine, were not in vain, but are justified by my present
calamities.

[Job 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 3:26</span></span>

Quiet - I did not misbehave myself in prosperity, abusing it by
presumption, and security, but I lived circumspectly, walking humbly
with God, and working out my salvation with fear and trembling.
Therefore in this sense also, his way was hid, he knew not why God
contended with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 4](job004)

</div>
