<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh009)  [Next](joh011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001)

[John 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 10:1</span></span>

He that entereth not by the door - By Christ. He is the only lawful
entrance. Into the sheepfold - The Church. He is a thief and a robber -
In God's account. Such were all those teachers, to whom our Lord had
just been speaking.

[John 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 10:3</span></span>

To him the door keeper openeth - Christ is considered as the shepherd,
[Joh 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011). As the door in the first
and following verses. And as it is not unworthy of Christ to be styled
the door, by which both the sheep and the true pastor enter, so neither
is it unworthy of God the Father to be styled the door keeper. See [Act
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027); [Col
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003); [Rev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#008); [Act
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014). And the sheep hear his voice -
The circumstances that follow, exactly agree with the customs of the
ancient eastern shepherds. They called their sheep by name, went before
them and the sheep followed them. So real Christians hear, listen to,
understand, and obey the voice of the shepherd whom Christ hath sent.
And he counteth them his own, dearer than any friend or brother:
calleth, advises, directs each by name, and leadeth them out, in the
paths of righteousness, beside the waters of comfort.

[John 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 10:4</span></span>

He goeth before them - In all the ways of God, teaching them in every
point, by example as well as by precept; and the sheep follow him - They
tread in his steps: for they know his voice - Having the witness in
themselves that his words are the wisdom and the power of God. Reader,
art thou a shepherd of souls? Then answer to God. Is it thus with thee
and thy flock?

[John 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 10:5</span></span>

They will not follow a stranger - One whom Christ hath not sent, who
doth not answer the preceding description. Him they will not follow -
And who can constrain them to it? But will flee from him - As from the
plague. For they know not the voice of strangers - They cannot relish
it; it is harsh and grating to them. They find nothing of God therein.

[John 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 10:6</span></span>

They - The Pharisees, to whom our Lord more immediately spake, as
appears from the close of the foregoing chapter.

[John 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 10:7</span></span>

I am the door - Christ is both the Door and the Shepherd, and all
things.

[John 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 10:8</span></span>

Whosoever are come - Independently of me, assuming any part of my
character, pretending, like your elders and rabbis, to a power over the
consciences of men, attempting to make laws in the Church, and to teach
their own traditions as the way of salvation: all those prophets and
expounders of God's word, that enter not by the door of the sheepfold,
but run before I have sent them by my Spirit. Our Lord seems in
particular to speak of those that had undertaken this office since he
began his ministry, are thieves - Stealing temporal profit to
themselves, and robbers - Plundering and murdering the sheep.

[John 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 10:9</span></span>

If any one - As a sheep, enter in by me - Through faith, he shall be
safe - From the wolf, and from those murdering shepherds. And shall go
in and out - Shall continually attend on the shepherds whom I have sent;
and shall find pasture - Food for his soul in all circumstances.

[John 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 10:10</span></span>

The thief cometh not but to steal, and to kill, and to destroy - That
is, nothing else can be the consequence of a shepherd's coming, who does
not enter in by me.

[John 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 10:12</span></span>

But the hireling - It is not the bare receiving hire, which denominates
a man a hireling: (for the labourer is worthy of his hire; Jesus Christ
himself being the Judge: yea, and the Lord hath ordained, that they who
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel:) but the loving hire: the
loving the hire more than the work: the working for the sake of the
hire. He is a hireling, who would not work, were it not for the hire; to
whom this is the great (if not only) motive of working. O God! If a man
who works only for hire is such a wretch, a mere thief and a robber,
what is he who continually takes the hire, and yet does not work at all?
The wolf - signifies any enemy who, by force or fraud, attacks the
Christian's faith, liberty, or life. So the wolf seizeth and scattereth
the flock - He seizeth some, and scattereth the rest; the two ways of
hurting the flock of Christ.

[John 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 10:13</span></span>

The hireling fleeth because he is a hireling - Because he loves the
hire, not the sheep.

[John 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 10:14</span></span>

I know my sheep - With a tender regard and special care: and am known of
mine - With a holy confidence and affection.

[John 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 10:15</span></span>

As the Father knoweth me, and I know the Father - With such a knowledge
as implies an inexpressible union: and I lay down my life - Speaking of
the present time. For his whole life was only a going unto death.

[John 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 10:16</span></span>

I have also other sheep - Which he foreknew; which are not of this fold
- Not of the Jewish Church or nation, but Gentiles. I must bring them
likewise - Into my Church, the general assembly of those whose names are
written in heaven. And there shall be one flock - (Not one fold, a plain
false print) no corrupt or divided flocks remaining. And one shepherd -
Who laid down his life for the sheep, and will leave no hireling among
them. The unity both of the flock and the shepherd shall he completed in
its season. The shepherd shall bring all into one flock: and the whole
flock shall hear the one shepherd.

[John 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 10:17</span></span>

I lay down my life that I may take it again - I cheerfully die to
expiate the sins of men, to the end I may rise again for their
justification.

[John 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 10:18</span></span>

I lay it down of myself - By my own free act and deed. I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it again - I have an original
power and right of myself, both to lay it down as a ransom, and to take
it again, after full satisfaction is made, for the sins of the whole
world. This commission have I received of my Father - Which I readily
execute. He chiefly spoke of the Father, before his suffering: of his
own glory, after it. Our Lord's receiving this commission as mediator is
not to be considered as the ground of his power to lay down and resume
his life. For this he had in him self, as having an original right to
dispose thereof, antecedent to the Father's commission. But this
commission was the reason why he thus used his power in laying down his
life. He did it in obedience to his Father.

[John 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 10:21</span></span>

These are not the words - The word in the original takes in actions too.

[John 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 10:22</span></span>

It was the feast of the dedication - Instituted by Judas Maccabeus, 1
Macc. iv, 59, when he purged and dedicated the altar and temple after
they had been polluted. So our Lord observed festivals even of human
appointment. Is it not, at least, innocent for us to do the same?

[John 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 10:23</span></span>

In Solomon's portico - Josephus informs us, that when Solomon built the
temple, he filled up a part of the adjacent valley, and built a portico
over it toward the east. This was a noble structure, supported by a wall
four hundred cubits high: and continued even to the time of Albinus and
Agrippa, which was several years after the death of Christ.

[John 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 10:26</span></span>

Ye do not believe, because ye are not of my sheep - Because ye do not,
will not follow me: because ye are proud, unholy, lovers of praise,
lovers of the world, lovers of pleasure, not of God.

[John 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 10:27</span></span>

My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, &c. - Our
Lord still alludes to the discourse he had before this festival. As if
he had said, My sheep are they who, Hear my voice by faith; Are known
(that is, approved) by me, as loving me; and Follow me, keep my
commandments, with a believing, loving heart. And to those who, Truly
believe (observe three promises annexed to three conditions) I give
eternal life. He does not say, I will, but I give. For he that believeth
hath everlasting life. Those whom, I know truly to love me, shall never
perish, provided they abide in my love. Those who follow me, neither men
nor devils can pluck out of my hand. My Father who hath, by an
unchangeable decree, given me all that believe, love, and obey, is
greater than all in heaven or earth, and none is able to pluck them out
of his hand.

[John 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 10:30</span></span>

I and the Father are one - Not by consent of will only, but by unity of
power, and consequently of nature. Are - This word confutes Sabellius,
proving the plurality of persons: one - This word confutes Arius,
proving the unity of nature in God. Never did any prophet before, from
the beginning of the world, use any one expression of himself, which
could possibly be so interpreted as this and other expressions were, by
all that heard our Lord speak. Therefore if he was not God he must have
been the vilest of men.

[John 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 10:34</span></span>

[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006).

[John 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 10:35</span></span>

If he (God) called them gods unto whom the word of God came, (that is,
to whom God was then speaking,) and the Scripture cannot be broken -
That is, nothing which is written therein can be censured or rejected.

[John 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 10:36</span></span>

Say ye of him whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world -
This sanctification (whereby he is essentially the Holy One of God) is
mentioned as prior to his mission, and together with it implies, Christ
was God in the highest sense, infinitely superior to that wherein those
judges were so called.

[John 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 10:38</span></span>

That ye may know and believe - In some a more exact knowledge precedes,
in others it follows faith. I am in the Father and the Father in me. I
and the Father are one - These two sentences illustrate each other.

[John 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 10:40</span></span>

To the desert place where John baptized, and gave so honourable a
testimony of him.

[John 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 10:41</span></span>

John did no miracle - An honour reserved for him, whose forerunner he
was.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 11](joh011)

</div>
