<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](luk024)  [Next](joh002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

[John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 1:1</span></span>

In the beginning - (Referring to [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001), and [Pro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#023).) When all things began to be
made by the Word: in the beginning of heaven and earth, and this whole
frame of created beings, the Word existed, without any beginning. He was
when all things began to be, whatsoever had a beginning. The Word - So
termed [Psa 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006), and frequently by
the seventy, and in the Chaldee paraphrase. So that St. John did not
borrow this expression from Philo, or any heathen writer. He was not yet
named Jesus, or Christ. He is the Word whom the Father begat or spoke
from eternity; by whom the Father speaking, maketh all things; who
speaketh the Father to us. We have, in [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018), both a real description of the
Word, and the reason why he is so called. He is the only begotten Son of
the Father, who is in the bosom of the Father, and hath declared him.
And the Word was with God - Therefore distinct from God the Father. The
word rendered with, denotes a perpetual tendency as it were of the Son
to the Father, in unity of essence. He was with God alone; because
nothing beside God had then any being. And the Word was God - Supreme,
eternal, independent. There was no creature, in respect of which he
could be styled God in a relative sense. Therefore he is styled so in
the absolute sense. The Godhead of the Messiah being clearly revealed in
the Old Testament, ([Jer 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#007); [Hos
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006); [Psa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001),) the other evangelists aim at
this, to prove that Jesus, a true man, was the Messiah. But when, at
length, some from hence began to doubt of his Godhead, then St. John
expressly asserted it, and wrote in this book as it were a supplement to
the Gospels, as in the Revelation to the prophets.

[John 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 1:2</span></span>

The same was in the beginning with God - This verse repeats and
contracts into one the three points mentioned before. As if he had said,
This Word, who was God, was in the beginning, and was with God.

[John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 1:3</span></span>

All things beside God were made, and all things which were made, were
made by the Word. In [Joh 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001) is
described the state of things before the creation: [Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), In the creation: [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004), In the time of man's innocency:
[Joh 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005), In the time of man's
corruption.

[John 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 1:4</span></span>

In him was life - He was the foundation of life to every living thing,
as well as of being to all that is. And the life was the light of men -
He who is essential life, and the giver of life to all that liveth, was
also the light of men; the fountain of wisdom, holiness, and happiness,
to man in his original state.

[John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 1:5</span></span>

And the light shineth in darkness - Shines even on fallen man; but the
darkness - Dark, sinful man, perceiveth it not.

[John 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 1:6</span></span>

There was a man - The evangelist now proceeds to him who testified of
the light, which he had spoken of in [Joh
1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001).

[John 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 1:7</span></span>

The same came for (that is, in order to give) a testimony - The
evangelist, with the most strong and tender affection, interweaves his
own testimony with that of John, by noble digressions, wherein he
explains the office of the Baptist; partly premises and partly subjoins
a farther explication to his short sentences. What St. Matthew, Mark,
and Luke term the Gospel, in respect of the promise going before, St.
John usually terms the testimony, intimating the certain knowledge of
the relator; to testify of the light - Of Christ.

[John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 1:9</span></span>

Who lighteth every man - By what is vulgarly termed natural conscience,
pointing out at least the general lines of good and evil. And this
light, if man did not hinder, would shine more and more to the perfect
day.

[John 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 1:10</span></span>

He was in the world - Even from the creation.

[John 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 1:11</span></span>

He came - In the fulness of time, to his own - Country, city, temple:
And his own - People, received him not.

[John 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 1:12</span></span>

But as many as received him - Jews or Gentiles; that believe on his name
- That is, on him. The moment they believe, they are sons; and because
they are sons, God sendeth forth the Spirit of his Son into their
hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

[John 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 1:13</span></span>

Who were born - Who became the sons of God, not of blood - Not by
descent from Abraham, nor by the will of the flesh - By natural
generation, nor by the will of man - Adopting them, but of God - By his
Spirit.

[John 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 1:14</span></span>

Flesh sometimes signifies corrupt nature; sometimes the body; sometimes,
as here, the whole man. We beheld his glory - We his apostles,
particularly Peter, James, and John, [Luk
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#032). Grace and truth - We are all by
nature liars and children of wrath, to whom both grace and truth are
unknown. But we are made partakers of them, when we are accepted through
the Beloved. The whole verse might be paraphrased thus: And in order to
raise us to this dignity and happiness, the eternal Word, by a most
amazing condescension, was made flesh, united himself to our miserable
nature, with all its innocent infirmities. And he did not make us a
transient visit, but tabernacled among us on earth, displaying his glory
in a more eminent manner, than even of old in the tabernacle of Moses.
And we who are now recording these things beheld his glory with so
strict an attention, that we can testify, it was in every respect such a
glory as became the only begotten of the Father. For it shone forth not
only in his transfiguration, and in his continual miracles, but in all
his tempers, ministrations, and conduct through the whole series of his
life. In all he appeared full of grace and truth: he was himself most
benevolent and upright; made those ample discoveries of pardon to
sinners, which the Mosaic dispensation could not do: and really
exhibited the most substantial blessings, whereas that was but a shadow
of good things to come.

[John 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 1:15</span></span>

John cried - With joy and confidence; This is he of whom I said - John
had said this before our Lord's baptism, although he then knew him not
in person: he knew him first at his baptism, and afterward cried, This
is he of whom I said. &c. He is preferred before me - in his office: for
he was before me - in his nature.

[John 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 1:16</span></span>

And - Here the apostle confirms the Baptist's words: as if he had said,
He is indeed preferred before thee: so we have experienced: We all -
That believe: have received - All that we enjoy out of his fulness: and
in the particular, grace upon grace - One blessing upon another,
immeasurable grace and love.

[John 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 1:17</span></span>

The law - Working wrath and containing shadows: was given - No
philosopher, poet, or orator, ever chose his words so accurately as St.
John. The law, saith he, was given by Moses: grace was by Jesus Christ.
Observe the reason for placing each word thus: The law of Moses was not
his own. The grace of Christ was. His grace was opposite to the wrath,
his truth to the shadowy ceremonies of the law. Jesus - St. John having
once mentioned the incarnation [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014),) no more uses that name, the
Word, in all his book.

[John 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 1:18</span></span>

No man hath seen God - With bodily eyes: yet believers see him with the
eye of faith. Who is in the bosom of the Father - The expression denotes
the highest unity, and the most intimate knowledge.

[John 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 1:19</span></span>

The Jews - Probably the great council sent.

[John 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 1:20</span></span>

I am not the Christ - For many supposed he was.

[John 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 1:21</span></span>

Art thou Elijah? - He was not that Elijah (the Tishbite) of whom they
spoke. Art thou the prophet - Of whom Moses speaks, [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015).

[John 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 1:23</span></span>

He said - I am that forerunner of Christ of whom Isaiah speaks. I am the
voice - As if he had said, Far from being Christ, or even Elijah, I am
nothing but a voice: a sound that so soon as it has expressed the
thought of which it is the sign, dies into air, and is known no more.
[Isa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003).

[John 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 1:24</span></span>

They who were sent were of the Pharisees - Who were peculiarly tenacious
of old customs, and jealous of any innovation (except those brought in
by their own scribes) unless the innovator had unquestionable proofs of
Divine authority.

[John 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 1:25</span></span>

They asked him, Why baptizest thou then? - Without any commission from
the sanhedrim? And not only heathens (who were always baptized before
they were admitted to circumcision) but Jews also?

[John 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 1:26</span></span>

John answered, I baptize - To prepare for the Messiah; and indeed to
show that Jews, as well as Gentiles, must be proselytes to Christ, and
that these as well as those stand in need of being washed from their
sins.

[John 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 1:28</span></span>

Where John was baptizing - That is, used to baptize.

[John 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 1:29</span></span>

He seeth Jesus coming and saith, Behold the Lamb - Innocent; to be
offered up; prophesied of by Isaiah, [Isa
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007), typified by the paschal lamb,
and by the daily sacrifice: The Lamb of God - Whom God gave, approves,
accepts of; who taketh away - Atoneth for; the sin - That is, all the
sins: of the world - Of all mankind. Sin and the world are of equal
extent.

[John 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 1:31</span></span>

I knew him not - Till he came to be baptized. How surprising is this;
considering how nearly they were related, and how remarkable the
conception and birth of both had been. But there was a peculiar
providence visible in our Saviour's living, from his infancy to his
baptism, at Nazareth: John all the time living the life of a hermit in
the deserts of Judea, [Luk 1:80](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#080),
ninety or more miles from Nazareth: hereby that acquaintance was
prevented which might have made John's testimony of Christ suspected.

[John 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 1:34</span></span>

I saw it - That is, the Spirit so descending and abiding on him. And
testified - From that time.

[John 1:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 1:37</span></span>

They followed Jesus - They walked after him, but had not the courage to
speak to him.

[John 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 1:41</span></span>

He first findeth his own brother Simon - Probably both of them sought
him: Which is, being interpreted, the Christ - This the evangelist adds,
as likewise those words in [Joh 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038),
that is, being interpreted, Master.

[John 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 1:42</span></span>

Jesus said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonah - As none had told our Lord
these names, this could not but strike Peter. Cephas, which is Peter -
Moaning the same in Syriacts which Peter does in Greek, namely, a rock.

[John 1:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 1:45</span></span>

Jesus of Nazareth - So Philip thought, not knowing he was born in
Bethlehem. Nathanael was probably the same with Bartholomew, that is,
the son of Tholomew. St. Matthew joins Bartholomew with Philip, [Mat
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003), and St. John places Nathanael in
the midst of the apostles, immediately after Thomas, [Joh
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#002), just as Bartholomew is placed,
[Act 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#013).

[John 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 1:46</span></span>

Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? - How cautiously should we
guard against popular prejudices? When these had once possessed so
honest a heart as that of Nathanael, they led him to suspect the blessed
Jesus himself for an impostor, because he had been brought up at
Nazareth. But his integrity prevailed over that foolish bias, and laid
him open to the force of evidence, which a candid inquirer will always
be glad to admit, even when it brings the most unexpected discoveries.
Can any good thing - That is, have we ground from Scripture to expect
the Messiah, or any eminent prophet from Nazareth? Philip saith, Come
and see - The same answer which he had received himself from our Lord
the day before.

[John 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 1:48</span></span>

Under the fig tree I saw thee - Perhaps at prayer.

[John 1:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 1:49</span></span>

Nathanael answered - Happy are they that are ready to believe, swift to
receive the truth and grace of God. Thou art the Son of God - So he
acknowledges now more than he had heard from Philip: The Son of God, the
king of Israel - A confession both of the person and office of Christ.

[John 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">joh 1:51</span></span>

Hereafter ye shall see - All of these, as well as thou, who believe on
me now in my state of humiliation, shall hereafter see me come in my
glory, and all the angels of God with me. This seems the most natural
sense of the words, though they may also refer to his ascension.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 2](joh002)

</div>
