<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos023)  [Next](jdg001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001)

[Joshua 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 24:1</span></span>

All Israel - Namely, their representatives. Shechem - To the city of
Shechem, a place convenient for the purpose, not only because it was a
Levitical city, and a city of refuge, and a place near Joshua's city,
but especially for the two main ends for which he summoned them thither.
For the solemn burial of the bones of Joseph, and the rest of the
patriarchs, for which this place was designed. For the solemn renewing
of their covenant with God; which in this place was first made between
God and Abraham, [Gen 12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006), and
afterwards renewed by the Israelites at their first entrance into the
land of Canaan, between the two mountains of Ebal and Gerizzim, [Jos
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030), &c. which were very near
Shechem: and therefore this place was most proper, both to remind them
of their former obligations to God, and to engage them to a farther
ratification of them. Before God - As in God's presence, to hear what
Joshua was to speak to them in God's name, and to receive God's commands
from his mouth. He had taken a solemn farewell before: but as God
renewed his strength, he desired to improve it for their good. We must
never think our work for God done, 'till our life is done.

[Joshua 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 24:2</span></span>

The people - To the elders, by whom it was to be imparted to all the
rest, and to as many of the people as came thither. He spake to them in
God's name, and as from him, in the language of a prophet, Thus saith
the Lord. Jehovah, the great God, and the God of Israel, whom you are
peculiarly engaged to hear. The flood - Or, the river, namely,
Euphrates, so called by way of eminency. They served - That is, Both
Abraham and Nahor were no less idolaters than the rest of mankind. This
is said to prevent their vain boasting in their worthy ancestors, and to
assure them that whatsoever good was in, or had been done by their
progenitors, was wholly from God's free grace, and not for their own
merit or righteousness.

[Joshua 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 24:3</span></span>

I took - I snatched him out of that idolatrous place, and took him into
acquaintance and covenant with myself, which was the highest honour and
happiness he was capable of. And led - That is I brought him after his
father's death into Canaan, [Gen 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001),
and I conducted and preserved him in all his travels through the several
parts of Canaan. And multiplied - That is, gave him a numerous
posterity, not only by Hagar and Keturah, but even by Sarah and by
Isaac. Gave Isaac - By my special power and grace to be heir of my
covenant, and all my promises, and the seed in or by which all the
nations were to be blessed.

[Joshua 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 24:4</span></span>

Mount Seir - That he might leave Canaan entire to his brother Jacob and
his posterity, [Gen 36:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#007). Into Egypt
- Where they long lived in grievous bondage; which God having delivered
us from, I shall now pass it over.

[Joshua 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 24:7</span></span>

Your eyes - He speaketh this to the elders, [Jos
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001), who were so, not only by power
and dignity, but many of them by age; and there being now not sixty
years past since those Egyptian plagues, it is very probable that a
considerable number of those present, had seen those things in Egypt,
and being not twenty years old, were exempted from that dreadful
sentence passed upon all who were older, [Num
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#029).

[Joshua 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 24:9</span></span>

Balak warred - Balak warred, tho' not by open force, yet by crafty
counsel and warlike stratagems, by wicked devices.

[Joshua 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 24:10</span></span>

Unto Balaam - Who hereby appears to have desired of God leave to curse
Israel; and therefore it is not strange, that God who permitted him
simply to go, was highly angry with him for going with so wicked an
intent, [Num 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#020), [Num
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#022), [Num
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#032). Delivered you - That is, from
Balak's malicious design against you.

[Joshua 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 24:11</span></span>

Deliver them - Namely, successively; for in these few words he seems to
comprise all their wars, which being so fresh in their memory, he
thought it needless particularly to mention.

[Joshua 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 24:12</span></span>

Sent the hornet - When they were actually engaged in battle with the
Canaanites. These dreadful swarms which first appeared in their war with
Sihon and Og, tormented them with their stings and terrified them with
their noise, so that they became an easy prey to Israel. God had
promised to do this for them, [Exo
23:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027), and here Joshua observes the
fulfilling the promise.

[Joshua 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 24:14</span></span>

The gods - Whereby it appears, that although Joshua had doubtless
prevented and purged out all public idolatry, yet there were some of
them who practised it in their private houses and retirements. Your
fathers - Terah, and Nahor, and Abraham, as [Jos
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002), and other of your ancestors. In
Egypt - See [Eze 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#003), [Eze
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#008), [Eze
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#019), [Eze
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#021), [Eze
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#027). Under these particulars, no
doubt he comprehends all other false gods, which were served by the
nations amongst whom they were, but only mentions these, as the idols
which they were in more danger of worshipping than those in Canaan;
partly because those of Canaan had been now lately and palpably
disgraced by their inability to preserve their worshippers from total
ruin; and partly, because the other idols came recommended to them by
the venerable name of antiquity, and the custom of their forefathers.

[Joshua 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 24:15</span></span>

Seem evil - Unjust, unreasonable or inconvenient. Choose ye - Not that
he leaves them to their liberty, whether they would serve God or idols;
for Joshua had no such power himself, nor could give it to any other;
and both he and they were obliged by the law of Moses, to give their
worship to God only, and to forbear all idolatry in themselves, and
severely to punish it in others; but it is a powerful insinuation,
whereby he both implies, that the worship of God is so highly
reasonable, necessary and beneficial; and the service of idols so
absurd, and vain, and pernicious, that if it were left free for all men
to take their choice, every man in his right wits must needs chuse the
service of God, before that of idols; and provokes them to bind
themselves faster to God by their own choice. He will - But know this,
if you should all be so base and brutish, as to prefer senseless and
impotent idols, before the true and living God, it is my firm purpose,
that I will, and my children, and servants (as far as I can influence
them) shall be constant and faithful to the Lord. And that, whatever
others do. They that resolve to serve God, must not start at being
singular in it. They that are bound for heaven must be willing to swim
against the stream, and must do, not as most do, but as the best do.

[Joshua 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 24:19</span></span>

Ye cannot - He speaks not of an absolute impossibility, (for then both
his resolution to serve God himself, and his exhortation to them had
been vain) but of a moral impossibility, or a very great difficulty,
which he alledgeth not to discourage them from God's service, but to
make them more considerate in obliging themselves; and more resolved in
answering their obligations. The meaning is, God's service is not, as
you seem to fancy, a slight and easy thing, but it is a work of great
difficulty, and requires great care, and courage and resolution; and
when I consider the infinite purity of God, that he will not be mocked
or abused; and withal your proneness to superstition and idolatry, even
during the life of Moses, and in some of you, while I live, and while
the obligations which God had laid upon you in this land, are fresh in
remembrance; I cannot but fear that after my decease you will think the
service of God burdensome, and therefore will cast it off and revolt
from him, if you do not carefully avoid all occasions of idolatry. A
jealous God - In the Hebrew, He is the holy Gods, holy Father, holy Son,
holy Spirit. He will not endure a partner in his worship; you can not
serve him and idols together. Will not forgive - If you who own
yourselves his people and servants, shall wilfully transgress his laws,
he will not let this go unpunished in you, as he doth in other nations;
therefore consider what you do, when you take the Lord for your God;
weigh your advantages and inconveniences together; for as if you be
sincere and faithful in God's service, you will have admirable benefits
by it; so if you be false to your professions, and forsake him whom you
have so solemnly avouched to be your God, he will deal more severely
with you than with any people in the world.

[Joshua 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 24:20</span></span>

Will turn - That is, he will alter his course and the manner of his
dealing with you, and will be as severe as ever he was kind and
gracious. He will repent of his former kindnesses, and his goodness
abused will be turned into fury.

[Joshua 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 24:21</span></span>

The Lord - Namely, him only, and not strange gods.

[Joshua 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 24:22</span></span>

Against yourselves - This solemn profession will be a swift witness
against you, if hereafter you apostatize from God.

[Joshua 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 24:23</span></span>

Strange gods - Those idols which you either brought out of Egypt, or
have taken in Canaan, which some of you keep contrary to God's command,
whether for the preciousness of the matter, or rather for some secret
inclination to superstition and idolatry.

[Joshua 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 24:25</span></span>

A statute - He set or established that covenant with them, that is, the
people, for a statute or an ordinance, to bind themselves and their
posterity unto God for ever.

[Joshua 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 24:26</span></span>

These words - That is, this covenant or agreement of the people with the
Lord. In the book - That is, in the volume which was kept in the ark,
[Deu 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009), [Deu
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#026), whence it was taken and put
into this book of Joshua: this he did for the perpetual remembrance of
this great and solemn action, to lay the greater obligation upon the
people to be true to their engagement; and as a witness for God, against
the people, if afterward he punished them for their defection from God,
to whom they had so solemnly and freely obliged themselves. Set it up -
As a witness and monument of this great transaction, according to the
custom of those ancient times. Possibly this agreement was written upon
this stone, as was then usual. By the sanctuary - That is, near the
place where the ark and tabernacle then were; for tho' they were
forbidden to plant a grove of trees near unto the altar, as the Gentiles
did, yet they might for a time set up an altar, or the ark, near a great
tree which had been planted there before.

[Joshua 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 24:27</span></span>

It hath heard - It shall be as sure a witness against you, as if it had
heard. This is a common figure, whereby the sense of hearing is often
ascribed to the heavens and the earth, and other senseless creatures.

[Joshua 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 24:32</span></span>

The bones of Joseph - Joseph died two hundred years before in Egypt, but
gave commandment concerning his bones, that they should not rest in a
grave, 'till Israel rested in the land of promise. Now therefore they
were deposited in that piece of ground, which his father gave him near
Shechem. One reason why Joshua called all Israel to Shechem, might be to
attend Joseph's bones to the grave. So that he now delivered as it were
both Joseph's funeral sermon, and his own farewell sermon. And if it was
in the last year of his life, the occasion might well remind him, of his
own death now at hand. For he was just of the same age with his
illustrious ancestor, who died being one hundred and ten years old, [Gen
50:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#026).

[Joshua 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jos 24:33</span></span>

Given him - By special favour, and for his better conveniency in
attending upon the ark, which then was, and for a long time was to be in
Shiloh, near this place: whereas the cities which were given to the
priests, were in Judah. Benjamin, and Simeon, which were remote from
Shiloh, tho' near the place where the ark was to have its settled abode,
namely, at Jerusalem. It is probable Eleazar died about the same time
with Joshua, as Aaron did in the same year with Moses. While Joshua
lived, religion was kept up, under his care and influence, but after he
and his contemporaries were gone, it swiftly went to decay. How well is
it for the gospel church, that Christ, our Joshua, is still with it by
his Spirit, and will be always, even to the end of the world?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 1](jdg001)

</div>
