<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos006)  [Next](jos008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

[Joshua 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 7:1</span></span>

The children of Israel - That is, one of them, by a very usual figure,
as [Mat 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#008), where that is ascribed
to the disciples, which belonged to Judas only, [Joh
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#004). Accursed thing - That is, in
taking some of the forbidden and accursed goods. Zabdi - Called also
Zimri, [Ch1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006). Zerah - Or, Zarah,
who was Judah's immediate son, [Gen
38:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#030), who went with Judah into Egypt:
and so for the filling up the 256 years that are supposed to come
between that and this time, we must allow Achan to be, now an old man,
and his three ancestors to have begotten each his son at about sixty
years of age; which at that time was not incredible nor unusual. Against
the children of Israel - Why did God punish the whole society for this
one man's sin? All of them were punished for their own sins, whereof
each had a sufficient proportion; but God took this occasion to inflict
the punishment upon the society, partly because divers of them might be
guilty of this sin, either by coveting what he actually did, or by
concealing his fault, which it is probable could not be unknown to
others; or by not sorrowing for it, and endeavoring to purge themselves
from it: partly to make sin the more hateful; as being the cause of such
dreadful judgments: and partly to oblige all the members of every
society to be more circumspect in ordering their own actions, and more
diligent to prevent the miscarriages of their brethren, which is a great
benefit to them, and to the whole society.

[Joshua 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 7:2</span></span>

To Ai - They were not to go into the city of Ai, but into the country
belonging to it, to understand the state of the place; and the people.

[Joshua 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 7:3</span></span>

Go up - Which was done by the wise contrivance of Divine providence,
that their sin might be punished, and they awaked and reformed with as
little mischief and reproach, as might be: for if the defeat of these
caused so great a consternation in Joshua, it is easy to guess what
dread it would have caused in the people if a host had been defeated.

[Joshua 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 7:4</span></span>

They fled - Not having courage to strike a stroke, which was a plain
evidence that God had forsaken then; and an useful instruction, to shew
them what they were when God left them: and that it was God, not their
own valour, that gave the Canaanites into their hands.

[Joshua 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 7:5</span></span>

About thirty and six men - A dear victory to them, whereby Israel was
awakened and reformed, and they hardened to their own ruin. The going
down - By which it seems it was a down - hill way to Jericho, which was
nearer Jordan. As water - Soft and weak, and full of fluctuation and
trembling.

[Joshua 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 7:6</span></span>

Rent his clothes - In testimony of great sorrow, for the loss felt, the
consequent mischief feared, and the sin which he suspected. His face -
In deep humiliation and fervent supplication. Until the even - tide -
Continuing the whole day in fasting and prayer. Put dust upon their
heads - As was usual in case of grief and astonishment.

[Joshua 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 7:7</span></span>

Over Jordan - This and the following clause, tho' well intended, yet
favour of human infirmity, and fall short of that reverence and modesty,
and submission, which he owed to God; and are mentioned as instances
that the holy men of God were subject to like passions and infirmities
with other men.

[Joshua 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 7:8</span></span>

What shall I say - In answer to the reproaches of our insulting enemies.
When Israel - God's people, which he hath singled out of all nations for
his own.

[Joshua 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 7:9</span></span>

Thy great name - Which will upon this occasion be blasphemed and charged
with inconstancy, and with inability to resist them, or to do thy people
that good which thou didst intend them. The name of God is a great name,
above every name. And whatever happens, we ought to pray, that this may
not be polluted. This should be our concern more than any thing else: on
this we should fix our eye: and we cannot urge a better plea than this,
Lord, what wilt thou do for thy great name? Let God in all be glorified,
and then welcome his whole will!

[Joshua 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 7:10</span></span>

Upon thy face - This business is not to be done by inactive
supplication, but by vigorous endeavours for reformation.

[Joshua 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 7:11</span></span>

Israel - Some or one of them. Transgressed my covenant - That is, broken
the conditions of my covenant which they have promised to perform,
whereof this was one, not to meddle with the accursed thing. Stolen -
That is, taken my portion which I had reserved, [Jos
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#019). Dissembled - Covered the fact
with deep dissimulation. Possibly Achan might be suspected, and being
accused, had denied it. Among their own stuff - Converted it to their
own use, and added obstinacy to the crime.

[Joshua 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 7:12</span></span>

Were accursed - They have put themselves out of my protection, and
therefore are liable to the same destruction which belongs to this
accursed people.

[Joshua 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 7:13</span></span>

Sanctify yourselves - Purify yourselves from that defilement which you
have all in some sort contracted by this accursed fact, and prepare
yourselves to appear before the Lord, expecting the sentence of God for
the discovery and punishment of the sin, and that the guilty person
might hereby be awakened, and brought to a free confession of his fault.
And it is a marvellous thing that Achan did not on this occasion
acknowledge his crime; but this is to be imputed to the heart -
hardening power of sin, which makes men, grow worse and worse; to his
pride, being loath to take to himself the shame of such a mischievous
and infamous action; and to his vain conceit, whereby he might think
others were guilty as well as he, and some of them might be taken, and
he escape.

[Joshua 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 7:14</span></span>

The Lord taketh - Which shall be declared guilty by the lot, which is
disposed by the Lord, [Pro 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033), and
which was to be cast in the Lord's presence before the ark. Of such use
of lots, see [Sa1 14:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#041); [Jon
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#007); [Act
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#026).

[Joshua 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 7:15</span></span>

Shall be burnt with fire - As persons and things accursed were to be.
All that he hath - His children and goods, as is noted, [Jos
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024), according to the law, [Deu
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#016). Wrought folly - So sin is often
called in scripture, in opposition to the idle opinion of sinners, who
commonly esteem it to be their wisdom. In Israel - That is, among the
church and people of God who had such excellent laws to direct them, and
such an all - sufficient and gracious God to provide for them, without
any such unworthy practices. It was sacrilege, it was invading God's
rights, and converting to a private use that which was devoted to his
glory, which was to be thus severely punished, for a warning to all
people in all ages, to take heed how they rob God.

[Joshua 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 7:17</span></span>

The family - Either, the tribe or people, as the word family sometimes
signifies, or, the families, as [Jos
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#014), the singular number for the
plural, the chief of each of their five families, [Num
26:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#020). Man by man - Not every
individual person, as is evident from [Jos
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#018), but every head of the several
houses, or lesser families of that greater family of the Zarhites, of
which see [Ch1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006).

[Joshua 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 7:19</span></span>

My son - So he calls him, to shew, that this severe inquisition and
sentence did not proceed from any hatred to his person, which he loved
as a father doth his son, and as a prince ought to do each of his
subjects. The Lord God of Israel - As thou hast highly dishonoured him,
now take the blame to thyself, and ascribe unto God the glory of his
omniscience in knowing thy sin, of his justice in punishing it in thee,
and others for thy sake; of his omnipotency, which was obstructed by
thee; and of his kindness and faithfulness to his people, which was
eclipsed by thy wickedness; all which will now be evident by thy sin
confessed and punished.

[Joshua 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 7:20</span></span>

Indeed I have sinned - He seems to make a sincere and ingenuous
confession, and loads his sin with all just aggravations. Against the
Lord - Against his express command, and glorious attributes. God of
Israel - The true God, who hath chosen me and all Israel to be the
people of his peculiar love and care.

[Joshua 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 7:21</span></span>

When I saw - He accurately describes the progress of his sin, which
began at his eye, which he permitted to gaze upon them, which inflamed
his desire, and made him covet them; and that desire made him take them;
and having taken, resolve to keep them; and to that end hide them in his
tent. Babylonish garment - Which were composed with great art with
divers colours, and of great price, as appears both from scripture, and
Heathen authors. Two hundred shekels - To wit, in weight, not in coin;
for as yet they received and payed money by weight. The silver under it
- That is, under the Babylonish garment; covered with it, or wrapt up in
it.

[Joshua 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 7:22</span></span>

Sent messengers - That the truth of his confession might be
unquestionable, which some, peradventure might think was forced from
him. And they ran - Partly longing to free themselves and all the people
from the curse under which they lay; and partly that none of Achan's
relations might get thither before them, and take away the things. It
was hid - That is, the parcel of things mentioned, [Jos
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#021) and [Jos
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024).

[Joshua 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 7:23</span></span>

Before the Lord - Where Joshua and the elders continued yet in their
assembly waiting for the issue.

[Joshua 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 7:24</span></span>

His sons, and his daughters - Their death was a debt they owed to their
own sins, which debt God may require when he pleaseth; and he could not
take it in more honourable circumstances than these, that the death of a
very few in the beginning of a new empire, and of their settlement in
the land, might be useful to prevent the deaths of many thousands who
took warning by this dreadful example, whom, if the fear of God did not,
yet the love of their own, and of their dear children's lives would
restrain from such pernicious practices. And it is very probable they
were conscious of the fact, as the Jewish doctors affirm. If it be
pretended that some of them were infants; the text doth not say so, but
only calls them sons and daughters. And considering that Achan was an
old man, as is most probable, because he was the fifth person from
Judah, it seems most likely, that the children were grown up, and so
capable of knowing, and concealing, or discovering this fact. His oxen,
and his asses, and his sheep - Which, though not capable of sin, nor of
punishment, properly so called, yet as they were made for man's use, so
they are rightly destroyed for man's good; and being daily killed for
our bodily food, it cannot seem strange to kill them for the instruction
of our minds, that hereby we might learn the contagious nature of sin,
which involves innocent creatures in its plagues; and how much sorer
punishments are reserved for man, who having a law given to him, and
that excellent gift of reason and will to restrain him from the
transgressions of it, his guilt must needs be unspeakably greater, and
therefore his sufferings more severe and terrible. Farther, by this
enumeration it appears, that he had no colour of necessity to induce him
to this fact.

[Joshua 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 7:25</span></span>

With stones - And burned him with fire; which is easily understood both
out of the following words, and from God's command to do so. They were
stoned (which was the punishment of such offenders, [Lev
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#014); [Num
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#035),) and not burned to death; but
God would have their dead carcases burned to shew his utmost detestation
of such persons as break forth into sins of such a public scandal and
mischief.

[Joshua 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 7:26</span></span>

A great heap of stones - As a monument of the sin and judgment here
mentioned, that others might be warned by the example; and as a brand of
infamy, as [Jos 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#029); [Sa2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#017). The valley of Achor - Or, the
valley of trouble, from the double trouble expressed, [Jos
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#025).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 8](jos008)

</div>
