<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos021)  [Next](jos023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)

[Joshua 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 22:4</span></span>

Your tents - That is, to your settled habitations. Tho' their affections
to their families could not but make them very desirous to return, yet
like good soldiers, they would not move 'till they had orders from their
general. So, tho' we desire to be at home with Christ ever so much, yet
we must stay here till our warfare is accomplished, wait for a due
discharge, and not anticipate the time of our removal.

[Joshua 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 22:5</span></span>

Take heed - Watch over yourselves and all your actions. Commandment and
law - Two words expressing the same thing, the law of commandments
delivered by Moses. All your heart and soul - With the whole strength of
your minds, and wills, and affections.

[Joshua 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 22:8</span></span>

With your brethren - That is, with them who stayed beyond Jordan for the
defence of their land, and wives, and children, who therefore were to
have a share, though not an equal share with these. But for them, [Sa1
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#024), their share was equal, because
their danger was equal.

[Joshua 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 22:10</span></span>

Built an altar - About that time when they came to them, they designed
it, and as soon as they were got over Jordan, which was in a very little
time, they effected and perfected it. They built it, no doubt, on their
own side of the water: for how could they build on other men's land,
without their consent? And it is said, in the following verse, to be
over against the land of Jordan. Nor would there have been cause to
suspect that it was designed for sacrifice, if they had not built it
among themselves.

[Joshua 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 22:11</span></span>

At the passage - Where they passed over Jordan, either at their first
entrance into Canaan, or afterwards, and usually.

[Joshua 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 22:12</span></span>

The children of Israel - Not in their own persons, not by their elders,
who used to transact all affairs of this kind in the name of all the
people. Against them - As apostates from God, according to God's command
in that case, [Deu 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#013). &c.

[Joshua 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 22:16</span></span>

The congregation - Who do and are resolved to cleave unto that God from
whom you have revolted. What trespass - How heinous a crime is this!
This day - That is, so soon after God hath obliged you by such wonderful
favours, and when God is now conducting you home to reap the fruits of
all your pains and hazards. Rebel - With a design to rebel against God,
and against his express command of worshipping him at one only altar.

[Joshua 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 22:17</span></span>

Of Peor - That is, of our worshipping of Baal - peor, [Num
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003). Probably this is mentioned the
rather, because Phinehas, the first commissioner in this treaty, had
signalized himself in that matter: and because they were now at or near
the very place, where that iniquity was committed. Are not cleansed -
For though God had pardoned it, as to the national punishment of it,
[Num 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011), yet they were not yet
throughly purged from it; partly because the shame and blot of that
odious practice was not yet wiped off: and partly, because some of that
corrupt leaven still remained among them, and though smothered for a
time, yet was ready to break forth upon all occasions, See [Jos
24:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#033). And God also took notice of
these idolatrous inclinations in particular persons, and found out ways
to punish them.

[Joshua 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 22:18</span></span>

To - morrow - That is, suddenly, as that word is often used.
Congregation - With you for doing so, and with us for suffering, or not
punishing it.

[Joshua 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 22:19</span></span>

Be unclean - If you apprehend it to be so for want of the tabernacle and
altar there; as the following words imply: if you now repent of your
former choice in preferring the worldly commodities of that country
before the advantage of God's presence, and more frequent opportunities
of his service. Among us - We will readily resign part of our
possessions to you for the prevention of this sin and mischief. Against
us - For all the tribes were united in one body politick, and made one
commonwealth, and one church; and each tribe was subject to the laws and
commands of the whole society, and of the chief ruler or rulers thereof;
so its disobedience to their just commands was properly rebellion
against them.

[Joshua 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 22:20</span></span>

Of Zerah - That is, one of his posterity. Not alone - But brought
destruction upon his whole family, and part of our forces sent against
Ai.

[Joshua 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 22:22</span></span>

The Lord - That Jehovah, whom we no less than you acknowledge and adore
as the God of gods, infinitely superior to all that are called gods. The
multiplying of his titles, and the repetition of these words, shew their
zeal and earnestness in this matter. He knoweth - To him we appeal who
knoweth all things, and the truth of what we are now saying. Not only
our present words, but our future and constant course shall satisfy all
Israel of our perseverance in the true religion. In rebellion - If this
have been done by us with such design, or in such a manner. Save us not
- Thou, O Lord, to whom we have appealed, and without whom we cannot be
saved and preserved, save us not from any of our enemies, nor from the
sword of our brethren. It is a sudden apostrophe to God, usual in such
vehement speeches.

[Joshua 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 22:23</span></span>

Require it - That is, call us to an account and punish us for it.

[Joshua 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 22:24</span></span>

With the Lord - You have no relation to him, nor interest in him, or his
worship.

[Joshua 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 22:25</span></span>

A border - To shut you out of the land of promise, and consequently from
the covenant made between God and our fathers. No part - Nothing to do
with him; no right to serve him or expect favour from him. Cease from
fearing the Lord - For they that are cut off from public ordinances,
usually by degrees lose all religion. It is true, the form and
profession of godliness, may be kept without the life and power of it.
But the life and power will not long be kept, without the form and
profession of it.

[Joshua 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 22:27</span></span>

Before him - That we and ours may have and hold our privilege of serving
and worshiping God, not upon this altar, but in the place of God's
presence, in your tabernacle, and upon your altar.

[Joshua 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 22:28</span></span>

The pattern - An exact representation and resemblance. A witness - That
we both serve one God, and approve and make use of one and the same
altar.

[Joshua 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 22:30</span></span>

Pleased them - They were fully satisfied with this answer.

[Joshua 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jos 22:31</span></span>

Is among us - By his gracious presence, and preventing goodness, in
keeping you from so great an offence, and all of us from those
calamities that would have followed it. Hand of the Lord - That is, from
the wroth and dreadful judgments of God, by avoiding that sin which
would have involved both you and us in a most bloody war; you have
delivered us from the evils we feared. He that prevents an approaching
disease or mischief, doth as truly deliver a man from it, as he that
cures or removes it after it hath been inflicted.

[Joshua 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jos 22:33</span></span>

Destroy the land - As they were by the law of God obliged to do, if they
had been guilty and persisted therein; as afterwards they did the tribe
of Benjamin for the same reason.

[Joshua 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jos 22:34</span></span>

The altar Ed - That is, a witness: a witness of the relation they stood
in to God and Israel, and of their concurrence with the other tribes in
the common faith, that Jehovah he is God. It was a witness to posterity,
of their care to transmit their religion pure and entire; and would be a
witness against them, if ever they should turn from following the Lord
their God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 23](jos023)

</div>
