<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1013)  [Next](kg1015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 14:1</span></span>

At that time - Presently after the things described in the former
chapter; which, though related in the beginning of his reign, yet might
be done a good while after it, and so Ahijah the prophet might be very
old, as he is described to be [Kg1
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#004). It is probable he was his eldest
son.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 14:2</span></span>

His wife - Because she might without suspicion enquire concerning her
own child; and because she would enquire exactly, and diligently, and
faithfully acquaint him with the truth. Disguise - Change thy habit, and
voice, and go like a private and obscure person. This caution proceeded:
first, from the pride of his heart, which made him loth to confess his
folly in worshipping such helpless idols, and to give glory to the God
whom he had forsaken. Secondly, from jealousy and suspicion, lest the
prophet knowing this, should either give her no answer, or make it worse
than indeed it was. Thirdly, from policy, lest his people should by his
example be drawn to forsake the calves, and to return to the God of
Judah.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 14:3</span></span>

And take - A present, after the manner, but mean, as became an ordinary
country woman, which she personated. It had been more pious to enquire,
why God contended with him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 14:6</span></span>

Thou wife - By which discovery he both reproves their folly, who thought
to conceal themselves from God, and withal gives her assurance of the
truth, and certainty of that message which he was to deliver.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 14:8</span></span>

David - Who though he fell into some sins, yet, first, he constantly
persevered in the true worship of God; from which thou art revolted.
Secondly, he heartily repented of, and turned from all his sins whereas
thou art obstinate and incorrigible.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 14:9</span></span>

Above all - Above all the former kings of my people, as Saul, and
Solomon, and Rehoboam. Images - Namely the golden calves: not as if they
thought them to be other gods in a proper sense; for it is apparent they
still pretended to worship the God of their fathers, but because God
rejected their whole worship, and, howsoever they accounted it, he
reckoned it a manifest defection from him, and a betaking themselves to
other gods, or devils, as they are called, [Ch2
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#015), whom alone they served and
worshipped therein, whatsoever pretences they had to the contrary. To
provoke - Whereby thou didst provoke me. For otherwise this was not
Jeroboam's design in it, but only to establish himself in the throne.
Hast cast - Despised and forsaken me, and my commands, and my worship,
as we do things which we cast behind our backs.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 14:10</span></span>

Shut up - Those who had escaped the fury of their enemies invading them,
either because they were shut up in caves, or castles, or strong towns,
or, because they were left, over - looked or neglected by them, or
spared as poor, impotent, helpless creatures. But now, saith he, they
shall be all searched out, and brought to destruction. Dung - Which they
remove, as a loathsome thing, out of their houses, and that throughly
and universally.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 14:11</span></span>

Eat - So both sorts shall die unburied.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 14:12</span></span>

When, &c. - Presently upon thy entrance into the city; when thou art
gone but a little way in it, even as far as to the threshold of the
king's door, [Kg1 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#017), which
possibly was near the gates of the city. And by this judge of the truth
of the rest of my prophecy.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 14:13</span></span>

Shall mourn - For the loss of so worthy and hopeful a person, and for
the sad calamities which will follow his death, which possibly his
moderation, and wisdom, and virtue, might have prevented. So they should
mourn, not simply for him, but for their own loss in him. Grave - Shall
have the honour of burial. Some good - Pious intentions of taking away
the calves, and of permitting or obliging his people to go up to
Jerusalem to worship, if God gave him life and authority to do it, and
of trusting God with his kingdom. In the house - Which is added for his
greater commendation; he was good in the midst of so many temptations
and wicked examples; a good branch of a bad flock.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 14:14</span></span>

A king - Baasha, [Kg1 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#028). That day
- When he is so raised; in the very beginning of his reign, [Kg1
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#029). But what? - But what do I say,
he shall raise, as it were a thing to be done at a great distance of
time: the man is now in being if not in power, who shall do this: this
judgment shall be shortly executed. Sometimes God makes quick work with
sinners. He did so with the house of Jeroboam. It was not twenty four
years from his first elevation, to the final extirpation of his family.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 14:15</span></span>

Is shaken - Hither and thither, with every wind. So shall the kingdom
and people of Israel be always in an unquiet and unsettled posture,
tossed to and fro by foreign invasions and civil wars; by opposite kings
and factions, and by the dissensions of the people. The river -
Euphrates, so called by way of eminency, this was accomplished in part
[Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029), and more fully, [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006). Groves - For the worship of
their idols, God having before condemned the making and worshipping of
the calves, by which they pretended to worship the true God; he now
takes notice that they were not contented with the calves, but (as it is
in the nature of idolatry, and all sin, to proceed from evil to worse)
were many of them fallen into a worse kind of idolatry, even their
worship of the heathenish Baals, which they commonly exercised in
groves.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 14:16</span></span>

Who made, &c. - By his invention, and making the occasion of their sin,
the calves; by his example, encouraging those and only those that
worshipped the calves; and by his authority requiring and compelling
them to do it. This is mentioned as a monstrous aggravation of his
wickedness, that he was not content with his own sin, but was the great
author of drawing others into sin, and of corrupting and undoing the
whole kingdom, which therefore God would never forgive him, but upon all
occasions mentions him with this eternal brand of infamy upon him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 14:17</span></span>

Tirzah - An ancient and royal city, in a pleasant place, where the kings
of Israel had a palace, whither Jeroboam was now removed from Shechem,
either for his pleasure, or for his son's recovery, by the healthfulness
of the place. The threshold - Of the king's house, which probably was
upon, or by the wall of the city, and near the gate.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 14:18</span></span>

Mourned - And justly: not only for the loss of an hopeful prince, but
because his death plucked up the floodgates, at which an inundation of
judgments broke in.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 14:19</span></span>

The chronicles - not that canonical book of chronicles; for that was
written long after this book: but a book of civil records, the annals,
wherein all remarkable passages were recorded by the king's command from
day to day; out of which the sacred penman by the direction of God's
spirit, took those passages which were most useful for God's honour, and
mens edification.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 14:21</span></span>

Forty one years - Therefore he was born a year before Solomon was king,
as appears from [Kg1 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#042), this is
noted as an aggravation of Rehoboam's folly, that he was old enough to
have been wiser. An Ammonitess - A people cursed by God, and shut out of
the congregation of his people for ever. This is observed as one cause
both of God's displeasure in punishing Solomon with such a son, and of
Rehoboam's apostacy after his three first years, [Ch2
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#017). None can imagine how fatal and
how lasting are the consequence of being unequally yoked with an
unbeliever.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 14:22</span></span>

In the sight of the Lord - In contempt and defiance of him, and the
tokens of his special presence. Jealousy - As the adulterous wife
provokes her husband, by breaking the marriage covenant.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 14:23</span></span>

They also - Followed the example of the Israelites, although they were
better instructed, and had the temple in their kingdom, and liberty of
access to it, and the privilege of worshipping God in his own way, and
the counsels, and sermons, and examples of the priests and Levites, and
the dreadful example of Israel's horrid apostacy, to caution and terrify
them. High places - Which was unlawful, and, now especially when the
temple was built, and ready to receive them; unnecessary, and therefore
expressed a greater contempt of God and his express command. Groves -
Not only after the manner of the Heathens and Israelites, but against a
direct and particular prohibition. Under every green tree - The people
were universally corrupted: which is prodigious, all things considered,
and is a clear evidence of the greatness and depth of the original
corruption of man's nature.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 14:24</span></span>

Abomination - They dishonoured God by one sin, and then God left them to
dishonour themselves by another.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 14:25</span></span>

Fifth year - Presently after his and his people's apostacy, which was
not 'till his fourth year: while apostate, Israel enjoyed peace and some
kind of prosperity, of which difference, two reasons may be given:
first, Judah's sins were committed against clearer light, and more
powerful means and remedies of all sorts, and therefore deserved more
severe and speedy judgments. Secondly, God discovered more love to Judah
in chastizing them speedily, that they might be humbled, reformed, and
preserved, as it happened; and more anger against Israel, whom he spared
to that total destruction which he intended to bring upon them. Sishak -
He is thought to be Solomon's brother - in - law. But how little such
relations signify among princes, when their interest is concerned, all
histories witness. Besides Rehoboam was not Solomon's son by Pharaoh's
daughter and so the relation was in a manner extinct. Came up - Either,
from a desire to enlarge his empire: or, by Jeroboam's instigation: or
from a covetous desire of possessing those great treasures which David
and Solomon had left: and above all, by God's providence, disposing his
heart to this expedition for Rehoboam's punishment.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 14:26</span></span>

He took - First the city: which may seem strange, considering the great
strength of it, and how much time it took Nebuchadnezzar and Titus to
take it. But, first, it might cost Shishak also a long siege though that
be not here related. Secondly, it is probable David and Solomon in their
building and altering the city, had more respect to state and
magnificence than to its defence, as having no great cause to fear the
invasion of any enemies. And it is certain, that after the division
between Judah and Israel, the kings of Judah added very much to the
fortifications of it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 14:27</span></span>

Brazen shields - This was an emblem of the diminution of his glory. Sin
makes the gold become dim, it changes the most fine gold and turns it
into brass.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 14:28</span></span>

To the house, &c. - By which it seems the affliction had done him some
good, and brought him back to the worship of God, which he had forsaken.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 14:30</span></span>

Was war - Not an invasive war with potent armies, which was forbidden,
[Kg1 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#024), and not revived 'till
Abijam's reign, [Ch2 13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#001), but a
defensive war from those hostilities which by small parties and
skirmishes they did to one another.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 14:31</span></span>

An Ammonitess - This is repeated as a thing very observable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 15](kg1015)

</div>
