<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1004)  [Next](kg1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 5:6</span></span>

They - That is, thy servants. And this assistance which these Gentiles
gave to the building of Solomon's temple, was a type of the calling of
the Gentiles, and that they should be instrumental in building and
constituting Christ's spiritual temple. Cedar - trees - Which for their
soundness, and strength, and fragrancy, and durableness, were most
proper for his design. Of these David had procured some, but not a
sufficient number. Lebanon - Which was in Solomon's jurisdiction: and
therefore he doth not desire that Hiram would give him the cedars,
because they were his own already; but only that his servants might hew
them for him; which the ingenious Tyrians well understood. With thy
servants - Either to be employed therein as they shall direct; or to
receive the cedars, from their hands, and transmit them to me. Hire -
Pay them for their labour and art. Sidonians - Or Tyrians: for these
places and people being near, are promiscuously used one for another.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 5:7</span></span>

Rejoiced - Being a faithful friend to David and his house, and tho' it
is not probable he was a sincere proselyte, yet he had sufficient
information concerning the nature and excellency of the God of Israel,
and had honourable thoughts of him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 5:9</span></span>

The sea - The mid - land sea. Floats - Or, rafts. It is thought the
timber were tied together in the water, as now is usual, and so by the
help of boats or ships, conveyed to the appointed place, which was at no
great distance. Household - My family and court, which most properly is
called his house.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 5:11</span></span>

Measures - Heb. twenty cors pure oil; but in [Ch2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#010), it is twenty thousand baths of
oil. To which there is added twenty thousand measures of barley, and
twenty thousand baths of wine. Either therefore, first, he speaks of
several things. Or, secondly, he speaks there of what Solomon offered:
for it runs thus, I will give; and here of what Hiram accepted. Or,
thirdly, the barley, and wine, and twenty thousand baths of common oil,
mentioned [Ch2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#010), must be added to
the twenty thousand measures of wheat, and the twenty measures of pure
oil here expressed, and the whole sum is to be made up from both places;
that book of Chronicles being written to supply and compleat the
histories of the books of Samuel, and of the Kings. Gave Hiram - Either,
first, for sustenance to the workmen, during the years wherein they were
employed in the cutting down and hewing of timber. Or, for the yearly
support of the king's house, during the said time. Thus by the wise
disposal of providence, one country has need of another, and is
benefited by another, that there may be a mutual correspondence and
dependence, to the glory of God our common Parent.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 5:13</span></span>

The levy - Which were to be employed in the most honourable and easy
parts of the work relating to the temple; and these were Israelites; but
those fifteen hundred thousand mentioned [Kg1
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#015), were strangers. If it seem
strange, that so many thousands should be employed about so small a
building as the temple was; it must be considered, that the temple, all
its parts being considered, was far larger than men imagine; that it is
probable, they were employed by turns, as the thirty thousand were, [Kg1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#014), else they had been oppressed
with hard and uninterrupted labours. that the timber and stone hewed and
carried by them, was designed, not only for the temple, but also for
Solomon's own houses, and buildings; because we read of no other levy of
men, nor of any care and pains taken after the building of the temple,
for the procurement, or preparation of materials for his own houses, or
his other buildings; nay, that this very levy of men was made and
employed for the building of the Lord's house, and Solomon's house, and
Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer, is
expressed [Kg1 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#015).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 5:16</span></span>

Three thousand &c. - Whereof three thousand were set over the fifteen
hundred thousand, expressed [Kg1 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#015),
each of these, over fifty of them, and the odd three hundred were set
over these three thousand, each of these to have the oversight of ten of
them, to take an account of the work for them. But in [Ch2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#018), these overseers are said to be
thirty - six hundred. The three thousand added in [Ch2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#002), might be a reserve, to supply the
places of the other three thousand: yea, or of the thirty - three
hundred, as any of them should be taken off from the work by death, or
sickness, or weakness, or necessary occasions; which was a prudent
provision, and not unusual in like cases. And so there were thirty - six
hundred commissioned for the work, but only thirty - three hundred
employed at one time; and therefore both computations fairly stand
together.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 5:17</span></span>

Great and costly - Marble and porphyry, or other stones of great size
and value. The foundation - Where they could not afterward be seen: and
therefore that this was done, is mentioned only as a point of
magnificence, except it was intended for a type, or mystical
signification of the preciousness of Christ, who is the foundation of
the true temple, the church of God.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 5:18</span></span>

Stone - squarers - Heb. the Giblites, the inhabitants of Gebel, a place
near Zidon, famous for artificers and architects, [Jos
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#005). These are here mentioned apart,
distinct from the rest of Hiram's builders, as the most eminent of them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 6](kg1006)

</div>
