<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2018)  [Next](kg2020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 19:1</span></span>

Rent his cloaths, &c. - Great men must not think it any disparagement to
them, to sympathize with the injured honour of the great God.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 19:3</span></span>

The children - We are like a poor travailing woman in great extremity,
having no strength left to help herself, and to bring forth her infant
into the world. We have attempted to deliver ourselves from the Assyrian
yoke; and had carried on that work to some maturity, and as we thought,
brought it to the birth; but now we have no might to finish. We have
begun an happy reformation, and are hindered by this insolent Assyrian,
from bringing it to perfection.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 19:4</span></span>

For the remnant - For Judah, which is but a remnant, now the ten tribes
are gone: for Jerusalem, which is but a remnant, now the defenced cities
of Judah are taken.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 19:8</span></span>

Returned - To the king, to give him an account of the treaty; leaving
behind him the army under the other commanders.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 19:15</span></span>

O Lord God of Israel, &c. - He calls him the God of Israel, because
Israel was his peculiar people; but yet the God of the whole earth, not
as Sennacherib fancied, the God of Israel only. Let them say what they
will, thou art sovereign Lord, the God of gods, even thou alone:
Universal Lord of all the kingdoms of the earth; and rightful Lord; for
thou hast made heaven and earth. Being creator of all, by an
incontestable title thou art owner and ruler of all.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 19:16</span></span>

Him - Rabshakeh: he would not do him the honour to name him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 19:21</span></span>

Virgin - So he calls Zion, or Jerusalem; because she was pure in good
measure from that gross idolatry wherewith other people were defiled,
which is called spiritual whoredom: and to signify, that God would
defend her from the rape which Sennacherib intended to commit upon her
with no less care than parents do their virgin daughters from those who
seek to force and deflower them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 19:23</span></span>

Mountains - I have brought up my very chariots to those mountains which
were thought inaccessible by my army. Lebanon - An high hill, famous for
cedars and fir - trees. Cut down - I will cut down the trees that hinder
my march, and plane the way for my numerous army and chariots. Lodgings
- Those cities (which he calls lodgings in way of contempt) which are in
his utmost borders. I am come into the land of Canaan at one border,
Lebanon, and I resolve to march on to the other border, and so destroy
the whole country, from one border to the other. Carmel - The forest of
mount Carmel, which may seem to be another inaccessible place, like
Lebanon.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 19:24</span></span>

Strange waters - Such as were never discovered by others. Dried up - And
as I can furnish my army with water digged out of the earth; so I can
deprive my enemies of their water, and can dry up their rivers, and that
with the sole of my feet; with the march of my vast and numerous army,
who will easily do this, either by marching through them, and each
carrying away part with them: or by making new channels, and driving the
waters of the river into them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 19:25</span></span>

Hast thou not, &c. - Hast thou not long since learned, that which some
of thy philosophers could teach thee; that there is a supreme and
powerful God, by whose decree and providence all these wars and
calamities were sent, and ordered; whose mere instrument thou art, so
that thou hast no cause for these vain boastings? This work is mine, not
thine. I have, &c. - I have so disposed of things by my providence, that
thou shouldest be a great and victorious prince, and that thou shouldest
be so successful as thou hast hitherto been, first against the kingdom
of Israel, and now against Judah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 19:26</span></span>

Therefore - Because I had armed thee with my commission and strength,
and taken away their spirit and courage.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 19:27</span></span>

I know - Though thou dost not know me, yet I throughly know thee, and
all thy designs and actions, all thy secret contrivances in the place of
thy abode, in thy own kingdom and court; and the execution of thy
designs abroad, what thou intendest in thy going out, and with what
farther thoughts thou comest in, or returnest to thy own land.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg2 19:28</span></span>

My hook, &c. - What a comfort is it, that God has a hook in the nose and
a bridle in the jaws of all his and our enemies?

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 19:29</span></span>

A sign - Of the certain accomplishment of the promises here made: that
God will not only preserve the city from his present fury, but also,
bless his people with a durable prosperity, [Kg2
19:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#030). The third year - This was an
excellent sign; especially, considering the waste and havock which the
Assyrians had made in the land; and that the Jews had been forced to
retire into their strong hold, and consequently to neglect their
tilling, and sowing, and reaping; and yet this year they should have
sufficient provision from those fruits of the earth which the Assyrians
left; and the second year, which was the year of release, in which they
might neither sow, nor reap, from such fruits as the earth brought forth
of its own accord; and so in the third year. And eat - You shall not
sow, and another reap, as lately you did; but you shall enjoy the fruit
of your own labours.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 19:30</span></span>

The remnant, &c. - They shall be well fixt and provided for themselves,
and then do good to others.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg2 19:31</span></span>

Go forth - That handful of Jews who were now gathered together, and shut
up in Jerusalem, shall go out of their several habitations, and by my
singular blessing increase exceedingly. The zeal - Although when you
reflect upon yourselves, and consider either your present fewness, and
weakness, or your great unworthiness, this may seem too great a blessing
for you to expect; yet God will do it from the zeal which he hath, both
for his own name, and for the good of his undeserving people.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg2 19:32</span></span>

He shall not - The army sent with Rabshaketh did not form a close siege
against it, but only disposed themselves so as to block it up at some
distance; possibly waiting 'till the king of Assyria had taken Libnah
and Lachish, (which they presumed he would speedily do.)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg2 19:35</span></span>

Angel - Such an angel as destroyed the first - born of Egypt. Arose -
The few that were left alive: all their companions were dead.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg2 19:36</span></span>

So Sennacherib, &c. - The manner of the expression intimates the great
disorder and distraction of mind he was in.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg2 19:37</span></span>

Was worshipping, &c. - The God of Israel had done enough to convince
him, that he was the only true God. Yet he persists in his idolatry.
Justly then is his blood mingled with his sacrifices, who will not be
convinced by so dear - bought a demonstration, of his folly in
worshipping idols.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 20](kg2020)

</div>
