<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](exo040)  [Next](lev002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

[Leviticus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 1:1</span></span>

Moses - Stood without, [Exo 40:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035),
waiting for God's call. The tabernacle - From the mercy - seat in the
tabernacle.

[Leviticus 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 1:2</span></span>

There are divers kinds of sacrifices here prescribed, some by way of
acknowledgment to God for mercies either desired or received; others by
was of satisfaction to God for men's sins; others were mere exercises of
devotion. And the reason why there were so many kinds of them was,
partly a respect to the childish state of the Jews, who by the custom of
nations, and their own natural inclinations were much addicted to
outward rites and ceremonies, that they might have full employment of
that kind in Gods's service, and thereby be kept from temptations to
idolatry; and partly to represent as well the several perfections of
Christ, the true sacrifice, and the various benefits of his death, as
the several duties which men owe to their Creator and Redeemer, all
which could not be so well expressed by one sort of sacrifice. Of the
flock - Or, Of the sheep; though the Hebrew word contains both the sheep
and goats. Now God chose these creatures for his sacrifices, either, In
opposition to the Egyptian idolatry, to which divers of the Israelites
had been used, and were still in danger of revolting to again, that the
frequent destruction of these creatures might bring such silly deities
into contempt. Or, Because these are the fittest representations both of
Christ and of true Christians, as being gentle, and harmless, and
patient, and useful to men. Or, As the best and most profitable
creatures, with which it is fit God should be served, and which we
should be ready to part with, when God requires us to do so. Or, As
things most common, that men might never want a sacrifice when they
needed, or God required it.

[Leviticus 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 1:3</span></span>

A burnt sacrifice - Strictly so called, such as was to be all burnt, the
skin excepted. For every sacrifice was burnt, more or less. The
sacrifices signified that the whole man, in whose stead the sacrifice
was offered, was to be entirely offered or devoted to God's service; and
that the whole man did deserve to be utterly consumed, if God should
deal severely with him; and directed us to serve the Lord with all
singleness of heart, and to be ready to offer to God even such
sacrifices or services wherein we ourselves should have no part or
benefit. A male - As being more perfect than the female, [Mal
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014), and more truly representing
Christ. Without blemish - To signify, That God should he served with the
best of every kind. That man, represented by these sacrifices, should
aim at all perfection of heart and life, and that Christians should one
day attain to it, [Eph 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027). The
spotless and compleat holiness of Christ. Of his own will - According to
this translation, the place speaks only of free - will offerings, or
such as were not prescribed by God to be offered in course, but were
offered by the voluntary devotion of any person, either by way of
supplication for any mercy, or by way of thanksgiving for any blessing
received. But it may seem improper to restrain the rules here given to
free - will offerings, which were to be observed in other offerings
also. At the door - In the court near the door, where the altar stood,
[Lev 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005). For here it was to be
sacrificed, and here the people might behold the oblation of it. And
this farther signified, that men could have no entrance, neither into
the earthly tabernacle, the church, nor into the heavenly tabernacle of
glory, but by Christ, who is the door, [Joh
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007), [Joh
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009), by whom alone we have access to
God.

[Leviticus 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 1:4</span></span>

He shall put his hand - Both his hands, [Lev
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014), [Lev
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#018), and [Lev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021). Whereby he signified, that he
willingly gave it to the Lord. That he judged himself worthy of that
death which it suffered in his stead; and that he laid his sins upon it
with an eye to him upon whom God would lay the iniquity of us all, [Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006), and that together with it he did
freely offer up himself to God. To make atonement - Sacramentally; as
directing his faith and thoughts to that true propitiatory sacrifice
which in time was to be offered up for him. And although burnt -
offerings were commonly offered by way of thanksgiving; yet they were
sometimes offered by way of atonement for sin, that is, for sins in
general, as appears from [Job 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005), but
for particular sins there were special sacrifices.

[Leviticus 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 1:5</span></span>

And he - Either, the offerer, who is said to do it, namely, by the
priest; for men are commonly said to do what they cause others to do, as
[Joh 4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001). the priest, as it follows,
or the Levite, whose office this was. Shall sprinkle the blood - Which
was done in a considerable quantity, and whereby was signified, That the
offerer deserved to have his blood spilt in that manner. That the blood
of Christ should be poured forth for sinners, and that this was the only
mean of their reconciliation to God, and acceptance with him.

[Leviticus 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 1:6</span></span>

Pieces - Namely, the head, and fat, and inwards, and legs, [Lev
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#008).

[Leviticus 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 1:7</span></span>

Put fire - Or, dispose the fire, that is, blow it up, and put it
together, so as it might be fit for the present work. For the fire there
used and allowed came down from heaven, [Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024), and was to be carefully
preserved there, and all other fire was forbidden, [Lev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001), &c.

[Leviticus 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 1:8</span></span>

The fat - All the fat was to be separated from the flesh, and to be put
together, to increase the flame, and to consume the other parts of the
sacrifice more speedily.

[Leviticus 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 1:9</span></span>

But the inwards shall he wash - To signify the universal and perfect
purity both of the inwards, or the heart, and of the legs, or ways or
actions, which was in Christ, and which should be in all Christians. And
he washed not only the parts now mentioned, but all the rest, the trunk
of the body, and the shoulders. A sweet savour - Not in itself, for so
it rather caused a stink, but as it represented Christ's offering up
himself to God as a sweet smelling savour.

[Leviticus 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 1:11</span></span>

North - ward - Here this and other kinds of sacrifices were killed, [Lev
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025), and [Lev
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#002), because here seems to have been
the largest and most convenient place for that work, the altar being
probably near the middle of the east - end of the building, and the
entrance being on the south - side. Besides this might design the place
of Christ's death both more generally, in Jerusalem, which was in the
sides of the north, [Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002), and
more specially, on mount Calvary, which was on the north - west side of
Jerusalem.

[Leviticus 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 1:14</span></span>

Turtle - doves - These birds were appointed for the poor who could not
bring better. And these birds are preferred before others, partly
because they were easily gotten, and partly because they are fit
representations of Christ's chastity, and meekness, and gentleness, for
which these birds are remarkable. The pigeons must be young, because
then they are best; but the turtle - doves are better when they are
grown up, and therefore they are not confined to that age.

[Leviticus 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 1:15</span></span>

His head - From the rest of the body; as sufficiently appears, because
this was to be burnt by itself, and the body afterwards, [Lev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#017). And whereas it is said [Lev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#008). He shall - wring his head from
his neck, but shall not divide it asunder, that is spoken not of the
burnt - offering as here, but of the sin - offering.

[Leviticus 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 1:16</span></span>

With its feathers - Or, with its dung or filth, contained in the crop
and in the guts. On the east - Of the Tabernacle. Here the filth was
cast, because this was the remotest place from the holy of holies, which
was in the west - end; to teach us, that impure things and persons
should not presume to approach to God, and that they should be banished
from his presence. The place of the ashes - Where the ashes fell down
and lay, whence they were afterwards removed without the camp.

[Leviticus 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 1:17</span></span>

He shall cleave the bird through the whole length, yet so as not to
separate the one side from the other. A sweet savour unto the Lord - Yet
after all, to love God with all our hearts, and to love our neighbour as
ourselves, is better than all burnt - offerings and sacrifices.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 2](lev002)

</div>
