<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev010)  [Next](lev012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001)

[Leviticus 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 11:1</span></span>

From the laws concerning the priests, he now comes to those which belong
to all the people. God spake to both of them, because the cognizance of
the following matters belonged to both: the priest was to direct the
people about the things forbidden or allowed, where any doubt or
difficulty arose; and the magistrate was to see the direction followed.

[Leviticus 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 11:2</span></span>

These are the beasts - Though every creature of God be good and pure in
itself, yet it pleased God to make a difference between clean and
unclean, which he did in part before the flood, [Gen
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#002), but more fully here for many
reasons; as, To assert his own sovereignty over man, and all the
creatures which men may not use but with God's leave. To keep up the
wall of partition between the Jews and other nations, which was very
necessary for many great and wise purposes. That by bridling their
appetite in things in themselves lawful, and some of them very
desirable, they might be better prepared and enabled to deny themselves
in things simply and grossly sinful. For the preservation of their
health, some of the creatures forbidden being, though used by the
neighbouring nations, of unwholesome nourishment, especially to the
Jews, who were very obnoxious to leprosies. To teach them to abhor that
filthiness, and all those ill qualities for which some of these
creatures are noted.

[Leviticus 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 11:3</span></span>

Cloven - footed - That is, divided into two parts only: This clause is
added to explain and limit the former, as appears from [Lev
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#026), for the feet of dogs, cats &c.
are parted or cloven into many parts. And cheweth the cud - Heb. and
bringeth up the cud, that is, the meat once chewed, out of the stomach
in the mouth again, that it may be chewed a second time for better
concoction. And this branch is to be joined with the former, both
properties being necessary for the allowed beasts. But the reason hereof
must be resolved into the will of the law - giver; though interpreters
guess that God would hereby signify their duties, by the first, that of
discerning between good and evil; and by the latter, that duty of
recalling God's word to our minds and meditating upon it.

[Leviticus 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 11:4</span></span>

The camel - An usual food in Arabia, but yielding bad nourishment.
Divideth not the hoof - So as to have his foot cloven in two, which
being expressed, [Lev 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#003), is here to
be understood. Otherwise the camel's hoof is divided, but it is but a
small and imperfect division.

[Leviticus 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 11:5</span></span>

As for the names of the following creatures, seeing the Jews themselves
are uncertain and divided about them, it seems improper to trouble the
unlearned readers with disputes about them.

[Leviticus 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 11:8</span></span>

Ye shall not touch - Not in order to eating, as may be gathered by
comparing this with [Gen 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#003). But
since the fat and skins of some of the forbidden creatures were useful,
for medicinal and other good purposes, and were used by good men, it is
not probable that God would have them cast away. Thus God forbad the
making of images, [Exo 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004), not
universally, but in order to the worshipping them, as Christian
interpreters agree.

[Leviticus 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 11:9</span></span>

Fins and scales - Both of them; such fishes being more cleanly, and more
wholesome food than others. The names of them are not particularly
mentioned, partly because most of them wanted names, the fish not being
brought to Adam and named by him as other creatures were; and partly
because the land of Canaan had not many rivers, nor great store of fish.

[Leviticus 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 11:11</span></span>

Unto you - This clause is added to shew that they were neither
abominable in their own nature, nor for the food of other nations; and
consequently when the partition - wall between Jews and Gentiles was
taken away, these distinctions of meat were to cease.

[Leviticus 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 11:13</span></span>

Among the fowls - The true signification of the following Hebrew words
is now lost, as the Jews at this day confess; which not falling out
without God's singular providence may intimate the cessation of this
law, the exact observation whereof since Christ came is become
impossible. In general, this may be observed, that the fowls forbidden
in diet, are all either ravenous and cruel, or such as delight in the
night and darkness, or such as feed upon impure things; and so the
signification of these prohibitions is manifest, to teach men to
abominate all cruelty or oppression, and all works of darkness and
filthiness. The ossifrage and the osprey - Two peculiar kinds of eagles,
distinct from that which being the chief of its kind, is called by the
name of the whole kind.

[Leviticus 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 11:15</span></span>

After his kind - According to the several kinds, known by this general
name, which includes, besides ravens properly so called, crows, rooks,
pyes, and others.

[Leviticus 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 11:20</span></span>

All fowls - Flying things that crawl or creep upon the earth, and so
degenerate from their proper nature, and are of a mongrel kind, which
may intimate that apostates and mongrels in religion are abominable in
the sight of God. Upon all four - Upon four legs, or upon more than
four, which is all one to the present purpose.

[Leviticus 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 11:22</span></span>

The locust - Locusts, though unusual in our food, were commonly eaten by
the Ethiopians, Lybians, Parthians, and other eastern people bordering
upon the Jews. And as it is certain the eastern locusts were much larger
than ours, so it is probable they were of different qualities, and
yielding better nourishment.

[Leviticus 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 11:23</span></span>

All other - That is, which have not those legs above and besides their
feet mentioned, [Lev 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021).

[Leviticus 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 11:24</span></span>

Unclean - And such were excluded both from the court of God's house, and
from free conversation with other men.

[Leviticus 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 11:25</span></span>

Beareth - Or, taketh away, out of the place where it may lie, by which
others may be either offended, or polluted.

[Leviticus 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 11:27</span></span>

Upon his paws - Heb. upon his hands, that is, which hath feet divided
into several parts like fingers, as dogs, cats, apes, and bears.

[Leviticus 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lev 11:34</span></span>

That on which such water cometh - That flesh or herbs or other food
which is dressed in water, in a vessel so polluted, shall be unclean;
not so, if it be food which is eaten dry, as bread, or fruits; the
reason of which difference seems to be this, that the water did sooner
receive the pollution in itself, and convey it to the food so dressed.

[Leviticus 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 11:36</span></span>

Of this no reason can be given, but the will of the law - giver and his
merciful condescension to men's necessities, water being scarce in those
countries; and for the same reason God would have the ceremonial law of
sacrifices, give place to the law of mercy.

[Leviticus 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lev 11:37</span></span>

Seed - Partly because this was necessary provision for man; and partly
because such seed would not be used for man's food till it had received
many alterations in the earth whereby such pollution was taken away.

[Leviticus 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">lev 11:38</span></span>

If any water - The reason of the difference is, because wet seed doth
sooner receive, and longer retain any pollution and partly because such
seed was not fit to be sown presently, and therefore that necessity
which justified the use of the dry seed, could not be pretended in this
case.

[Leviticus 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">lev 11:39</span></span>

If any beast die - Either of itself, or being killed by some wild beast,
in which cases the blood was not poured forth, as it was when they were
killed by men either for food or sacrifice.

[Leviticus 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">lev 11:40</span></span>

He that eateth - Unwittingly, for if he did it knowingly, it was a
presumptuous sin against an express law, [Deu
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021), and therefore punished with
cutting off.

[Leviticus 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">lev 11:41</span></span>

Every creeping thing - Except those expressly excepted, [Lev
11:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029).

[Leviticus 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">lev 11:42</span></span>

Upon the belly - As worms and snakes, Upon all four - As toads and
divers serpents.

[Leviticus 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">lev 11:44</span></span>

Ye shall be holy - By this he gives them to understand, that all these
cautions about eating or touching these creatures was not for any real
uncleanness in them, but only that by diligent observation of these
rules they might learn with greater care to avoid all moral pollutions,
and to keep themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and from
all familiar and intimate converse with notorious sinners.

[Leviticus 11:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">lev 11:45</span></span>

That bringeth you up out of Egypt - This was a reason why they should
chearfully submit to distinguishing laws, who had been so honoured with
distinguishing favours.

[Leviticus 11:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">lev 11:46</span></span>

This is the law - It was so, as long the Mosaic dispensation lasted. But
under the gospel we find it expressly repealed by a voice from heaven,
[Act 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#015). Let us therefore bless
God, that to us every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 12](lev012)

</div>
