<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev020)  [Next](lev022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)

[Leviticus 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 21:1</span></span>

Among his people - None of the priests shall touch the dead body, or
assist at his funeral, or eat of the funeral feast. The reason of this
law is evident, because by such pollution they were excluded from
converse with men, to whom by their function they were to be serviceable
upon all occasions, and from the handling of holy things. And God would
hereby teach them, and in them all successive ministers, that they ought
entirely to give themselves to the service of God. Yea, to renounce all
expressions of natural affection, and all worldly employments, so far as
they are impediments to the discharge of their holy services.

[Leviticus 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 21:2</span></span>

Near to him - Under which general expression his wife seems to be
comprehended, though she be not expressed. And hence it is noted as a
peculiar case, that Ezekiel, who was a priest, was forbidden to mourn
for his wife, [Eze 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#016), &c. These
exceptions God makes in condescension to human infirmity, because in
such cases it was very hard to restrain the affections. But this
allowance concerns only the inferior priest, not the high - priest.

[Leviticus 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 21:3</span></span>

That is nigh him - That is, by nearness not of relation, (for that might
seem a needless addition) but of habitation, one not yet cut off from
the family. For if she was married, she was now of another family, and
under her husband's care in those matters.

[Leviticus 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 21:4</span></span>

Being - Or, seeing he is a chief man, for such not only the high -
priest, but others also of the inferior priests were. He shall not
defile himself for any other person whatsoever. To profane himself -
Because such defilement for the dead did profane him, or make him as a
common person, and consequently unfit to manage his sacred employment.

[Leviticus 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 21:5</span></span>

They shall not make baldness - In funerals, as the Heathens did. Though
I allow them to defile themselves for some of the dead, yet in no case
shall they use these superstitious rites, which also the people were
forbidden to do; but the priests in a more peculiar manner, because they
are by word and example to teach the people their duty.

[Leviticus 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 21:6</span></span>

Holy unto their God - Devoted to God's service, and always prepared for
it, and therefore shall keep themselves from all defilements. The name
of their God - Which they especially bear. The bread of their God - That
is, the shew - bread: or rather, all the other offerings, besides burnt
- offerings: which are called bread, because bread is commonly put for
all food.

[Leviticus 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 21:7</span></span>

Profane - Or defiled, or deflowered, though it were done secretly, or by
force: because the priest must take care that all the members of his
family be free not only from gross wickedness, but from all suspicions
of evil.

[Leviticus 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 21:8</span></span>

Thou - O Moses, and whosoever shall succeed in thy place, to whom it
belongs to see my laws observed, shall take care that the priest be
holy, and do not defile himself by any of these forbidden marriages.

[Leviticus 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 21:9</span></span>

And the daughter - And by analogy his son also, and his wife, because
the reason of the law here added, concerns all. And nothing is more
common than to name one kind for the rest of the same nature, as also is
done [Lev 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006). She profaneth her
father - Exposeth his person and office, and consequently religion, to
contempt.

[Leviticus 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 21:10</span></span>

The garments - Those holy garments, which were peculiar to him. Shall
not uncover his head - This being then the posture of mourners, [Lev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006), though afterwards the custom was
changed and mourners covered their heads, [Sa2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030), [Est
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012). Nor rent his clothes - Another
expression of mourning.

[Leviticus 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 21:11</span></span>

Go in - Into the chamber or house where they lie. This and divers other
rites here prescribed were from hence translated by the Heathens into
their use, whose priests were put under the same obligations.

[Leviticus 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 21:12</span></span>

Out of the sanctuary - To attend the funerals of any person: for upon
other occasions he might and did commonly go out. Nor profane the
sanctuary - Either by the performance of a civility, or by entering into
the sanctuary before the seven days allotted for his cleansing, [Num
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011), were expired. The crown of the
anointing oil - Or, the crown, the golden plate, which is called the
holy crown, [Exo 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#006), and the
anointing oil of his God are upon him. So there is only an ellipsis of
the conjunction and, which is frequent. And these two things, being most
eminent, are put for the rest, as the sign is put for the thing
signified, that is, for he is God's high - priest.

[Leviticus 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 21:13</span></span>

In her virginity - Or, a virgin, partly because as he was a type of
Christ, so his wife was a type of the church, which is compared to a
virgin, and partly for greater caution and assurance that his wife was
not a defiled or deflowered person. Most of these things are forbidden
to all the priests; and here to the high - priest, to shew that he also,
and he especially is obliged to the same cautions.

[Leviticus 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 21:15</span></span>

I the Lord sanctify him - I have separated him from all other men for my
immediate service, and therefore will not have that race corrupted.

[Leviticus 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 21:17</span></span>

Of thy seed - Whether the high priest, or the inferior ones. That hath -
In all successive ages, any defect or excess of parts, any notorious
deformity or imperfection in his body. The reason hereof is partly
typical, that he, might more fully represent Christ, the great high -
priest, who was typified both by the priest and sacrifice, and therefore
both were to be without blemish; partly moral, to teach all Christians
and especially ministers of holy things, what purity and perfection of
heart and life they should labour after, and that notorious blemishes in
the mind or conversation, render a man unfit for the ministry of the
gospel; and partly prudential, because such blemishes were apt to breed
contempt of the person; and consequently, of his function, and of the
holy things wherein he ministered. For which reason, such persons as
have notorious defects or deformities, are still unfit for the ministry
except where there are eminent gifts and graces, which vindicate a man
from the contemptibleness of his bodily presence. The particular
defect's here mentioned, I shall not enlarge upon because some of the
Hebrew words are diversely interpreted, and because the use of these
things being abolished, the knowledge of them is not necessary.

[Leviticus 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 21:18</span></span>

A flat nose - Most restrain this word to the nose, and to some great
deformity relating to it. But according to others, it signifies more
generally, a person that wants some member or members, because the next
word, to which it is opposed, signifies one that hath more members than
he should.

[Leviticus 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 21:21</span></span>

A blemish - Any notorious blemish whereby he is disfigured, though not
here mentioned.

[Leviticus 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 21:22</span></span>

He shall eat - Which a priest having any uncleanness might not do
whereby God would shew the great difference between natural infirmities
sent upon a man by God, and moral defilements which a man brought upon
himself.

[Leviticus 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 21:23</span></span>

To the veil - To the second veil which was between the holy and the most
holy place, to burn incense, to order the shew - bread, and to dress the
lamps, which were nigh unto that veil though without. My altar - The
altar of burnt - offering, which was without the sanctuary. The sense
is, he shall not execute the priest's office, which was to be done in
those two places.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 22](lev022)

</div>
