<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk015)  [Next](luk017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#001)

[Luke 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 16:1</span></span>

And he said also to his disciples - Not only to the scribes and
Pharisees to whom he had hitherto been speaking, but to all the younger
as well as the elder brethren: to the returning prodigals who were now
his disciples. A certain rich man had a steward - Christ here teaches
all that are now in favour with God, particularly pardoned penitents, to
behave wisely in what is committed to them.

[Luke 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 16:3</span></span>

To beg I am ashamed - But not ashamed to cheat! This was likewise a
sense of honour! "By men called honour, but by angels pride."

[Luke 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 16:4</span></span>

I know - That is, I am resolved, what to do.

[Luke 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 16:8</span></span>

And the lord commended the unjust steward - Namely, in this respect,
because he had used timely precaution: so that though the dishonesty of
such a servant be detestable, yet his foresight, care, and contrivance,
about the interests of this life, deserve our imitation, with regard to
the more important affairs of another. The children of this world -
Those who seek no other portion than this world: Are wiser - Not
absolutely, for they are, one and all, egregious fools; but they are
more consistent with themselves; they are truer to their principles;
they more steadily pursue their end; they are wiser in their generation
- That is, in their own way, than the children of light - The children
of God, whose light shines on their hearts.

[Luke 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 16:9</span></span>

And I say to you - Be good stewards even of the lowest talents wherewith
God hath intrusted you. Mammon means riches or money. It is termed the
mammon of unrighteousness, because of the manner wherein it is commonly
either procured or employed. Make yourselves friends of this, by doing
all possible good, particularly to the children of God: that when ye
fail, when your flesh and your heart faileth, when this earthly
tabernacle is dissolved, those of them who have gone before may receive,
may welcome you into the everlasting habitations.

[Luke 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 16:10</span></span>

And whether ye have more or less, see that ye be faithful as well as
wise stewards. He that is faithful in what is meanest of all, worldly
substance, is also faithful in things of a higher nature; and he that
uses these lowest gifts unfaithfully, is likewise unfaithful in
spiritual things.

[Luke 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 16:11</span></span>

Who will intrust you with the true riches? - How should God intrust you
with spiritual and eternal, which alone are true riches?

[Luke 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 16:12</span></span>

If ye have not been faithful in that which was another's - None of these
temporal things are yours: you are only stewards of them, not
proprietors: God is the proprietor of all; he lodges them in your hands
for a season: but still they are his property. Rich men, understand and
consider this. If your steward uses any part of your estate (so called
in the language of men) any farther or any otherwise than you direct, he
is a knave: he has neither conscience nor honour. Neither have you
either one or the other, if you use any part of that estate, which is in
truth God's, not yours, any otherwise than he directs. That which is
your own - Heaven, which when you have it, will be your own for ever.

[Luke 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 16:13</span></span>

And you cannot be faithful to God, if you trim between God and the
world, if you do not serve him alone. [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024).

[Luke 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 16:15</span></span>

And he said to them, Ye are they who justify yourselves before men - The
sense of the whole passage is, that pride, wherewith you justify
yourselves, feeds covetousness, derides the Gospel, [Luk
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#014), and destroys the law, [Luk
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#018). All which is illustrated by a
terrible example. Ye justify yourselves before men - Ye think yourselves
righteous, and persuade others to think you so.

[Luke 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 16:16</span></span>

The law and the prophets were in force until John: from that time the
Gospel takes place; and humble upright men receive it with inexpressible
earnestness. [Mat 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013).

[Luke 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 16:17</span></span>

Not that the Gospel at all destroys the law. [Mat
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018).

[Luke 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 16:18</span></span>

But ye do; particularly in this notorious instance. [Mat
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031); [Mat
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#007).

[Luke 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 16:19</span></span>

There was a certain rich man - Very probably a Pharisee, and one that
justified himself before men; a very honest, as well as honourable
gentleman: though it was not proper to mention his name on this
occasion: who was clothed in purple and fine linen - and doubtless
esteemed on this account, (perhaps not only by those who sold it, but by
most that knew him,) as encouraging trade, and acting according to his
quality: And feasted splendidly every day - And consequently was
esteemed yet more, for his generosity and hospitality in keeping so good
a table.

[Luke 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 16:20</span></span>

And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, (according to the Greek
pronunciation) or Eleazer. By his name it may be conjectured, he was of
no mean family, though it was thus reduced. There was no reason for our
Lord to conceal his name, which probably was then well known.
Theophylact observes, from the tradition of the Hebrews, that he lived
at Jerusalem. Yea, the dogs also came and licked his sores - It seems
this circumstance is recorded to show that all his ulcers lay bare, and
were not closed or bound up.

[Luke 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 16:22</span></span>

And the beggar - Worn out with hunger, and pain, and want of all things,
died: and was carried by angels (amazing change of the scene!) into
Abraham's bosom - So the Jews styled paradise; the place where the souls
of good men remain from death to the resurrection. The rich man also
died, and was buried - Doubtless with pomp enough, though we do not read
of his lying in state; that stupid, senseless pageantry, that shocking
insult on a poor, putrefying carcass, was reserved for our enlightened
age!

[Luke 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 16:23</span></span>

He seeth Abraham afar off - And yet knew him at that distance: and shall
not Abraham's children, when they are together in paradise, know each
other!

[Luke 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 16:24</span></span>

Father Abraham, have mercy on me - It cannot be denied, but here is one
precedent in Scripture of praying to departed saints: but who is it that
prays, and with what success? Will any, who considers this, be fond of
copying after him?

[Luke 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 16:25</span></span>

But Abraham said, Son - According to the flesh. Is it not worthy of
observation, that Abraham will not revile even a damned soul? and shall
living men revile one another? Thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things - Thou didst choose and accept of worldly things as thy good, thy
happiness. And can any be at a loss to know why he was in torments? This
damnable idolatry, had there been nothing more, was enough to sink him
to the nethermost hell.

[Luke 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 16:26</span></span>

Beside this there is a great gulf fixed - Reader, to which side of it
wilt thou go?

[Luke 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 16:28</span></span>

Lest they also come into this place - He might justly fear lest their
reproaches should add to his own torment.

[Luke 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 16:31</span></span>

Neither will they be persuaded - Truly to repent: for this implies an
entire change of heart: but a thousand apparitions cannot, effect this.
God only can, applying his word.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 17](luk017)

</div>
