<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh012)  [Next](est001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#001)

[Nehemiah 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 13:1</span></span>

That day - Not presently after the dedication of the wall and city, but
upon a certain day, when Nehemiah was returned from the Persian court to
Jerusalem, from which he had been absent for some considerable time, in
which some errors and abuses had crept in. Not come - Not be
incorporated into the common - wealth of Israel, nor be joined with any
Israelite in marriage.

[Nehemiah 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 13:3</span></span>

Multitude - All the heathenish people with whom they had contracted
alliance.

[Nehemiah 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 13:4</span></span>

Eliashib - The high - priest. Chamber - Of the chambers, the high -
priest having the chief power over the house of God, and all the
chambers belonging to it. Tobiah - The Ammonite, and a violent enemy to
God's people.

[Nehemiah 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 13:5</span></span>

Prepared - By removing the things out of it, uniting divers small
chambers into one, and furnishing it for the use of Tobiah when he came
to Jerusalem: whom he seems to have lodged there, that he might have
more free communication with him.

[Nehemiah 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 13:6</span></span>

But, &c. - Eliashib took the occasion of my absence to do these things.
Came I - From Jerusalem; where he had been once and again.

[Nehemiah 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 13:8</span></span>

Grieved me - That so sacred a place should be polluted by one who in
many respects ought not to come there, being no priest, a stranger, an
Ammonite, and one of the worst of that people; and that all this should
be done by the permission and order of the high - priest.

[Nehemiah 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 13:10</span></span>

Not given - Which might be either, from this corrupt high - priest
Eliashib, who took their portions, as he did the sacred chambers, to his
own use, or employed them for the entertainment of Tobiah, and his other
great allies. Or, from the people, who either out of covetousness
reserved them to themselves, contrary to their own solemn agreement, or
were so offended at Eliashib's horrid abuse of sacred things, that they
abhorred the offering and service of God, and therefore neglected to
bring in their tithes, which they knew would be perverted to bad uses.
Fled - To his possession in the country, being forced to do so for a
livelihood.

[Nehemiah 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 13:11</span></span>

Contended - I sharply reproved those priests to whom the management of
those things was committed, for neglect of their duty, and breach of
their late solemn promise. Why, &c. - You have not only injured men in
with - holding their dues, but you have occasioned the neglect of God's
house and service. Gathered - To Jerusalem from their several country
possessions. Set - Restored them to the exercise of their office.

[Nehemiah 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 13:12</span></span>

Bought - Out of the respect which they had to Nehemiah, and because they
saw they would now be applied to their proper uses.

[Nehemiah 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 13:13</span></span>

Faithful - By the consent of those who knew them. Such he now sought out
the more diligently, because he had experience of the perfidiousness of
the former trustees.

[Nehemiah 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 13:16</span></span>

Jerusalem - The holy city, where God's house was; and where the great
judicatories of the nation were. So this is added as an aggravation of
their sin, that it was done with manifest contempt of God and man.

[Nehemiah 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 13:17</span></span>

Nobles - Their chief men and rulers; whom he charges with this sin,
because though others did it, it was by their countenance or connivance:
probably too by their example. If the nobles allowed themselves in
recreations, in idle visits and idle talk on the sabbath day, the men of
business would profane it by their worldly employments, as the more
justifiable of the two.

[Nehemiah 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">neh 13:19</span></span>

At the gates - Out of a diffidence in those, to whom the keeping of the
gates was committed.

[Nehemiah 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 13:22</span></span>

Cleanse - Because the work they now were set upon, though common in its
nature, yet was holy in design of it, and had respect unto the sabbath:
and, because the day in which they were to do this was the sabbath -
day, for the observation whereof they were obliged to purify themselves.
Gates - The gates of the city; not daring to trust the common porters,
he commits the charge of them upon the sabbath - days, to the Levites,
to whom the care of sanctifying the sabbath did properly belong. Mercy -
Whereby he intimates, that though he mentioned his good - works, as
things wherewith God was well - pleased, and which he had promised to
reward, yet he neither did, nor durst trust to their merit, or his own
worthiness, but, when he had done all, he judged himself an unprofitable
servant, and one that needed God's infinite mercy to pardon all his
sins, and particularly those infirmities and corruptions which adhered
to his good deeds.

[Nehemiah 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">neh 13:25</span></span>

Cursed - Caused them to be excommunicated and cast out of the society of
God's people. This and the following punishments were justly inflicted
upon them, because this transgression was contrary both to a plain law
of God, and to their own late solemn covenants. Smote - I caused to be
beaten with stripes, according to the law, [Deu
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#002), such whose faults were most
aggravated; to whom he added this punishment over and above the former.
Plucked off - Or, shaved them. The hair was an ensign of liberty among
the eastern nations; and baldness was a disgrace, and token of slavery
and sorrow.

[Nehemiah 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">neh 13:28</span></span>

And one, &c. - Said by Josephus to be that Manasses, who by Sanballat's
interest procured liberty to build the Samaritan temple in mount
Gerizim; to which those priests who had married strange wives, or been
otherwise criminal, betook themselves, and with, or after them, others
of the people in the same or like circumstances. Chased - From my
presence and court, from the city and temple, and from the congregation
and church of Israel.

[Nehemiah 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">neh 13:31</span></span>

For good - This may well be the summary of our petitions. We need no
more to make us happy but this.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 1](est001)

</div>
