<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num004)  [Next](num006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#001)

[Numbers 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 5:3</span></span>

That they defile not the camp - By which God would intimate the danger
of being made guilty by other mens sins, and the duty of avoiding
intimate converse with wicked men. I dwell - By my special and gracious
presence.

[Numbers 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 5:6</span></span>

Any sin that men commit - Heb. any sins of men, that is, sins against
men, as deceits or wrongs, whereby other men are injured, of which he
manifestly speaks. Against the Lord - Which words may be added, to shew
that such injuries done to men are also sins against God, who hath
commanded justice to men, as well as religion to himself. Guilty - That
is, shall be sensible of his guilt, convicted in his conscience.

[Numbers 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 5:7</span></span>

They shall confess their sin - They shall not continue in the denial of
the fact, but give glory to God, and take shame to themselves by
acknowledging it. The principal - That is, the thing he took away, or
what is equivalent to it. And add - Both as a compensation to the
injured person for the want of his goods so long, and as a penalty upon
the injurious dealer, to discourage others from such attempts.

[Numbers 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 5:8</span></span>

No kinsman - This supposes the person injured to be dead or gone, into
some unknown place, and the person injured to be known to the injurer.
To the priest - Whom God appointed as his deputy to receive his dues,
and take them to his own use, that so he might more chearfully and
entirely devote himself to the ministration of holy things. This is an
additional explication to that law, [Lev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002), and for the sake thereof it seems
here to be repeated.

[Numbers 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 5:9</span></span>

Unto the priest - To offer by his hands.

[Numbers 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 5:10</span></span>

Every man's hallowed things - Understand this not of the sacrifices,
because these were not the priest's peculiar, but part of them was
offered to God, and the remainder was eaten by the offerer as well as by
the priest; but of such other things as were devoted to God, and could
not be offered in sacrifice; as suppose a man consecrated an house to
the Lord, this was to be the priest's.

[Numbers 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 5:12</span></span>

If a man's wife - This law was given partly to deter wives from
adulterous practices, and partly to secure wives against the rage of
their hard - hearted husbands, who otherwise might upon mere suspicions
destroy them, or at least put them away. There was not like fear of
inconveniences to the husband from the jealousy, of the wife, who had
not that authority and power, and opportunity for the putting away or
killing the husband, as the husband had over the wife. Go aside - From
the way of religion and justice, and that either in truth, or in her
husband's opinion.

[Numbers 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 5:15</span></span>

The man shall bring her to the priest - Who first strove to persuade her
to own the truth. If she did, she was not put to death, (which must have
been, if it had been proved against her) but only was divorced and lost
her dowry. Her offering - By way of solemn appeal to God, whom hereby
she desired to judge between her and her husband, and by way of
atonement to appease God, who had for her sins stirred up her husband
against her. He shall pour no oil - Both because it was a kind of sin -
offering, from which these were excluded, and because she came thither
as a delinquent, or suspected of delinquency, unpleasing both to God and
men; as one that wanted that grace and amiableness and joy which oil
signified, and that acceptance with God which frankincense denoted, [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002). Bringing iniquity to
remembrance - Both to God before whom she appeared as a sinner, and to
her own conscience, if she was guilty; and, if she were not guilty of
this, yet it reminded her of her other sins, for which this might be a
punishment.

[Numbers 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 5:16</span></span>

Before the Lord - That is, before the sanctuary where the ark was.

[Numbers 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 5:17</span></span>

Holy water - Water of purification appointed for such uses. This was
used, that if she were guilty, she might be afraid to add profaneness to
her other crime. An earthen vessel - Because, after this use, it was to
be broken in pieces, that the remembrance of it might be blotted out as
far as was possible. Dust - An emblem of vileness and misery. From the
floor of the tabernacle - Which made it holy dust, and struck the
greater terror into the woman, if she were guilty.

[Numbers 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 5:18</span></span>

Before the Lord - Before the tabernacle with her face towards the ark.
Uncover her head - Partly that she might be made sensible how manifest
she and all her ways were to God; partly in token of her sorrow for her
sin, or at least for any cause of suspicion which she had given. In her
hands - That she herself might offer it, and thereby call God to be
witness of her innocency. Bitter - So called either from the bitter
taste which the dust gave it, or from the bitter effects of it upon her,
if she were guilty. That causeth the curse - Not by any natural power,
but by a supernatural efficacy.

[Numbers 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 5:19</span></span>

By an oath - To answer truly to his question, or to declare whether she
be guilty or no, and after such oath shall say as follows.

[Numbers 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 5:21</span></span>

An oath - That is, a form of cursing, that when they would curse a
person, they may wish that they may be as miserable as thou wast. Thy
thigh - A modest expression, used both in scripture, as [Gen
46:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026), [Exo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#005), and other authors. To rot - Heb.
to fall, that is, to die or waste away. To swell - Suddenly and
violently till it burst, which the Jews note was frequent in this case.
And it was a clear evidence of the truth of their religion.

[Numbers 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 5:22</span></span>

Amen, amen - That is, so let it be if I be guilty. The word is doubled
by her as an evidence of her innocency, and ardent desire that God would
deal with her according to her desert.

[Numbers 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 5:23</span></span>

In a book - That is, in a scroll of parchment, which the Hebrews
commonly call a book. Blot them out - Or scrape them out and cast them
into the bitter water. Whereby it was signified, that if she was
innocent, the curses should be blotted out and come to nothing; and, if
she were guilty, she should find in her the effects of this water which
she drank, after the words of this curse had been scraped and put in.

[Numbers 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 5:24</span></span>

To drink - That is, after the jealousy - offering was offered.

[Numbers 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 5:28</span></span>

Conceive seed - That is, shall bring forth children, as the Jews say, in
case of her innocency, she infallibly did, yea though she was barren
before.

[Numbers 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 5:31</span></span>

Guiltless - Which he should not have been, if he had either indulged her
in so great a wickedness, and not endeavoured to bring her to repentance
or punishment, or cherished suspicions in his breast, and thereupon
proceeded to hate her or cast her off. Whereas now, whatsoever the
consequence is, the husband shall not be censured for bringing such
curses upon her, or for defaming her, if she appear to be innocent. Her
iniquity - That is, the punishment of her iniquity, whether she was
false to her husband, or by any light carriage gave him occasion to
suspect her.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 6](num006)

</div>
