<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num034)  [Next](num036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)

[Numbers 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 35:3</span></span>

For the cattle - For pasturage for their cattle: where they might not
build houses, nor plant gardens, orchards or vineyards, no nor sow corn,
for which they were abundantly provided out of the first - fruits. And
these suburbs did not belong to the Levites in common, but were
distributed to them in convenient proportions.

[Numbers 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 35:4</span></span>

A thousand cubits - In the next verse it is two thousand. But this verse
and the next do not speak to the same thing; this speaks of the space
from whence the suburbs shall be measured, the next speaks of the space
unto which that measure shall be extended; and the words may very well
be read thus. And the suburbs - Shall be from the wall of the city and
from without it, or, from the outward parts of it, even from a thousand
cubits round about. Which are mentioned not as the thing measured, but
as the space from which the measuring line should begin. And then it
follows, [Num 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#005). And ye shall
measure from without the city, (not from the wall of the city, as said
before [Num 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#004), but from without it,
that is, from the said outward space of a thousand cubits without the
wall of the city round about) on the east side two thousand cubits. So
in truth there were three thousand cubits from the wall of the city,
whereof one thousand probably were for out - houses, stalls for cattle,
gardens, vineyards and olive - yards, and the other two thousand for
pasture, which are therefore called the field of the suburbs, [Lev
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#034), by way of distinction from the
suburbs themselves, which consist of the first thousand cubits from the
wall of the city.

[Numbers 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 35:6</span></span>

Cities for refuge - Or, of escape for manslayers: And these cities are
assigned among the Levites, partly because they might be presumed to be
the most proper and impartial judges between man - slayers, and wilful
murderers; partly because their presence and authority would more
effectually bridle the passions of the avenger of blood who might pursue
him thither; and perhaps to signify, that it is only in Christ (whom the
Levitical priests represented) that sinners find refuge and safety from
the destroyer.

[Numbers 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 35:11</span></span>

Unawares - Not wilfully, designedly or maliciously, but through mistake
or indiscretion.

[Numbers 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 35:12</span></span>

From the avenger - Heb. from the redeemer, or, from the next kinsman, to
whom by the law belonged the right of redemption of the lands of; and
vindication of the injury done to, the person deceased. Die not - Be not
killed by the avenger meeting him in some other place. Before the
congregation - Before the judges or elders who were appointed in every
city for the decision of criminal causes, who were to examine, and that
publickly before the people, whether the murder was wilful or casual.

[Numbers 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 35:14</span></span>

On this side Jordan - Because that land was as long as Canaan, though
not so broad, and besides these might be convenient for many of them
that lived in Canaan.

[Numbers 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 35:16</span></span>

If he smite him - Wittingly and wilfully, though not with premeditated
malice. He shall be put to death - Yea though he were fled into the city
of refuge.

[Numbers 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 35:19</span></span>

He shall slay him - Either by himself, as the following words shew; so
it is a permission, that he may do it without offence to God or danger
to himself: or by the magistrate, from whom he shall demand justice: so
it is a command.

[Numbers 35:24](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 35:24</span></span>

Then - If the man - slayer flee to to the city of refuge.

[Numbers 35:26](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 35:26</span></span>

He shall abide in it - Be confined to it, partly to shew the hatefulness
of murder in God's account by so severe a punishment, inflicted upon the
very appearance of it, and partly for the security of the man - slayer,
lest the presence of such a person, and his conversation among the
kindred of the deceased, might occasion reproach and blood - shed. The
death of the high - priest - Perhaps to shew that the death of Christ
(the true High - priest, whom the others represented) is the only means
whereby sins are pardoned and sinners set at liberty.

[Numbers 35:27](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 35:27</span></span>

Not guilty - Not liable to punishment from men, though not free of guilt
before God. This God ordained to oblige the man - slayer to abide in his
city of refuge.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 36](num036)

</div>
