<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num023)  [Next](num025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#001)

[Numbers 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 24:1</span></span>

At other times - In former times. Toward the wilderness - Where Israel
lay encamped, expecting what God of his own accord would suggest to him
concerning this matter.

[Numbers 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 24:2</span></span>

Came upon him - Inspired him to speak the following words.

[Numbers 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 24:3</span></span>

Whose eyes are open - Heb. Who had his eyes shut, but now open. The eyes
of his mind, which God had opened in a peculiar and prophetical manner,
whence prophets are called Seers, [Sa1
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009). It implies that before he was
blind and stupid, having eyes, but not seeing nor understanding.

[Numbers 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 24:4</span></span>

The vision - So called properly, because he was awake when this was
revealed to him: A trance - Or, extasy, fainting and falling upon the
ground, as the prophets used to do.

[Numbers 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 24:6</span></span>

As the valleys - Which often from a small beginning are spread forth far
and wide. As gardens - Pleasant and fruitful and secured by a fence. As
lign - aloes - An Arabian and Indian tree of a sweet smell, yielding
shade and shelter both to man and beast; such is Israel, not only safe
themselves, but yielding shelter to all that join themselves to them.
Which the Lord hath planted - Nature, not art.

[Numbers 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 24:7</span></span>

He shall pour the water - That is. God will abundantly water the
valleys, gardens, and trees, which represent the Israelites; he will
wonderfully bless his people, not only with outward blessings, of which
a chief one in those parts was plenty of water, but also with higher
gifts and graces, with his word and spirit, which are often signified by
water, and at last with eternal life, the contemplation whereof made
Balaam desire to die the death of the righteous. His seed shall be in
many waters - This also may be literally understood of their seed, which
shall be sown in waterish ground, and therefore bring forth a better
increase. His King - That is, the King of Israel, or their chief
governor. Than Agag - Than the King of the Amalekites, which King and
people were famous and potent in that age, as may be guessed by their
bold attempt upon so numerous a people as Israel. And it is probable,
that Agag was the common name of the Amalekitish Kings, as Abimelech was
of the Philistines, and Pharaoh of the Egyptians, and Caesar of the
Romans.

[Numbers 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 24:9</span></span>

He lay down - Having conquered his enemies the Canaanites, and their
land, he shall quietly rest and settle himself there.

[Numbers 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 24:11</span></span>

The Lord - Whose commands thou hast preferred before my desires and
interest; and therefore seek thy recompence from him, and not from me.

[Numbers 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 24:17</span></span>

I shall see him - Or, I have seen, or do see the star, and sceptre as it
here follows, that is, a great and eminent prince, which was to come out
of Israel's loins, the Messiah, as both Jewish and Christian
interpreters expound it, who most eminently and fully performed what is
here said, in destroying the enemies of Israel or of God's church, here
described under the names of the nearest and fiercest enemies of Israel:
And to him alone agrees the foregoing verb properly, I shall see him, in
my own person, as every eye shall see him, when he comes to judgment.
Not now - Not yet, but after many ages. A star - A title often given to,
princes and eminent persons, and particularly to the Messiah, [Rev
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028), [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016). A sceptre - That is, a sceptre
- bearer, a king or ruler, even that sceptre mentioned [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010). The corners - The borders,
which are often used in scripture for the whole country to which they
belong. Of Sheth - This seems to be the name of some then eminent,
though now unknown place or prince in Moab; there being innumerable
instances of such places or persons sometime famous, but now utterly
lost as to all monuments and remembrances of them.

[Numbers 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 24:18</span></span>

A possession - Which was also foretold, [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023), and in part fulfilled, [Sa2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014); [Ch1
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#013), but more fully by Christ, [Amo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012); [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018), who shall subdue and possess all
his enemies; here signified by the name of Edom, as Jacob or Israel, his
brother, signifies all his church and people. Seir - A part and,
mountain of Edom.

[Numbers 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 24:19</span></span>

Out of Jacob - Out of Jacob's loins. He that shall have dominion -
David, and especially Christ. Of the city - Or from or out of this city,
that is, the cities, the singular number for the plural. He shall not
subdue those Moabites and Edomites which meet him in the field, but he
shall pursue them even to their strongest holds and cities.

[Numbers 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 24:20</span></span>

He looked on Amalek - From the top of Pisgah, which was exceeding high,
and gave him the prospect of part of all these kingdoms. The first -
Heb. the firstfruits; so called either, because they were the first of
all the neighbouring nations which were embodied together in one
government: or, because he was the first who fought against Israel and
was vanquished by them. That victory was an earnest and first - fruit of
the large harvest of victories which the Israelites should in due time
get over all their enemies. He shall perish for ever - He began with God
and with Israel, but God will end with him, and the firm purpose of God
is, that he shall be utterly destroyed; so that Saul lost his kingdom
for not executing this decree, and God's command pursuant thereunto.

[Numbers 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 24:21</span></span>

The Kenites - The posterity or kindred of Jethro; not that part of them
which dwelt among the Israelites, to whom the following words do not
agree, but those of them who were mingled with the Amalekites and
Midianites. Thy nest - Thy dwelling - place, so called, either because
it was in an high place, as nests commonly are: or in allusion to their
name, for ken in Hebrew signifies a nest.

[Numbers 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 24:22</span></span>

The Kenite - Heb. Kain, that is, the Kenite, so called, either by a
transposition of letters, which is very usual in the Hebrew tongue; or
from the name of some eminent place where they lived, or person from
whom they were descended, though now the memory of them be utterly lost,
as it hath fared with innumerable other places and persons, famous in
their generations, mentioned in ancient Heathen writers. Shall be wasted
- Shall be by degrees diminished by the incursions of divers enemies,
till at last the Assyrian comes to compleat the work and carries them
into captivity. For the Kenites who lived partly among the ten tribes,
and partly with the two tribes, were carried captive with them, part by
Salmaneser, the King of Assyria, and part by Nebuchadnezzar, who also is
called an Assyrian, [Ezr 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#022); [Isa
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#004).

[Numbers 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 24:23</span></span>

Who shall live - How calamitous and miserable will the state of the
world be, when the Assyrian, and after him the Chaldean, shall over -
turn all these parts of the world? Who will be able to keep his heart
from fainting under such grievous pressures? Nay, how few will escape
the destroying sword?

[Numbers 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 24:24</span></span>

Chittim - A place or people so called from Chittim the son of Javan,
[Gen 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004), whose posterity were very
numerous, and were first seated in the lesser Asia, and from thence sent
forth colonies into the islands of the Aegean sea, and into Cyprus,
afterwards into Macedonia and other parts of Greece, and then into
Italy. Whence it comes to pass that by this name is understood sometimes
Macedonia, as 1Mac. i. 1, and 1Mac. viii. 5, sometimes Italy, as [Dan
11:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#029), and sometimes both, as in
this place: for he speaks here of the scourge that God hath appointed
for the Assyrian after he had done God's work in punishing of his people
and the bordering nations. Now although the Assyrian and Chaldean empire
was subdued by the Medes and Persians, yet the chief afflictions of that
people came from two hands, both beyond the sea and brought to them by
ships; first from the Grecians under Alexander and his successors, by
whom that people were grievously oppressed and wasted; then from the
Romans, who subdued all the Grecian empire, one great part whereof were
the Assyrians largely so called. Eber - The posterity of Eber, the
Hebrews, who were the chief and flower of Eber's children. He also - Not
the Hebrews: they shall have a better end; all Israel shall be saved;
but the afflicter or scourge of Ashur and Eber, namely, the Grecian and
Roman empire. Thus Balaam, instead of cursing the church, curses Amalek,
the first, and Rome, the last enemy of it!

[Numbers 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 24:25</span></span>

To his place - To Mesopotamia; tho' afterwards he returned to the
Midianites, and gave them that devilish counsel which was put in
practice, [Num 25:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#016).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 25](num025)

</div>
