<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num019)  [Next](num021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)

[Numbers 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 20:1</span></span>

Then - To wit, after many stations and long journeys here omitted, but
particularly described, Num. 33:1-49. Zin - A place near the land of
Edom, distinct and distant from that Sin, [Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001). The first month - Of the
fortieth year, as is evident, because the next station to this was in
mount Hor, where Aaron died, who died in the fifth month of the fortieth
year, [Num 33:38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#038). Moses doth not give
us an exact journal of all occurrences in the wilderness, but only of
those which were most remarkable, and especially of those which happened
in the first and second, and in the fortieth year. Miriam died - Four
months before Aaron, and but a few more before Moses.

[Numbers 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 20:2</span></span>

No water - Which having followed them through all their former journeys,
began to fail them here, because they were now come near countries,
where waters might be had by ordinary means, and therefore God would not
use extraordinary, lest he should seem to prostitute the honour of
miracles. This story, though like that, [Exo
17:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001), is different from it, as
appears by divers circumstances. It is a great mercy, to have plenty of
water; a mercy which if we found the want of, we should own the worth
of.

[Numbers 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 20:3</span></span>

Before the Lord - Suddenly, rather than to die such a lingering death.
Their sin was much greater than that of their parents, because they
should have taken warning by their miscarriages, and by the terrible
effects of them, which their eyes had seen.

[Numbers 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 20:8</span></span>

The rod - That which was laid up before the Lord in the tabernacle;
whether it was Aaron's rod, which was laid up there, [Num
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#010), or Moses's rod by which he
wrought so many miracles. For it is likely, that wonder - working rod,
was laid up in some part of the tabernacle, though not in or near the
ark, where Aaron's blossoming rod was put.

[Numbers 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 20:9</span></span>

From before the Lord - Out of the tabernacle.

[Numbers 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 20:12</span></span>

Ye believed me not - But shewed your infidelity: which they did, either
by smiting the rock, and that twice, which is emphatically noted, as if
he doubted whether once smiting would have done it, whereas he was not
commanded to smite so much as once, but only to speak to it: or by the
doubtfulness of these words, [Num
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#010). Must we fetch water out of the
rock? which implies a suspicion of it, whereas they should have spoken
positively and confidently to the rock to give forth water. And yet they
did not doubt of the power of God, but of his will, whether he would
gratify these rebels with this farther miracle, after so many of the
like kind. To sanctify me - To give me the glory of my power in doing
this miracle, and of my truth in punctually fulfilling my promise, and
of my goodness in doing it notwithstanding the peoples perverseness. In
the eyes of Israel - This made their sin scandalous to the Israelites,
who of themselves were too prone to infidelity; to prevent the
contagion, God leaves a monument of his displeasure upon them, and
inflicts a punishment as publick as their sin.

[Numbers 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 20:13</span></span>

Meribah - That is, strife. In them - Or, among them, the children of
Israel, by the demonstration of his omnipotency, veracity, and clemency
towards the Israelites, and of his impartial holiness and severity
against sin even in his greatest friends and favourites.

[Numbers 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 20:14</span></span>

All the travel - All the wanderings and afflictions of our parents and
of us their children, which doubtless have come to thine ears.

[Numbers 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 20:16</span></span>

An Angel - The Angel of the Covenant, who first appeared to Moses in the
bush, and afterward in the cloudy pillar, who conducted Moses and the
people out of Egypt, and through the wilderness. For though Moses may be
called an angel or messenger yet it is not probable that he is meant,
partly because Moses was the person that sent this message; and partly
because another angel above Moses conducted them, and the mention hereof
to the Edomites, was likely to give more authority to their present
message. In Kadesh - Near, the particle in being so often used.

[Numbers 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 20:17</span></span>

The wells - Or, pits, which any of you have digged for your private use,
not without paying for it, [Num 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#019),
but only of the waters of common rivers, which are free to all
passengers. No man's property ought to be invaded, under colour of
religion. Dominion is founded in providence, not in Grace.

[Numbers 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 20:18</span></span>

By me - Through my country: I will not suffer thee to do so: which was
an act of policy, to secure themselves from so numerous an host.

[Numbers 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 20:19</span></span>

Said - That is, their messengers replied what here follows.

[Numbers 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 20:23</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron - So these two dear brothers
must part! Aaron must die first: but Moses is not likely to be long
after him. So that it is only for a while, a little while, that they are
separated.

[Numbers 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 20:24</span></span>

Because they rebelled - This was one but not the only reason. God would
not have Moses and Aaron to carry the people into Canaan, for this
reason also, to signify the insufficiency of the Mosaical law and
Aaronical priesthood to make them perfectly happy, and the necessity of
a better, and to keep the Israelites from resting in them, so as to be
taken off from their expectation of Christ.

[Numbers 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 20:26</span></span>

His garments - His priestly garments, in token of his resignation of his
office. Put them on Eleazar - By way of admission and inauguration to
his office.

[Numbers 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 20:27</span></span>

In the sight of all the congregation - That their hearts might be more
affected with their loss of so great a pillar, and that they all might
be witnesses of the translation of the priesthood from Aaron to Eleazar.

[Numbers 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 20:28</span></span>

And Moses stript Aaron - And Death will strip us. Naked we came into the
world: naked we must go out. We shall see little reason to be proud of
our cloaths, our ornaments, or marks of honour, if we consider how soon
death will strip us of all our glory, and take the crown off from our
head! Aaron died there - He died in Mosera, [Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006). Mosera was the general name of
the place where that station was, and mount Hor a particular place in
it. Presently after he was stript of his priestly garments, he laid him
down and died. A good man would desire, if it were the will of God, not
to outlive his usefulness. Why should we covet to continue any longer in
this world, than while we may do God and our generation some service?

[Numbers 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 20:29</span></span>

Saw - Understood by the relation of Moses and Eleazar, and by other
signs. Thirty days - The time of publick and solemn mourning for great
persons.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 21](num021)

</div>
