<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num007)  [Next](num009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001)

[Numbers 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 8:2</span></span>

When thou lightest the lamps - The priests lighted the middle lamp from
the fire of the altar; and the rest one from another; signifying that
all light and knowledge comes from Christ, who has the seven spirits of
God, figured by the seven lamps of fire. Over against the candlestick -
On that part which is before the candlestick, Heb. over against the face
of the candlestick - That is, in that place towards which the
candlestick looked, or where the candlestick stood in full view, that
is, upon the north - side, where the table of shew - bread stood, as
appears from hence, because the candlestick stood close to the boards of
the sanctuary on the south - side, [Exo
26:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#035). And thus the lights were on
both sides of the sanctuary, which was necessary, because it was dark in
itself, and had no window.

[Numbers 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 8:4</span></span>

Of beaten gold - Not hollow, but solid gold, beaten out of one piece,
not of several pieces joined or soldered together.

[Numbers 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 8:7</span></span>

Of purifying - Heb. of sin, that is, for the expiation of sin. This
water was mixed with the ashes of a red heifer, [Num
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009), which therefore may seem to have
been prescribed before, though it be mentioned after; such kind of
transplacings of passages being frequent in scripture. Shave all their
flesh - This external rite signified the cutting off their inordinate
desire of earthly things and that singular purity of heart and life
which is required in the ministers of God.

[Numbers 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 8:8</span></span>

A young bullock - The same sacrifice which was offered for a sin -
offering for the whole congregation, because the Levites came in the
stead of all the first - born, who did in a manner represent the whole
congregation.

[Numbers 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 8:10</span></span>

The children of Israel - Not all of them, which was impossible, but some
in the name of all the princes or chiefs of each tribe, who used to
transact things in the name of their tribes. Put their hands - Whereby
they signified their transferring that right of ministering to God from
the first - born in whose hands it formerly was, to the Levites, and
their entire resignation and dedication of them to God's service.

[Numbers 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 8:11</span></span>

For an offering - Heb. for a wave - offering. Not that Aaron did so wave
them, which he could not do, but that he caused them to imitate that
motion, and to wave themselves toward the several parts of the world:
whereby they might signify their readiness to serve God, according to
their capacity wheresoever they should be.

[Numbers 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 8:12</span></span>

Lay their hands - To signify that they were offered by them and for
them.

[Numbers 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 8:13</span></span>

Set the Levites before Aaron - Give the Levites to them, or to their
service. Unto the Lord - For to him they were first properly offered,
and by him given to the priests in order to his service.

[Numbers 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 8:15</span></span>

Go in - Into the court, where they were to wait upon the priests at the
altar of burnt - offering; and, at present, into the tabernacle, to take
it down and set it up.

[Numbers 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 8:19</span></span>

To do the service of Israel - To serve God in their stead, to do what
otherwise they had been obliged to do in their own persons. To make an
atonement - Not by offering sacrifices, which the priests alone might
do, but by assisting the priests in that expiatory work, and by a
diligent performance of all the parts of their office, whereby God was
pleased both with them and with the people. That there be no plague -
This is added as a reason why God appointed them to serve in the
tabernacle, that they might guard it, and not suffer any of the people
to come near it, or meddle with holy things, which if they did, it would
certainly bring a plague upon them.

[Numbers 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 8:26</span></span>

In the tabernacle - By way of advice, and assistance in lesser and
easier works.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 9](num009)

</div>
