<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num015)  [Next](num017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

[Numbers 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 16:1</span></span>

The son of Izhar - Amram's brother, [Exo
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018), therefore Moses and he were
cousin germans. Moreover, Izhar was the second son of Kohath, whereas
Elizaphan, whom Moses had preferred before him, and made prince or ruler
of the Kohathites, [Num 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#030), was the
son of Uzziel, the fourth son of Kohath. This, the Jewish writers say,
made him malcontent, which at last broke forth into sedition. Sons of
Reuben - These are drawn into confederacy with Korah, partly because
they were his next neighbours, both being encamped on the south - side,
partly in hopes to recover their rights of primogeniture, in which the
priesthood was comprehended, which was given away from their father.

[Numbers 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 16:2</span></span>

Rose up - That is, conspired together, and put their design in
execution. Before Moses - Not obscurely, but openly and boldly, not
fearing nor regarding the presence of Moses.

[Numbers 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 16:3</span></span>

They - Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and the rest, who were all together
when Moses spake those words, [Num
16:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#005), but after that, Dathan and
Abiram retired to their tents, and then Moses sent for Korah and the
Levites, who had more colourable pretences to the priesthood, and treats
with them apart, and speaks what is mentioned, [Num
16:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#008). Having dispatched them, he
sends for Dathan and Abiram, [Num
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012), that he might reason the case
with them also apart. Against Aaron - To whom the priesthood was
confined, and against Moses, both because this was done by his order,
and because before Aaron's consecration Moses appropriated it to
himself. For whatever they intended, they seem not now directly to
strike at Moses for his supreme civil government, but only for his
influence in the disposal of the priesthood. Ye take too much - By
perpetuating the priesthood in yourselves and family, with the exclusion
of all others from it. All are holy - A kingdom of priests, an holy
nation, as they are called, [Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006),
a people separated to the service of God, and therefore no less fit to
offer sacrifice and incense, than you are. Among them - By his
tabernacle and cloud, the tokens of his gracious presence, and therefore
ready to receive sacrifices from their own hands. Ye - Thou Moses, by
prescribing what laws thou pleasest about the priesthood, and confining
it to thy brother; and thou Aaron by usurping it as thy peculiar
privilege.

[Numbers 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 16:4</span></span>

On his face - Humbly begging that God would direct and vindicate him.
Accordingly God answers his prayers, and strengthens him with new
courage, and confidence of success.

[Numbers 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 16:5</span></span>

To - morrow - Heb. In the morning, the time appointed by men for
administering justice, and chosen by God for that work. Some time is
allowed, partly that Korah and his company might prepare themselves and
their censers, and partly to give them space for consideration and
repentance. He will cause him - He will by some evident token declare
his approbation of him and his ministry.

[Numbers 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 16:8</span></span>

Ye sons of Levi - They were of his own tribe, nay, they were of God's
tribe. It was therefore the worse in them thus to mutiny against God and
against him.

[Numbers 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 16:9</span></span>

To minister to them - So they were the servants both of God and of the
church, which was an high dignity, though not sufficient for their
ambitious minds.

[Numbers 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 16:11</span></span>

Against the Lord - Whose chosen servant Aaron is. You strike at God
through Aaron's sides.

[Numbers 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 16:12</span></span>

Dathan and Abiram - To treat with them and give them, as he had done
Korah and his company, a timely admonition. Come up - To Moses's
tabernacle, whither the people used to go up for judgment. Men are said
in scripture phrase to go up to places of judgment.

[Numbers 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 16:14</span></span>

These men - Of all the people who are of our mind: wilt thou make them
blind, or persuade them that they do not see what is visible to all that
have eyes, to wit, that thou hast deceived them, and broken thy faith
and promise given to them?

[Numbers 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 16:15</span></span>

Respect not their offering - Accept not their incense which they are now
going to offer, but shew some eminent dislike of it. He calls it their
offering, though it was offered by Korah and his companions, because it
was offered in the name and by the consent of all the conspirators, for
the decision of the present controversy between them and Moses. I have
not hurt one of them - I have never injured them, nor used my power to
defraud or oppress them, as I might have done; I have done them many
good offices, but no hurt: therefore their crime is without any cause or
provocation.

[Numbers 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 16:16</span></span>

Before the Lord - Not in the tabernacle, which was not capable of so
many persons severally offering incense, but at the door of the
tabernacle, where they might offer it by Moses's direction upon this
extraordinary occasion. This work could not be done in that place, which
alone was allowed for the offering up of incense; not only for its
smallness, but also because none but priests might enter to do this
work. Here also the people, who were to be instructed by this
experiment, might see the proof and success of it.

[Numbers 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 16:18</span></span>

Fire - Taken from the altar which stood in that place, for Aaron might
not use other fire. And it is likely the rememberance of the death of
Nadab and Abihu deterred them from offering any strange fire.

[Numbers 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 16:19</span></span>

Against them - That they might be witnesses of the event, and, upon
their success, which they doubted not of, might fall upon Moses and
Aaron. And it seems by this that the people were generally incensed
against Moses, and inclined to Korah's side. The glory appeared - In the
cloud, which then shone with greater brightness and majesty, as a token
of God's approach and presence.

[Numbers 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 16:22</span></span>

The spirits - And this is no empty title here, but very emphatical. Thou
art the maker of spirits, destroy not thy own workmanship! O thou who
art the preserver of men, and of their spirits, the Lord of spirits,
[Job 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#010), who as thou mayst justly
destroy this people, so thou canst preserve whom thou pleasest: the
father of spirits, the souls. Deal mercifully with thy own children: the
searcher of spirits, thou canst distinguish between those who have
maliciously railed this tumult, and those whose ignorance and simple
credulity hath made them a prey to crafty seducers. Of all flesh - Of
all mankind: the word flesh is often put for men. One man - Korah, the
ringleader of this sedition.

[Numbers 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 16:24</span></span>

The congregation - Whom for your sakes I will spare upon the condition
following.

[Numbers 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 16:25</span></span>

Unto Dathan - Because they refused to come to him. The elders - The
seventy rulers, whom he carried with him for the greater solemnity of
the action, and to encourage them in their work, notwithstanding the
obstinate and untractable nature of the people they were to govern.

[Numbers 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 16:27</span></span>

Stood in the door - An argument of their foolish confidence, obstinacy
and impenitency, whereby they declared that they neither feared God, nor
reverenced man.

[Numbers 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 16:28</span></span>

All these works - As the bringing of the people out of Egypt; the
conducting of them through the wilderness; the exercising authority
among them; and giving laws to them concerning the priesthood.

[Numbers 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 16:29</span></span>

The death of all men - By a natural death. The visitation of all men -
By plague, or sword, or some usual judgment. The Lord hath not sent me -
I am content that you take me for an imposter, falsely pretending to be
sent of God.

[Numbers 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 16:32</span></span>

All that appertained unto Korah - That is, all his family which were
there, women, children, and servants; but his sons, who were spared,
[Num 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#011), [Num
26:58](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#058); [Ch1
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#022), [Ch1
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#037), were absent either upon some
service of the tabernacle, or upon some other occasion, God so ordering
it by his providence either because they disliked their fathers act, or
upon Moses's intercession for them. This expression may intimate, that
Korah himself was not here, but that he continued with his two hundred
and fifty men before the Lord, where they were waiting for God's
decision of the controversy. Nor is it probable that their chief captain
would desert them, and leave them standing there without an head,
especially, when Aaron his great adversary, abode there still, and did
not go with Moses to Dathan. And Korah may seem to have been consumed
with those two hundred and fifty. And so much is intimated, [Num
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#040), that no stranger come near to
offer incense before the Lord, that he be not as Korah, and as his
company, that is, destroyed, as they were, by fire from the Lord. And
when the Psalmist relates this history, [Psa
106:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#017), the earth's swallowing them
up is confined to Dathan and Abiram, [Psa
106:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#017), and for all the rest of that
conspiracy it is added, [Psa 106:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#018).
And a fire was kindled in their company, the flame burnt up the wicked.

[Numbers 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 16:33</span></span>

Into the pit - Into the earth, which first opened itself to receive
them, and then shut itself to destroy them.

[Numbers 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 16:35</span></span>

From the Lord - From the cloud, wherein the glory of the Lord appeared.

[Numbers 16:37](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">num 16:37</span></span>

To Eleazer - Rather than to Aaron, partly because the troublesome part
of the work was more proper for him, and partly lest Aaron should be
polluted by going amongst those dead carcasses; for it is probable this
fire consumed them, as lightning sometimes doth, others, by taking away
their lives, and leaving their bodies dead upon the place. Out of the
burning - From among the dead bodies of those men who were burnt. Yonder
- Far from the altar and sanctuary, into an unclean place, where the
ashes were wont to be cast: by which God shews his rejection on of their
services. They are hallowed - By God's appointment, because they were
presented before the Lord by his express order, [Num
16:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#016).

[Numbers 16:38](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 16:38</span></span>

Their own souls - That is, their own lives: who were the authors of
their own destruction. The altar - Of burnt - offerings, which was made
of wood, but covered with brass before this time, [Exo
27:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001), to which this other covering
was added for farther ornament, and security against the fire,
continually burning upon it. A sign - A warning to all strangers to take
heed of invading the priesthood.

[Numbers 16:40](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 16:40</span></span>

To him - To Eleazer. These words belong to [Num
16:38](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#038), the meaning is, that Eleazer
did as God bade him.

[Numbers 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 16:41</span></span>

On the morrow - Prodigious wickedness and madness so soon to forget such
a terrible instance of Divine vengeance! The people of the Lord - So
they call those wicked wretches, and rebels against God! Tho' they were
but newly saved from sharing in the same punishment, and the survivors
were as brands plucked out of the burning, yet they fly in the face of
Moses and Aaron, to whose intercession they owe their preservation.

[Numbers 16:42](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">num 16:42</span></span>

They - Moses and Aaron, who in all their distresses made God their
refuge.

[Numbers 16:43](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">num 16:43</span></span>

Moses and Aaron came - To hear what God, who now appeared, would say to
them.

[Numbers 16:45](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">num 16:45</span></span>

They fell upon their faces - To beg mercy for the people; thus rendering
Good for Evil.

[Numbers 16:46](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">num 16:46</span></span>

Incense - Which was a sign of intercession, and was to be accompanied
with it. Go unto the congregation - He went with the incense, to stir up
the people to repentance and prayer, to prevent their utter ruin. This
he might do upon this extraordinary occasion, having God's command for
his warrant, though ordinarily incense was to be offered only in the
tabernacle.

[Numbers 16:48](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 16:48</span></span>

The living - Whereby it may seem that this plague, like that fire, [Num
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001), began in the uttermost parts of
the congregation, and so proceeded destroying one after another in an
orderly manner, which gave Aaron occasion and direction so to place
himself, as a mediator to God on their behalf.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 17](num017)

</div>
