<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](jam005)  [Next](pe1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

[1 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 1:1</span></span>

To the sojourners - Upon earth, the Christians, chiefly those of Jewish
extraction. Scattered - Long ago driven out of their own land. Those
scattered by the persecution mentioned [Act
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001), were scattered only through Judea
and Samaria, though afterwards some of them travelled to Phenice,
Cyprus, and Antioch. Through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia - He names these five provinces in the order wherein they
occurred to him, writing from the east. All these countries lie in the
Lesser Asia. The Asia here distinguished from the other provinces is
that which was usually called the Proconsular Asia being a Roman
province.

[1 Peter 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe1 1:2</span></span>

According to the foreknowledge of God - Speaking after the manner of
men. Strictly speaking, there is no foreknowledge, no more than
afterknowledge, with God: but all things are known to him as present
from eternity to eternity. This is therefore no other than an instance
of the divine condescension to our low capacities. Elect - By the free
love and almighty power of God taken out of, separated from, the world.
Election, in the scripture sense, is God's doing anything that our merit
or power have no part in. The true predestination, or fore - appointment
of God is, He that believeth shall be saved from the guilt and power of
sin. He that endureth to the end shall be saved eternally. They who
receive the precious gift of faith, thereby become the sons of God; and,
being sons, they shall receive the Spirit of holiness to walk as Christ
also walked. Throughout every part of this appointment of God, promise
and duty go hand in hand. All is free gift; and yet such is the gift,
that the final issue depends on our future obedience to the heavenly
call. But other predestination than this, either to life or death
eternal, the scripture knows not of. Moreover, it is. Cruel respect of
persons; an unjust regard of one, and an unjust disregard of another. It
is mere creature partiality, and not infinite justice. It is not plain
scripture doctrine, if true; but rather, inconsistent with the express
written word, that speaks of God's universal offers of grace; his
invitations, promises, threatenings, being all general. We are bid to
choose life, and reprehended for not doing it. It is inconsistent with a
state of probation in those that must be saved or must be lost. It is of
fatal consequence; all men being ready, on very slight grounds, to fancy
themselves of the elect number. But the doctrine of predestination is
entirely changed from what it formerly was. Now it implies neither
faith, peace, nor purity. It is something that will do without them all.
Faith is no longer, according to the modern predestinarian scheme, a
divine "evidence of things not seen," wrought in the soul by the
immediate power of the Holy Ghost; not an evidence at all; but a mere
notion. Neither is faith made any longer a means of holiness; but
something that will do without it. Christ is no more a Saviour from sin;
but a defence, a countenancer of it. He is no more a fountain of
spiritual life in the soul of believers, but leaves his elect inwardly
dry, and outwardly unfruitful; and is made little more than a refuge
from the image of the heavenly; even from righteousness, peace, and joy
in the Holy Ghost. Through sanctification of the Spirit - Through the
renewing and purifying influences of his Spirit on their souls.

Unto obedience - To engage and enable them to yield themselves up to all
holy obedience, the foundation of all which is, the sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ - The atoning blood of Christ, which was typified
by the sprinkling of the blood of sacrifices under the law; in allusion
to which it is called "the blood of sprinkling."

[1 Peter 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe1 1:3</span></span>

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ - His Father,
with respect to his divine nature; his God, with respect to his human.
Who hath regenerated us to a living hope - An hope which implies true
spiritual life, which revives the heart, and makes the soul lively and
vigorous. By the resurrection of Christ - Which is not only a pledge of
ours, but a part of the purchase - price. It has also a close connexion
with our rising from spiritual death, that as he liveth, so shall we
live with him. He was acknowledged to be the Christ, but usually called
Jesus till his resurrection; then he was also called Christ.

[1 Peter 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe1 1:4</span></span>

To an inheritance - For if we are sons, then heirs. Incorruptible - Not
like earthly treasures. Undefiled - Pure and holy, incapable of being
itself defiled, or of being enjoyed by any polluted soul. And that
fadeth not away - That never decays in its value, sweetness, or beauty,
like all the enjoyments of this world, like the garlands of leaves or
flowers, with which the ancient conquerors were wont to be crowned.
Reserved in heaven for you - Who "by patient continuance in welldoing,
seek for glory and honour and immortality."

[1 Peter 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe1 1:5</span></span>

Who are kept - The inheritance is reserved; the heirs are kept for it.
By the power of God - Which worketh all in all, which guards us against
all our enemies. Through faith - Through which alone salvation is both
received and retained. Ready to be revealed - That revelation is made in
the last day. It was more and more ready to be revealed, ever since
Christ came.

[1 Peter 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe1 1:6</span></span>

Wherein - That is, in being so kept. Ye even now greatly rejoice, though
now for a little while - Such is our whole life, compared to eternity.
If need be - For it is not always needful. If God sees it to be the best
means for your spiritual profit. Ye are in heaviness - Or sorrow; but
not in darkness; for they still retained both faith, [Pe1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005), hope, and love; yea, at this very
time were rejoicing with joy unspeakable, [Pe1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008).

[1 Peter 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 1:7</span></span>

That the trial of your faith - That is, your faith which is tried. Which
is much more precious than gold - For gold, though it bear the fire, yet
will perish with the world. May be found - Though it doth not yet
appear. Unto praise - From God himself. And honour - From men and
angels. And glory - Assigned by the great Judge.

[1 Peter 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe1 1:8</span></span>

Having not seen - In the flesh.

[1 Peter 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe1 1:9</span></span>

Receiving - Now already. Salvation - From all sin into all holiness,
which is the qualification for, the forerunner and pledge of, eternal
salvation.

[1 Peter 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 1:10</span></span>

Of which salvation - So far beyond all that was experienced under the
Jewish dispensation. The very prophets who prophesied long ago of the
grace of God toward you - Of his abundant, overflowing grace to be
bestowed on believers under the Christian dispensation. Inquired - Were
earnestly inquisitive. And searched diligently - Like miners searching
after precious ore, after the meaning of the prophecies which they
delivered.

[1 Peter 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe1 1:11</span></span>

Searching what time - What particular period. And what manner of time -
By what marks to be distinguished. The glories that were to follow - His
sufferings; namely, the glory of his resurrection, ascension,
exaltation, and the effusion of his Spirit; the glory of the last
judgment, and of his eternal kingdom; and also the glories of his grace
in the hearts and lives of Christians.

[1 Peter 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe1 1:12</span></span>

To whom - So searching. It was revealed, that not for themselves, but
for us they ministered - They did not so much by those predictions serve
themselves, or that generation, as they did us, who now enjoy what they
saw afar off. With the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven - Confirmed by
the inward, powerful testimony of the Holy Ghost, as well as the mighty
effusion of his miraculous gifts. Which things angels desire to look
into - A beautiful gradation; prophets, righteous men, kings, desired to
see and hear what Christ did and taught. What the Holy Ghost taught
concerning Christ the very angels long to know.

[1 Peter 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 1:13</span></span>

Wherefore - Having such encouragement. Gird up the loins of your mind -
As persons in the eastern countries were wont, in travelling or running,
to gird up their long garments, so gather ye up all your thoughts and
affections, and keep your mind always disencumbered and prepared to run
the race which is set before you. Be watchful - As servants that wait
for their Lord. And hope to the end - Maintain a full expectation of all
the grace - The blessings flowing from the free favour of God. Which
shall be brought to you at the final revelation of Jesus Christ - And
which are now brought to you by the revelation of Christ in you.

[1 Peter 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe1 1:14</span></span>

Your desires - Which ye had while ye were ignorant of God.

[1 Peter 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe1 1:16</span></span>

[Lev 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044).

[1 Peter 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe1 1:17</span></span>

Who judgeth according to every man's work - According to the tenor of
his life and conversation. Pass the time of your sojourning - Your short
abode on earth. In humble, loving fear - The proper companion and guard
of hope.

[1 Peter 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe1 1:18</span></span>

Your vain conversation - Your foolish, sinful way of life.

[1 Peter 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe1 1:19</span></span>

Without blemish - In himself. Without spot - From the world.

[1 Peter 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe1 1:21</span></span>

Who through him believe - For all our faith and hope proceed from the
power of his resurrection. In God that raised Jesus, and gave him glory
- At his ascension. Without Christ we should only dread God; whereas
through him we believe, hope, and love.

[1 Peter 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe1 1:22</span></span>

Having purified your souls by obeying the truth through the Spirit, who
bestows upon you freely, both obedience and purity of heart, and
unfeigned love of the brethren, go on to still higher degrees of love.
Love one another fervently - With the most strong and tender affection;
and yet with a pure heart - Pure from any spot of unholy desire or
inordinate passion.

[1 Peter 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pe1 1:23</span></span>

Which liveth - Is full of divine virtue. And abideth the same for ever.

[1 Peter 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pe1 1:24</span></span>

All flesh - Every human creature is transient and withering as grass.
And all the glory of it - His wisdom, strength, wealth, righteousness.
As the flower - The most short - lived part of it. The grass - That is,
man. The flower - That is, his glory. Is fallen off - As it were, while
we are speaking. [Isa 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006), &c.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 2](pe1002)

</div>
