<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](phi003)  [Next](col001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)

[Philippians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 4:1</span></span>

So stand - As ye have done hitherto.

[Philippians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">phi 4:2</span></span>

I beseech - He repeats this twice, as if speaking to each face to face,
and that with the utmost tenderness.

[Philippians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">phi 4:3</span></span>

And I entreat thee also, true yokefellow - St. Paul had many
fellowlabourers, but not many yokefellows. In this number was Barnabas
first, and then Silas, whom he probably addresses here; for Silas had
been his yokefellow at the very place, [Act
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#019). Help those women who laboured
together with me - Literally, who wrestled. The Greek word doth not
imply preaching, or anything of that kind; but danger and toil endured
for the sake of the gospel, which was also endured at the same time,
probably at Philippi, by Clement and my other fellowlabourers - This is
a different word from the former, and does properly imply
fellowpreachers. Whose names, although not set down here, are in the
book of life - As are those of all believers. An allusion to the
wrestlers in the Olympic games, whose names were all enrolled in a book.
Reader, is thy name there? Then walk circumspectly, lest the Lord blot
thee out of his book!

[Philippians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">phi 4:5</span></span>

Let your gentleness - Yieldingness, sweetness of temper, the result of
joy in the Lord. Be known - By your whole behaviour. To all men - Good
and bad, gentle and froward. Those of the roughest tempers are good
natured to some, from natural sympathy and various motives; a Christian,
to all. The Lord - The judge, the rewarder, the avenger. Is at hand -
Standeth at the door.

[Philippians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">phi 4:6</span></span>

Be anxiously careful for nothing - If men are not gentle towards you,
yet neither on this, nor any other account, be careful, but pray.
Carefulness and prayer cannot stand together. In every thing - Great and
small. Let your requests be made known - They who by a preposterous
shame or distrustful modesty, cover, stifle, or keep in their desires,
as if they were either too small or too great, must be racked with care;
from which they are entirely delivered, who pour them out with a free
and filial confidence. To God - It is not always proper to disclose them
to men. By supplication - Which is the enlarging upon and pressing our
petition. With thanksgiving - The surest mark of a soul free from care,
and of prayer joined with true resignation. This is always followed by
peace. Peace and thanksgiving are both coupled together, [Col
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#015).

[Philippians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">phi 4:7</span></span>

And the peace of God - That calm, heavenly repose, that tranquility of
spirit, which God only can give. Which surpasseth all understanding -
Which none can comprehend, save he that receiveth it. Shall keep - Shall
guard, as a garrison does a city. Your hearts - Your affections. Your
minds - Your understandings, and all the various workings of them;
through the Spirit and power of Christ Jesus, in the knowledge and love
of God. Without a guard set on these likewise, the purity and vigour of
our affections cannot long be preserved.

[Philippians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">phi 4:8</span></span>

Finally - To sum up all. Whatsoever things are true - Here are eight
particulars placed in two fourfold rows; the former containing their
duty; the latter, the commendation of it. The first word in the former
row answers the first in the latter; the second word, the second and so
on. True - In speech. Honest - In action. Just - With regard to others.
Pure - With regard to yourselves. Lovely - And what more lovely than
truth? Of good report - As is honesty, even where it is not practised.
If there be any virtue - And all virtues are contained in justice. If
there be any praise - In those things which relate rather to ourselves
than to our neighbour. Think on these things - That ye may both practise
them yourselves, and recommend them to others.

[Philippians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">phi 4:9</span></span>

The things which ye have learned - As catechumens. And received - By
continual instructions. And heard and seen - In my life and
conversation. These do, and the God of peace shall be with you - Not
only the peace of God, but God himself, the fountain of peace.

[Philippians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">phi 4:10</span></span>

I rejoiced greatly - St. Paul was no Stoic: he had strong passions, but
all devoted to God. That your care of me hath flourished again - As a
tree blossoms after the winter. Ye wanted opportunity - Either ye had
not plenty yourselves, or you wanted a proper messenger.

[Philippians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">phi 4:11</span></span>

I have learned - From God. He only can teach this. In everything,
therewith to be content - Joyfully and thankfully patient. Nothing less
is Christian content. We may observe a beautiful gradation in the
expressions, I have learned; I know; I am instructed; I can.

[Philippians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 4:12</span></span>

I know how to be abased - Having scarce what is needful for my body. And
to abound - Having wherewith to relieve others also. Presently after,
the order of the words is inverted, to intimate his frequent transition
from scarcity to plenty, and from plenty to scarcity. I am instructed -
Literally, I am initiated in that mystery, unknown to all but
Christians. Both to be full and to be hungry - For one day. Both to
abound and to want - For a longer season.

[Philippians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">phi 4:13</span></span>

I can do all things - Even fulfil all the will of God.

[Philippians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">phi 4:15</span></span>

In the beginning of the gospel - When it was first preached at Philippi.
In respect of giving - On your part. And receiving - On mine.

[Philippians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">phi 4:17</span></span>

Not that I desire - For my own sake, the very gift which I receive of
you.

[Philippians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">phi 4:18</span></span>

An odour of a sweet smell - More pleasing to God than the sweetest
perfumes to men.

[Philippians 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">phi 4:19</span></span>

All your need - As ye have mine. According to his riches in glory - In
his abundant, eternal glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 1](col001)

</div>
