<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa018)  [Next](psa020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)

[Psalms 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 19:1</span></span>

The heavens - They are as a legible book, wherein he that runs may read
it. The glory - His eternal power and Godhead, his infinite wisdom and
goodness. Firmament - Or, the expansion, all the vast space extended
from the earth to the highest heavens, with all its goodly furniture.

[Psalms 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 19:2</span></span>

Day - Every day and night repeats these demonstrations of God's glory.
Uttereth - Or, poureth forth, constantly and abundantly, as a fountain
doth water; So this Hebrew word signifies. Knowledge - Gives us a clear
knowledge or discovery of God their author.

[Psalms 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 19:3</span></span>

Heard - Or, understood; there are divers nations in the world, which
have several languages, so that one cannot discourse with, or be
understood by another, but the heavens are such an universal teacher,
that they can speak to all people, and be clearly understood by all.

[Psalms 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 19:4</span></span>

Line - Their lines, the singular number being put for the plural. And
this expression is very proper, because the heavens do not teach men
audibly, or by speaking to their ears, but visibly by propounding things
to their eyes, which is done in lines or writings. Gone - Is spread
abroad. Earth - So as to be seen and read, by all the inhabitants of the
earth. Words - Their magnificent structure, their exquisite order, and
most regular course, by which they declare their author, no less than
men discover their minds by their words. Sun - Which being the most
illustrious and useful of all the heavenly bodies, is here particularly
mentioned.

[Psalms 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 19:5</span></span>

Bridegroom - Gloriously adorned with light as with a beautiful garment,
and smiling upon the world with a pleasant countenance. Chamber - In
which he is poetically supposed to have rested all night, and thence to
break forth as it were on a sudden. Strong man - Conscious and confident
of his own strength.

[Psalms 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 19:6</span></span>

The ends - His course is constant from east to west, and thence to the
east again. So that there is no part of the earth which doth not one
time or other feel the benefit of his light and heat.

[Psalms 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 19:7</span></span>

The law - The doctrine delivered to his church, whether by Moses, or by
other prophets. Having discoursed hitherto of the glory of God shining
forth in, the visible heavens, he now proceeds to another demonstration
of God's glory, which he compares with and prefers before the former.
Perfect - Completely discovering both the nature and will of God, and
the whole duty of man, what he is to believe and practice, and
whatsoever is necessary to his present and eternal happiness. Whereas
the creation, although it did declare so much of God, as left all men
without excuse, yet did not fully manifest the will of God, nor bring
men to eternal salvation. Converting - From sin to God, from whom all
men are naturally revolted. Testimony - His law, so called because it is
a witness between God and man, what God requires of man, and what upon
the performance of that condition, he will do for man. Sure - Heb.
faithful or true, which is most necessary in a witness: it will not
mislead any man, but will infallibly bring him to happiness. Simple -
Even persons of the lowest capacities.

[Psalms 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 19:8</span></span>

Right - Both in themselves, and in their effect, as guiding men in the
ready way to eternal happiness. Rejoicing - By the discoveries of God's
love to sinful men, in offers and promises of mercy. Commandment - All
his commands. Pure - Without the least mixture of error. The eyes - Of
the mind, with a compleat manifestation of God's will and man's duty:
both which, the works of nature, and all the writings of men discover
but darkly and imperfectly.

[Psalms 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 19:9</span></span>

The fear - The law and word of God, because it is both the object and
the rule, and the cause of holy fear. Clean - Sincere, not adulterated
with any mixture. Constant and unchangeable, the same for substance in
all ages. Judgments - God's laws are frequently called his judgments,
because they are the declarations of his righteous will, and as it were
his judicial sentence by which he expects that men should govern
themselves, and by which he will judge them at the last day.

[Psalms 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 19:12</span></span>

Who - Thy law, O Lord, is holy and just and good. But I fall infinitely
short of it. Cleanse - Both by justification, through the blood of thy
son; and by sanctification thro' thy holy spirit. Though the first may
seem to be principally intended, because he speaks of his past sins.
Secret - From the guilt of such sins as were secret either, from others;
such as none knows but God and my own conscience: or, from myself; such
as I never observed, or did not discern the evil of. Pardon my unknown
sins, of which I never repented particularly, as I should have done.

[Psalms 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 19:13</span></span>

Presumptuous - From known and evident sins, such as are committed
against knowledge, against the checks of conscience, and the motions of
God's spirit. Dominion - If I be at any time tempted to such sins, Lord
let them not prevail over me, and if I do fall into them, let me
speedily rise again.

[Psalms 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 19:14</span></span>

Let - Having prayed that God would keep him from sinful actions, he now
prays that God would govern, and sanctify his words and thoughts: and
this was necessary to preserve him from presumptuous sins, which have
their first rise in the thoughts. Redeemer - This expression seems to be
added emphatically, and with special respect to Christ, to whom alone
this word Goel can properly belong.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 20](psa020)

</div>
