<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa015)  [Next](psa017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)

[Psalms 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 16:2</span></span>

To thee - Thou dost not need me or my service, nor art capable of any
advantage from it.

[Psalms 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 16:3</span></span>

But - I bear a singular respect and love to all saints, for thy sake,
whose friends and servants they are, and whose image they bear. This
more properly agrees to David, than to Christ, whose goodness was
principally designed for, and imparted to sinners.

[Psalms 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 16:4</span></span>

Sorrows - Having shewed his affection to the servants of the true God,
he now declares what an abhorrency he has for those that worship idols.
Offerings - In which the Gentiles used sometimes to drink part of the
blood of their sacrifices. Names - Of those other gods mentioned before.

[Psalms 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 16:5</span></span>

The Lord - I rejoice in God as my portion, and desire no better, no
other felicity. Cup - The portion which is put into my cup, as the
ancient manner was in feasts, where each had his portion of meat, and of
wine allotted to him. Lot - My inheritance divided to me by lot, as the
custom then was.

[Psalms 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 16:6</span></span>

Lines - My portion, which was measured with lines. Are fallen - In a
land flowing with milk and honey, and above all, blessed with the
presence and knowledge of God.

[Psalms 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 16:7</span></span>

The Lord - Hath inspired that wisdom into me, by which I have chosen the
Lord for my portion, and am so fully satisfied with him. Reins - My
inward thoughts and affections, being inspired and moved by the holy
spirit. Instruct - Direct me how to please God, and put my whole trust
in him. Night - Even when others are asleep, my mind is working upon
God, and improving the silence and solitude of holy meditations.

[Psalms 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 16:8</span></span>

I have set - I have always presented him to my mind, as my witness and
judge, as my patron and protector. Hitherto David seems to have spoken
with respect to himself, but now he is transported by the spirit of
prophecy, and carried above himself, to speak as a type of Christ, in
whom this and the following verses were truly accomplished. Christ as
man did always set his father's will and glory before him. Right - hand
- To strengthen, protect, assist, and comfort me: as this assistance of
God was necessary to Christ as man. Moved - Though the archers shoot
grievously at me, and both men and devils seek my destruction, and God
sets himself against me as an enemy, yet I am assured he will deliver me
out of all my distresses.

[Psalms 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 16:9</span></span>

My glory - My tongue, which is a man's glory and privilege, above all
other living creatures. Rejoiceth - Declares my inward joy. For this
word signifies not so much eternal joy, as the outward demonstrations of
it. My flesh - My body shall quietly rest in the grave. Shall rest - in
confident assurance of its incorruption there, and of its resurrection
to an immortal life: the flesh or body is in itself, but a dead lump of
clay; yet hope is here ascribed to it figuratively, as it is to the
brute creatures, [Rom 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019).

[Psalms 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 16:10</span></span>

Hell - In the state of the dead. Holy one - Me thy holy son, whom thou
hast sanctified and sent into the world. It is peculiar to Christ, to be
called the holy one of God. To see - To be corrupted or putrefied in the
grave, as the bodies of others are.

[Psalms 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 16:11</span></span>

Life - Thou wilt raise me from the grave, and conduct me to the place
and state of everlasting felicity. Presence - In that heavenly paradise,
where thou art gloriously present, where thou dost clearly and fully
discover the light of thy countenance; whereas in this life thou hidest
thy face and shewest us only thy back - parts. Right - hand - Which he
mentions as a place of the greatest honour, the place where the saints
are placed at the last day, and where Christ himself is said to sit,
[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001). Pleasures - All our joys
are empty and defective: But in heaven there is fulness of joy. Our
pleasures here are transient and momentary; but those at God's right
hand are pleasures for evermore. For they are the pleasures of immortal
souls, in the enjoyment of an eternal God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 17](psa017)

</div>
