<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev008)  [Next](rev010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001)

[Revelation 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 9:1</span></span>

And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star - Far different from that
mentioned, [Rev 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#011). This star
belongs to the invisible world. The third woe is occasioned by the
dragon cast out of heaven; the second takes place at the loosing of the
four angels who were bound in the Euphrates. The first is here brought
by the angel of the abyss, which is opened by this star, or holy angel.
Falling to the earth - Coming swiftly and with great force. And to him
was given - when he was come. The key of the bottomless pit - A deep and
hideous prison; but different from "the lake of fire."

[Revelation 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 9:2</span></span>

And there arose a smoke out of the pit - The locusts, who afterwards
rise out of it, seem to be, as we shall afterwards see, the Persians;
agreeable to which, this smoke is their detestable idolatrous doctrine,
and false zeal for it, which now broke out in an uncommon paroxysm. As
the smoke of a great furnace - where the clouds of it rise thicker and
thicker, spread far and wide, and press one upon another, so that the
darkness increases continually. And the sun and the air were darkened -
A figurative expression, denoting heavy affliction. This smoke
occasioned more and more such darkness over the Jews in Persia.

[Revelation 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 9:3</span></span>

And out of the smoke - Not out of the bottomless pit, but from the smoke
which issued thence. There went forth locusts - A known emblem of a
numerous, hostile, hurtful people. Such were the Persians, from whom the
Jews, in the sixth century, suffered beyond expression. In the year 540
their academies were stopped, nor were they permitted to have a
president for near fifty years. In 589 this affliction ended; but it
began long before 540. The prelude of it was about the year 455 and 474:
the main storm came on in the reign of Cabades, and lasted from 483 to
532. Toward the beginning of the sixth century, Mar Rab Isaac, president
of the academy, was put to death. Hereon followed an insurrection of the
Jews, which lasted seven years before they were conquered by the
Persians. Some of them were then put to death, but not many; the rest
were closely imprisoned. And from this time the nation of the Jews were
hated and persecuted by the Persians, till they had well nigh rooted
them out. The scorpions of the earth - The most hurtful kind. The
scorpions of the air have wings.

[Revelation 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 9:4</span></span>

And it was commanded them - By the secret power of God. Not to hurt the
grass, neither any green thing, nor any tree - Neither those of low,
middling, or high degree, but only such of them as were not sealed -
Principally the unbelieving Israelites. But many who were called
Christians suffered with them.

[Revelation 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 9:5</span></span>

Not to kill them - Very few of them were killed: in general, they were
imprisoned and variously tormented.

[Revelation 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 9:6</span></span>

The men - That is, the men who are so tormented.

[Revelation 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 9:7</span></span>

And the appearances - This description suits a people neither throughly
civilized, nor entirely savage; and such were the Persians of that age.
Of the locusts are like horses - With their riders. The Persians
excelled in horsemanship. And on their heads are as it were crowns -
Turbans. And their faces are as the faces of men - Friendly and
agreeable.

[Revelation 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 9:8</span></span>

And they had hair as the hair of women - All the Persians of old gloried
in long hair. And their teeth were as the teeth of lions - Breaking and
tearing all things in pieces.

[Revelation 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 9:9</span></span>

And the noise of their wings was as the noise of chariots of many horses
- With their war - chariots, drawn by many horses, they, as it were,
flew to and fro.

[Revelation 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 9:10</span></span>

And they have tails like scorpions - That is, each tail is like a
scorpion, not like the tail of a scorpion. To hurt the unsealed men five
months - Five prophetic months; that is, seventy - nine common years So
long did these calamities last.

[Revelation 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 9:11</span></span>

And they have over them a king - One by whom they are peculiarly
directed and governed. His name is Abaddon - Both this and Apollyon
signify a destroyer. By this he is distinguished from the dragon, whose
proper name is Satan.

[Revelation 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 9:12</span></span>

One woe is past; behold, there come yet two woes after these things -
The Persian power, under which was the first woe, was now broken by the
Saracens: from this time the first pause made a wide way for the two
succeeding woes. In 589, when the first woe ended, Mahomet was twenty
years old, and the contentions of the Christians with each other were
exceeding great. In 591 Chosroes II. reigned in Persia, who, after the
death of the emperor, made dreadful disturbances in the east, Hence
Mahomet found an open door for his new religion and empire. And when the
usurper Phocas had, in the year 606, not only declared the Bishop of
Rome, Boniface III., universal bishop, but also the church of Rome the
head of all churches, this was a sure step to advance the Papacy to its
utmost height. Thus, after the passing away of the first woe, the
second, yea, and the third, quickly followed; as indeed they were both
on the way together with it before the first effectually began.

[Revelation 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 9:13</span></span>

And the sixth angel sounded - Under this angel goes forth the second
woe. And I heard a voice from the four corners of the golden altar -
This golden altar is the heavenly pattern of the Levitical altar of
incense. This voice signified that the execution of the wrath of God,
mentioned [Rev 9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020), should, at no
intercession, be delayed any longer.

[Revelation 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 9:14</span></span>

Loose the four angels - To go every way; to the four quarters. These
were evil angels, or they would not have been bound. Why, or how long,
they were bound we know not.

[Revelation 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 9:15</span></span>

And the four angels were loosed, who were prepared - By loosing them, as
well as by their strength and rage. To kill the third part of men - That
is, an immense number of them. For the hour, and day, and month, and
year - All this agrees with the slaughter which the Saracens made for a
long time after Mahomet's death. And with the number of angels let loose
agrees the number of their first and most eminent caliphs. These were
Ali, Abubeker, Omar, and Osman. Mahomet named Ali, his cousin and son -
in - law, for his successor; but he was soon worked out by the rest,
till they severally died, and so made room for him. They succeeded each
other, and each destroyed innumerable multitudes of men. There are in a
prophetic

Com. Years. Com. Days.

Hour 8 Day 196 in all 212 years. Month 15 318 Year 196 117

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 10](rev010)

</div>
