<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](jde001)  [Next](rev002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

[Revelation 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 1:1</span></span>

The Revelation - Properly so called; for things covered before are here
revealed, or unveiled. No prophecy in the Old Testament has this title;
it was reserved for this alone in the New. It is, as it were, a
manifesto, wherein the Heir of all things declares that all power is
given him in heaven and earth, and that he will in the end gloriously
exercise that power, maugre all the opposition of all his enemies. Of
Jesus Christ - Not of "John the Divine," a title added in latter ages.
Certain it is, that appellation, the Divine, was not brought into the
church, much less was it affixed to John the apostle, till long after
the apostolic age. It was St. John, indeed, who wrote this book, but the
author of it is Jesus Christ. Which God gave unto him - According to his
holy, glorified humanity, as the great Prophet of the church. God gave
the Revelation to Jesus Christ; Jesus Christ made it known to his
servants. To show - This word recurs, [Rev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006); and in many places the parts of
this book refer to each other. Indeed the whole structure of it breathes
the art of God, comprising, in the most finished compendium, things to
come, many, various; near, intermediate, remote; the greatest, the
least; terrible, comfortable; old, new; long, short; and these
interwoven together, opposite, composite; relative to each other at a
small, at a great, distance; and therefore sometimes, as it were,
disappearing, broken off, suspended, and afterwards unexpectedly and
most seasonably appearing again. In all its parts it has an admirable
variety, with the most exact harmony, beautifully illustrated by those
very digressions which seem to interrupt it. In this manner does it
display the manifold wisdom of God shining in the economy of the church
through so many ages. His servants - Much is comprehended in this
appellation. It is a great thing to be a servant of Jesus Christ. This
book is dedicated particularly to the servants of Christ in the seven
churches in Asia; but not exclusive of all his other servants, in all
nations and ages. It is one single revelation, and yet sufficient for
them all, from the time it was written to the end of the world. Serve
thou the Lord Jesus Christ in truth: so shalt thou learn his secret in
this book; yea, and thou shalt feel in thy heart whether this book be
divine, or not. The things which must shortly come to pass - The things
contained in this prophecy did begin to be accomplished shortly after it
was given; and the whole might be said to come to pass shortly, in the
same sense as St. Peter says, "The end of all things is at hand;" and
our Lord himself, "Behold, I come quickly." There is in this book a rich
treasure of all the doctrines pertaining to faith and holiness. But
these are also delivered in other parts of holy writ; so that the
Revelation need not to have been given for the sake of these. The
peculiar design of this is, to show the things which must come to pass.
And this we are especially to have before our eyes whenever we read or
hear it.

It is said afterward, "Write what thou seest;" and again, "Write what
thou hast seen, and what is, and what shall be hereafter;" but here,
where the scope of the hook is shown, it is only said, the things which
must come to pass. Accordingly, the showing things to come, is the great
point in view throughout the whole. And St. John writes what he has
seen, and what is, only as it has an influence on, or gives light to,
what shall be. And he - Jesus Christ. Sent and signified them - Showed
them by signs or emblems; so the Greek word properly means. By his angel
- Peculiarly called, in the sequel, "the angel of God," and particularly
mentioned, [Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001); [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009); [Rev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006), [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016). To his servant John - A title
given to no other single person throughout the book.

[Revelation 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 1:2</span></span>

Who hath testified - In the following book. The word of God - Given
directly by God. And the testimony of Jesus - Which he hath left us, as
the faithful and true witness. Whatsoever things he saw - In such a
manner as was a full confirmation of the divine original of this book.

[Revelation 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 1:3</span></span>

Happy is he that readeth, and they that hear, the words of this prophecy
- Some have miserably handled this book. Hence others are afraid to
touch it; and, while they desire to know all things else, reject only
the knowledge of those which God hath shown. They inquire after anything
rather than this; as if it were written, "Happy is he that doth not read
this prophecy." Nay, but happy is he that readeth, and they that hear,
and keep the words thereof - Especially at this time, when so
considerable a part of them is on the point of being fulfilled.

Nor are helps wanting whereby any sincere and diligent inquirer may
understand what he reads therein. The book itself is written in the most
accurate manner possible. It distinguishes the several things whereof it
treats by seven epistles, seven seals, seven trumpets, seven phials;
each of which sevens is divided into four and three. Many things the
book itself explains; as the seven stars; the seven candlesticks; the
lamb, his seven horns and seven eyes; the incense; the dragon; the heads
and horns of the beasts; the fine linen; the testimony of Jesus: and
much light arises from comparing it with the ancient prophecies, and the
predictions in the other books of the New Testament.

In this book our Lord has comprised what was wanting in those prophecies
touching the time which followed his ascension and the end of the Jewish
polity. Accordingly, it reaches from the old Jerusalem to the new,
reducing all things into one sum, in the exactest order, and with a near
resemblance to the ancient prophets. The introduction and conclusion
agree with Daniel; the description of the man child, and the promises to
Sion, with Isaiah; the judgment of Babylon, with Jeremiah; again, the
determination of times, with Daniel; the architecture of the holy city,
with Ezekiel; the emblems of the horses, candlesticks, &c., with
Zechariah. Many things largely described by the prophets are here
summarily repeated; and frequently in the same words. To them we may
then usefully have recourse. Yet the Revelation suffices for the
explaining itself, even if we do not yet understand those prophecies;
yea, it casts much light upon them. Frequently, likewise, where there is
a resemblance between them, there is a difference also; the Revelation,
as it were, taking a stock from one of the old prophets, and inserting a
new graft into it. Thus Zechariah speaks of two olive trees; and so does
St. John; but with a different meaning. Daniel has a beast with ten
horns; so has St. John; but not with quite the same signification. And
here the difference of words, emblems, things, times, ought studiously
to be observed. Our Lord foretold many things before his passion; but
not all things; for it was not yet seasonable. Many things, likewise,
his Spirit foretold in the writings of the apostles, so far as the
necessities of those times required: now he comprises them all in one
short book; therein presupposing all the other prophecies, and at the
same time explaining, continuing, and perfecting them in one thread. It
is right therefore to compare them; but not to measure the fulness of
these by the scantiness of those preceding.

Christ, when on earth, foretold what would come to pass in a short time;
adding a brief description of the last things. Here he foretells the
intermediate things; so that both put together constitute one complete
chain of prophecy. This book is therefore not only the sum and the key
of all the prophecies which preceded, but likewise a supplement to all;
the seals being closed before. Of consequence, it contains many
particulars not revealed in any other part of scripture. They have
therefore little gratitude to God for such a revelation, reserved for
the exaltation of Christ, who boldly reject whatever they find here
which was not revealed, or not so clearly, in other parts of scripture.
He that readeth and they that hear - St. John probably sent this book by
a single person into Asia, who read it in the churches, while many
heard. But this, likewise, in a secondary sense, refers to all that
shall duly read or hear it in all ages. The words of this prophecy - It
is a revelation with regard to Christ who gives it; a prophecy, with
regard to John who delivers it to the churches. And keep the things
which are written therein - In such a manner as the nature of them
requires; namely, with repentance, faith, patience, prayer, obedience,
watchfulness, constancy. It behoves every Christian, at all
opportunities, to read what is written in the oracles of God; and to
read this precious book in particular, frequently, reverently, and
attentively. For the time - Of its beginning to be accomplished. Is near
- Even when St. John wrote. How much nearer to us is even the full
accomplishment of this weighty prophecy!

[Revelation 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 1:4</span></span>

John - The dedication of this book is contained in [Rev
1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004); but the whole Revelation is a
kind of letter. To the seven churches which are in Asia - That part of
the Lesser Asia which was then a Roman province. There had been several
other churches planted here; but it seems these were now the most
eminent; and it was among these that St. John had laboured most during
his abode in Asia. In these cities there were many Jews. Such of them as
believed in each were joined with the gentile believers in one church.
Grace be unto you, and peace - The favour of God, with all temporal and
eternal blessings. From him who is, and who was, and who cometh, or, who
is to come - A wonderful translation of the great name JEHOVAH: he was
of old, he is now, he cometh; that is, will be for ever. And from the
seven spirits which are before his throne - Christ is he who "hath the
seven spirits of God." "The seven lamps which burn before the throne are
the seven spirits of God." " The lamb hath seven horns and seven eyes,
which are the seven spirits of God." Seven was a sacred number in the
Jewish church: but it did not always imply a precise number. It
sometimes is to be taken figuratively, to denote completeness or
perfection. By these seven spirits, not seven created angels, but the
Holy Ghost is to be understood. The angels are never termed spirits in
this book; and when all the angels stand up, while the four living
creatures and the four and twenty elders worship him that sitteth on the
throne, and the Lamb, the seven spirits neither stand up nor worship. To
these "seven spirits of God," the seven churches, to whom the Spirit
speaks so many things, are subordinate; as are also their angels, yea,
and "the seven angels which stand before God." He is called the seven
spirits, not with regard to his essence, which is one, but with regard
to his manifold operations.

[Revelation 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 1:5</span></span>

And from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the first begotten from the
dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth - Three glorious
appellations are here given him, and in their proper order. He was the
faithful witness of the whole will of God before his death, and in
death, and remains such in glory. He rose from the dead, as "the first
fruits of them that slept;" and now hath all power both in heaven and
earth. He is here styled a prince: but by and by he hears his title of
king; yea, King of kings, and Lord of lords." This phrase, the kings of
the earth, signifies their power and multitude, and also the nature of
their kingdom. It became the Divine Majesty to call them kings with a
limitation; especially in this manifesto from his heavenly kingdom; for
no creature, much less a sinful man, can bear the title of king in an
absolute sense before the eyes of God.

[Revelation 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 1:6</span></span>

To him that loveth us, and, out of that free, abundant love, hath washed
us from the guilt and power of our sins with his own blood, and hath
made us kings - Partakers of his present, and heirs of his eternal,
kingdom. And priests unto his God and Father - To whom we continually
offer ourselves, an holy, living sacrifice. To him be the glory - For
his love and redemption. And the might - Whereby he governs all things.

[Revelation 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 1:7</span></span>

Behold - In this and the next verse is the proposition, and the summary
of the whole book. He cometh - Jesus Christ. Throughout this book,
whenever it is said, He cometh, it means his glorious coming. The
preparation for this began at the destruction of Jerusalem, and more
particularly at the time of writing this book; and goes on, without any
interruption, till that grand event is accomplished. Therefore it is
never said in this book, He will come; but, He cometh. And yet it is not
said, He cometh again: for when he came before, it was not like himself,
but in "the form of a servant." But his appearing in glory is properly
his coming; namely, in a manner worthy of the Son of God. And every eye
- Of the Jews in particular. Shall see him - But with what different
emotions, according as they had received or rejected him. And they who
have pierced him - They, above all, who pierced his hands, or feet, or
side. Thomas saw the print of these wounds even after his resurrection;
and the same, undoubtedly, will be seen by all, when he cometh in the
clouds of heaven. And all the tribes of the earth - The word tribes, in
the Revelation, always means the Israelites: but where another word,
such as nations or people, is joined with it, it implies likewise (as
here) all the rest of mankind. Shall wail because of him - For terror
and pain, if they did not wail before by true repentance. Yea, Amen -
This refers to, every eye shall see him. He that cometh saith, Yea; he
that testifies it, Amen. The word translated yea is Greek; Amen is
Hebrew: for what is here spoken respects both Jew and gentile.

[Revelation 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 1:8</span></span>

I am the Alpha and the Omega, saith the Lord God - Alpha is the first,
Omega, the last, letter in the Greek alphabet. Let his enemies boast and
rage ever so much in the intermediate time, yet the Lord God is both the
Alpha, or beginning, and the Omega, or end, of all things. God is the
beginning, as he is the Author and Creator of all things, and as he
proposes, declares, and promises so great things: he is the end, as he
brings all the things which are here revealed to a complete and glorious
conclusion. Again, the beginning and end of a thing is in scripture
styled the whole thing. Therefore God is the Alpha and the Omega, the
beginning and the end; that is, one who is all things, and always the
same.

[Revelation 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 1:9</span></span>

I John - The instruction and preparation of the apostle for the work are
described from [Rev 1:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009). Your
brother - In the common faith. And companion in the affliction - For the
same persecution which carried him to Patmos drove them into Asia. This
book peculiarly belongs to those who are under the cross. It was given
to a banished man; and men in affliction understand and relish it most.
Accordingly, it was little esteemed by the Asiatic church, after the
time of Constantine; but highly valued by all the African churches, as
it has been since by all the persecuted children of God. In the
affliction, and kingdom and patience of Jesus - The kingdom stands in
the midst. It is chiefly under various afflictions that faith obtains
its part in the kingdom; and whosoever is a partaker of this kingdom is
not afraid to suffer for Jesus, [Ti2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012). I was in the island Patmos - In
the reign of Domitian and of Nerva. And there he saw and wrote all that
follows. It was a place peculiarly proper for these visions. He had over
against him, at a small distance, Asia and the seven churches; going on
eastward, Jerusalem and the land of Canaan; and beyond this, Antioch,
yea, the whole continent of Asia. To the west, he had Rome, Italy, and
all Europe, swimming, as it were, in the sea; to the south, Alexandria
and the Nile with its outlets, Egypt, and all Africa; and to the north,
what was afterwards called Constantinople, on the straits between Europe
and Asia. So he had all the three parts of the world which were then
known, with all Christendom, as it were, before his eyes; a large
theatre for all the various scenes which were to pass before him: as if
this island had been made principally for this end, to serve as an
observatory for the apostle. For preaching the word of God he was
banished thither, and for the testimony of Jesus - For testifying that
he is the Christ.

[Revelation 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 1:10</span></span>

I was in the Spirit - That is, in a trance, a prophetic vision; so
overwhelmed with the power, and filled with the light, of the Holy
Spirit, as to be insensible of outward things, and wholly taken up with
spiritual and divine. What follows is one single, connected vision,
which St. John saw in one day; and therefore he that would understand it
should carry his thought straight on through the whole, without
interruption. The other prophetic books are collections of distinct
prophecies, given upon various occasions: but here is one single
treatise, whereof all the parts exactly depend on each other. [Rev
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001) is connected with [Rev
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#019) and what is delivered in the
fourth chapter goes on directly to the twenty - second. On the Lord's
day - On this our Lord rose from the dead: on this the ancients believed
he will come to judgment. It was, therefore, with the utmost propriety
that St. John on this day both saw and described his coming. And I heard
behind me - St. John had his face to the east: our Lord, likewise, in
this appearance looked eastward toward Asia, whither the apostle was to
write. A great voice, as of a trumpet - Which was peculiarly proper to
proclaim the coming of the great King, and his victory over all his
enemies.

[Revelation 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 1:11</span></span>

Saying, What thou seest - And hearest. He both saw and heard. This
command extends to the whole book. All the books of the New Testament
were written by the will of God; but none were so expressly commanded to
be written. In a book - So all the Revelation is but one book: nor did
the letter to the angel of each church belong to him or his church only;
but the whole book was sent to them all. To the churches - Hereafter
named; and through them to all churches, in all ages and nations. To
Ephesus - Mr. Thomas Smith, who in the year 1671 travelled through all
these cities, observes, that from Ephesus to Smyrna is forty - six
English miles; from Smyrna to Pergamos, sixty - four; from Pergamos to
Thyatira, forty - eight; from Thyatira to Sardis, thirty - three; from
Sardis to Philadelphia, twenty - seven; from Philadelphia to Laodicea,
about forty - two miles.

[Revelation 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 1:12</span></span>

And I turned to see the voice - That is, to see him whose voice it was.
And being turned, I saw - It seems, the vision presented itself
gradually. First he heard a voice; and, upon looking behind, he saw the
golden candlesticks, and then, in the midst of the candlesticks, which
were placed in a circle, he saw one like a son of man - That is, in an
human form. As a man likewise our Lord doubtless appears in heaven:
though not exactly in this symbolical manner, wherein he presents
himself as the head of his church. He next observed that our Lord was
clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt with a golden girdle -
Such the Jewish high priests wore. But both of them are here marks of
royal dignity likewise. Girt about at the breast - he that is on a
journey girds his loins. Girding the breast was an emblem of solemn
rest. It seems that the apostle having seen all this, looked up to
behold the face of our Lord: but was beat back by the appearance of his
flaming eyes, which occasioned his more particularly observing his feet.
Receiving strength to raise his eyes again, he saw the stars in his
right hand, and the sword coming out of his mouth: but upon beholding
the brightness of his glorious countenance, which probably was much
increased since the first glance the apostle had of it, he "fell at his
feet as dead." During the time that St. John was discovering these
several particulars, our Lord seems to have been speaking. And doubtless
even his voice, at the very first, bespoke the God: though not so
insupportably as his glorious appearance. And I turned to see the voice
- That is, to see him whose voice it was. And being turned, I saw - It
seems, the vision presented itself gradually. First he heard a voice;
and, upon looking behind, he saw the golden candlesticks, and then, in
the midst of the candlesticks, which were placed in a circle, he saw one
like a son of man - That is, in an human form. As a man likewise our
Lord doubtless appears in heaven: though not exactly in this symbolical
manner, wherein he presents himself as the head of his church. He next
observed that our Lord was clothed with a garment down to the foot, and
girt with a golden girdle - Such the Jewish high priests wore. But both
of them are here marks of royal dignity likewise. Girt about at the
breast - he that is on a journey girds his loins. Girding the breast was
an emblem of solemn rest. It seems that the apostle having seen all
this, looked up to behold the face of our Lord: but was beat back by the
appearance of his flaming eyes, which occasioned his more particularly
observing his feet. Receiving strength to raise his eyes again, he saw
the stars in his right hand, and the sword coming out of his mouth: but
upon beholding the brightness of his glorious countenance, which
probably was much increased since the first glance the apostle had of
it, he "fell at his feet as dead." During the time that St. John was
discovering these several particulars, our Lord seems to have been
speaking. And doubtless even his voice, at the very first, bespoke the
God: though not so insupportably as his glorious appearance.

[Revelation 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 1:14</span></span>

His head and his hair - That is, the hair of his head, not his whole
head. Were white as white wool - Like the Ancient of Days, represented
in Daniel's vision, [Dan 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009). Wool is
commonly supposed to be an emblem of eternity. As snow - Betokening his
spotless purity. And his eyes as a flame of fire - Piercing through all
things; a token of his omniscience.

[Revelation 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 1:15</span></span>

And his feet like fine brass - Denoting his stability and strength. As
if they burned in a furnace - As if having been melted and refined, they
were still red hot. And his voice - To the comfort of his friends, and
the terror of his enemies. As the voice of many waters - Roaring aloud,
and bearing down all before them.

[Revelation 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 1:16</span></span>

And he had in his right hand seven stars - In token of his favour and
powerful protection. And out of his mouth went a sharp two - edged sword
- Signifying his justice and righteous anger, continually pointed
against his enemies as a sword; sharp, to stab; two - edged, to hew. And
his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength - Without any
mist or cloud.

[Revelation 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 1:17</span></span>

And I fell at his feet as dead - Human nature not being able to sustain
so glorious an appearance. Thus was he prepared (like Daniel of old,
whom he peculiarly resembles) for receiving so weighty a prophecy. A
great sinking of nature usually precedes a large communication of
heavenly things. St. John, before our Lord suffered, was so intimate
with him, as to lean on his breast, to lie in his bosom. Yet now, near
seventy years after, the aged apostle is by one glance struck to the
ground. What a glory must this be! Ye sinners, be afraid cleanse your
hands: purify your hearts. Ye saints, be humble, prepare: rejoice. But
rejoice unto him with reverence: an increase of reverence towards this
awful majesty can be no prejudice to your faith. Let all petulancy, with
all vain curiosity, be far away, while you are thinking or reading of
these things. And he laid his right hand upon me - The same wherein he
held the seven stars. What did St. John then feel in himself? Saying,
Fear not - His look terrifies, his speech strengthens. He does not call
John by his name, (as the angels did Zechariah and others,) but speaks
as his well known master. What follows is also spoken to strengthen and
encourage him. I am - When in his state of humiliation he spoke of his
glory, he frequently spoke in the third person, as [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064). But he now speaks of his own
glory, without any veil, in plain and direct terms. The first and the
last - That is, the one, eternal God, who is from everlasting to
everlasting, [Isa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004).

[Revelation 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 1:18</span></span>

And he that liveth - Another peculiar title of God. And I have the keys
of death and of hades - That is, the invisible world. In the
intermediate state, the body abides in death, the soul in hades. Christ
hath the keys of, that is, the power over, both; killing or quickening
of the body, and disposing of the soul, as it pleaseth him. He gave St.
Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven; but not the keys of death or of
hades. How comes then his supposed successor at Rome by the keys of
purgatory? From the preceding description, mostly, are taken the titles
given to Christ in the following letters, particularly the four first.

[Revelation 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 1:19</span></span>

Write the things which thou hast seen - This day: which accordingly are
written, [Rev 1:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011). And which are -
The instructions relating to the present state of the seven churches.
These are written, Rev. 1:20-3:22. And which shall be hereafter - To the
end of the world; written, Rev. 4:1, &c.

[Revelation 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 1:20</span></span>

Write first the mystery - The mysterious meaning of the seven stars -
St. John knew better than we do, in how many respects these stars were a
proper emblem of those angels: how nearly they resembled each other, and
how far they differed in magnitude, brightness, aa& other circumstances.
The seven stars are angels of the seven churches - Mentioned in [Rev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011). In each church there was one
pastor or ruling minister, to whom all the rest were subordinate. This
pastor, bishop, or overseer, had the peculiar care over that flock: on
him the prosperity of that congregation in a great measure depended, and
he was to answer for all those souls at the judgment seat of Christ. And
the seven candlesticks are seven churches - How significant an emblem is
this! For a candlestick, though of gold, has no light of itself; neither
has any church, or child of man. But they receive from Christ the light
of truth, holiness, comfort, that it may shine to all around them. As
soon as this was spoken St. John wrote it down, even all that is
contained in this first chapter. Afterwards what was contained in the
second and third chapters was dictated to him in like manner.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 2](rev002)

</div>
