<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev018)  [Next](rev020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001)

[Revelation 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 19:1</span></span>

I heard a loud voice of a great multitude - Whose blood the great whore
had shed. Saying, Hallelujah - This Hebrew word signifies, Praise ye
Jah, or Him that is. God named himself to Moses, EHEIEH, that is, I will
be, [Exo 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014); and at the same time,
"Jehovah," that is, "He that is, and was, and is to come:" during the
trumpet of the seventh angel, he is styled, "He that is and was," [Rev
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#005); and not "He that is to come;"
because his long - expected coming is under this trumpet actually
present. At length he is styled, "Jah," "He that is;" the past together
with the future being swallowed up in the present, the former things
being no more mentioned, for the greatness of those that now are. This
title is of all others the most peculiar to the everlasting God. The
salvation - Is opposed to the destruction which the great whore had
brought upon the earth. His power and glory - Appear from the judgment
executed on her, and from the setting up his kingdom to endure through
all ages.

[Revelation 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 19:2</span></span>

For true and righteous are his judgments - Thus is the cry of the souls
under the altar changed into a song of praise.

[Revelation 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 19:4</span></span>

And the four and twenty elders, and the four living creatures felt down
- The living creatures are nearer the throne than the elders.
Accordingly they are mentioned before them, with the praise they render
to God, [Rev 4:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009); [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008), [Rev
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#014); inasmuch as there the praise
moves from the centre to the circumference. But here, when God's
judgments are fulfilled, it moves back from the circumference to the
centre. Here, therefore, the four and twenty elders are named before the
living creatures.

[Revelation 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 19:5</span></span>

And a voice came forth from the throne - Probably from the four living
creatures, saying, Praise our God - The occasion and matter of this song
of praise follow immediately after, [Rev
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006), &c.; God was praised before, for
his judgment of the great whore, [Rev
19:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001). Now for that which follows it:
for that the Lord God, the Almighty, takes the kingdom to himself, and
avenges himself on the rest of his enemies. Were all these inhabitants
of heaven mistaken? If not, there is real, yea, and terrible anger in
God.

[Revelation 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 19:6</span></span>

And I heard the voice of a great multitude. So all his servants did
praise him. The Almighty reigneth - More eminently and gloriously than
ever before.

[Revelation 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 19:7</span></span>

The marriage of the Lamb is come - Is near at hand, to be solemnized
speedily. What this implies, none of "the spirits of just men," even in
paradise, yet know. O what things are those which are yet behind! And
what purity of heart should there be, to meditate upon them! And his
wife hath made herself ready - Even upon earth; but in a far higher
sense, in that world. After a time allowed for this, the new Jerusalem
comes down, both made ready and adorned, [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002).

[Revelation 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 19:8</span></span>

And it is given to her - By God. The bride is all holy men, the whole
invisible church. To be arrayed in fine linen, white and clean - This is
an emblem of the righteousness of the saints - Both of their
justification and sanctification.

[Revelation 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 19:9</span></span>

And he - The angel, saith to me, Write - St. John seems to have been so
amazed at these glorious sights, that he needeth to be reminded of this.
Happy are they who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb -
Called to glory. And he saith - After a little pause.

[Revelation 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 19:10</span></span>

And I fell before his feet to worship him - It seems, mistaking him for
the angel of the covenant. But he saith, See thou do it not - In the
original, it is only, See not, with a beautiful abruptness. To pray to
or worship the highest creature is flat idolatry. I am thy fellowservant
and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus - I am now employed
as your fellowservant, to testify of the Lord Jesus, by the same Spirit
which inspired the prophets of old.

[Revelation 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 19:11</span></span>

And I saw the heaven opened - This is a new and peculiar opening of it,
in order to show the magnificent expedition of Christ and his
attendants, against his great adversary. And behold a white horse - Many
little regarded Christ, when he came meek, "riding upon an ass;" but
what will they say, when he goes forth upon his white horse, with the
sword of his mouth? White - Such as generals use in solemn triumph. And
he that sitteth on him, called Faithful - In performing all his
promises. And True - In executing all his threatenings. And in
righteousness - With the utmost justice. He judgeth and maketh war -
Often the sentence and execution go together.

[Revelation 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 19:12</span></span>

And his eyes are a flame of fire - They were said to be as or like a
flame of fire, before, [Rev 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014); an
emblem of his omniscience. And upon his head are many diadems - For he
is king of all nations. And he hath a name written, which none knoweth
but himself - As God he is incomprehensible to every creature.

[Revelation 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 19:13</span></span>

And he is clothed in a vesture dipped in blood - The blood of the
enemies he hath already conquered. [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), &c

[Revelation 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 19:15</span></span>

And he shall rule them - Who are not slain by his sword. With a rod of
iron - That is, if they will not submit to his golden sceptre. And he
treadeth the wine press of the wrath of God - That is, he executes his
judgments on the ungodly. This ruler of the nations was born (or
appeared as such) immediately after the seventh angel began to sound. He
now appears, not as a child, but as a victorious warrior. The nations
have long ago felt his "iron rod," partly while the heathen Romans,
after their savage persecution of the Christians, themselves groaned
under numberless plagues and calamities, by his righteous vengeance;
partly, while other heathens have been broken in pieces by those who
bore the Christian name. For although the cruelty, for example, of the
Spaniards in America, was unrighteous and detestable, yet did God
therein execute his righteous judgment on the unbelieving nations; but
they shall experience his iron rod as they never did yet, and then will
they all return to their rightful Lord.

[Revelation 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 19:16</span></span>

And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh - That is, on the part of
his vesture which is upon his thigh. A name written - It was usual of
old, for great personages in the eastern countries, to have magnificent
titles affixed to their garments.

[Revelation 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 19:17</span></span>

Gather yourselves together to the great supper of God - As to a great
feast, which the vengeance of God will soon provide; a strongly
figurative expression, (taken from [Eze
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017),) denoting the vastness of the
ensuing slaughter.

[Revelation 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 19:19</span></span>

And I saw the kings of the earth - The ten kings mentioned [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012); who had now drawn the other
kings of the earth to them, whether Popish, Mahometan, or pagan.
Gathered together to make war with him that sat upon the horse - All
beings, good and evil, visible and invisible, will be concerned in this
grand contest. See [Zac 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#001), &c.

[Revelation 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 19:20</span></span>

The false prophet, who had wrought the miracles before him - And
therefore shared in his punishment; these two ungodly men were cast
alive - Without undergoing bodily death. Into the lake of fire - And
that before the devil himself, [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010). Here is the last of the beast.
After several repeated strokes of omnipotence, he is gone alive into
hell. There were two that went alive into heaven; perhaps there are two
that go alive into hell. It may be, Enoch and Elijah entered at once
into glory, without first waiting in paradise; the beast and the false
prophet plunge at once into the extremest degree of torment, without
being reserved in chains of darkness till the judgment of the great day.
Surely, none but the beast of Rome would have hardened himself thus
against the God he pretended to adore, or refused to have repented under
such dreadful, repeated visitations! Well is he styled a beast, from his
carnal and vile affections; a wild beast, from his savage and cruel
spirit! The rest were slain - A like difference is afterwards made
between the devil, and Gog and Magog, [Rev
20:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009).

[Revelation 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 19:21</span></span>

Here is a most magnificent description of the overthrow of the beast and
his adherents. It has, in particular, one exquisite beauty; that, after
exhibiting the two opposite armies, and all the apparatus for a battle,
[Rev 19:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011); then follows
immediately, [Rev 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020), the account
of the victory, without one word of an engagement or fighting. Here is
the most exact propriety; for what struggle can there be between
omnipotence, and the power of all the creation united against it! Every
description must have fallen short of this admirable silence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 20](rev020)

</div>
