<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev007)  [Next](rev009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001)

[Revelation 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 8:1</span></span>

And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven -
Such a silence is mentioned but in this one place. It was uncommon, and
highly observable: for praise is sounding in heaven day and night. In
particular, immediately before this silence, all the angels, and before
them the innumerable multitude, had been crying with a loud voice; and
now all is still at once: there is an universal pause. Hereby the
seventh seal is very remarkably distinguished from the six preceding.
This silence before God shows that those who were round about him were
expecting, with the deepest reverence, the great things which the Divine
Majesty would farther open and order. Immediately after, the seven
trumpets are heard, and a sound more august than ever. Silence is only a
preparation: the grand point is, the sounding the trumpets to the praise
of God. About half an hour - To St. John, in the vision, it might seem a
common half hour.

[Revelation 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 8:2</span></span>

And I saw - The seven trumpets belong to the seventh seal, as do the
seven phials to the seventh trumpet. This should be carefully
remembered, that we may not confound together the times which follow
each other. And yet it may be observed, in general, concerning the times
of the incidents mentioned in this book, it is not a certain rule, that
every part of the text is fully accomplished before the completion of
the following part begins. All things mentioned in the epistles are not
full accomplished before the seals are opened; neither are all things
mentioned under the seals fulfilled before the trumpets begin; nor yet
is the seventh trumpet wholly past before the phials are poured out.
Only the beginning of each part goes before the beginning of the
following. Thus the epistles begin before the seals, the seals before
the trumpets, the trumpets before the phials. One epistle begins before
another, one seal before another, one trumpet especially before another,
one phial before another. Yet, sometimes, what begins later than another
thing ends sooner; and what begins earlier than another thing ends
later: so the seventh trumpet begins earlier than the phials, and yet
extends beyond them all. The seven angels which stood before God - A
character of the highest eminence. And seven trumpets were given them. -
When men desire to make known openly a thing of public concern, they
give a token that may be seen or heard far and wide; and, among such,
none are more ancient than trumpets, [Lev
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009); [Num
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002); [Amo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006). The Israelites, in particular,
used them, both in the worship of God and in war; therewith openly
praising the power of God before, after, and in, the battle, [Jos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#004); [Ch2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#014), &c. And the angels here made
known by these trumpets the wonderful works of God, whereby all opposing
powers are successively shaken, till the kingdom of the world becomes
the kingdom of God and his Anointed.

These trumpets reach nearly from the time of St. John to the end of the
world; and they are distinguished by manifest tokens. The place of the
four first is specified; namely, east, west, south, and north
successively: in the three last, immediately after the time of each, the
place likewise is pointed out.

The seventh angel did not begin to sound, till after the going forth of
the second woe: but the trumpets were given to him and the other six
together; (as were afterward the phials to the seven angels;) and it is
accordingly said of all the seven together, that "they prepared
themselves to sound." These, therefore, were not men, as some have
thought, but angels, properly so called.

[Revelation 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 8:3</span></span>

And - In [Rev 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#002), the "trumpets were
given" to the seven angels; and in [Rev
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#006), they "prepared to sound." But
between these, the incense of this angel and the prayers of the saints
are mentioned; the interposing of which shows, that the prayers of the
saints and the trumpets of the angels go together: and these prayers,
with the effects of them, may well be supposed to extend through all the
seven. Another angel - Another created angel. Such are all that are here
spoken of. In this part of the Revelation, Christ is never termed an
angel; but, "the Lamb." Came and stood at the altar - Of burnt -
offerings. And there was given him a golden censer - A censer was a cup
on a plate or saucer. This was the token and the business of the office.
And much incense was given - Incense generally signifies prayer: here it
signifies the longing desires of the angels, that the holy counsel of
God might be fulfilled. And there was much incense; for as the prayers
of all the saints in heaven and earth are here joined together: so are
the desires of all the angels which are brought by this angel. That he
might place it - It is not said, offer it; for he was discharging the
office of an angel, not a priest. With the prayers of all the saints -
At the same time; but not for the saints. The angels are fellowservants
with the saints, not mediators for them.

[Revelation 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 8:4</span></span>

And the smoke of the incense came up before God, with the prayers of the
saints - A token that both were accepted.

[Revelation 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 8:5</span></span>

And there were thunderings, and lightnings, and voices, and an
earthquake - These, especially when attended with fire, are emblems of
God's dreadful judgments, which are immediately to follow.

[Revelation 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 8:6</span></span>

And the seven angels prepared themselves to sound - That each, when it
should come to his turn, might sound without delay. But while they do
sound, they still stand before God.

[Revelation 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 8:7</span></span>

And the first sounded - And every angel continued to sound, till all
which his trumpet brought was fulfilled and till the next began. There
are intervals between the three woes, but not between the four first
trumpets. And there was hail and fire mingled with blood, and there were
cast upon the earth - The earth seems to mean Asia; Palestine, in
particular. Quickly after the Revelation was given, the Jewish
calamities under Adrian began: yea, before the reign of Trajan was
ended. And here the trumpets begin. Even under Trajan, in the year 114,
the Jews made an insurrection with a most dreadful fury; and in the
parts about Cyrene, in Egypt, and in Cyprus, destroyed four hundred and
sixty thousand persons. But they were repressed by the victorious power
of Trajan, and afterward slaughtered themselves in vast multitudes. The
alarm spread itself also into Mesopotamia, where Lucius Quintius slew a
great number of them. They rose in Judea again in the second year of
Adrian; but were presently quelled. Yet in 133 they broke out more
violently than ever, under their false messiah Barcochab; and the war
continued till the year 135, when almost all Judea was desolated. In the
Egyptian plague also hail and fire were together. But here hail is to be
taken figuratively, as also blood, for a vehement, sudden, powerful,
hurtful invasion; and fire betokens the revenge of an enraged enemy,
with the desolation therefrom. And they were cast upon the earth - That
is, the fire and hail and blood. But they existed before they were cast
upon the earth. The storm fell, the blood flowed, and the flames raged
round Cyrene, and in Egypt, and Cyprus, before they reached Mesopotamia
and Judea. And the third part of the earth was burnt up - Fifty well -
fortified cities, and nine hundred and eighty - five well - inhabited
towns of the Jews, were wholly destroyed in this war. Vast tracts of
land were likewise left desolate and without inhabitant. And the third
part of the trees was burned up, and all the green grass was burned up -
Some understand by the trees, men of eminence among the Jews; by the
grass, the common people. The Romans spared many of the former: the
latter were almost all destroyed.

Thus vengeance began at the Jewish enemies of Christ's kingdom; though
even then the Romans did not quite escape. But afterwards it came upon
them more and more violently: the second trumpet affects the Roman
heathens in particular; the third, the dead, unholy Christians; the
fourth, the empire itself.

[Revelation 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 8:8</span></span>

And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning
with fire was cast into the sea - By the sea, particularly as it is here
opposed to the earth, we may understand the west, or Europe; and chiefly
the middle parts of it, the vast Roman empire. A mountain here seems to
signify a great force and multitude of people. [Jer
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025); so this may point at the
irruption of the barbarous nations into the Roman empire. The warlike
Goths broke in upon it about the year 250: and from that time the
irruption of one nation after another never ceased till the very form of
the Roman empire, and all but the name, was lost. The fire may mean the
fire of war, and the rage of those savage nations. And the third part of
the sea became blood - This need not imply, that just a third part of
the Romans was slain; but it is certain an inconceivable deal of blood
was shed in all these invasions.

[Revelation 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 8:9</span></span>

And the third part of the creatures that were in the sea - That is, of
all sorts of men, of every station and degree. Died - By those merciless
invaders. And the third part of the ships were destroyed - It is a
frequent thing to resemble a state or republic to a ship, wherein many
people are embarked together, and share in the same dangers. And how
many states were utterly destroyed by those inhuman conquerors! Much
likewise of this was literally fulfilled. How often was the sea tinged
with blood! How many of those who dwelt mostly upon it were killed! And
what number of ships destroyed!

[Revelation 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 8:10</span></span>

And the third angel sounded, and there fell from heaven a great star,
and it fell on the third part of the rivers - It seems Afric is meant by
the rivers; (with which this burning part of the world abounds in an
especial manner;) Egypt in particular, which the Nile overflows every
year far and wide. ln the whole African history, between the irruption
of the barbarous nations into the Roman empire, and the ruin of the
western empire, after the death of Valentinian the Third, there is
nothing more momentous than the Arian calamity, which sprung up in the
year 315. It is not possible to tell how many persons, particularly at
Alexandria, in all Egypt, and in the neighbouring countries, were
destroyed by the rage of the Arians. Yet Afric fared better than other
parts of the empire, with regard to the barbarous nations, till the
governor of it, whose wife was a zealous Arian, and aunt to Genseric,
king of the Vandals, was, under that pretence, unjustly accused before
the empress Placidia. He was then prevailed upon to invite the Vandals
into Afric; who under Genseric, in the year 428, founded there a kingdom
of their own, which continued till the year 533. Under these Vandal
kings the true believers endured all manner of afflictions and
persecutions. And thus Arianism was the inlet to all heresies and
calamities, and at length to Mahometanism itself. This great star was
not an angel, (angels are not the agents in the two preceding or the
following trumpet,) but a teacher of the church, one of the stars in the
right hand of Christ. Such was Arius. He fell from on high, as it were
from heaven, into the most pernicious doctrines, and made in his fall a
gazing on all sides, being great, and now burning as a torch. He fell on
the third part of the rivers - His doctrine spread far and wide,
particularly in Egypt. And on the fountains of water - wherewith Afric
abounds.

[Revelation 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 8:11</span></span>

And the name of the star is called Wormwood - The unparalleled
bitterness both of Arius himself and of his followers show the exact
propriety of his title. And the third part of the waters became wormwood
- A very considerable part of Afric was infected with the same bitter
doctrine and Spirit. And many men (though not a third part of them) died
- By the cruelty of the Arians.

[Revelation 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 8:12</span></span>

And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was smitten
- Or struck. After the emperor Theodosius died, and the empire was
divided into the eastern and the western, the barbarous nations poured
in as a flood. The Goths and Hunns in the years 403 and 405 fell upon
Italy itself with an impetuous force; and the former, in the year 410,
took Rome by storm, and plundered it without mercy. In the year 452
Attila treated the upper part of Italy in the same manner. In 455
Valentinian the Third was killed, and Genseric invited from Afric. He
plundered Rome for fourteen days together. Recimer plundered it again in
472. During all these commotions, one province was lost after another,
till, in the year 476, Odoacer seized upon Rome, deposed the emperor,
and put an end to the empire itself.

An eclipse of the sun or moon is termed by the Hebrews, a stroke. Now,
as such a darkness does not come all at once, but by degrees, so
likewise did the darkness which fell on the Roman, particularly the
western empire; for the stroke began long before Odoacer, namely, when
the barbarians first conquered the capital city. And the third part of
the moon, and the third part of the stars; so that the third part of
them was darkened - As under the first, second, and third trumpets by
"the earth," "sea, " and "rivers," are to be understood the men that
inhabit them; so here by the sun, moon, and stars, may be understood the
men that live under them, who are so overwhelmed with calamities in
those days of darkness, that they can no longer enjoy the light of
heaven: unless it may be thought to imply their being killed; so that
the sun, moon, and stars shine to them no longer. The very same
expression we find in . "I will darken all the lights of heaven over
them." As then the fourth seal transcends the three preceding seals, so
does the fourth trumpet the three preceding trumpets. For in this not
the third part of the earth, or sea, or rivers only, but of all who are
under the sun, are affected. And the day shone not for a third part
thereof - That is, shone with only a third part of its usual brightness.
And the night likewise - The moon and stars having lost a third part of
their lustre, either with regard to those who, being dead, saw them no
longer, or those who saw them with no satisfaction.

The three last trumpets have the time of their continuance fixed, and
between each of them there is a remarkable pause: whereas between the
four former there is no pause, nor is the time of their continuance
mentioned; but all together these four seem to take up a little less
than four hundred years.

[Revelation 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 8:13</span></span>

And I saw, and heard an angel flying - Between the trumpets of the
fourth and fifth angel. In the midst of heaven - The three woes, as we
shall see, stretch themselves over the earth from Persia eastward,
beyond Italy, westward; all which space had been filled with the gospel
by the apostles. In the midst of this lies Patmos, where St. John saw
this angel, saying, Woe, woe, woe - Toward the end of the fifth century,
there were many presages of approaching calamities. To the inhabitants
of the earth - All without exception. Heavy trials were coming on them
all. Even while the angel was proclaiming this, the preludes of these
three woes were already in motion. These fell more especially on the
Jews. As to the prelude of the first woe in Persia, Isdegard II., in
454, was resolved to abolish the sabbath, till he was, by Rabbi Mar,
diverted from his purpose. Likewise in the year 474, Phiruz afflicted
the Jews much, and compelled many of them to apostatize. A prelude of
the second woe was the rise of the Saracens, who, in 510, fell into
Arabia and Palestine. To prepare for the third woe, Innocent I., and his
successors, not only endeavoured to enlarge their episcopal jurisdiction
beyond all bounds, but also their worldly power, by taking every
opportunity of encroaching upon the empire, which as yet stood in the
way of their unlimited monarchy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 9](rev009)

</div>
