<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](act028)  [Next](rom002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

[Romans 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 1:1</span></span>

Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ - To this introduction the conclusion
answers, [Rom 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015), &c. Called to be
an apostle - And made an apostle by that calling. While God calls, he
makes what he calls. As the Judaizing teachers disputed his claim to the
apostolical office, it is with great propriety that he asserts it in the
very entrance of an epistle wherein their principles are entirely
overthrown. And various other proper and important thoughts are
suggested in this short introduction; particularly the prophecies
concerning the gospel, the descent of Jesus from David, the great
doctrines of his Godhead and resurrection, the sending the gospel to the
gentiles, the privileges of Christians, and the obedience and holiness
to which they were obliged in virtue of their profession. Separated - By
God, not only from the bulk of other men, from other Jews, from other
disciples, but even from other Christian teachers, to be a peculiar
instrument of God in spreading the gospel.

[Romans 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 1:2</span></span>

Which he promised before - Of old time, frequently, solemnly. And the
promise and accomplishment confirm each other. [Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018); [Isa
9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001); [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001); [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005).

[Romans 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 1:3</span></span>

Who was of the seed of David according to the flesh - That is, with
regard to his human nature. Both the natures of our Saviour are here
mentioned; but the human is mentioned first, because the divine was not
manifested in its full evidence till after his resurrection.

[Romans 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 1:4</span></span>

But powerfully declared to be the Son of God, according to the Spirit of
Holiness - That is, according to his divine nature. By the resurrection
from the dead - For this is both the fountain and the object of our
faith; and the preaching of the apostles was the consequence of Christ's
resurrection.

[Romans 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 1:5</span></span>

By whom we have received - I and the other apostles. Grace and
apostleship - The favour to be an apostle, and qualifications for it.
For obedience to the faith in all nations - That is, that all nations
may embrace the faith of Christ. For his name - For his sake; out of
regard to him.

[Romans 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 1:6</span></span>

Among whom - The nations brought to the obedience of faith. Are ye also
- But St. Paul gives them no preeminence above others.

[Romans 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 1:7</span></span>

To all that are in Rome - Most of these were heathens by birth, [Rom
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013), though with Jews mixed among
them. They were scattered up and down in that large city, and not yet
reduced into the form of a church. Only some had begun to meet in the
house of Aquila and Priscilla. Beloved of God - And from his free love,
not from any merit of yours, called by his word and his Spirit to
believe in him, and now through faith holy as he is holy. Grace - The
peculiar favour of God. And peace - All manner of blessings, temporal,
spiritual, and eternal. This is both a Christian salutation and an
apostolic benediction. From God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ -
This is the usual way wherein the apostles speak, "God the Father," "God
our Father." Nor do they often, in speaking of him, use the word Lord,
as it implies the proper name of God, Jehovah. In the Old Testament,
indeed, the holy men generally said, "The Lord our God;" for they were
then, as it were, servants; whereas now they are sons: and sons so well
know their father, that they need not frequently mention his proper
name. It is one and the same peace, and one and the same grace, which is
from God and from Jesus Christ. Our trust and prayer fix on God, as he
is the Father of Christ; and on Christ, as he presents us to the Father.

[Romans 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 1:8</span></span>

I thank - In the very entrance of this one epistle are the traces of all
spiritual affections; but of thankfulness above all, with the expression
of which almost all St. Paul's epistles begin. He here particularly
thanks God, that what otherwise himself should have done, was done at
Rome already. My God - This very word expresses faith, hope, love, and
consequently all true religion. Through Jesus Christ - The gifts of God
all pass through Christ to us; and all our petitions and thanksgivings
pass through Christ to God. That your faith is spoken of - In this kind
of congratulations St. Paul describes either the whole of Christianity,
as [Col 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#003), &c.; or some part of it,
as [Co1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005). Accordingly here he
mentions the faith of the Romans, suitably to his design, [Rom
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012), [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017). Through the whole world - This
joyful news spreading everywhere, that there were Christians also in the
imperial city. And the goodness and wisdom of God established faith in
the chief cities; in Jerusalem and Rome particularly; that from thence
it might be diffused to all nations.

[Romans 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 1:9</span></span>

God, whom I serve - As an apostle. In my spirit - Not only with my body,
but with my inmost soul. In the gospel - By preaching it.

[Romans 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 1:10</span></span>

Always - In all my solemn addresses to God. If by any means now at
length - This accumulation of particles declares the strength of his
desire.

[Romans 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 1:11</span></span>

That I may impart to you - Face to face, by laying on of hands, prayer,
preaching the gospel, private conversation. Some spiritual gift - With
such gifts the Corinthians, who had enjoyed the presence of St. Paul,
abounded, [Co1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007); [Co1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001); [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001). So did the Galatians likewise,
[Gal 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#005); and, indeed, all those
churches which had had the presence of any of the apostles had peculiar
advantages in this kind, from the laying on of their hands, [Act
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006); [Act
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017), &c., [Ti2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006). But as yet the Romans were
greatly inferior to them in this respect; for which reason the apostle,
in the twelfth chapter also, says little, if any thing, of their
spiritual gifts. He therefore desires to impart some, that they might be
established; for by these was the testimony of Christ confirmed among
them. That St. Peter had no more been at Rome than St. Paul, at the time
when this epistle was wrote, appears from the general tenor thereof, and
from this place in particular: for, otherwise, what St. Paul wishes to
impart to the Romans would have been imparted already by St. Peter.

[Romans 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 1:12</span></span>

That is, I long to be comforted by the mutual faith both of you and me -
He not only associates the Romans with, but even prefers them before,
himself. How different is this style of the apostle from that of the
modern court of Rome!

[Romans 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 1:13</span></span>

Brethren - A frequent, holy, simple, sweet, and yet grand, appellation.
The apostles but rarely address persons by their names; 'O ye
Corinthians," "O Timotheus." St. Paul generally uses this appellation, "
Brethren;" sometimes in exhortation, " My beloved," or, " My beloved
brethren;" St. James, "Brethren," "My brethren," My beloved brethren;"
St. Peter and Jude always, " Beloved;" St. John frequently, " Beloved;"
once, " Brethren;" oftener than once, My little children." Though I have
been hindered hitherto - Either by

business, see [Rom 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#022); or

persecution, [Th1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#002); or

the Spirit, [Act 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#007).

That I might have some fruit - Of my ministerial labours. Even as I have
already had from the many churches I have planted and watered among the
other gentiles.

[Romans 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 1:14</span></span>

To the Greeks and the barbarians - He includes the Romans under the
Greeks; so that this division comprises all nations. Both to the wise,
and the unwise - For there were unwise even among the Greeks, and wise
even among the barbarians. I am a debtor to all - I am bound by my
divine mission to preach the gospel to them.

[Romans 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 1:16</span></span>

For I am not ashamed of the gospel - To the world, indeed, it is folly
and weakness, [Co1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018); therefore, in
the judgment of the world, he ought to be ashamed of it; especially at
Rome, the head and theatre of the world. But Paul is not ashamed,
knowing it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believeth - The great and gloriously powerful means of saving all who
accept salvation in God's own way. As St. Paul comprises the sum of the
gospel in this epistle, so he does the sum of the epistle in this and
the following verse. Both to the Jew, and to the gentile - There is a
noble frankness, as well as a comprehensive sense, in these words, by
which he, on the one hand, shows the Jews their absolute need of the
gospel; and, on the other, tells the politest and greatest nation in the
world both that their salvation depended on receiving it, and that the
first offers of it were in every place to be made to the despised Jews.

[Romans 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 1:17</span></span>

The righteousness of God - This expression sometimes means God's
eternal, essential righteousness, which includes both justice and mercy,
and is eminently shown in condemning sin, and yet justifying the sinner.
Sometimes it means that righteousness by which a man, through the gift
of God, is made and is righteous; and that, both by receiving Christ
through faith, and by a conformity to the essential righteousness of
God. St. Paul, when treating of justification, means hereby the
righteousness of faith; therefore called the righteousness of God,
because God found out and prepared, reveals and gives, approves and
crowns it. In this verse the expression means, the whole benefit of God
through Christ for the salvation of a sinner. Is revealed - Mention is
made here, and [Rom 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018), of a twofold
revelation, - of wrath and of righteousness: the former, little known to
nature, is revealed by the law; the latter, wholly unknown to nature, by
the gospel. That goes before, and prepares the way; this follows. Each,
the apostle says, is revealed at the present time, in opposition to the
times of ignorance. From faith to faith - By a gradual series of still
clearer and clearer promises. As it is written - St. Paul had just laid
down three propositions:

Righteousness is by faith, [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017).

Salvation is by righteousness, [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016).

Both to the Jews and to the gentiles, [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016). Now all these are confirmed by
that single sentence, The just shall live by faith - Which was primarily
spoken of those who preserved their lives, when the Chaldeans besieged
Jerusalem, by believing the declarations of God, and acting according to
them. Here it means, He shall obtain the favour of God, and continue
therein by believing. [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)

[Romans 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 1:18</span></span>

For - There is no other way of obtaining life and salvation. Having laid
down his proposition, the apostle now enters upon the proof of it. His
first argument is, The law condemns all men, as being under sin. None
therefore is justified by the works of the law. This is treated of [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020). And hence he infers, Therefore
justification is by faith. The wrath of God is revealed - Not only by
frequent and signal interpositions of divine providence, but likewise in
the sacred oracles, and by us, his messengers. From heaven - This speaks
the majesty of Him whose wrath is revealed, his all - seeing eye, and
the extent of his wrath: whatever is under heaven is under the effects
of his wrath, believers in Christ excepted. Against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness - These two are treated of, [Rom
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023), &c. Of men - He is speaking here
of the gentiles, and chiefly the wisest of them. Who detain the truth -
For it struggles against their wickedness. In unrighteousness - The word
here includes ungodliness also.

[Romans 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 1:19</span></span>

For what is to be known of God - Those great principles which are
indispensably necessary to be known. Is manifest in them; for God hath
showed it to them - By the light which enlightens every man that cometh
into the world.

[Romans 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 1:20</span></span>

For those things of him which are invisible, are seen - By the eye of
the mind. Being understood - They are seen by them, and them only, who
use their understanding

[Romans 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 1:21</span></span>

Because, knowing God - For the wiser heathens did know that there was
one supreme God; yet from low and base considerations they conformed to
the idolatry of the vulgar. They did not glorify him as God, neither
were thankful - They neither thanked him for his benefits, nor glorified
him for his divine perfection. But became vain - Like the idols they
worshipped. In their reasonings - Various, uncertain, foolish. What a
terrible instance have we of this in the writings of Lucretius! What
vain reasonings, and how dark a heart, amidst so pompous professions of
wisdom!

[Romans 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 1:23</span></span>

And changed - With the utmost folly. Here are three degrees of
ungodliness and of punishment: the first is described, [Rom
1:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021); the second, [Rom
1:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025); the third, in [Rom
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028), and following verses. The
punishment in each case is expressed by God gave them up. If a man will
not worship God as God, he is so left to himself that he throws away his
very manhood. Reptiles - Or creeping things; as beetles, and various
kinds of serpents.

[Romans 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 1:24</span></span>

Wherefore - One punishment of sin is from the very nature of it, as [Rom
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027); another, as here, is from
vindictive justice. Uncleanness - Ungodliness and uncleanness are
frequently joined, [Th1 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#005) as are the
knowledge of God and purity. God gave them up - By withdrawing his
restraining grace.

[Romans 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 1:25</span></span>

Who changed the truth - The true worship of God. Into a lie - False,
abominable idolatries. And worshipped - Inwardly. And served -
Outwardly.

[Romans 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 1:26</span></span>

Therefore God gave them up to vile affections - To which the heathen
Romans were then abandoned to the last degree; and none more than the
emperors themselves.

[Romans 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 1:27</span></span>

Receiving the just recompense of their error - Their idolatry being
punished with that unnatural lust, which was as horrible a dishonour to
the body, as their idolatry was to God.

[Romans 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 1:28</span></span>

God gave them up to an undiscerning mind - Treated of, [Rom
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032). To do things not expedient -
Even the vilest abominations, treated of [Rom
1:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029).

[Romans 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 1:29</span></span>

Filled with all injustice - This stands in the first place;
unmercifulness, in the last. Fornication - Includes here every species
of uncleanness. Maliciousness - The Greek word properly implies a temper
which delights in hurting another, even without any advantage to itself.

[Romans 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 1:30</span></span>

Whisperers - Such as secretly defame others. Backbiters - Such as speak
against others behind their back. Haters of God - That is, rebels
against him, deniers of his providence, or accusers of his justice in
their adversities; yea, having an inward heart - enmity to his justice
and holiness. Inventors of evil things - Of new pleasures, new ways of
gain, new arts of hurting, particularly in war.

[Romans 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 1:31</span></span>

Covenant - breakers - It is well known, the Romans, as a nation, from
the very beginning of their commonwealth, never made any scruple of
vacating altogether the most solemn engagement, if they did not like it,
though made by their supreme magistrate, in the name of the whole
people. They only gave up the general who had made it, and then supposed
themselves to be at full liberty. Without natural affection - The custom
of exposing their own new - born children to perish by cold, hunger, or
wild beasts, which so generally prevailed in the heathen world,
particularly among the Greeks and Romans, was an amazing instance of
this; as is also that of killing their aged and helpless parents, now
common among the American heathens.

[Romans 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 1:32</span></span>

Not only do the same, but have pleasure in those that practise them -
This is the highest degree of wickedness. A man may be hurried by his
passions to do the thing he hates; but he that has pleasure in those
that do evil, loves wickedness for wickedness' sake. And hereby he
encourages them in sin, and heaps the guilt of others upon his own head.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 2](rom002)

</div>
