<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom008)  [Next](rom010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

[Romans 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 9:1</span></span>

In Christ - This seems to imply an appeal to him. In the Holy Ghost -
Through his grace.

[Romans 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 9:2</span></span>

I have great sorrow - A high degree of spiritual sorrow and of spiritual
Joy may consist together, [Rom 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#039).
By declaring his sorrow for the unbelieving Jews, who excluded
themselves from all the blessings he had enumerated, he shows that what
he was now about to speak, he did not speak from any prejudice to them.

[Romans 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 9:3</span></span>

I could wish - Human words cannot fully describe the motions of souls
that are full of God. As if he had said, I could wish to suffer in their
stead; yea, to be an anathema from Christ in their place. In how high a
sense he wished this, who can tell, unless himself had been asked and
had resolved the question? Certainly he did not then consider himself at
all, but only others and the glory of God. The thing could not be; yet
the wish was pious and solid; though with a tacit condition, if it were
right and possible.

[Romans 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 9:4</span></span>

Whose is the adoption, &c. - He enumerates six prerogatives, of which
the first pair respect God the Father, the second Christ, the third the
Holy Ghost. The adoption and the glory - That is, Israel is the first -
born child of God, and the God of glory is their God, [Deu
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007); [Psa
106:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#020). These are relative to each
other. At once God is the Father of Israel, and Israel are the people of
God. He speaks not here of the ark, or any corporeal thing. God himself
is "the glory of his people Israel." And the covenants, and the giving
of the law - The covenant was given long before the law. It is termed
covenants, in the plural, because it was so often and so variously
repeated, and because there were two dispositions of it, [Gal
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024), frequently called two covenants;
the one promising, the other exhibiting the promise. And the worship,
and the promises - The true way of worshipping God; and all the promises
made to the fathers.

[Romans 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 9:5</span></span>

To the preceding, St. Paul now adds two more prerogatives. Theirs are
the fathers - The patriarchs and holy men of old, yea, the Messiah
himself. Who is over all, God blessed for ever - The original words
imply the self - existent, independent Being, who was, is, and is to
come. Over all - The supreme; as being God, and consequently blessed for
ever. No words can more dearly express his divine, supreme majesty, and
his gracious sovereignty both over Jews and, gentiles.

[Romans 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 9:6</span></span>

Not as if - The Jews imagined that the word of God must fail if all
their nation were not saved. This St. Paul now refutes, and proves that
the word itself had foretold their falling away. The word of God - The
promises of God to Israel. Had fallen to the ground - This could not be.
Even now, says the apostle, some enjoy the promises; and hereafter "all
Israel shall be saved." This is the sum of the ninth, tenth, and
eleventh chapters. For - Here he enters upon the proof of it. All are
not Israel, who are of Israel - The Jews vehemently maintained the
contrary; namely, that all who were born Israelites, and they only, were
the people of God. The former part of this assertion is refuted here,
the latter, [Rom 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024), &c. The sum is,
God accepts all believers, and them only; and this is no way contrary to
his word. Nay, he hath declared in his word, both by types and by
express testimonies, that believers are accepted as the "children of the
promise," while unbelievers are rejected, though they are "children
after the flesh." All are not Israel - Not in the favour of God. Who are
lineally descended of Israel.

[Romans 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 9:7</span></span>

Neither because they are lineally the seed of Abraham, will it follow
that they are all children of God - This did not hold even in Abraham's
own family; and much less in his remote descendants. But God then said,
In Isaac shall thy seed be called - That is, Isaac, not Ishmael, shall
be called thy seed; that seed to which the promise is made.

[Romans 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 9:8</span></span>

That is, Not the children, &c. - As if he had said, This is a clear type
of things to come; showing us, that in all succeeding generations, not
the children of the flesh, the lineal descendants of Abraham, but the
children of the promise, they to whom the promise is made, that is,
believers, are the children of God. [Gen
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)

[Romans 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 9:9</span></span>

For this is the word of the promise - By the power of which Isaac was
conceived, and not by the power of nature. Not, Whosoever is born of
thee shall be blessed, but, At this time - Which I now appoint. I will
come, and Sarah shall have a son - And he shall inherit the blessing.
[Gen 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010).

[Romans 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 9:10</span></span>

And that God's blessing does not belong to all the descendants of
Abraham, appears not only by this instance, but by that of Esau and
Jacob, who was chosen to inherit the blessing, before either of them had
done good or evil. The apostle mentions this to show, that neither were
their ancestors accepted through any merit of their own. That the
purpose of God according to election might stand - Whose purpose was, to
elect or choose the promised seed. Not of works - Not for any preceding
merit in him he chose. But of him that called - Of his own good pleasure
who called to that privilege whom he saw good.

[Romans 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 9:12</span></span>

The elder - Esau. Shall serve the younger - Not in person, for he never
did; but in his posterity. Accordingly the Edomites were often brought
into subjection by the Israelites. [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023).

[Romans 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 9:13</span></span>

As it is written - With which word in Genesis, spoken so long before,
that of Malachi agrees. I have loved Jacob - With a peculiar love; that
is, the Israelites, the posterity of Jacob. And I have, comparatively,
hated Esau - That is, the Edomites, the posterity of Esau. But observe,
This does not relate to the person of Jacob or Esau Nor does it relate
to the eternal state either of them or their posterity. Thus far the
apostle has been proving his proposition, namely, that the exclusion of
a great part of the seed of Abraham, yea, and of Isaac, from the special
promises of God, was so far from being impossible, that, according to
the scriptures themselves, it had actually happened. He now introduces
and refutes an objection. [Mal 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002).

[Romans 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 9:14</span></span>

Is there injustice with God - Is it unjust in God to give Jacob the
blessing rather than Esau? or to accept believers, and them only. God
forbid - In no wise. This is well consistent with justice; for he has a
right to fix the terms on which he will show mercy, according to his
declaration to Moses, petitioning for all the people, after they had
committed idolatry with the golden calf. I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy - According to the terms I myself have fixed. And I will
have compassion on whom I will have compassion - Namely, on those only
who submit to my terms, who accept of it in the way that I have
appointed.

[Romans 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 9:15</span></span>

[Exo 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019).

[Romans 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 9:16</span></span>

It - The blessing. Therefore is not of him that willeth, nor of him that
runneth - It is not the effect either of the will or the works of man,
but of the grace and power of God. The will of man is here opposed to
the grace of God, and man's running, to the divine operation. And this
general declaration respects not only Isaac and Jacob, and the
Israelites in the time of Moses, but likewise all the spiritual children
of Abraham, even to the end of the world.

[Romans 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 9:17</span></span>

Moreover - God has an indisputable right to reject those who will not
accept the blessings on his own terms. And this he exercised in the case
of Pharaoh; to whom, after many instances of stubbornness and rebellion,
he said, as it is recorded in scripture, For this very thing have I
raised thee up - That is, Unless thou repent, this will surely be the
consequence of my raising thee up, making thee a great and glorious
king, that my power will be shown upon thee, (as indeed it was, by
overwhelming him and his army in the sea,) and my name declared through
all the earth - As it is at this day. Perhaps this may have a still
farther meaning. It seems that God was resolved to show his power over
the river, the insects, other animals, (with the natural causes of their
health, diseases, life, and death,) over the meteors, the air, the sun,
(all of which were worshipped by the Egyptians, from whom other nations
learned their idolatry,) and at once over all their gods, by that
terrible stroke of slaying all their priests, and their choicest
victims, the firstborn of man and beast; and all this with a design, not
only to deliver his people Israel, (for which a single act of
omnipotence would have sufficed,) but to convince the Egyptians, that
the objects of their worship were but the creatures of Jehovah, and
entirely in his power, and to draw them and the neighbouring nations,
who should hear of all these wonders, from their idolatry, to worship
the one God. For the execution of this design, (in order to the display
of the divine power over the various objects of their worship, in
variety of wonderful acts, which were at the same time just punishments
for their cruel oppression of the Israelites,) God was pleased to raise
to the throne of an absolute monarchy, a man, not whom he had made
wicked on purpose, but whom he found so, the proudest, the most daring
and obstinate of all the Egyptian princes; and who, being incorrigible,
well deserved to be set up in that situation, where the divine judgments
fell the heaviest. [Exo 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016).

[Romans 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 9:18</span></span>

So then - That is, accordingly he does show mercy on his own terms,
namely, on them that believe. And whom he willeth - Namely, them that
believe not. He hardeneth - Leaves to the hardness of their hearts.

[Romans 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 9:19</span></span>

Why doth he still find fault - The particle still is strongly expressive
of the objector's sour, morose murmuring. For who hath resisted his will
- The word his likewise expresses his surliness and aversion to God,
whom he does not even deign to name.

[Romans 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 9:20</span></span>

Nay, but who art thou, O man - Little, impotent, ignorant man. That
repliest against God - That accusest God of injustice, for himself
fixing the terms on which he will show mercy? Shall the thing formed say
to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus - Why hast thou made
me capable of honour and immortality, only by believing?

[Romans 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 9:21</span></span>

Hath not the potter power over the clay - And much more hath not God
power over his creatures, to appoint one vessel, namely, the believer,
to honour, and another, the unbeliever, to dishonour?

If we survey the right which God has over us, in a more general way,
with regard to his intelligent creatures, God may be considered in two
different views, as Creator, Proprietor, and Lord of all; or, as their
moral Governor, and Judge.

God, as sovereign Lord and Proprietor of all, dispenses his gifts or
favours to his creatures with perfect wisdom, but by no rules or methods
of proceeding that we are acquainted with. The time when we shall exist,
the country where we shall live, our parents, our constitution of body
and turn of mind; these, and numberless other circumstances, are
doubtless ordered with perfect wisdom, but by rules that lie quite out
of our sight. But God's methods of dealing with us, as our Governor and
Judge, are dearly revealed and perfectly known; namely, that he will
finally reward every man according to his works: "He that believeth
shalt be saved, and he that believeth not shall be damned."

Therefore, though "He hath mercy on whom he willeth, and whom he willeth
he hardeneth," that is, suffers to be hardened in consequence of their
obstinate wickedness; yet his is not the will of an arbitrary,
capricious, or tyrannical being. He wills nothing but what is infinitely
wise and good; and therefore his will is a most proper rule of judgment.
He will show mercy, as he hath assured us, to none but true believers,
nor harden any but such as obstinately refuse his mercy. [Jer
18:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#006)

[Romans 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 9:22</span></span>

What if God, being willing - Referring to [Rom
9:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018). That is, although it was now
his will, because of their obstinate unbelief, To show his wrath - Which
necessarily presupposes sin. And to make his power known - This is
repeated from [Rom 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017). Yet endured -
As he did Pharaoh. With much longsuffering - Which should have led them
to repentance. The vessels of wrath - Those who had moved his wrath by
still rejecting his mercy. Fitted for destruction - By their own wilful
and final impenitence. Is there any injustice in this ?

[Romans 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 9:23</span></span>

That he might make known - What if by showing such longsuffering even to
"the vessels of wrath," he did the more abundantly show the greatness of
his glorious goodness, wisdom, and power, on the vessels of mercy; on
those whom he had himself, by his grace, prepared for glory. Is this any
injustice?

[Romans 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 9:24</span></span>

Even us - Here the apostle comes to the other proposition, of grace free
for all, whether Jew or gentile. Of the Jews - This he treats of, [Rom
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025). Of the gentiles - Treated of in
the same verse.

[Romans 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 9:25</span></span>

Beloved - As a spouse. Who once was not beloved - Consequently, not
unconditionally elected. This relates directly to the final restoration
of the Jews. [Hos 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)

[Romans 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 9:26</span></span>

There shall they be called the sons of God - So that they need not leave
their own country and come to Judea. [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010)

[Romans 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 9:27</span></span>

But Isaiah testifies, that (as many gentiles will be accepted, so) many
Jews will be rejected; that out of all the thousands of Israel, a
remnant only shall be saved. This was spoken originally of the few that
were saved from the ravage of Sennacherib's army. [Isa
10:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)

[Romans 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 9:28</span></span>

For he is finishing or cutting short his account - In rigorous justice,
will leave but a small remnant. There will be so general a destruction,
that but a small number will escape.

[Romans 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 9:29</span></span>

As Isaiah had said before - Namely, [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009), concerning those who were
besieged in Jerusalem by Rezin and Pekah. Unless the Lord had left us a
seed - Which denotes, The present paucity: The future abundance. We had
been as Sodom - So that it is no unexampled thing for the main body of
the Jewish nation to revolt from God, and perish in their sin.

[Romans 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 9:30</span></span>

What shall we say then - What is to be concluded from all that has been
said but this, That the gentiles, who followed not after righteousness -
Who a while ago had no knowledge of, no care or thought about, it. Have
attained to righteousness - Or justification. Even the righteousness
which is by faith. This is the first conclusion we may draw from the
preceding observations. The second is, that Israel - The Jews Although
following after the law of righteousness - That law which, duly used,
would have led them to faith, and thereby to righteousness. Have not
attained to the law of righteousness - To that righteousness or
justification which is one great end of the law

[Romans 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 9:32</span></span>

And wherefore have they not? Is it because God eternally decreed they
should not? There is nothing like this to be met with but agreeable to
his argument the apostle gives us this good reason for it, Because they
sought it not by faith - Whereby alone it could be attained. But as it
were - In effect, if not professsedly, by works. For they stumbled at
that stumblingstone - Christ crucified.

[Romans 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">rom 9:33</span></span>

As it is written - Foretold by their own prophet. Behold, I lay in Sion
- I exhibit in my church, what, though it is in truth the only sure
foundation of happiness, yet will be in fact a stumblingstone and rock
of offence - An occasion of ruin to many, through their obstinate
unbelief. [Isa 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014); [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 10](rom010)

</div>
