<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1005)  [Next](sa1007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 6:1</span></span>

Seven months - So long they kept it, as loath to lose so great a prize,
and willing to try all ways to keep it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 6:3</span></span>

It shall be known - You shall understand, what is hitherto doubtful,
whether he was the author of these calamities, and why they continued so
long upon you.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 6:4</span></span>

Emerods - Figures representing the disease. These they offered not in
contempt of God, for they fought to gain his favour hereby; but in
testimony of their humiliation, that by leaving this monument of their
own shame and misery, they might obtain pity from God. Mice - Which
marred their land by destroying the fruits thereof; as the other plague
afflicted their Bodies.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 6:5</span></span>

Give glory - The glory of his power in conquering you, who seemed to
have conquered him; of his justice in punishing you, and of his goodness
if he relieve you.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 6:6</span></span>

Wherefore, &c. - They express themselves thus, either because some
opposed the sending home the ark, though most had consented to it; or
because they thought they would hardly send it away in the manner
prescribed, by giving glory to God, and taking shame to themselves.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 6:7</span></span>

Milch kine, &c. - In respect to the ark; and for the better discovery,
because such untamed heifers are apt to wander, and keep no certain and
constant paths, as oxen accustomed to the yoke do, and therefore were
most unlikely to keep the direct road to Israel's land. From them -
Which would stir up natural affection in their dams, and cause them
rather to return home, than to go to a strange country.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 6:9</span></span>

His own coast - Or Border, that is, the way that leadeth to his coast,
or border, namely, the country to which it belongs. Then he, &c. - Which
they might well conclude, if such heifers should against their common
use, and natural instinct, go into a strange path, and regularly and
constantly proceed in it, without any man's conduct.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 6:12</span></span>

Beth - shemesh - A city of the priests, who were by office to take care
of it. Loving - Testifying at once both their natural and vehement
inclination to their calves, and the supernatural power which over -
ruled them to a contrary course. The lords went - To prevent all
imposture, and to get assurance of the truth of the event. All which
circumstances tended to the greater illustration of God's glory.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 6:14</span></span>

They - Not the lords of the Philistines, but the Beth - shemites, the
priest that dwelt there. Offered the kine - There may seem to he a
double error in this act.

First, that they offered females for a burnt - offering, contrary to

[Lev 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003).

Secondly, that they did it in a forbidden place, [Deu
12:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005). But this case being
extraordinary, may in some sort excuse it, if they did not proceed by
ordinary rules.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 6:18</span></span>

Villages - This is added for explication of that foregoing phrase, all
the cities; either to shew, that under the name of the five cities were
comprehended all the villages and territories belonging to them, in
whose name, and at whose charge these presents were made; or to express
the difference between this and the former present, the emerods being
only five, according to the five cities mentioned, [Sa1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#017), because it may seem, the cities
only, or principally, were pestered with that disease; and the mice
being many more according to the number of all the cities, as is here
expressed: the word city being taken generally so, as to include not
only fenced cities, but also the country villages, and the fields
belonging to them. Abel - This is mentioned as the utmost border of the
Philistines territory, to which the plague of mice extended. And this
place is here called Abel, by anticipation from the great mourning
mentioned in the following verse. It is desirable, to see the ark in its
habitation, in all the circumstances of solemnity. But it is better to
have it on a great stone, and in the fields of the wood, than to be
without it. The intrinsic grandeur of divine ordinances ought not to be
diminished in our eyes, by the meanness and poverty of the place, where
they are administered.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 6:19</span></span>

Had looked - Having now an opportunity which they never yet had, it is
not strange they had a vehement curiosity to see the contents of the
ark. Of the people - In and near Beth - shemesh and coming from all
parts on this occasion.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 6:20</span></span>

Who is able, &c. - That is, to minister before the ark where the Lord is
present. Since God is so severe to mark what is amiss in his servants,
who is sufficient to serve him? It seems to be a complaint, or
expostulation with God, concerning this great instance of his severity.
And to whom, &c. - Who will dare to receive the ark with so much hazard
to themselves. Thus when the word of God works with terror on men's
consciences, instead of taking the blame to themselves, they frequently
quarrel with the word, and endeavour to put it from them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 6:21</span></span>

Kirjath - jearim - Whither they sent, either because the place was not
far off from them, and so it might soon be removed: or because it was a
place of eminency and strength, and somewhat farther distant from the
Philistines, where therefore it was likely to be better preserved from
any new attempts of the Philistines, and to be better attended by the
Israelites, who would more freely and frequently come to it at such a
place, than in Beth - shemesh, which was upon the border of their
enemies land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 7](sa1007)

</div>
