<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1024)  [Next](sa1026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 25:1</span></span>

Lamented him - Those have hard hearts, that can bury their faithful
ministers with dry eyes, and are not sensible of the loss of them who
have prayed for them, and taught them the way of the Lord.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 25:2</span></span>

Carmel - In some part of this wilderness Israel wandered, when they came
out of Egypt. The place would bring to mind God's care concerning them,
which David might now improve for his own encouragement.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 25:3</span></span>

Abigail - That is, the joy of his father: yet he could not promise
himself much joy of her, when he married her to such an husband: it
seems, in inquiring, (no unfrequent thing) more after his wealth, than
after his wisdom. Caleb - This is added to aggravate his crime, that he
was a degenerate branch of that noble stock of Caleb, and consequently
of the tribe of Judah, as David was.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 25:4</span></span>

Shear sheep - Which times were celebrated with feasting.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 25:6</span></span>

Prosperity - By this expression David both congratulates Nabal's
felicity, and tacitly minds him of the distress in which he and his men
were.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 25:7</span></span>

We hurt not - This considering the licentiousness of soldiers, and the
necessities David and his men were exposed to, was no small favour,
which Nabal was bound both in justice, and gratitude, and prudence to
requite.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 25:8</span></span>

A good day - That is, in a day of feasting and rejoicing; when men are
most chearful and liberal; when thou mayst relieve us out of thy
abundance without damage to thyself; when thou art receiving the mercies
of God, and therefore obliged to pity and relieve distressed and
indigent persons.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 25:17</span></span>

Can not speak - But he flies into a passion.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 25:18</span></span>

Abigail took, &c. - This she did without his leave, because it was a
case of apparent necessity, for the preservation of herself, and
husband, and all the family from imminent ruin. And surely, that
necessity which dispenseth with God's positive commands, might dispense
with the husband's right, in this case. Bottles - Casks or rundlets.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 25:22</span></span>

Enemies of David - That is, unto David himself. But because it might
seem ominous to curse himself, therefore instead of David, he mentions
David's enemies. But is this the voice of David? Can he speak so
unadvisedly with his lips? Has he been so long in the school of
affliction, and learned no more patience therein? Lord, what is man? And
what need have we to pray, lead us not into temptation.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 25:24</span></span>

And said, &c. - Impute Nabal's sin to me, and if thou pleasest, punish
it in me, who here offer myself as a sacrifice to thy just indignation.
This whole speech of Abigail shews great wisdom, by an absolute
submitting to mercy, without any pretence of justification, of what was
done, (but rather with aggravation of it) she endeavours to work upon
David's generosity, to pardon it. And there is hardly any head of
argument, whence the greatest orator might argue in this case, which she
doth not manage to the best advantage.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 25:25</span></span>

Nabal is his name - Nabal signifies a fool.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 25:26</span></span>

As Nabal - Let them be as contemptible as Nabal is, and will be for this
odious action; let them be as unable to do thee any hurt as he is; let
them be forced to yield to thee, and implore thy pardon, as Nabal now
doth by my mouth: let the vengeance thou didst design upon Nabal and his
family fall upon their heads, who, by their inveterate malice against
thee, do more deserve it than this fool for this miscarriage; and much
more than all the rest of our family, who, as they are none of thine
enemies, so they were in way guilty of this wicked action. And therefore
spare these, and execute thy vengeance upon more proper objects.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 25:27</span></span>

Blessing - So a gift or present is called here, and elsewhere; not only
because the matter of it comes from God's blessing; but also because it
is given with a blessing, or with a good will. Unto the young men - As
being unworthy of thine acceptance or use.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa1 25:28</span></span>

The trespass - That is, which I have taken upon myself, and which, if it
be punished, the punishment will reach to me. Sure house - Will give the
kingdom to thee, and to thy house for ever, as he hath promised thee.
And therefore let God's kindness to thee, make thee gentle and merciful
to others; do not sully thy approaching glory with the stain of innocent
blood; but consider, that it is the glory of a king, to profit by
offences: and that it will be thy loss to cut off such as will shortly
be thy subjects. The battles - For the Lord, and for the people of the
Lord against their enemies; especially, the Philistines. And as this is
thy proper work, and therein thou mayest expect God's blessing; so it is
not thy work to draw thy sword in thy own private quarrel against any of
the people of the Lord; and God will not bless thee in it. Evil hath
not, &c. - Though thou hast been charged with many crimes by Saul and
others; yet thy innocency is evident to all men: do not therefore by
this cruel act, justify thine enemies reproaches, or blemish thy great
and just reputation.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 25:29</span></span>

A man - Saul though no way injured. Thy soul - To take away thy life.
Bundle of life - Or, in the bundle: that is, in the society, or
congregation of the living; out of which, men are taken, and cut off by
death. The phrase is taken from the common usage of men, who bind those
things in bundles, which they are afraid to lose. The meaning is, God
will preserve thy life; and therefore it becomes not thee, unnecessarily
to take away the lives of any; especially of the people of thy God. With
the Lord - That is, in the custody of God, who by his watchful
providence, preserves this bundle, and all that are in it; and thee in a
particular manner, as being thy God in a particular way, and special
covenant. The Jews understand this. not only of the present life, but of
that which is to come, even the happiness of departed souls, and
therefore use it commonly, as an inscription on their grave - stones.
"Here we have laid the body, trusting the soul is bound up in the bundle
of life with the Lord." Sling out - God himself will cut them off
suddenly, violently, and irresistibly; and cast them far away; both from
his presence, and from thy neighbourhood, and from all capacity of doing
thee hurt.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa1 25:31</span></span>

No grief - The mind and conscience will be free from all the torment
which such an action would cause in thee. By which, she intimates, what
a blemish this would be to his glory, what a disturbance to his peace,
if he proceeded to execute his purpose: and withal implies, how
comfortable it would be to him to remember, that he had for conscience
to God, restrained his passions. Causeless - Which she signifies would
be done if he should go on. For though Nabal had been guilty of
abominable rudeness, and ingratitude; yet he had done nothing worthy of
death, by the laws of God or of man. And whatsoever he had done, the
rest of his family were innocent. Avenged - Which is directly contrary
to God's law, [Lev 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018); [Deu
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035). Then - When God shall make thee
king, let me find grace in thy sight.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa1 25:32</span></span>

The Lord - Who by his gracious providence so disposed matters, that thou
shouldst come to me: He rightly begins at the fountain of his
deliverance; and then proceeds to the instruments.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa1 25:33</span></span>

From coming, &c. - Which I had sworn to do. Hereby it plainly appears,
that oaths whereby men bind themselves to any sin, are null and void:
and as it was a sin to make them; so it is adding sin to sin to perform
them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa1 25:35</span></span>

Accepted - That is, shewed my acceptance of thy person, by my grant of
thy request.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa1 25:36</span></span>

A feast - As the manner was upon those solemn occasions. Sordid
covetousness, and vain prodigality were met together in him. Told
nothing - As he was then incapable of admonition, his reason and
conscience being both asleep.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa1 25:37</span></span>

His heart died - He fainted away through the fear and horror of so great
a mischief though it was past. As one, who having in the night galloped
over a narrow plank, laid upon a broken bridge, over a deep river; when
in the morning he came to review it, was struck dead with the horror of
the danger he had been in.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">sa1 25:38</span></span>

Smote - God either inflicted some other stroke upon him, or increased
his grief and fear to such an height, as killed him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa1 25:39</span></span>

Blessed, &c. - This was another instance of human infirmity in David.
David sent - But this doubtless was not done immediately after Nabal's
death, but some time after it; though such circumstances be commonly
omitted in the sacred history; which gives only the heads, and most
important passages of things.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 26](sa1026)

</div>
