<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2013)  [Next](sa2015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 14:1</span></span>

Was towards - He desired to see him, but was ashamed to shew kindness to
one whom God's law and his own conscience obliged him to punish; he
wanted therefore a fair pretence, which therefore Joab gave him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 14:2</span></span>

Anoint - As they used to do when they were out of a mourning state.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 14:5</span></span>

Widow - One of them who most need thy compassion, and whom thou art by
God's law obliged in a singular manner to relieve.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 14:9</span></span>

Be guiltless - If through thy forgetfulness or neglect of this my just
cause, my adversaries prevail and destroy my son, my desire is, that God
would not lay it to the king's charge, but rather to me and mine, so the
king may be exempted thereby. Whereby she insinuates, that such an
omission will bring guilt upon him; and yet most decently orders her
phrase so as not to seem to blame or threaten the king. This sense seems
best to agree with David's answer, which shew's that she desired some
farther assurances of the king's care.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 14:11</span></span>

Remember - Remember the Lord, in whose presence thou hast made me this
promise, and who will be a witness against thee, if thou breakest it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 14:13</span></span>

Wherefore then - If thou shouldst not permit the avengers of blood to
molest me, or to destroy my son, who are but two persons; how
unreasonable is it that thou shouldest proceed in thy endeavours to
avenge Amnon's blood upon Absalom, whose death would be grievous to the
whole commonwealth of Israel, all whose eyes are upon him as the heir of
the crown, and a wise, and valiant, and amiable person, unhappy only in
this one act of killing Amnon, which was done upon an high provocation,
and whereof thou thyself didst give the occasion by permitting Amnon to
go unpunished? Faulty - By thy word, and promise, and oath given to me
for my son, thou condemnest thyself for not allowing the same equity
towards thy own son. It is true, Absalom's case was widely different
from that which she had supposed. But David was too well affected to
him, to remark that difference, and was more desirous than she could be,
to apply that favourable judgment to his own son, which he had given
concerning hers.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 14:14</span></span>

We - We shall certainly die, both thou, O king, who art therefore
obliged to take care of thy successor, Absalom; and Absalom, who, if he
do not die by the hand of justice, must shortly die by the necessity of
nature: and Amnon too must have died in the common way of all flesh, if
Absalom had not cut him off. Respect - So far as to exempt him from this
common law of dying. Not expelled - He hath given laws to this purpose,
that the man - slayer who is banished should not always continue in
banishment, but upon the High - priest's death return to his own city.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 14:15</span></span>

The people - The truth is, I was even forced to this bold address to
thee by the disposition of thy people, who are discontented at Absalom's
perpetual banishment, lest, if Absalom by his father - in - law's
assistance invade the land, the people who have a great kindness for
him, and think he is very hard used, should take up arms.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 14:16</span></span>

Hear - For I know the king is so wise and just, that I assure myself of
audience and acceptation. Deliver - To grant my request concerning my
son, and consequently the peoples petition concerning Absalom. My son -
Implying that her life was bound up in the life of her son, and that she
could not outlive his death; (and supposing that it might be David's
case also, and would therefore touch him in a tender part, though it
were not proper to say it expressly:) and thereby suggesting, that the
safety and comfort of the people of Israel, depended upon Absalom's
restitution. Inheritance - That is, out of that land which God gave to
his people to be their inheritance, and in which alone God hath settled
the place of his presence and worship: whereby she intimates the danger
of Absalom's living in a state of separation from God, and his house,
amongst idolaters.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 14:17</span></span>

Angel - In wisdom, and justice, and goodness. Therefore - Because thou
art so wise and gracious to those who in strict justice deserve
punishment, God will own and stand by thee in this thy act of grace: or
God will prosper thee in thy enterprizes.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 14:19</span></span>

Of Joab - Hast thou not said and done this by Joab's direction. Said -
It is even so, thou hast discovered the truth. These words - As to the
substance of them, but not as to all the expressions; for these were to
be varied as the king's answer gave occasion.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 14:20</span></span>

To fetch - That is, to propose his, and the peoples desire of Absalom's
restitution in this parabolical manner. In the earth - Or, in this land,
in all thy kingdom; all the counsels and devices of thy subjects.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 14:22</span></span>

Fulfilled - But it seems David had no power to dispense with God's laws,
nor to spare any whom God appointed him to destroy: for the laws of God
bound the kings and rulers, as well as the people of Israel. How justly
did God make this man, whom he had so sinfully spared, a scourge to him?

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 14:24</span></span>

Let him turn - Lest whilst be shewed some mercy to Absalom, he should
seem to approve of his sin. Likewise by this means Absalom might be
drawn to a more thorough humiliation and repentance.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 14:25</span></span>

Beauty - This is noted as the occasion of his pride, and of the people's
affection to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 14:26</span></span>

Weighed - Others understand this not of the weight, but of the price of
his hair.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 14:27</span></span>

Sons - All which died not long after they were born, as may be gathered
from [Sa2 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018), where it is said,
that Absalom had no son.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa2 14:32</span></span>

Kill me - For it is better for me to die, than to want the sight and
favour of my dear father. Thus he insinuates himself into his father's
affections, by pretending such respect and love to him It seems that by
this time Absalom having so far recovered his father's favour, began to
grow upon him, and take so much confidence as to stand upon his own
justification, as if what he had done, had been no iniquity, at least
not such as to deserve death. See how easily wise parents may be imposed
on by their children, when they are blindly fond of them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa2 14:33</span></span>

Kissed - Did the bowels of a father prevail to reconcile him to an
impenitent son? And shall penitent sinners question the compassion of
him who is the Father of mercy? If Ephraim bemoan himself, God soon
bemoans him, with all the expressions of fatherly tenderness. He is a
dear son, a pleasant child.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 15](sa2015)

</div>
