<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2017)  [Next](sa2019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 18:5</span></span>

Deal gently - If you conquer (which be presaged they would by God's
gracious answer to his prayer for the turning of Ahithophel's counsel
into foolishness,) take him prisoner, but do not kill him. Which desire
proceeded, from his great indulgence towards his children: from his
consciousness that he himself was the meritorious cause of this
rebellion, Absalom being given up to it for the punishment of David's
sins; from the consideration of his youth, which commonly makes men
foolish, and subject to ill counsels: and from his piety, being loth
that he should be cut off in the act of his sin without any space for
repentance. But ''what means, says Bp. Hall, this ill - placed mercy?
Deal gently with a traitor? Of all traitors with a son? And all this for
thy sake, whose crown, whose blood he hunts after? Even in the holiest
parents nature may be guilty of an injurious tenderness. But was not
this done in type of that unmeasurable mercy, of the true King of
Israel, who prayed for his murderers, Father, forgive them! Deal gently
with them for my sake!" Yea, when God sends an affliction to correct his
children, it is with this charge, deal gently with them for my sake: for
he knows our frame.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 18:8</span></span>

The wood - More people died in the wood, either through hunger, and
thirst, and weariness: or, by the wild beasts, whereof great numbers
were there, which, though they were driven away from the place of the
main battle, yet might easily meet with them when they fled several
ways: or, by falling into ditches and pits, which were in that place,
[Sa2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#017), and probably were covered
with grass or wood, so that they could not see them till they fell into
them: and especially by David's men, who pursued them, and killed them
in the wood: and the wood is rightly said to have devoured them, because
it gave the occasion to their destruction, inasmuch as the trees, and
ditches, and pits, entangled them, and stopped their flight, and made
them an easy prey to David's men, who followed them, and slew them in
the pursuit. The sword - In the main battle: the sword being put for the
battle, by a common figure.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 18:9</span></span>

The servants of David - Who, according to David's command, spared him,
and gave him an opportunity to escape. His head - In which probably he
was entangled by the hair of the head, which being very long and thick,
might easily catch hold of a bough, especially when the great God
directed it. Either he wore no helmet, or he had thrown it away as well
as his other arms, to hasten his flight. Thus the matter of his pride
was the instrument of his ruin.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 18:15</span></span>

Slew him - The darts did not dispatch him, and therefore they smote him
again, and killed him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 18:18</span></span>

A pillar - To preserve his name; whereas it had been more for his honour
if his name had been buried in perpetual oblivion.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 18:24</span></span>

Gates - For the gates of the cities then were, as now they are, large
and thick; and for the greater security, had two gates, one more
outward, the other inward. Here he sat, that he might hear tidings when
any came into the city.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa2 18:33</span></span>

Over the gate - Retiring himself from all men and business, that he
might wholly give up himself to lamentation. My son - This he might
speak from a deep sense of his eternal state, because he died in his
sins, and because David himself had by his own sins been the occasion of
his death. But it seems rather to be the effect of strong passion,
causing him to speak unadvisedly with his lips.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 19](sa2019)

</div>
