<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2019)  [Next](sa2021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 20:1</span></span>

Happened - His presence was casual in itself, though ordered by God's
providence. No part - The tribe of Judah have monopolized the king to
themselves, and will not allow us any share in him; let them therefore
enjoy him alone, and let us seek out a new king. The son of Jesse - An
expression of contempt, implying that he was no more to be owned as
their king, but as a private person, as the son of Jesse. To his tents -
Let us all desist from this unthankful office, of bringing the king
back, and go each to our homes, that we may consider, and then meet
together to chuse a new king.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 20:2</span></span>

Every man - That is, the generality of those Israelites who were
present.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 20:5</span></span>

Tarried - Either, because the people being wearied out by the late war,
were not forward to engage in another: or because the soldiers had more
affection to Joab, than to their new general.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 20:6</span></span>

Abishai - Not to Joab; lest by this means he should recover his place,
and Amasa be discontented, and David's fidelity in making good his
promise to Amasa be questioned.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 20:7</span></span>

Joab's men - The remainders of Joab's army who were there present, with
whom also Joab might go as a reformade, watching an opportunity to do
what he designed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 20:8</span></span>

Amasa went - Having gathered some forces, and given due orders for the
rest to follow him, he returned to Jerusalem, and by the king's command
went after those mentioned [Sa2 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#007),
and being come up to them at the place where they waited for him, he put
himself in the head of Joab's men, and the Cherethites and the
Pelethites, and such as he had brought along with him, and marched
before them as their general. Girded - After the manner of travellers
and soldiers. Went forth - To meet and salute Amasa, who was coming
towards him to do him honour. It fell - Things having (it is likely)
been so contrived by Joab, that upon the least motion of his body, his
sword should drop out, and he might take it up without raising Amasa's
suspicion.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 20:9</span></span>

Beard - As the manner of ancient times was, when they saluted one
another.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 20:10</span></span>

The sword - Which falling out, as it seemed, casually, he supposed that
Joab intended only to put it into its scabbard, and therefore took no
care to defend himself against the stroke. So Joab - Who now boldly
resumed his former place, and marched in the head of the army. It is not
strange, that Amasa's soldiers did not fight to revenge his death;
partly, because not many of them were yet come up, as the following
verses shew; and partly, because Joab's interest and authority with the
military - men was very great; especially, with David's guards, who were
here present, and who had no kindness for Amasa, as having been the
general of the rebellious army; and, as they might think, not fit to be
put into a place of so great trust.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 20:11</span></span>

One - Left there on purpose to deliver the following message. Favoureth
Joab - He that would have Joab to be general, rather than such a
perfidious rebel as Amasa. For David - He that wisheth David good
success against Sheba, and against all rebels.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 20:12</span></span>

Stood still - Wondering at the spectacle, and enquiring into the author
and occasion of it. Removed - Perceiving, that it both incensed them
against Joab and hindered the king's service. Cast a cloth upon him -
But the covering of blood with a cloth cannot stop its cry to God for
vengeance.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 20:14</span></span>

He - Sheba, who marched from tribe to tribe to stir them up to sedition.
Abel - Unto Abel - beth - maachah, as this place is called here in the
Hebrew text, [Sa2 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#015), to
distinguish it from other Abels; and to signify, that this was that Abel
which was in the northern border of Canaan towards that part of Syria
called Maachah, [Sa2 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#008). Berites -
Such as lived in the city, or territory of Beeroth of Benjamin, [Jos
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025), who being of the same tribe, if
not city with Sheba, adhered to him, and followed him through all the
tribes of Israel. They - The tribes of Israel; that is, a considerable
number of them; as might well be expected, when the discontents were so
high and general.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 20:15</span></span>

They - That is, Joab and his army. A bank - From whence they might
either batter the wall, or shoot at those who defended it. It stood -
The bank stood in, or near to the trench, or the wall of the city; so
that the city was in great danger of being taken.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 20:16</span></span>

Then cried a wise woman - It seems none of all the men of Abel, offered
to treat with Joab: no, not when they were reduced to extremity: but one
wise woman saved the city. Souls know no difference of sex: many a manly
heart is lodged in a female breast. Nor is the treasure of wisdom the
less valuable, for being lodged in the weaker vessel.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 20:18</span></span>

Ask counsel - This city which thou art about to destroy, is no mean and
contemptible one, but so honourable and considerable for its wisdom,
that when any differences arose among any of the neighbours, they used
proverbially to say, We will ask the opinion and advice as the men of
Abel about it, and we will stand to their arbitration; and so all
parties were satisfied, and disputes ended.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 20:19</span></span>

A mother - Great cities are commonly called mothers; as lesser towns or
villages subject to them, and depending upon them, are called their
daughters. Inheritance - That is, a considerable part of, that land
which God hath chosen for his particular possession. The destruction
which thou art about to bring upon us, is an injury to Israel, and to
the God of Israel.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 20:21</span></span>

Ephraim - Probably mount Ephraim was a place in Benjamin so called,
either because it was upon the borders of Ephraim or for some notable
action or event of the Ephraimites in that place. His head - Which she
undertook, because she knew the present temper of the citizens, and
soldiers too. And it is not unlikely, that this woman might be a
governness in that city. For though this office was commonly performed
by men; yet women were sometimes employed in the government: as we see
in Deborah, who judged Israel, [Jdg
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 20:22</span></span>

Wisdom - Prudently treated with them about it, representing to them the
certainty and nearness of their ruin, if they did not speedily comply
with her desires, and certain deliverance if they did.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 20:23</span></span>

Over all the host - The good success of this, and of the former
expedition, under the conduct of Joab, had so fixed his interest in the
army, and others of David's fastest friends, that the king could not
without danger displace him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 21](sa2021)

</div>
