<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol005)  [Next](sol007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 6:1</span></span>

Gone - From thee.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 6:2</span></span>

Is gone - The spouse had hitherto been at a loss for her beloved, but
having diligently sought him, now at last she meets with a gracious
answer from God, directing her where to find him. The garden may signify
the church catholic, and the gardens, as it follows, as also the beds,
the particular assemblies of the faithful, in which Christ affords his
presence. Spices - In which the gifts and graces of God's spirit, fitly
compared to spices, grow. To feed - To refresh and delight himself.
Lillies - Which may denote either, particular believers, whom Christ
gathers to himself in his church; or, the prayers and praises of his
people in the publick congregations.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 6:4</span></span>

Thou - These are the words of Christ, who had now again manifested
himself to his church. Tirzah - A very pleasant city, the royal seat of
the kings of Israel. Jerusalem - Which was beautiful both for its
situation, and for its goodly buildings. Terrible - To her enemies, whom
God will certainly destroy.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 6:5</span></span>

Turn away - It is a poetical expression, signifying how beautiful the
church was in Christ's eyes. Thy hair - This clause, and the whole
following verse are repeated from, [Sol
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001). And this repetition is not vain
but confirms what was said before, that the churches miscarriage had not
alienated Christ's affection from her.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 6:8</span></span>

Threescore - A certain number for an uncertain. The sense seems to be
this, there are many beautiful queens and concubines in the world, in
the courts of princes, but none of them is to be compared with my
spouse.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 6:9</span></span>

But one - The only beloved of my soul, my only spouse. The only one -
She is as dear and as precious to me as only children use to be to their
parents, and especially to their mothers. Daughters - Called virgins,
[Sol 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008). Praised - As more beautiful
and worthy than themselves.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 6:10</span></span>

Who - These are the words of the queens and concubines. Who, what manner
of person is this, how excellent and glorious! Morning - As the morning
light, which coming after the darkness, is very pleasant and amiable.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 6:11</span></span>

I went - When I went away from thee these are the words of the
bridegroom. Valley - Which being low, and well watered is very fruitful.
To see - What beginnings or appearances there were of good fruits or
works among believers.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 6:12</span></span>

Or ever - I was surprized with a vehement desire of my spouse, which is
to be understood figuratively, and so as to agree with the majesty and
omnisciency of Christ. Ammi - nadib - Eager in my desire, and swift in
my motion towards the church. Ammi - nadib is supposed to be some
eminent charioteer then well known, and famous for his speed in driving
chariots.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 6:13</span></span>

Return - Christ recalls his spouse, who as when Christ was gone, she
pursued after him, so now when Christ was coming to her, she was ready
to wander from him. Return - This word is repeated four times, to
signify both Christ's passionate love to her, and her backwardness.
Shulamite - This title signifies, the wife of Solomon, thus called after
her husband's name, and as Christ is called by the name of Solomon, so
the church is fitly described by the title of Solomon's wife. May look -
That I and my companions may contemplate thy beauty. What - But what do
you my friends expect to discover in her? Christ proposes the question,
that they might take special notice of this as a very remarkable thing
in her. The company - Whereby he intimates that this one spouse was made
up of the whole multitude of believers. Two armies - Confederate
together, and so this may signify the union of Jews and Gentiles, and
the safety and strength of the church, which is compared to a numerous
host, distributed into two armies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 7](sol007)

</div>
