<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol003)  [Next](sol005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Explanatory Notes on the Whole Bible*, by John Wesley, \[1754-65\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 4:1</span></span>

Behold - These words are evidently spoken by the bridegroom. Fair -
Being clothed with my righteousness, and adorned with all the graces of
my spirit. Fair - He repeats it both to confirm his assertion, and to
shew the fervency of his affection. Dove's eyes - Whereas the beauty of
the spouse is here described in her several parts, we need not labour
much about the application of each particular to some distinct grace of
the church, this being the chief design of the description to shew that
compleatness and absolute perfection which the church hath in part
received, and shall more fully receive in the future life. Goats - Which
in these parts was of extraordinary length, and softness, and
comeliness. Mount Gilead - A very fruitful place, fit for breeding all
sorts of cattle, and especially of goats, because it was an hilly and
woody country.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 4:2</span></span>

A flock - Numerous, and placed in due order. Even - Smooth and even, as
also clean and white. Twins - Which seems to denote the two rows of
teeth. Barren - Not one tooth is lacking.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 4:3</span></span>

Thy speech - Which is added as another ingredient of an amiable person;
and to explain the foregoing metaphor. The discourse of believers is
edifying and comfortable, and acceptable to God, and to serious men.
Temples - Under which he comprehends the cheeks. Pomegranate - In which
there is a lovely mixture of red and white.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 4:4</span></span>

Thy neck - This may represent the grace of faith, by which we are united
to Christ, as the body is to the head by the neck. By which Christians
receive their spiritual food, and consequently their strength and
ability for action. The tower - Upright, firm, and strong; and moreover
adorned with chains of gold or pearl, or the like ornaments. Of David -
Some tower built by David, when he repaired, and enlarged his royal
city, and used by him as an armory. Bucklers - Such as are reserved for
the use of mighty men. A thousand is put indefinitely for a great
number.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 4:5</span></span>

Lillies - In the fields where lillies grow.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 4:6</span></span>

Until - These words are uttered by the bride, [Sol
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017), and here returned by the
bridegroom as an answer to that request. And this place may be
understood of the day of glory, when all shadows and ordinances shall
cease. To the hill - To my church upon earth, which was typified by the
mountain of Moriah and the temple upon it. This in prophetic writings is
called a mountain, and may well be called a mountain of myrrh and
frankincense, both for the acceptable services which are there offered
to God, and for the precious gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit, which
are of a sweet smelling savour to God and men. Thus Christ directs
believers, where they may find him, namely in his church and ordinances.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 4:8</span></span>

Come - Unto the mountains of myrrh. Look - To the place to which I
invite thee to go, which from those high mountains thou mayest easily
behold. Of Leopards - From these or other mountains, which are inhabited
by lions and leopards. This seems to be added as an argument to move the
spouse to go with him, because the places where now she was, were not
only barren, but also dangerous.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 4:9</span></span>

My sister - So he calls her to shew the greatness of his love, which
cannot sufficiently be expressed by any one relation. With one - With
one glance. One chain - With one of those other graces and perfections
wherewith thou art adorned.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 4:10</span></span>

Fair - How amiable and acceptable to me. Ointments - Of the gifts and
graces of God's Spirit, wherewith thou art anointed.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 4:11</span></span>

Thy lips - Thy speeches both to me in prayer and praises, and to men for
their edification, are highly acceptable to me. Milk - Words more sweet
and comfortable than honey or milk. Garments - Of that righteousness
wherewith I have adorned thee. Lebanon - Which was very sweet and
grateful in regard of the great numbers of sweet - smelling spices and
trees which grow on that mountain.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 4:12</span></span>

A garden - For order and beauty, for pleasant walks, and flowers, and
fruits. Inclosed - Defended by the care of my providence: and reserved
for my proper use. Shut up - To preserve it from all pollution, and to
reserve it for the use of its owner, for which reason, springs were shut
up in those countries where water was scarce and precious.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 4:13</span></span>

Plants - Believers, which are planted in thee, are like the plants or
fruits of an orchard, which are pleasant to the eye, and delicious to
the taste or smell, whereby he signifies the variety and excellency of
the gifts and graces in the several members of the church. Spikenard -
Which he mentions here with camphire, and in the next verse with
saffron, because it is mixed with both these, and being so mixed,
yields. the more grateful smell.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sol 4:14</span></span>

All trees - Such trees as produce frankincense.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sol 4:15</span></span>

Living water - Though my spouse be in some sort a fountain shut up, yet
that is not so to be understood as if she kept her waters to herself,
for she is like a fountain of living or running water, which flows into
gardens, and makes its flowers and plants to flourish. The church
conveys those waters of life which she receives from Christ to
particular believers. Streams - Like those sweet and refreshing rivers
which flow down from mount Lebanon, of which Jordan is one.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sol 4:16</span></span>

North wind - These winds may signify the several dispensations of God's
spirit. My garden - This verse is spoken by the spouse. And he calls the
garden both hers and his, because of that oneness which is between them,
[Sol 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016). May flow - That my graces
may be exercised. Let - Let Christ afford his gracious presence to his
church. And eat - And let him delight himself in that service which is
given him, both by the religious worship, and by the holy conversation
of his people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 5](sol005)

</div>
