[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps011) 
[Next](ps013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 8

<span class="margnote">Of his own incarnation through Mary.</span>And
Jesus continued again in the discourse and said: "It came to pass then
thereafter, that at the command of the First Mystery I looked down on
the world of mankind and found Mary, who is called 'my mother' according
to the body of matter. I spake with her in the type of Gabriēl, and when
she had turned herself to the height towards me, I cast thence into her
the first power which I had received from Barbēlō--that is the body
which I have borne in the height. And instead of the soul I cast into
her the power which I \|<span class="rmargnote">**14**.</span> have
received from the great Sabaōth, the Good, who is in the region of the
Right.

"And the twelve powers of the twelve saviours

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="margnote">More concerning the light-powers in the
disciples.</span>of the Treasury of the Light which I had received from
the twelve ministers of the Midst, I cast into the sphere of the rulers.
And the decans of the rulers and their servitors thought that they were
souls of the rulers; and the servitors brought them, they bound them
into the body of your mothers. And when your time was completed, ye were
born in the world without souls of the rulers in you. And ye have
received your portion out of the power which the last Helper hath
breathed into the Mixture, that \[power\] which is blended with all the
invisibles and all rulers and all æons,--in a word, which is blended
with the world of destruction which is the Mixture. This \[power\],
which from the beginning I brought out of myself, I have cast into the
First Commandment, and the First Commandment cast a portion thereof into
the great Light, and the great Light cast a portion of that which it had
received, into the five Helpers, and the last Helper took a portion of
that which it received, and cast it into the Mixture. And \[this
portion\] is in all who are in the Mixture, \|<span
class="rmargnote">**15**.</span> as I have just said unto you."

<span class="margnote">Why they should rejoice that he time of his
investiture had come.</span>This then Jesus said to his disciples on the
Mount of Olives. Jesus continued again in the discourse with his
disciples \[and said\]: "Rejoice and exult and add joy to your joy, for
the times are completed for me to put on my Vesture, which hath been
prepared for me from the beginning, which I left behind in the last
mystery until the time of its completion. Now the time of its completion
is the time when I shall be commanded through the First Mystery to
discourse with you from the beginning of the Truth to the

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

completion thereof, and from the interiors of the interiors \[to the
exteriors of the exteriors\], for the world will be saved through you.
Rejoice then and exult, for ye are blessed before all men who are on the
earth. It is ye who will save the whole world."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](ps013)
