[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps010.md) 
[Next](ps012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 7

"It came to pass, when the sun rose in the east, thereafter then through
the First Mystery, which existed from the beginning, on account of which
the universe hath arisen, \|<span class="rmargnote">**10**.</span> out
of which also I am myself now come, not in the time before my

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

crucifixion, but now,--it came to pass, through the command of that
mystery, that there should<span class="margnote">How the Vesture of
Light was sent unto him.</span> be sent me my Light-vesture, which it
had given me from the beginning, and which I had left behind in the last
mystery, that is the four-and-twentieth mystery from within
without,--those which are in the orders of the second space of the First
Mystery. That Vesture then I left behind in the last mystery, until the
time should be completed to put it on, and I should begin to discourse
with the race of men and reveal unto them all from the beginning of the
Truth to its completion, and discourse with them from the interiors of
the interiors to the exteriors of the exteriors and from the exteriors
of the exteriors to the interiors of the interiors. Rejoice then and
exult and rejoice more and more greatly, for to you it is given that I
speak first with you from the beginning of the Truth to its completion.

<span class="margnote">Of the souls of the disciples and their
incarnation.</span>"For this cause have I chosen you verily from the
beginning through the First Mystery. Rejoice then and exult, for when I
set out for the world, \|<span class="rmargnote">**11**.</span> I
brought from the beginning with me twelve powers, as I have told you
from the beginning, which I have taken from the twelve saviours of the
Treasury of the Light, according to the command of the First Mystery.
These then I cast into the womb of your mothers, when I came into the
world, that is those which are in your bodies to-day. For these powers
have been given unto you before the whole world, because ye are they who
will save the whole world, and that ye may be able to endure the threat
of the rulers of the world and the pains of the world and its dangers
and all its persecutions, which the rulers of the height will

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

bring upon you. For many times have I said unto you that I have brought
the power in you out of the twelve saviours who are in the Treasury of
the Light. For which cause I have said unto you indeed from the
beginning that ye are not of the world. I also am not of it. For all men
who are in the world have gotten their souls out of \[the power of\] the
rulers of the æons. But the power which is in you is from me; your souls
belong to the height. I have brought twelve powers of the twelve
saviours of the Treasury of the Light, taking them out of the portion of
my power which \|<span class="rmargnote">**13**.</span> I did first
receive. And when I had set forth for the world, I came into the midst
of the rulers of the sphere and had the form of Gabriēl the angel of the
æons; and the rulers of the æons did not know me, but they thought that
I was the angel Gabriēl.

<span class="margnote">Of the incarnation of John the
Baptizer.</span>"It came to pass then, when I had come into the midst of
the rulers of the æons, that I looked down on the world of mankind, by
command of the First Mystery. I found Elizabeth, the mother of John the
Baptizer, before she had conceived him, and I sowed into her a power
which I had received from the little Iaō, the Good, who is in the Midst,
that he might be able to make proclamation before me and make ready my
way, and baptize with the water of the forgiveness of sins. That power
then is in the body of John.

<span class="margnote">That John was Elias in a former
birth.</span>"Moreover in place of the soul of the ruler which he was
appointed to receive, I found the soul of the prophet Elias in the æons
of the sphere; and I took him thence, and took hi soul and brought it to
the Virgin of Light, and

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

she gave it over to her receivers; they brought it to the sphere of the
rulers and cast it into the womb of Elizabeth. So the power of the
little Iaō, who is in the Midst, and the soul of the prophet Elias, they
were bound into the body of John the Baptizer. For this cause then were
ye in doubt aforetime, I when I said unto you: 'John said: I am not the
Christ,' and ye said unto me: 'It standeth written in the scripture:
When the Christ shall come, Elias cometh before him and maketh ready his
way.' But when ye said this unto me, I said unto you: 'Elias verily is
come and hath made ready all things, as it standeth written, and they
have done unto him as they would.' And when I knew that ye had not
understood that I had discoursed with you concerning the soul of Elias
which is bound into John the Baptizer, I answered you in the discourse
in openness face to face: 'If ye like to accept John the Baptizer: he is
Elias, of whom I have said that he will come.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](ps012.md)
