[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps028.md) 
[Next](ps030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 25

And Jesus answered and said unto Mary: "Well said, Mary; thou
questionest finely with thy excellent question, and thou throwest light
on all things with surety and precision. Now,

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

therefore, from now on will I hide nothing from you, but I will reveal
unto you all things with surety and openness. Hearken then, Mary, and
give ear, all ye disciples: Before I made proclamation to all the rulers
of the æons and to all the rulers of the Fate and Of the sphere, they
were all bound in their bonds and in their spheres and in their seals,
as Yew, the Overseer of the Light, had bound them from the beginning;
and every one of them remained in his order, and every one journeyed
according to his course, as Yew, the Overseer of the Light, had
established them. And when the time of the number of Melchisedec, the
great Receiver of the Light, <span class="margnote">The coming of
Melchisedec.</span> came, he was wont to come into the midst of the æons
and of all the rulers \|<span class="rmargnote">**35**.</span> who are
bound in the sphere and in the Fate, and he carried away the
purification of the light from all the rulers of the æons and from all
the rulers of the Fate and from those of the sphere--for he carried away
then that which brings them into agitation--and he set in motion the
hastener who is over them, and made them turn their circles swiftly, and
he \[*sc.* the hastener\] carried away their power which was in them and
the breath of their mouth and the tears \[lit. waters\] of their eyes
and the sweat of their bodies.

<span class="margnote">Of the fashioning of the souls of men.</span>"And
Melchisedec, the Receiver of the Light; purifieth those powers and
carrieth their light into the Treasury of the Light, while the servitors
of all the rulers gather together all matter from them all; and the
servitors of all the rulers of the Fate and the servitors of the sphere
which is below the æons, take it and fashion it into souls of men and
cattle and reptiles and wild-beasts and birds,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

and send them down into the world of mankind. And further the receivers
of the sun and the receivers of the moon, if they look above and see the
configurations of the paths of the æons and the configurations of the
Fate and those of the sphere, then they take from them the light-power;
and the \|<span class="rmargnote">**36**.</span> receivers of the sun
get it ready and deposit it, until they hand it over to the receivers of
Melchisedec, the Light-purifier. And their material refuse they bring to
the sphere which is below the æons, and fashion it into \[souls of\]
men, and fashion it also into souls of reptiles and of cattle and of
wild-beasts and of birds, according to the circle of the rulers of that
sphere and according to all the configurations of its revolution, and
they cast them into this world of mankind, and they become souls in this
region, as I have just said unto you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](ps030.md)
