[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps030.md) 
[Next](ps032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 27

"It came to pass then, when the rulers of the æons and those of the Fate
and those of the sphere continued to carry out this type,--turning on
themselves, devouring the refuse of their matter, and not allowing souls
to be born into the world of mankind, in order that they might delay in
being rulers, and that the powers which are in their powers, that is the
souls, might spend a long time here outside,--they then persisted doing
this continually for two circles.

"It came to pass then, when I wished to ascend for the ministry for the
sake of which I was called \|<span class="rmargnote">**38**.</span> by
command of the First Mystery, that I came up into the midst of the
tyrants of the rulers of the twelve æons, with my light-vesture

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

about me, shining most exceedingly, and there was no measure for the
light which was about me.

<span class="margnote">Adamas and the tyrants fight against the
light-vesture.</span>"It came to pass then, when those tyrants saw the
great light which was about me, that the great Adamas, the Tyrant, and
all the tyrants of the twelve æons, all together began to fight against
the light of my vesture, desiring to hold it fast among them, in order
to delay in their rulership. This then they did, not knowing against
whom they fought.

<span class="margnote">Jesus taketh from them a third of their power and
changeth their course.</span>"When then they mutinied and fought against
the light, thereon by command of the First Mystery I changed the paths
and the courses of their æons and the paths of their Fate and of their
sphere. I made them face six months towards the triangles on the left
and towards the squares and towards those in their aspect and towards
their octagons, just as they had formerly been. But their manner of
turning, or facing, I changed to another order, and made them other six
months face towards the works of their influences in the squares on the
right and in their triangles and in those in their aspect and in their
octagons. And I made them to be confounded in great confusion and
deluded in great delusion \|<span class="rmargnote">**39**.</span>--the
rulers of the æons and all the rulers of the Fate and those of the
sphere; and I set them in great agitation, and thence on they were no
longer able to turn towards the refuse of their matter to devour it, in
order that their regions may continue to delay and they \[themselves\]
may spend a long time as rulers.

"But when I had taken away a third of their power, I changed their
spheres, so that they spend a time facing to the left and another time

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

facing to the right. I have changed their whole path and their whole
course, and I have made the path of their course to hurry, so that they
may be quickly purified and raised up quickly. And I have shortened
their circles, and made their path more speedy, and it will be
exceedingly hurried. And they were thrown into confusion in their path,
and from then on were no more able to devour the matter of the refuse of
the purification <span class="margnote">They no more have the power of
devouring their matter.</span>of their light. And moreover I have
shortened their times and their periods, so that the perfect number of
souls who shall receive the mysteries and be in the Treasury of the
Light, shall be quickly completed. For had I not changed their courses,
and had I not shortened their periods, they would not have let any soul
come into the world, because of the matter of their refuse \|<span
class="rmargnote">**40**.</span> which they devoured, and they would
have destroyed many souls. For this cause I said unto you aforetime: 'I
have shortened the times because of my elect; otherwise no soul would
have been able to be saved.' And I have shortened the times and the
periods because of the perfect number of the souls who shall receive the
mysteries, that is to say, the 'elect'; and had I not shortened their
periods, no material soul would have been saved, but they would have
perished in the fire which is in the flesh of the rulers. This then is
the word on which thou dost question me with precision."

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished speaking these words unto
his disciples, that they fell down all together, adored him and said to
him: "Blessed are we before all men, for unto us thou hast revealed
these great exploits."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](ps032.md)
