[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps033) 
[Next](ps035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 30

<span class="margnote">Mary desireth to hear the story of
Sophia.</span>It came to pass then, when Jesus had said this unto his
disciples, that Mary came forward and said: "My Lord, I have heard thee
say aforetime: 'Pistis Sophia is herself one of the f our-and-twenty
emanations, how then is she not in their region? \|<span
class="rmargnote">**44**.</span> But thou hast said: 'I found her below
the thirteenth æon.'"

### \[THE STORY OF PISTIS SOPHIA\]

<span class="margnote">Sophia desireth to enter the
Light-world.</span>And Jesus answered and said unto his disciples: "It
came to pass, when Pistis Sophia was in the thirteenth æon, in the
region of all her brethren the invisibles, that is the four-and-twenty
emanations of the great Invisible,--it came to pass then by command of
the First Mystery that Pistis Sophia gazed into the height. She saw the
light of the veil of the Treasury of the Light, and she

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

longed to reach to that region, and she could not reach to that region.
But she ceased to perform the mystery of the thirteenth æon, and sang
praises to the light of the height, which she had seen in the light of
the veil of the Treasury of the Light.

<span class="margnote">The rulers hate her for ceasing in their
mystery.</span>"It came to pass then, when she sang praises to the
region of the height, that all the rulers in the twelve æons, who are
below, hated her, because she had ceased from their mysteries, and
because she had desired to go into the height and be above them all. For
this cause then they were enraged against her and hated her, \[as did\]
the great triple-powered Self-willed, that is the third triple-power,
who is in the thirteenth æon, he who had become disobedient, in as much
as he had not emanated the whole purification of his power in him, and
had not given the purification of his light at the time when the rulers
gave their purification, in that he desired to rule over the whole
thirteenth æon \|<span class="rmargnote">**45**.</span> and those who
are below it.

<span class="margnote">Self-willed uniteth himself with the rulers of
the twelve æons and emanateth a lion-faced power to plague
Sophia.</span>"It came to pass then, when the rulers of the twelve æons
were enraged against Pistis Sophia, who is above them, and hated her
exceedingly, that the great triple-powered Self-willed, of whom I have
just now told you, joined himself to the rulers of the twelve æons, and
also was enraged against Pistis Sophia and hated her exceedingly,
because she had thought to go to the light which is higher than her. And
he emanated out of himself a great lion-faced power, and out of his
matter in him he emanated a host of other very violent material
emanations, and sent them into the regions below, to the parts of the
chaos, in order that they might there lie in wait for Pistis

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sophia and take
away her power out of her, because she thought to go to the height which
is above them all, and moreover she had ceased to perform their mystery,
and lamented continuously and sought after the light which she. had
seen. And the rulers who abide, or persist, in performing the mystery,
hated her, and all the guards who are at the gates of the æons, hated
her also.

"It came to pass then thereafter by command of the First Commandment
that the great triple-powered Self-willed, who is one of the three
\|<span class="rmargnote">**46**.</span> triple-powers, pursued Sophia
in the thirteenth æon, in order that she should look towards the parts
below, so that she might see in that region his lion-faced light-power
and long after it and go to that region, so that her light might be
taken from her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](ps035)
