[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps045) 
[Next](ps047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 42

When then Jesus had spoken these words unto his disciples, he said unto
them: "Who hath ears to hear, let him hear; and let him whose spirit
seetheth up in him, come forward and speak the solution of the thought
of the fifth repentance of Pistis Sophia."

<span class="margnote">Philip the scribe complaineth.</span>And when
Jesus had finished saying these words, Philip started forward, held up
and laid down the book in his hand,--for he is the scribe of all the
discourses which Jesus spake, and of all of that which he did,--Philip
then \|<span class="rmargnote">**70**.</span> came forward and said unto
him: "My Lord, surely then it is not on me alone that thou hast enjoined
to take care for the world and write down all

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the discourses which we shall speak and \[all we shall\] do? And thou
hast not suffered me to come forward to speak the solution of the
mysteries of the repentance of Pistis Sophia. For my spirit hath
ofttimes seethed in me and been unloosed and constrained me to come
forward and speak the solution of the repentance of Pistis Sophia; and I
could not come forward because I am the scribe of all the discourses."

<span class="margnote">Jesus explaineth that the appointed scribes are
Philip and Thomas and Matthew.</span>It came to pass then, when Jesus
had heard Philip, that he said unto him: "Hearken, Philip, blessed one,
that I may discourse with thee; for it is thou and Thomas and Matthew on
whom it is enjoined by the First Mystery to write all the discourses
which I shall speak and \[all which I shall\] do, and all things which
ye shall see. But as for thee, the number of the discourses which thou
hast to write, is so far not yet completed. When it is then completed,
thou art to come forward and proclaim what pleaseth thee. Now,
therefore, ye three have to write down all the discourses which I shall
speak and \[all things which I shall\] do and which ye shall see, in
order that ye may bear witness to all things of the kingdom of heaven."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 43](ps047)
