[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps043.md) 
[Next](ps045.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 40

<span class="margnote">John asketh and receiveth permission to
speak.</span>It came to pass while Jesus spake these words unto his
disciples, saying unto them: "This is the fourth repentance which Pistis
Sophia hath uttered; now, therefore, let him who understandeth,
understand,"--it came to pass then, when Jesus had spoken these words,
that John came forward, adored the breast of Jesus and said unto him:
"My Lord, give commandment to me also, and grant me to speak the
solution of the fourth repentance which Pistis Sophia hath uttered."

Jesus said unto John: "I give thee commandment, and I grant thee to
speak the solution of the repentance which Pistis Sophia hath uttered."

John answered and said: "My Lord and Saviour, concerning this repentance
which Pistis Sophia hath uttered, thy light-power which was in David,
hath prophesied aforetime in the one-hundred-and-first Psalm:

<span class="margnote">John interpreteth the repentance from Psalm
ci.</span>"'1. Lord, give ear unto my supplication and let my voice
reach unto thee.

"'2. Turn not away thy face from me; incline thine ear unto me in the
day when I am oppressed; quickly give ear to me on the day when I shall
cry unto thee.

"'3. For \|<span class="rmargnote">**66**.</span> my days are vanished
as smoke and my bones are parched as stone.

"'4. I am scorched as the grass, and my heart is dried up; for I have
forgotten to eat my bread.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

"'5. From the voice of my groaning my bones cleaved to my flesh.

"'6. I am become as a pelican in the desert; I am become as a
screech-owl in the house.

"'7. I have passed the night watching; I am become as a sparrow alone on
the roof.

"'8. My enemies have reviled me all the day long, and they who honour
me, have injured me.

"'9. For I have eaten ashes instead of my bread and mixed my drink with
tears,

"'10. Because of thy wrath and thy rage; for thou hast lifted me up and
cast me down.

"'11. My days have declined as a shadow, and I am dried up as the grass,

"'12. But thou, O Lord, thou endurest for ever, and thy remembrance unto
the generation of generation\[s\].

"'13. Arise and have mercy upon Zion, for the time is come to have mercy
upon her; the proper time is come.

"'14. Thy servants have longed for her stones, and will take pity on her
land.

"'15. And the nations will have fear of the name of the Lord, and the
kings of the earth have fear of thy sovereignty.

"'16. For the Lord will build up Zion and reveal himself in his
sovereignty.

"17. He hath regarded the prayer of the humble and hath not despised
their supplication.

"'18. This shall be recorded for another generation, and the people who
shall be created will praise the Lord.

"'19. Because he hath looked down on his holy height; the Lord hath
looked down from the heaven on the earth,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

"'20. To hear the sighing \|<span class="rmargnote">**67**.</span> of
those in chains, to loose the sons of those who are slain,

"'21. To proclaim the name of the Lord in Zion and his praise in
Jerusalem.'

"This, my Lord, is the solution of the mystery of the repentance which
Pistis Sophia hath uttered."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41](ps045.md)
