[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps039) 
[Next](ps041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 36

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished speaking these words unto
his disciples, that he said unto them: "Do ye understand in what manner
I discourse with you?"

And Peter started forward and said unto Jesus:

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Peter complaineth of Mary.</span>"My Lord, we will not
endure this woman, for she taketh the opportunity from us and hath let
none of us speak, but she discourseth many times."

And Jesus answered and said unto his disciples: "Let him in whom the
power of his spirit shall seethe, so that he understandeth what I say,
\|<span class="rmargnote">**58**.</span>come forward and speak. But now,
Peter, I see thy power in thee, that it understandeth the solution of
the mystery of the repentance which Pistis Sophia hath uttered. Now,
therefore, Peter, speak the thought of her repentance in the midst of
thy brethren."

<span class="margnote">Peter interpreteth the second repentance from
Psalm lxx.</span>And Peter answered and said unto Jesus "O Lord, give
ear that I may speak the thought of her repentance, of which aforetime
thy power prophesied through the prophet David, uttering her repentance
in the seventieth Psalm:

"'1. O God, my God, I have trusted in thee, let me no more be put to
shame for ever.

"'2. Save me in thy righteousness and set me free; incline thine ear
unto me and save me.

"'3. Be unto me a strong God and a firm place to save me; for thou art
my strength and my refuge.

"'4. My God, save me from the hand of the sinner and from the hand of
the transgressor and from the impious \[one\].

"'5. For thou art my endurance, O Lord, thou art my hope from my youth
up.

"'6. I have trusted myself to thee from my mother's womb; thou hast
brought me out of my mother's womb. My remembrance is ever in thee.

"'7. I have become as the crazy for many; \|<span
class="rmargnote">**59**.</span>

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

thou art my help and my strength, thou art my deliverer, O Lord.

"'8. My mouth was filled with glorifying, that I may praise the glory of
thy splendour the whole day long.

"'9. Cast me not away in the time of age; if my soul fades, forsake me
not.

"'10. For mine enemies have spoken evil against me and they who lay in
wait for my soul, have taken counsel against my soul,

"'11. Saying together: God hath forsaken him; pursue and seize him, for
there is no saviour.

"'12. God, give heed to my help.

"'13. Let them be ashamed and destroyed who calumniate my soul. Let them
be enwrapped in shame and disgrace who seek evil against me.'

"This then is the solution of the second repentance which Pistis Sophia
hath uttered."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 37](ps041)
