[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps060.md) 
[Next](ps062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 57

And Jesus continued again in the discourse and said unto his disciples:
"It came to pass

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

 

again thereafter that Pistis Sophia cried unto me, saying:

"O Light of lights, I have transgressed in the twelve æons, and have
descended from them; wherefor have I uttered the twelve repentances,
\[one\] for each æon. Now, therefore, O Light of lights, forgive me my
transgression, for it is exceedingly great, because I have abandoned the
regions of the height and have come to dwell in the regions of the
chaos.'

"When then Pistis Sophia had said this, she continued again in the
thirteenth repentance, saying:

<span class="margnote">The thirteenth repentance of Sophia.</span>"'1.
Hearken unto me singing praises unto thee, O Light of lights. Hearken
unto me uttering the repentance for the thirteenth æon, the region out
of which I have come down, in order that the thirteenth repentance of
the thirteenth æon may be accomplished,--those \[æons\] \|<span
class="rmargnote">**111**.</span> which I have overstepped and out of
which I have come down.

"'2. Now, therefore, O Light of lights, hearken unto me singing praises
unto thee in the thirteenth æon, my region out of which I have come
down.

"'3. Save me, O Light, in thy great mystery and forgive my transgression
in thy forgiveness.

"'4. And give unto me the baptism and forgive my sins and purify me from
my transgression.

"'5. And my transgression is the lion-faced power, which will never be
hidden from thee; for because of it have I gone down.

"'6. And I alone among the invisibles, in whose regions I was, have
transgressed, and have gone down into the chaos. Moreover I have

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

transgressed, that thy commandment may be accomplished.'

"This then Pistis Sophia said. Now, therefore, let him whom his spirit
urgeth to understand her words, come forward and proclaim her thought."

Martha came forward and said: "My Lord, my spirit urgeth me to proclaim
the solution of that which Pistis Sophia hath spoken; thy power hath
prophesied aforetime concerning it through David in the fiftieth Psalm,
saying thus:

<span class="margnote">Martha interpreteth the thirteenth repentance
from Psalm l.</span>"'1. Be gracious unto me, O God, according to thy
\|<span class="rmargnote">**112**.</span> great grace; according to the
fulness of thy mercy blot out my sin.

"'2. Wash me [thoroughly](errata.htm#1.md) from my iniquity.

"'3. And may my sin be ever present to thee,

"'4. That thou mayest be justified in thy words and prevail when thou
judgest me.'

"This is then the solution of the words which Pistis Sophia hath
uttered."

Jesus said unto her: "Well said, finely, Martha, blessed \[one\]."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 58](ps062.md)
