[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps067) 
[Next](ps069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

# THE SECOND BOOK OF PISTIS SOPHIA

### CHAPTER 63

JOHN also came forward and said: "O Lord, bid me also speak the solution
of the words which thy light-power hath prophesied aforetime through
David."

And Jesus answered and said unto John: "To thee too, John, I give
commandment to speak the solution of the words which my light-power hath
prophesied through David:

"'10. Grace and truth met together, and righteousness and peace kissed
each other.

"'11. Truth hath sprouted forth out of the earth, and righteousness
looked down from heaven.'"

<span class="margnote">John further interpreteth the same
scripture.</span>And John answered and said: "This is the word which
thou hast said unto us aforetime: 'I have come out of the Height and
entered into Sabaōth, the Good, and embraced the light-power in him.'
Now, therefore, 'Grace and truth' which 'met together,'--thou art
'grace,' thou who art sent out of the regions of the Height through thy
Father, the First Mystery which looketh within, in that he hath sent
thee, \|<span class="rmargnote">**127**.</span> that thou mayest have
mercy on the whole world. 'Truth' on the other hand is the power of

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sabaōth, the Good,
which bound itself in thee and which thou hast cast forth to the
Left,--thou the First Mystery which looketh without. And the little
Sabaōth, the Good, took it and cast it <span class="margnote">Of
Sabaōth, Barbēlō, Yabraōth and the light-vesture.</span>forth into the
matter of Barbēlō, and he made proclamation concerning the regions of
Truth to all the regions of those of the Left. That matter of Barbēlō
then it is which is body for thee to-day.

"And 'righteousness and peace' which 'kissed each
other,'--'righteousness' then art thou who didst bring all the mysteries
through thy Father, the First Mystery which looketh within, and hast
baptized this power of Sabaōth, the Good; and thou didst go to the
region of the rulers and didst give unto them the mysteries of the
Height; they became righteous and good.

"'Peace' on the other hand is the power of Sabaōth, that is thy soul,
which did enter into the matter of Barbēlō, and all the rulers of the
six æons of Yabraōth have made peace with the mystery of the Light.

"And 'truth' which 'sprouted forth out of the earth,'--it is the power
of Sabaōth, the Good, which came out of the region of the Right, which
lieth outside the Treasury of the Light., and which hath come into the
region of those of the Left; \|<span class="rmargnote">**128**.</span>
it hath entered into the matter of Barbēlō, and hath made proclamation
concerning the mysteries of the region of Truth.

"'Righteousness' on the other hand which 'looked down from heaven,' is
thou the First Mystery which looketh down without, as thou didst come
out of the spaces of the Height with the mysteries of the Light-kingdom;
and thou

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

didst come down upon the light-vesture which thou didst receive from the
hand of Barbēlō, which \[vesture\] is Jesus, our Saviour, in that thou
didst come down upon him as a dove."

It came to pass then, when John had brought forward these words, that
the First Mystery which looketh without, said unto -him: "Well said,
John, beloved brother."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 64](ps069)
