[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps070.md) 
[Next](ps072.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 66

<span class="margnote">The emanations of Sell-willed cry aloud to him
for help.</span>And the First Mystery continued again in the discourse
and said: "It came to pass then, before I had led forth Pistis Sophia
out of the chaos, because it was not yet commanded me through my Father,
the First Mystery which looketh within,--at that time then, after the
emanations of Self-willed had perceived that my light-stream had taken
from them the light-powers which they had taken from Pistis Sophia, and
had poured them into Pistis Sophia, and when they again had seen Pistis
Sophia, that she shone as she had done from the beginning, that they
were enraged against Pistis Sophia and cried out again to their
Self-willed, that he should come and help them, so that they might take
away the powers in Pistis Sophia anew.

<span class="margnote">He sendeth forth another more violent power like
unto a flying arrow.</span>"And Self-willed sent out of the height, out
of the thirteenth æon, and sent another great light-power. It came down
into the chaos \|<span class="rmargnote">**136**.</span> as a flying
arrow, that he might help his emanations, so that they might take away
the lights from Pistis Sophia anew. And when that light-power had come
down, the emanations of Self-willed which were in the chaos and
oppressed Pistis Sophia, took great courage and again pursued Pistis
Sophia with great terror and great alarm. And some of the emanations of
Self-willed oppressed her. One of them changed itself into

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="margnote">The fashioning of the serpent-, basilisk- and
dragon-powers.</span>the form of a great serpent; another again changed
itself also into the form of a seven-headed basilisk; another again
changed itself into the form of a dragon. And moreover the first power
of Self-willed, the lion-faced, and all his other very numerous
emanations, they came together and oppressed Pistis Sophia and led her
again into the lower regions of the chaos and alarmed her again
exceedingly.

<span class="margnote">The demon-power of Adamas dasheth Sophia
down.</span>"It came to pass then that there looked down out of the
twelve æons, Adamas, the Tyrant, who also was wroth with Pistis Sophia,
because she desired to go to the Light of lights, which was above them
all; therefore was he wroth with her. It came to pass then, when Adamas,
the Tyrant, had looked down out of the twelve æons, that he saw the
emanations of Self-willed oppressing Pistis Sophia, until they should
take from her all her lights. It came to pass then, when the power of
Adamas had come down into the chaos unto all the emanations of
Self-willed,--it came to pass then, when that demon came down into the
chaos, that it dashed down Pistis Sophia. And the lion-faced power and
the serpent-form and the basilisk-form and the dragon-form and all the
other very numerous emanations of Self-willed surrounded Pistis Sophia
all together, desiring to take from her anew her powers in her, and they
oppressed Pistis Sophia exceedingly and threatened her. It came to pass
then, when they oppressed her and alarmed her exceedingly, that she
cried again to the Light and sang praises, saying:

"'1. O Light, it is thou who hast helped me; let thy light come over me.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="margnote">Sophia again crieth to the Light.</span>"'2. For
thou art my protector, and I come hence unto thee, O Light, having faith
in thee, O Light.

"'3. For thou art my saviour from the emanations of Self-willed and of
Adamas, the Tyrant, and thou shalt save me from all his violent
threats.'

<span class="margnote">Gabriēl and Michaēl and the light-stream again go
to her aid.</span>"And when Pistis Sophia had said this, then at the
commandment \|<span class="rmargnote">**138**.</span> of my Father, the
First Mystery which looketh within, I sent again Gabriēl and Michaēl and
the great light-stream, that they should help Pistis Sophia. And I gave
commandment unto Gabriēl and Michaēl to bear Pistis Sophia in their
hands, so that her feet should not touch the darkness below; and I gave
them commandment moreover to guide her in the regions of the chaos, out
of which she was to be led.

"It came to pass then, when the angels had come down into the chaos,
they and the light-stream, and moreover \[when\] all the emanations of
Self-willed and the emanations of Adamas had seen the light-stream, how
it shone very exceedingly and there was no measure for the light about
it, that they became terror-stricken and quitted Pistis Sophia. And the
great light-stream surrounded Pistis Sophia on all sides of her, on her
left and on her right and on all her sides, and it became a light-wreath
round her head.

"It came to pass then, when the light-stream had surrounded Pistis
Sophia, that she took great courage, and it ceased not to surround her
on all her sides; and she was no longer in fear of the emanations of
Self-willed which are in the

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

chaos, nor was she any more in fear of the other new power of
Self-willed which he had cast down into the chaos \|<span
class="rmargnote">**139**.</span> as a flying arrow, nor did she any
more tremble at the demon power of Adamas which had come out of the
æons.

<span class="margnote">The transfiguration of Sophia.</span>"And
moreover by commandment of myself, the First Mystery which looketh
without, the light-stream which surrounded Pistis Sophia on all her
sides, shone most exceedingly, and Pistis Sophia abode in the midst of
the light, a great light being on her left and on her right, and on all
her sides, forming a wreath round her head. And all the emanations of
Self-willed \[could\] not change their face again, nor could they bear
the shock of the great light of the stream, which was a wreath round her
head. And all the emanations of Self-willed,--many of them fell at her
right, because she shone most exceedingly, and many others fell at her
left, and were not able at all to draw nigh unto Pistis Sophia because
of the great light; but they fell all one on another, or they all came
near one another, and they could not inflict any ill on Pistis Sophia,
because she had trusted in the Light.

<span class="margnote">Jesus, the First Mystery looking without, causeth
Sophia to triumph.</span>"And at the commandment of my Father, the First
Mystery which looketh within, I myself went down into the chaos, shining
most exceedingly, and approached the lion-faced power, which shone
exceedingly, and took its whole light in it and held fast all the
emanations of Self-willed, so that from now on they went not into their
region, that is the thirteenth æon. And I took away the power of all the
emanations of Self-willed, and they all fell down in the chaos
powerless. And I led forth Pistis Sophia, she

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

being on the right of Gabriēl and Michaēl. And the great light-stream
entered again into her. And Pistis Sophia beheld with her eyes her foes,
that I had taken their light-power from them. And I led Pistis Sophia
forth from the chaos, she treading under foot the serpent-faced
emanation of Self-willed, and moreover treading under foot the
seven-faced-basilisk emanation, and treading under foot the lion- and
dragon-faced power. I made Pistis Sophia continue to stand upon the
seven-headed-basilisk emanation of Self-willed; and it was more mighty
than them all in its evil doings. And I, the First Mystery, stood by it
and took all the powers in it, and made to perish its whole matter, so
that no seed should arise from it from now on."\|<span
class="rmargnote">**141**.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 67](ps072.md)
