[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps069.md) 
[Next](ps071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 65

Peter came forward and said: "My Lord, concerning the solution of the
words which thou hast spoken, thus hath thy light-power prophesied
aforetime through Solomon in his Odes:

<span class="margnote">Peter interpreteth the narrative from the Odes of
Solomon.</span>"'1. A stream came forth and became a great wide flood.

"'2. It tore away all to itself and turned itself against the temple.

"'3. Dams and buildings could not hold it, nor could the art of them who
hold the waters.

"'4. It was led over the whole land and laid hold of all.

"'5. They who were on the dry sand, drank; their thirst was quieted and
quenched, when the draught from the hand of the Highest was given.

"'6. Blessed are the ministers of that draught, to whom the water of the
Lord is entrusted.

"'7. They have refreshed parched lips; they whose power was taken away,
have gotten joy of heart and they have laid hold of souls, having

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

poured in the breath, so that they should not die.

"'8. They have raised up limbs which were fallen; they have given power
to their openness and light unto their eyes.

"'9. For they all have known themselves in the Lord and are saved
through the water of Life eternal.'

"Hearken, therefore, my Lord, that I may set forth the word in openness.
As thy \|<span class="rmargnote">**132**.</span> power hath prophesied
through Solomon: 'A stream came forth and became a great wide
flood,'--this is: The light-stream hath spread itself out in the chaos
over all the regions of the emanations of Self-willed.

"And again the word which thy power hath spoken through Solomon: 'It
tore away all to itself and led it over the temple,'--that is: It drew
all the light-powers out of the emanations of Self-willed, which they
had taken from Pistis Sophia, and poured them anew into Pistis Sophia.

"And again the word thy power hath spoken: 'The dams and buildings could
not hold it,'--that is: The emanations of Self-willed could not hold the
light-stream within the walls of the darkness of the chaos.

"And again the word which it hath spoken: It was led over the whole land
and filled all,'--that is: When Gabriēl and Michaēl had led it over the
body of Pistis Sophia, they poured into her all the lights which the
emanations of Self-willed had taken from her, and the body of her matter
shone.

"And the word which it hath spoken: 'They who were in the dry sand,
drank,'--that is:

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

All in Pistis Sophia whose light had before been taken away, got light.

"And the word which it hath spoken: 'Their thirst was quieted \|<span
class="rmargnote">**133**.</span> and quenched,'--that is: Her powers
ceased to lack the light, because their light, which had been taken from
them, was given them \[again\].

"And again as thy power hath spoken: 'The draught through the Highest
was given them,'--that is: The light was given unto them through the
light-stream, which came forth out of thee, the First Mystery."

"And as thy power hath spoken: 'Blessed are the ministers of that
draught,'--this is the word which thou hast spoken: 'Michaēl and
Gabriēl, who have ministered, have brought the light-stream into the
chaos and also led it forth again. They will give them the mysteries of
the Light of the Height, they to whom the light-stream is entrusted.'

"And again as thy power hath spoken: 'They have refreshed parched
lips,'--that is: Gabriēl and Michaēl have not taken for themselves from
the lights of Pistis Sophia, which they had spoiled from the emanations
of Self-willed, but they have poured them into Pistis Sophia.

"And again the word which it hath spoken:

They whose power was taken away, have gotten joy of heart,'--that is:
All the other powers of Pistis Sophia, which the emanations of
Self-willed have not taken, are become exceedingly merry and have filled
themselves with light from their light-fellows, for these have poured it
into them. \|<span class="rmargnote">**134**.</span>

"And the word which thy power hath spoken: 'They have quickened souls,
having poured in

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the breath, so that they should not die,'--that is: When they had poured
the lights into Pistis Sophia, they quickened the body of her matter,
from which they had before taken its lights, and which was on the point
of perishing.

"And again the word which thy power hath spoken: 'They have raised up
limbs which were fallen, or that they should not fall,'--that is: When
they poured into her her lights, they raised up all her powers which
were on the point of being dissolved.

"And again as thy light-power hath spoken: They have received again
their light and have become as they were before '; and again the word
which it hath spoken: 'They have given light unto their eyes,'--that is:
They have received sense in the Light and known the light-stream, that
it belongeth to the Height.

"And again the word which it hath spoken: 'They all have known
themselves in the Lord,'--that is: All the powers of Pistis Sophia have
known one another through the light-stream.

"And again the word which it hath spoken: 'They are saved through water
of Life eternal,'--that is: They are saved through the whole
light-stream.

"And again the word which it hath spoken: 'The light-stream tore all to
itself and drew it over the temple,'--that is: When the light-stream had
taken all the light-powers of Pistis Sophia and had spoiled them from
the emanations of Self-willed, it poured them into Pistis Sophia \|<span
class="rmargnote">**135**.</span> and turned itself about and went out
of the chaos and came over thee,--thou who art the temple.

"This is the solution of all the words which

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

thy light-power hath spoken through the Ode of Solomon."

It came to pass then, when the First Mystery had heard Peter speak these
words, that he said unto him: "Well said, blessed Peter. This is the
solution of the words which have been spoken."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 66](ps071.md)
