[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps090.md) 
[Next](ps092.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 86

And Jesus answered and said unto Mary: "Finely indeed dost thou question
concerning all with precision and certainty. But hearken, Mary, that I
may speak with thee about the consummation of the æon and the ascension
of the universe. It will not yet take place; but I have said unto you:
'If I lead you into the region of the inheritances of those who shall
receive the mystery of the Light, \|<span
class="rmargnote">**189**.</span> then will the Treasury of the Light,
the region of the emanations, count for you as a speck of dust only and
as the light of the sun by day.'

"I have therefore said: 'This will take place

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="margnote">Of the twelve saviours and their regions in the
Inheritance.</span>at the time of the consummation \[and\] of the
ascension of the universe.' The twelve saviours of the Treasury and the
twelve orders of every one of them, which are the emanations of the
seven Voices and of the five Trees, they will be with me in the region
of the inheritances of the Light; being kings with me in my kingdom, and
every one of them being king over his emanations, and moreover every one
of them being king according to his glory, the great according to his
greatness and the little according to his littleness.

"And the saviour of the emanations of the first Voice will be in the
region of the souls of those who have received the first mystery of the
First Mystery in my kingdom.

"And the saviour of the emanations of the second Voice will be in the
region of the souls of those who have received the second mystery of the
First Mystery.

"In like manner also will the saviour of the emanations of the third
Voice be in the region of the souls of those who have received the third
mystery of the First Mystery in the E inheritances of the Light.

"And the saviour of the emanations of the fourth Voice of the Treasury
of the Light will be in the region of the souls of those who have
received the fourth mystery of the First Mystery in the inheritances of
the Light.

"And the fifth saviour of the fifth Voice of the Treasury of the Light
will be in the region of the souls of those who have received the fifth
mystery of the First Mystery in the inheritances of the Light.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

"And the sixth saviour of the emanations of the sixth Voice of the
Treasury of the Light will be in the region of the souls of those who
have received the sixth mystery of the First Mystery.

"And the seventh saviour of the emanations of the seventh Voice of the
Treasury of the Light will be in the region of the souls of those who
have received the seventh mystery of the First Mystery in the Treasury
\[*sic*\] of the Light.

"And the eighth saviour, that is the saviour of the emanations of the
first Tree of the Treasury of the Light, will be in the region of the
souls of those who have received the I eighth mystery of the First
Mystery in the inheritances of the Light.

"And the ninth saviour, that is the saviour of the emanations of the
second Tree of the Treasury of the Light, will be in the region of the
souls of those who have received the ninth mystery of the First Mystery
in the inheritances of the Light.

"And the tenth saviour, that is the saviour of the emanations of the
third Tree of the Treasury of the Light, will be in the region of the
souls of those who have received the tenth mystery of the First Mystery
in the inheritances of the Light.

"In like manner also the eleventh saviour, that is the saviour of the
fourth Tree of the Treasury of the Light, will be in the region of the
souls of those who have received the eleventh mystery of the First
Mystery in the inheritances of the Light.

"And the twelfth saviour, that is the saviour of the emanations of the
fifth Tree of the Treasury of the Light, will be in the region of the
souls of those who have received the twelfth mystery of the First
Mystery in the inheritances of the Light.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

<span class="margnote">Of the ascension of those of the Treasury into
the Inheritance.</span>"And the seven \|<span
class="rmargnote">**192**.</span> Amēns and the five Trees and the three
Amēns will be on my right, being kings in the inheritances of the Light.
And the Twin-saviours, that is the Child of the Child, and the nine
guards will bide also at my left, being kings in the inheritances of the
Light.

<span class="margnote">Of their respective ranks in the
kingdom.</span>"And every one of the saviours will rule over the orders
of his emanations in the inheritances of the Light as they did also in
the Treasury of the Light.

"And the nine guards of the Treasury of the Light will be superior to
the saviours in the inheritances of the Light. And the Twin-saviours
will be superior to the nine guards in the kingdom. And the three Amēns
will be superior to the Twin-saviours in the kingdom. And the five Trees
will be superior to the three Amēns in the inheritances of the Light.

<span class="margnote">Of the powers of the Right, and their emanation
and ascension.</span>"And Yew and the guard of the veil of the Great
Light, and the receiver of Light and the two great guides and the great
Sabaōth, the Good, will be kings in the first saviour of the first Voice
of the Treasury of the Light, \[the saviour\] who will be in \|<span
class="rmargnote">**193**.</span> the region of those who have received
the first mystery of the First Mystery. For in sooth Yew and the guard
of the region of those of the Right and Melchisedec, the great receiver
of the Light, and the two great guides have come forth out of the
purified and utterly pure light of the first Tree up to the fifth.

"Yew in sooth is the overseer of the Light, who hath come forth first
out of the pure light of the first Tree; on the other hand the guard of
the veil of those of the Right hath come forth out of the second Tree;
and the two guides again

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

have come forth out of the pure and utterly purified light of the third
and fourth Trees of the Treasury of the Light; Melchisedec again hath
come forth out of the fifth Tree; on the other hand Sabaōth, the Good,
whom I have called my father, hath come forth out of Yew, the overseer
of the Light.

"These six then by command of the First Mystery the last Helper hath
caused to be in the region of those of the Right, for the economy of the
ingathering of the upper light out of the æons of the rulers and out of
the worlds and all races in them,--of every one of whom I will tell you
the employment over which he hath been set in the expansion of the
universe. Because, therefore, of the importance of the employment over
which they have been set, \|<span class="rmargnote">**194**.</span> they
will be fellow-kings in the first \[saviour\] of the first Voice of the
Treasury of the Light, who will be in the region of the souls of those
who have received the first mystery of the First Mystery.

<span class="margnote">Of the powers of the Midst and their
ascension.</span>"And the Virgin of Light and the great guide of the
Midst, whom the rulers of the æons are wont to call the Great Yew after
the name of a great ruler who is in their region,--he and the Virgin of
Light and his twelve ministers, from whom ye have received your shape
and from whom ye have received the power, they all will be kings with
the first saviour of the first Voice in the region of the souls of those
who will receive the first mystery of the First Mystery in the
inheritances of the Light.

"And the fifteen helpers of the seven virgins of the Light who are in
the Midst, they will expand themselves in the regions of the twelve
saviours,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

and the rest of the angels of the Midst, every one of them according to
his glory, will rule with me in the inheritances of the Light. And I
shall rule over them all in the inheritances of the Light.

<span class="margnote">But this shall not take place till the
consummation of the æon.</span>"All this then which I have said unto
you, will not take place at this time, but it will take place at the
consummation of the æon, that is at the ascension of the universe; that
is at the dissolution of the universe and at the total ascension of the
numbering \|<span class="rmargnote">**195**.</span> of the perfect souls
of the inheritances of the Light.

"Before the consummation, therefore, this which I have said unto you,
will not take place, but every one will be in his own region, into which
he hath been set from the beginning, until the numbering of the
ingathering of the perfect souls is completed.

"The seven Voices and the five Trees and the three Amēns and the
Twin-saviours and the nine guards and the twelve saviours and those of
the region of the Right and those of the region of the Midst, every one
will abide in the region in which they have been set, until the
numbering of the perfect souls of the inheritances of the Light shall be
raised up all together.

"And also all the rulers who have repented, they also will abide in the
region into which they have been set, until the numbering of the souls
of the Light shall be raised up all together.

<span class="margnote">Of the ascension of the souls of the
perfect.</span>"\[The souls\] will all come, every one at the time when
he will receive the mysteries; and all the rulers who have repented,
will pass through and come into the region of the Midst. And those of
the Midst will baptize them and give unto them the spiritual unction and
seal them with the

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

seals of their mysteries. And they will pass through those of all the
regions of the Midst, and they will pass through the region of the Right
and the interior of the region of the nine guards and the interior of
the region of the Twin-saviours and the interior of the region of the
three \|<span class="rmargnote">**196**.</span> Amens and of the twelve
saviours and the interior of the five Trees and of the seven Voices.
Every one giveth unto them his seal of his mystery, and they pass into
the interior of them all and go to the region of the inheritances of the
Light; and every one bideth in the region up to which he hath received
mysteries in the inheritances of the Light.

<span class="margnote">Of the rank of the souls of the
perfect.</span>"In a word, all the souls of men who shall receive the
mysteries of the Light, will precede all the rulers who have repented,
and they will precede all those of the region of the Midst and those of
the whole region of the Right, and they will precede those of the whole
region of the Treasury of the Light. In a word, they will precede all
those of the region \[of the Treasury\], and they will precede all those
of the regions of the first Commandment, and they will pass into the
interior of them all and go into the Inheritance of the Light up to the
region of their mystery; and every one abideth in the region up to which
he hath received mysteries. And those of the region of the Midst and of
the Right and those of the whole region of the Treasury, every one
abideth in the region of the order into which he hath been set from the
beginning on, until the universe shall be raised up. And every one of
them accomplisheth his economy to which he hath been set, in respect of
the ingathering of the souls who

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

have received the mysteries, in respect of this economy, so that they
may seal \|<span class="rmargnote">**197**.</span> all the souls who
will receive the mysteries and who will pass through their interior
towards the Inheritance of the Light.

"Now, therefore, Mary, this is the word concerning which thou dost
question me with precision and certainty. For the rest now then, who
hath ears to hear, let him hear."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 87](ps092.md)
