[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps097) 
[Next](ps099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 93

Jesus continued again and said unto his disciples: "Yet further, O my
disciples and companions and brethren, let every one be sober in the
spirit which is in him, let him understand and comprehend all the words
which I shall say unto you; for from now on will I begin to discourse
with you concerning all the gnoses of that Ineffable.

"That mystery knoweth why the west hath arisen and why the east hath
arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the south hath arisen and why the north
hath arisen.

Yet further, O my disciples, hearken and continue to be sober and
hearken to the total gnosis of the mystery of the Ineffable.

"That mystery knoweth why the demons have arisen and why mankind hath
arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the heat hath arisen and why the pleasant
air hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the stars have arisen and why the clouds
have arisen. \|<span class="rmargnote">**212**.</span>

"And that mystery knoweth why the earth became deep and why the water
came thereon.

"And that mystery knoweth why the earth became dry and why the water
came thereon.

"And that mystery knoweth why famine hath arisen and why superfluity
hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the hoar-frost

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

hath arisen and why the healthful dew hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the dust hath arisen and why the
delightsome freshness hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the hail hath arisen and why the pleasant
snow hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the west wind hath arisen and why the east
wind hath arisen.

("And that mystery knoweth why the fire of the height hath arisen and
why the waters have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the east wind hath arisen. \[?
miscopied.\])

"And that mystery knoweth why the south wind hath arisen and why the
north wind hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the stars of the heaven and the \|<span
class="rmargnote">**213**.</span> disks of the light-givers have arisen
and why the firmament with all its veils hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the rulers of the spheres have arisen and
why the sphere with all its regions hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the rulers of the æons have arisen and why
the æons with their veils have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the tyrant rulers of the æons have arisen
and why the rulers who have repented have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the servitors have arisen and why the
decans have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the angels

have arisen and why the archangels have arisen.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

"And that mystery knoweth why the lords have arisen and why the gods
have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the jealousy in the height hath arisen and
why concord hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why hate hath arisen and why love hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why discord hath arisen and why concord hath
arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why avarice \|<span
class="rmargnote">**214**.</span> hath arisen and why renunciation of
all hath arisen and love of possessions hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why love of the belly hath arisen and why
satiety hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the paired have arisen and why the
unpaired have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why impiety hath arisen and why fear of God
hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the light-givers have arisen and why the
sparks have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the thrice-powerful have arisen and why
the invisibles have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the fore-fathers have arisen and why the
purities have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the great self-willed hath arisen and why
his faithful have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the great triple-powerful hath arisen and
why the great invisible forefather hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the thirteenth æon hath arisen and why the
region \|<span class="rmargnote">**215**.</span> of those of the Midst
hath arisen.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

"And that mystery knoweth why receivers of the Midst have arisen and why
the virgins of the light have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the ministers of the Midst have arisen and
why the angels of the Midst have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the light-land hath arisen and why the
great receiver of the light hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the guards of the region of the Right have
arisen and why the leaders of them have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the gate of life hath arisen and why
Sabaōth, the Good, hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the region of the Right hath arisen and
why the light-land, which is the treasury of the light, hath arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the emanations of the light have arisen
and why the twelve saviours have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the three gates of the treasury of the
light have arisen and why the nine guards have arisen.

"And \|<span class="rmargnote">**216**.</span> that mystery knoweth why
the twin-saviours have arisen and why the three Amēns have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the five Trees have arisen and why the
seven Amēns have arisen.

"And that mystery knoweth why the Mixture which existeth not, hath
arisen and why it is purified."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 94](ps099)
