[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps101) 
[Next](ps103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 97

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary Magdalene started forward and
said: "My Lord, bear with me and be not wroth with me, if I question on
all things with precision and certainty. Now, therefore, my Lord, is
then another the word of the mystery of the Ineffable and another the
word of the whole gnosis?"

The Saviour answered and said: "Yea, another is the mystery of the
Ineffable and another the word of the whole gnosis."

And Mary answered again and said unto the Saviour: "My Lord, bear with
me, if I question thee, and be not wroth with me. Now, therefore, my
Lord, unless we live and know the gnosis of the whole word of the
Ineffable, shall we not be able to inherit the Light-kingdom?"

<span class="margnote">Of the distinction between the gnosis of the
universe and the mysteries of the Light.</span>And the Saviour answered
\|<span class="rmargnote">**233**.</span> and said unto Mary: "Surely;
for every one who shall receive a mystery of the Light-kingdom, will go
and inherit up to the region up to which he hath received mysteries. But
he will not know the

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

gnosis of the universe, wherefor all this hath arisen, unless he knoweth
the one and only word of the Ineffable, which is the gnosis of the
universe. And again in openness: I am the gnosis of the universe. And
moreover it is impossible to know the one and only word of the gnosis,
unless a man first receive the mystery of the Ineffable. But all the men
who shall receive mysteries in the Light,--every one will go and inherit
up to the region up to which he hath received mysteries.

"On this account I have said unto you aforetime: 'He who hath faith in a
prophet, will receive a prophet's reward, and he who hath faith in a
righteous \[man\] will receive a righteous \[man's\] reward,'--that is:
Every one will go to the region up to which he hath received mysteries.
He who receiveth a lesser mystery, will inherit the lesser mystery, and
he who receiveth a higher mystery, will inherit the higher regions. And
every one will abide in his region in the light of my kingdom, and every
one will have power over the orders which are below him, but he will not
have the power to go to the orders which are above him; but he will
abide in the region of the Inheritance of the Light \|<span
class="rmargnote">**234**.</span> of my kingdom, being in a great light
immeasurable for the gods and all the invisibles, and he will be in
great joy and great jubilation.

"But now, therefore, hearken, that I may discourse with you concerning
the grandeur of those who shall receive the mysteries of the First
Mystery.

"He, therefore, who shall receive the \[first\] mystery of that First
Mystery, and it shall be

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

<span class="margnote">Of the ascension of the souls of those who
receive the twelve mysteries of the First Mystery.</span>at the time
that he cometh out of the body of the matter of the rulers,--then the
retributive receivers come and lead the soul of that man out of the
body. And that soul will become a great light-stream in the hands of the
retributive receivers; and those receivers will be afraid of the light
of that soul. And that soul will go upwards and pass through all the
regions of the rulers and all the regions of the emanations of the
Light. And it will not give answers nor apologies nor tokens in any
single region of the Light nor in any single region of the rulers; but
it will pass through all the regions and cross over them all, so that it
goeth and ruleth over all the regions of the first saviour.

"In like manner also he who shall receive the second mystery of the
First Mystery and the third and fourth, until he shall receive the
twelfth mystery of the First Mystery, if it shall be at the time \|<span
class="rmargnote">**235**.</span> that he cometh out of the body of the
matter of the rulers,--then the retributive receivers come and lead the
soul of that man out of the body of matter. And those souls will become
a great light-stream in the hands of the retributive receivers; and
those receivers will be afraid of the light of those souls and will
become powerless and fall on their faces. And those souls will
straightway soar upwards and cross over all the regions of the rulers
and all the regions of the emanations of the Light. They will not give
answers nor apologies nor tokens in any single region; but they will
pass through all the regions and will cross over them all and rule over
all the regions of the twelve saviours, so that they who receive the
second mystery of the First

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

Mystery, will rule over all the regions of the second saviour in the
inheritances of the Light.

"In like manner also those who receive the third mystery of the First
Mystery and the fourth and fifth and sixth up to the twelfth,--every one
will rule over all the regions of the saviour up to whom he hath
received the mystery.

"And he who shall receive in sequence the twelfth mystery of the First
Mystery, that is the master-mystery concerning which I discourse with
you,--\|<span class="rmargnote">**236**.</span> and he who, therefore,
shall receive those twelve mysteries which belong to the First Mystery,
if he goeth forth out of the world, will pass through all the regions of
the rulers and all the regions of the Light, being a great light-stream,
and he will moreover rule over all the regions of the twelve saviours;
but they will not be able to be like unto those who receive the one and
only mystery of the Ineffable. But he who shall receive those mysteries
will abide in those orders, because they are exalted, and he will abide
in the orders of the twelve saviours."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 98](ps103)
