[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps099) 
[Next](ps101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 95

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard Mary say these words and knew
that the disciples had heard and had begun to let go, that he encouraged
them and said unto them: "Grieve

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

no more, my disciples, concerning the mystery of, the Ineffable,
thinking that ye will not understand it. Amēn, I say unto you: That
mystery is yours, and every one's who will give ear unto you, so that
they renounce this whole world and the whole matter therein and renounce
all the evil thoughts therein and renounce all the cares of this æon.

<span class="margnote">Jesus explaineth that that mystery is really
simpler than all mysteries.</span>"Now, therefore, I say unto you:
\|<span class="rmargnote">**218**.</span> For every one who will
renounce the whole world and all therein and will submit himself to the
godhead, that mystery is far easier than all the mysteries of the
Light-kingdom and it is sooner to understand than them all and it is
easier \[?\] than them all. He who reacheth unto the gnosis of that
mystery, renounceth this whole world and all the cares therein.

"For this cause have I said to you aforetime: 'All ye who are heavy
under your burden, come hither unto me, and I will quicken you. For my
burden is easy and my yoke is soft.' Now, therefore, he who will receive
that mystery, renounceth the whole world and the cares of all the matter
therein. For this cause, therefore, my disciples, grieve not, thinking
that ye will not understand that mystery. Amēn, I say unto you: That
mystery is far sooner to understand than all mysteries. And amēn, I say
unto you: That mystery is yours and every one's who will renounce the
whole world and the whole matter therein.

"Now, therefore, hearken, my disciples and my companions and my
brethren, that I may urge you on to the gnosis of the mystery of the
Ineffable \|<span class="rmargnote">**219**.</span> concerning which I
discourse with you,

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

because I have in Booth gotten as far as to tell you the whole gnosis at
the expansion of the universe; for the expansion of the universe is its
gnosis.

"But now then hearken that I may discourse with you progressively
concerning the gnosis of that mystery.

<span class="margnote">Of the rending asunder and emanation of the
powers of the universe.</span>"That mystery knoweth wherefor the five
Helpers have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth
from the Fatherless \[*pl*.\].

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the great Light of lights hath rent
itself asunder and wherefor it hath come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the first Commandment hath rent
itself asunder and wherefor it hath divided itself into the seven
mysteries and wherefor it is named the first Commandment and wherefor it
hath come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Great Light of the Impressions of
the Light hath rent itself asunder and wherefor it hath set itself up
without emanations and wherefor it hath come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the First Mystery, that is the
four-and-twentieth mystery from without, hath rent itself asunder and
wherefor it imitated in itself the twelve mysteries according to the
number of the numbering of the Uncontainables \|<span
class="rmargnote">**220**.</span> and Boundless and wherefor it hath
come forth from the Fatherless.

<span class="margnote">Of those of the second space of the
Ineffable.</span>"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the twelve
Immoveables have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have set
themselves with all

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

their orders and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Unwaverables have rent themselves
asunder and wherefor they have set themselves up, divided into twelve
orders, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless, which
belong to the orders of the space of the Ineffable.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Incomprehensibles, which pertain
to the second space of the Ineffable, have rent themselves asunder and
wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the twelve Undesignatables have rent
themselves asunder and wherefor they have set themselves up after all
the orders of the Unindicatables, themselves being uncontainable and
boundless, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor these Unindicatables have rent
themselves asunder,--\[they\] who have not indicated themselves nor
brought themselves into publicity according to the economy of the One
and Only, the Ineffable, and wherefor they have come forth \|<span
class="rmargnote">**221**.</span> from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Super-deeps have rent themselves
asunder and wherefor they have distributed themselves, being a single
order, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the twelve orders of the Unspeakables
have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

divided themselves, being three portions, and wherefor they have come
forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the Imperishables, being their
twelve orders, have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
settled themselves, being expanded in a single order, and wherefor they
have divided themselves and formed different orders, being uncontainable
and boundless, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Impassables have rent themselves
asunder and wherefor they have set themselves up, being twelve boundless
spaces, and have settled themselves, being three orders of spaces,
according to the economy of the One and Only, the Ineffable, and
wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the twelve Uncontainables, which
belong to the orders \|<span class="rmargnote">**222**.</span> of the
One and Only, the Ineffable, have rent themselves asunder and wherefor
they have come forth from the Fatherless, until they were brought to the
space of the First Mystery, which is the second space.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the four-and-twenty myriads of
Praise-singers have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
extended themselves outside the veil of the First Mystery, which is the
twin-mystery, that which looketh within and without, of the One and
Only, the Ineffable, and wherefor they have come forth from the
Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Uncontainables
have rent themselves asunder--\[those\], which I have just named, which
are in the regions of the second space of the Ineffable, which is the
space of the First Mystery, and wherefor those Uncontainables and
Boundless have come forth from the Fatherless.

<span class="margnote">Of those of the first space of the
Ineffable.</span>"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the four-and-twenty
mysteries of the first Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and
wherefor they are called the four-and-twenty spaces of the first
Thrice-spiritual and wherefor they have come forth from the second
Thrice-spiritual.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the four-and-twenty mysteries of the
\|<span class="rmargnote">**223**.</span> second Thrice-spiritual have
rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the third
Thrice-spiritual.

"And that mystery knoweth why the four-and-twenty mysteries of the third
Thrice-spiritual--that is the four-and-twenty spaces of the third
Thrice-spiritual--have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the five Trees of the first
Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
extended themselves, standing one behind [the](errata.htm#2) other and
moreover bound one to the other with all their orders, and wherefor they
have come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the five Trees of the second
Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
come forth from the Fatherless.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the five Trees of the third
Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth why the Fore-uncontainables of the first
Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have
come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Fore-uncontainables of the second
Trispiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor \|<span
class="rmargnote">**224**.</span> they have come forth from the
Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the Fore-uncontainables of the
third Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they
have come forth from the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the first Thrice-spiritual from
below--those who belong to the orders of the One and Only, the Ineffable
hath rent itself asunder and wherefor it hath come forth from the second
Thrice-spiritual.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor the third Thrice-spiritual--that is
the first Thrice-spiritual from above--hath rent itself asunder and
wherefor it hath come forth from the twelfth Pro-thrice-spiritual, which
is in the last region of the Fatherless.

"And that mystery knoweth wherefor all [the](errata.htm#3) regions which
are in the space of the Ineffable, and all those in them, have expanded
themselves, and wherefor they have come forth from the last Limb of the
Ineffable.

"And that mystery knoweth itself, wherefor it hath rent itself asunder
to come forth from the Ineffable,--that is from That which ruleth them

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

all and which expanded them all according to \|<span
class="rmargnote">**225**.</span> their orders.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 96](ps101)
