[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps114.md) 
[Next](ps116.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 110

When then Jesus had said this, Mary continued, threw herself at Jesus'
feet, kissed them and said: "My Lord, still will I question thee. Reveal
\[it\] unto us and hide \[it\] not from us."

Jesus answered and said unto Mary: "Question on what ye question, and I
will reveal \[it\] unto you in openness without similitude."

<span class="margnote">Mary continueth her questioning.</span>Mary
answered and said: "My Lord, hast thou then not brought mysteries into
the world because of poverty and riches, and because of weakness and
strength, and because of . . . and healthy bodies, in a word because of
all such, so that, if we go into the regions of the land, and they do
not have faith in us and they hearken not unto our words, and we perform
any such mysteries in those regions, they may know truly in truth that
we \|<span class="rmargnote">**279**.</span> herald the words \[of the
God\] of the universe?"

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary in the midst of the disciples:
"Concerning this mystery on which ye question me, I have given

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

it unto you at another time; but I will repeat it and speak the word
unto you:

<span class="margnote">The mystery of the raising of the
dead.</span>"Now, therefore, Mary, not only ye, but every man who shall
accomplish the mystery of the raising of the dead,--that which healeth
the demons and all pains and all sicknesses and the blind and the lame
and the maimed and the dumb and the deaf, which I have given unto you
aforetime,--he who shall receive \[that\] mystery and accomplish it,
thereafter then, if he ask for all things, for poverty and riches, for
weakness and strength, for . . . and healthy body, and for all healings
of the body and for the raising of the dead and for healing the lame and
the blind and the deaf and the dumb and all sicknesses and all
pains,--in a word, he who shall accomplish that mystery and ask for all
the things which I have just said, then will they quickly come to pass
for him."

<span class="margnote">The disciples became frenzied at the sublimity of
the prospect.</span>When then the Saviour had said this, the disciples
came forward, cried out all together and said: "O Saviour, thou hath
made us very exceedingly frenzied because of the great deeds of which
thou tellest us; and because thou hast borne up our souls, they have
pressed to go forth out of us \|<span class="rmargnote">**280**.</span>
unto thee, for we issue from thee. Now, therefore, because of these
great deeds of which thou tellest us, our souls have become frenzied and
they have pressed very exceedingly, yearning to go forth out of us on
high to the region of thy kingdom."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 111](ps116.md)
