[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps113) 
[Next](ps115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 109

<span class="margnote">Mary continueth her questioning.</span>And Mary
answered and said: "Now, therefore, my Lord, hast thou then not brought
mysteries into the world that man \|<span
class="rmargnote">**277**.</span> may not die through the death which is
appointed him by the rulers of the Fate,--be it that it is appointed one
to die by the sword or die by the waters or through tortures and
torturings and acts of violence which are in the law, or through any
other evil death,--hast thou then not brought mysteries into the world
that man may not die with them through the rulers of the Fate, but that
he may die by a sudden death, so that he endure no sufferings through
such kinds of death? For they are exceedingly numerous who persecute us
because of thee, and numerous those who persecute us because of thy
name, in order that, if they torture us, we may speak the mystery and
straightway go out of the body without having endured any sufferings at
all."

<span class="margnote">How he who possesseth the mysteries can come
forth out of the body without suffering.</span>The Saviour answered and
said unto all his disciples: "Concerning this word on which ye question
me, I have spoken unto you at another time; but hearken again that I may
say it unto you anew: Not only ye, but every man who will accomplish
that first mystery of the First Mystery of the Ineffable,--he who,
therefore, shall perform that mystery and accomplish it in all its
figures and all its types and all its stations, in

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

performing it, he will not come out of the body; but after he hath
accomplished that mystery in all its figures \|<span
class="rmargnote">**278**.</span> and all its types, thereafter then at
every time when he shall speak the name of that mystery, he will save
himself from all that which is appointed him by the rulers of the Fate.
And in that hour he will come forth out of the body of the matter of the
rulers, and his soul will become a great light-stream, so that it
soareth on high and penetrateth all the regions of the rulers and all
the regions of the Light, until it reacheth the region of its kingdom.
Neither giveth it answers nor apologies in any region at all, for it is
without tokens."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 110](ps115)
