[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps115) 
[Next](ps117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 111

<span class="margnote">How the disciples shall make
proclamation.</span>When then the disciples had said this, the Saviour
continued again and said unto his disciples: "If ye go into cities or
kingdoms or countries, proclaim first unto them, saying:

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

Search ever and cease not, until ye find the mysteries of the Light
which will lead you into the Light-kingdom. Say unto them: Beware of the
[doctrines](errata.htm#4) of error. For many will come in my name and
say: It is I. And it is not I, and they will lead many astray.

<span class="margnote">What mysteries they shall give.</span>"Now,
therefore, unto all men who come unto you and have faith in you and
hearken unto your words and do what is worthy of the mysteries of the
Light, give the mysteries of the Light and hide them not from them. And
unto him who is worthy of the higher mysteries, give them, and to him
who is worthy of the lower mysteries, give them, and hide not anything
from any one.

<span class="margnote">The mystery of the raising of the dead not to be
given to any.</span>"The mystery of the raising of the dead and of the
healing of the sick, on the other hand, give unto no one nor give
instruction in it, for that mystery belongeth to the rulers, it and all
its namings. For this cause, therefore, give it \|<span
class="rmargnote">**281**.</span> unto no one, nor give instruction in
it until ye establish the faith in the whole world, in order that, if ye
come into cities or into countries, and they do not receive you unto
themselves, and do not have faith, and do not hearken unto your words,
ye may raise the dead in those regions and heal the lame and the blind
and manifold of sicknesses in those regions. And through all such they
will have faith in you, that ye herald the God of the universe, and will
have faith in all the words of you. For this cause, therefore, have I
given unto you that mystery, until ye establish the faith in the whole
world."

When then the Saviour had said this, he continued again in the discourse
and said unto Mary: "Now, therefore, hearken, Mary, concerning the

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

word on which thou hast questioned me: Who constraineth the man until he
sinneth? Now, therefore, hearken:

<span class="margnote">Of the constitution of man.</span>"Is the babe
born, the power is feeble in it, and the soul is feeble in it, and also
the counterfeiting spirit is feeble in it; in a word, the three together
are feeble, without any one of them sensing anything, whether good or
evil, because of the load of forgetfulness which is very heavy. Moreover
the body also is feeble. And the babe eateth of the delights of the
world of the rulers; and the power draweth into itself from the portion
of the power which \|<span class="rmargnote">**282**.</span> is in the
delights; and the soul draweth into itself from the portion of the soul
which is in the delights; and the counterfeiting spirit draweth into
itself from the portion of the evil which is in the delights and in its
lusts. And on the other hand the body draweth into itself the matter
which senseth not, which is in the delights. The destiny on the contrary
taketh nothing from the delights, because it is not mingled with them,
but it departeth again in the condition in which it cometh into the
world.

"And little by little the power and the soul and the counterfeiting
spirit grow, and every one of them senseth according to its nature: the
power senseth to seek after the light of the height; the soul on the
other hand senseth to seek after the region of righteousness which is
mixed, which is the region of the commixture; the counterfeiting spirit
on the other hand seeketh after all evils and lusts and all sins; the
body on the contrary senseth nothing unless it taketh up force out of
the matter.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

"And straightway the three develop sense, every one according to its
nature. And the retributive receivers assign the servitors to follow
them and be witnesses of all the sins which they commit, with a view to
the manner and method how they will chastize them in the judgments.

<span class="margnote">Of the counterfeiting spirit.</span>"And after
this the counterfeiting spirit \|<span class="rmargnote">**283**.</span>
contriveth and senseth all sins and the evil which the rulers of the
great Fate have commanded for the soul, and it maketh them for the soul.

"And the inner power stirreth the soul to seek after the region of the
Light and the whole god-head; and the counterfeiting spirit leadeth away
the soul and compelleth it continually to do all its lawless deeds, all
its mischiefs and all its sin, and is persistently allotted to the soul
and is hostile to it, and making it do all this evil and all these sins.

"And it goadeth on the retributive servitors, so that they are witnesses
in all the sins which it will make it do. Moreover also if it will rest
in the night \[or\] by day, it stirreth it in dreams or in lusts of the
world, and maketh it to lust after all the things of the world. In a
word, it driveth \[?\] it into all the things which the rulers have
commanded for it and it is hostile to the soul, making it do what
pleaseth it not.

"Now, therefore, Mary, this is in fact the foe of the soul, and this
compelleth it until it doeth all sins.

<span class="margnote">The state of the sinful soul after
death.</span>"Now, therefore, if \|<span
class="rmargnote">**284**.</span> the time of that man is completed,
first cometh forth the destiny and leadeth the man unto death through
the rulers and their bonds with which they are bound through the Fate.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

"And thereafter the retributive receivers come and lead that soul out of
the body. And thereafter the. retributive receivers spend three days
circling round with that soul in all the regions and dispatch it to all
the æons of the world. And the counterfeiting spirit and the destiny
follow that soul; and the power returneth to the Virgin of Light.

"And after three days the retributive receivers lead down that soul to
the Amente of the chaos; and when they bring it down to the chaos, they
hand it over to those who chastize. And the retributive receivers return
unto their own regions according to the economy of the works of the
rulers concerning the coming-forth of the souls.

"And the counterfeiting spirit becometh the receiver of the soul, being
assigned unto it and transferring it according to the chastisement
because of the sins which it hath made it commit, and is in great enmity
to the soul.

"And when the soul hath finished the chastisements in the chaos
according to the sins \|<span class="rmargnote">**285**.</span> which it
hath committed, the counterfeiting spirit leadeth it forth out of the
chaos, being assigned unto it and transferring it to every region
because of the sins which it hath committed; and it leadeth it forth on
the way of the rulers of the midst. And when it reacheth them, \[the
rulers\] question it on the mysteries of the destiny; and if it hath not
found them, they question their destiny. And those rulers chastize that
soul according to the sins of which it is guilty. I will tell you the
type of their chastisements at the expansion of the universe.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="margnote">How a sinful soul is brought back to
birth.</span>"When, therefore, the time of the chastisements of that
soul in the judgments of the rulers of the midst shall be completed, the
counterfeiting spirit leadeth the soul up out of all the regions of the
rulers of the midst and bringeth it before the light of the sun
according to the commandment of the First Man, Yew, and bringeth it
before the judge, the Virgin of Light. And she proveth that soul and
findeth that it is a sinning soul, and ceaseth her light-power into it
for its standing-upright and because of the body and the community of
sense,--the type of which I will tell you at the expansion of the
universe. And the Virgin of Light sealeth that soul and handeth it over
to one of her receivers \|<span class="rmargnote">**286**.</span> and
will have it cast into a body which is suitable to the sins which it
hath committed.

"And amēn, I say unto you: They will not discharge that soul from the
changes of the body until it hath yielded its last circuit according to
its merit. Of all these then will I tell you their type and the type of
the bodies into which it will be cast according to the sins of each
soul. All this will I tell you when I shall have told you the expansion
of the universe."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 112](ps117)
