[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps112.md) 
[Next](ps114.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 108

<span class="margnote">Mary again questioneth Jesus.</span>It came to
pass, when Jesus had finished saying these words unto his disciples,
that Mary adored the feet of Jesus and kissed them. Mary said: "My Lord,
bear with me, if I question thee, and be not wroth with me."

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Question concerning what thou
desirest to question, and I will reveal it \|<span
class="rmargnote">**275**.</span> unto thee in openness."

And Mary answered and said: "My Lord, suppose a good and excellent
brother whom we have filled with all the mysteries of the Light, and
that brother hath a brother or kinsman, in a

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

word he hath in general \[any\] man, and this \[man\] is a sinner and
impious or better he is no sinner, and such an one hath gone out of the
body, and the heart of the good brother is grieved and mourneth over
him, that he is in judgments and chastisements,--now, therefore, my
Lord, what are we to do to remove him out of the chastisements and harsh
judgments?"

And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Concerning this word,
therefore, I have already spoken unto you at another time, but hearken
that I may say it again, so that ye may be perfected in all mysteries
and be called 'the perfected in every fulness.'

<span class="margnote">How the souls of those who have come out of the
body may be helped by those on earth.</span>"Now, therefore, all men,
sinners or better who are no sinners, not only if ye desire that they be
taken out of the judgments and violent chastisements, but that they be
removed into a righteous body which will find the mysteries of the
godhead, so that it goeth on high and inheriteth the
Light-kingdom,--then perform the third mystery of the Ineffable \|<span
class="rmargnote">**276**.</span> and say: Carry ye the soul of this and
this man of whom we think in our hearts, carry him out of all the
chastisements of the rulers and haste ye quickly to lead him before the
Virgin of Light; and in every month let the Virgin of Light seal him
with a higher seal, and in every month let the Virgin of Light cast him
into a body which will be righteous and good, so that it goeth on high
and inheriteth the Light-kingdom. "And if ye say this, amēn, I say unto
you: All who serve in all the orders of the judgments of the rulers,
hasten to hand over that soul from one to the other, until they lead it
before the Virgin of Light. And the Virgin of Light sealeth

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

it with the sign of the kingdom of the Ineffable and handeth it over
unto her receivers, and the receivers will cast it into a body which
will be righteous and find the mysteries of the Light, so that it will
be good and goeth on high and inheriteth the Light-kingdom. Lo, this is
it on which ye question me."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 109](ps114.md)
