[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps130) 
[Next](ps132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# A FOURTH BOOK

### CHAPTER 126

AND Mary continued again and said unto Jesus: "In what type is the outer
darkness; or rather how many regions of chastisement are there in it?"

<span class="margnote">Of the dragon of the outer darkness.</span>And
Jesus answered and said unto Mary: "The outer darkness is a great
dragon, whose tail is in his mouth, outside the whole world and
surrounding the whole world. And there are many regions of chastisement
within it. There are twelve mighty \|<span
class="rmargnote">**320**.</span> chastisement-dungeons and a ruler is
in every dungeon and the face of the rulers is different one from
another.

<span class="margnote">Of the rulers of the twelve dungeons and their
names.</span>"And the first ruler, who is in the first dungeon, hath a
crocodile's face, whose tail is in his mouth. And out of the jaws of the
dragon cometh all ice and all dust and all cold and all different
diseases. This \[is\] he who is called with his authentic name in his
region 'Enchthonin.'

"And the ruler who is in the second dungeon,--a cat's face is his
authentic face. This \[is\] he who is called in his region 'Charachar.'

"And the ruler who is in the third dungeon,--a dog's face is his
authentic face. This \[is\] he who is called in his region 'Archarōch.'

"And the ruler who is in the fourth dungeon,--a serpent's face is his
authentic face. This \[is\] he who is called in his region 'Achrōchar.'

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

"And the ruler who is in the fifth dungeon,--a black bull's face is his
authentic face. This \[is\] he who is called in his region 'Marchūr.'

"And the ruler who is in the sixth dungeon,--a wild boar's face is his
authentic face. This \[is\] he who is called in his region 'Lamchamōr.'

"And the ruler who is in the seventh dungeon, \|<span
class="rmargnote">**321**.</span>--a bear's face is his authentic face.
This \[is\] he who is called in his region with his authentic name
'Luchar.'

"And the ruler of the eighth dungeon,--a vulture's face is his authentic
face, whose name in his region is called 'Laraōch.'

"And the ruler of the ninth dungeon,--a basilisk's face is his authentic
face, whose name in his region is called 'Archeōch.'

"And in the tenth dungeon is a multitude of rulers, and every one of
them hath seven dragon's heads in his authentic face. And he who is over
them all is in his region with his name called Xarmarōch.'

"And in the eleventh dungeon is a multitude of rulers,--and every one of
them hath seven cat-faced heads in his authentic face. And the great one
over them is called in his region Rōchar.'

"And in the twelfth dungeon is an exceedingly great multitude of rulers,
and every one of them hath seven dog-faced heads in his authentic face.
And the great one over them is called in his region 'Chrēmaōr.'

"These rulers then of these twelve dungeons are inside the dragon of the
outer darkness, each and every one \|<span
class="rmargnote">**322**.</span> of them hath a name every hour, and
every one of them changeth his face every

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

<span class="margnote">Of the doors of the dungeons.</span>hour. And
moreover every one of these dungeons hath a door opening upwards, so
that the dragon of the outer darkness hath twelve dark dungeons, and
every dungeon hath a door opening upwards. And an angel of the height
watcheth each of the doors of the dungeons,--whom Yew, the First Man,
the overseer of the Light,<span class="margnote">The angels who watch
the doors.</span> the envoy of the First Commandment, hath established
as watchers of the dragon, so that the dragon and the rulers of his
dungeons which are in him, may not mutiny."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 127](ps132)
