[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps135.md) 
[Next](ps137.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 131

Mary continued again and said: "My Lord, doth the dragon of the outer
darkness come into this world or doth he not come?"

<span class="margnote">Of the light of the sun and the darkness of the
dragon.</span>The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "When the light
of the sun is outside \[? above the world\], he covereth the darkness of
the dragon; but if the sun is below the world, then the darkness of the
dragon abideth as veiling of the sun and the breath of the darkness
cometh into the world in form of a smoke in the night,--that is, if the
sun withdraweth into himself his rays, then indeed the world is not able
to endure the darkness of the dragon in its true form; otherwise would
it be dissolved and go to ruin withal."

When the Saviour had said this, Mary continued again and said unto the
Saviour: "My

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord, still do I
question thee and \|<span class="rmargnote">**336**.</span> hide \[it\]
not from me. Now, therefore, my Lord, who compelleth then the man until
he sinneth?"

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "It is the rulers of the Fate
who compel the man until he sinneth."

Mary answered and said unto the Saviour: "My Lord, surely the rulers do
not come down to the world and compel the man until he sinneth?"

<span class="margnote">Of the cup of forgetfulness.</span>The Saviour
answered and said unto Mary: "They do not come down in this manner into
the world. But the rulers of the Fate, when an old soul is about to come
down through them, then the rulers of that great Fate who \[are\] in the
regions of the head of the æons,--which is that region which is called
the region of the kingdom of Adamas, and which is that region which is
in face of the Virgin of Light,--then the rulers of the region of that
head give the old soul a cup of forgetfulness out of the seed of
wickedness, filled with all the different desires and all forgetfulness.
And straightway, when that soul shall drink out of the cup, it
forgetteth all the regions to which it hath gone, \|<span
class="rmargnote">**337**.</span> and all the chastisements in which it
hath travelled. And<span class="margnote">Of the counterfeiting
spirit.</span> that cup of the water of forgetfulness becometh body
outside the soul, and it resembleth the soul in all \[its\] figures and
maketh \[itself\] like it,--which is what is called the counterfeiting
spirit.

<span class="margnote">Of the fashioning of a new soul.</span>"If on the
other hand it is a new soul which they have taken out of the sweat of
the rulers and out of the tears of their eyes, or far rather out of the
breath of their mouths,--in a word, if it is one of the new souls or one
of such souls, if it is one out of the sweat, then the five great

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

rulers of the great Fate take up the sweat of all the rulers of their
æons, knead it together withal, portion it and make it into a soul. Or
far rather if it is refuse of the purification of the Light, then
Melchisedec taketh it up from the rulers. The five great rulers of the
great Fate knead the refuse together, portion it and make it into
different souls, so that every one of the rulers of the æons, every one
of them putteth his portion into the soul. For this cause they knead it
jointly, so that all may \[par\]take of the soul.

"And the five great rulers, if they portion it and make it into souls,
bring it out of the sweat \|<span class="rmargnote">**338**.</span> of
the rulers. But if it is one out of the refuse of the purification of
the Light, then Melchisedec, the great Receiver of the Light, taketh it
\[*sc.* the refuse\] up from the rulers, or far rather if it is out of
the tears of their eyes or out of the breath of their mouth,--in a word,
out of such souls, when the five rulers portion it and make it into
different souls,--or far rather if it is an old soul, then the ruler who
is in the head of the æons, himself mixeth the cup of forgetfulness with
the seed of wickedness, and he mixeth it with every one of the new souls
at the time when he is in the region of the head. And that cup of
forgetfulness becometh the counterfeiting spirit for that soul, and
bideth outside the soul, being a vesture for it and resembling it in
every way, being envelope as vesture outside it.

<span class="margnote">Of the in-breathing of the power.</span>"And the
five great rulers of the great Fate of the æons and the ruler of the
disk of the sun and the ruler of the disk of the moon inbreathe within
into that soul, and there cometh forth out

of them a portion out of my power which the

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

last Helper hath cast into the Mixture. And the portion of that power
remaineth within in the soul, \|<span class="rmargnote">**339**.</span>
unloosed and existing on its own authority for the economy unto which it
hath been inset, to give sense unto the soul, in order that it may seek
after the works of the Light of the Height always.

"And that power is like the species of the soul in every form and
resembleth it. It cannot be outside the soul, but remaineth inside it,
as I have commanded it from the beginning. When I willed to cast it into
the first Commandment, I gave it commandment to remain outside \[?
inside\] the souls for the economy of the First Mystery.

<span class="margnote">Jesus promiseth to reveal all in
detail.</span>"And so I will tell you at the expansion of the universe
all these words concerning the power and also concerning the soul, after
what type they are fashioned, or what ruler fashioneth them, or what are
the different species of the souls. And so will I tell you at the
expansion of the universe how many fashion the soul. And I will tell you
the name of all of them who fashion the soul. And I will tell you the
type, how the counterfeiting spirit and the destiny have been prepared.
And I will tell you the name of the soul before it is purged, and
moreover its name when it hath been purged and become pure. And I will
tell you the name of the counterfeiting spirit; and I will tell you the
name of the destiny. And I will tell you the name of all the bonds with
which the rulers bind the counterfeiting spirit \|<span
class="rmargnote">**340**.</span> to the soul. And I will tell you the
name of all the decans who fashion the soul in the bodies of the soul in
the world; and I will tell you in what

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

manner the souls are fashioned. And I will tell you the type of every
one of the souls; and I will tell you the type of the souls of the men
and of those of the birds and of those of the wild beasts and of those
of the reptiles. And. I will tell you the type of all the souls and of
those of all the rulers which are sent into the world, in order that ye
may be completed in all gnosis. All this will I tell you at the
expansion of the universe. And after all this I will tell you wherefor
all this hath come to pass.

<span class="margnote">Of the light-power and the counterfeiting
spirit.</span>"Hearken, therefore, that I may discourse with you
concerning the soul according as I have said: The five great rulers of
the great Fate of the æons and the rulers of the disk of the sun and the
rulers of the disk of the moon breathe into that soul, and there cometh
out of them a portion of my power, as I have just said. And the portion
of that power remaineth within the soul, so that the soul can stand. And
they put \|<span class="rmargnote">**341**.</span> the counterfeiting
spirit outside the soul, watching it and assigned to it; and the rulers
bind it to the soul with their seals and their bonds and seal it to it,
that it may compel it always, so that it continually doeth its mischiefs
and all its iniquities, in order that it may be their slave always and
remain under their sway always in the changes of the body; and they seal
it to it that it may be in all the sin and all the desires of the world.

<span class="margnote">The parents we are to abandon.</span>"For this
cause, therefore, have I in this manner brought the mysteries into this
world which undo all the bonds of the counterfeiting spirit and all the
seals which are bound to the soul,--those which make the soul free and
free it from its

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

parents the rulers, and make it into refined light and lead it up into
the kingdom of its father, the first Issue, the First Mystery, for ever.

"For this cause therefore, have I said unto you aforetime: 'He who doth
not abandon father and mother and come and follow after me, is not
worthy of me.' I have, therefore, said at that time: Ye are to abandon
your parents the rulers, that I may make you sons of the First Mystery
for ever."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 132](ps137.md)
