[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps137.md) 
[Next](ps139.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 133

Mary answered and said: "To all men then who are in the world, will all
which is appointed them through the Fate, whether good or bad or sin or
death or life,--in a word, will all which is appointed them through the
rulers of the Fate, have to come unto them?"

<span class="margnote">There is no escape from the destiny.</span>The
Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Amēn, I say unto you: All which is
appointed unto every one through the Fate, whether all good or all
sins,--in a word, all which is appointed them, cometh unto them.

<span class="margnote">Of the keys of the mysteries.</span>"For this
cause, therefore, have I brought \|<span
class="rmargnote">**351**.</span> the keys of the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven; otherwise no flesh in the world would be saved. For
without mysteries no one will enter into the Light-kingdom, be he a
righteous or a sinner.

"For this cause, therefore, have I brought the keys of the mysteries
into the world, that I may free the sinners who shall have faith in me
and hearken unto me, so that I may free them from the bonds and the
seals of the æons of the rulers and bind them to the seals and the
vestures and the orders of the Light, in order that he whom I shall free
in the world from the bonds and the seals of the æons of the rulers, may
be freed in the Height from the bonds and seals of the æons of the
rulers, and in order that he whom I

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

shall bind in the world to the seals and the vestures and the orders of
the Light, may be bound in the Light-land to the orders of the
inheritances of the Light.

"For the sake of sinners, therefore, have I torn myself asunder at this
time and have brought them the mysteries, that I may free them from the
æons of the rulers and bind them to the inheritances of the Light, and
not only the sinners, but also the righteous, in order that I may give
them the mysteries and that they may be taken into the Light, for
without mysteries they cannot \|<span class="rmargnote">**352**.</span>
be taken into the Light.

<span class="margnote">The mysteries are for all men.</span>"For this
cause, therefore, I have not hidden it, but I have cried it aloud
clearly. And I have not separated the sinners, but I have cried it aloud
and said it unto all men, unto sinners and righteous, saying: 'Seek that
ye may find, knock that it may be opened unto you; for every one who
seeketh in truth, will find, and who knocketh, to him it will be
opened.' For I have said unto all men: They are to seek the mysteries of
the Light-kingdom which shall purify them and make them refined and lead
them into the Light.

<span class="margnote">A prophecy of John the Baptizer.</span>"For this
cause, therefore, hath John the Baptizer prophesied concerning me,
saying: 'I indeed have baptized you with water unto repentance for
forgiveness of your sins. He who cometh after me, is stronger than me.
Whose fan is in his hand, and he will purify his floor. The chaff indeed
he will consume with unquenchable fire, but the wheat he will gather
into his barn.' The power in John hath prophesied concerning me, knowing
that I would bring the mysteries into the world and purify the sins of

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

the sinners who shall have faith in me and hearken unto me, and make
them into refined light and lead them into the Light."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 134](ps139.md)
