[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps129) 
[Next](ps131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 125

Mary continued again and said unto the Saviour: "My Lord, if the faith
and the mysteries shall have revealed themselves,--now, therefore, if
souls come into the world in many circuits and are neglectful of
receiving mysteries, hoping that, if they come into the world at any
other circuit, they will receive them, will they not then be in danger
\|<span class="rmargnote">**317**.</span> of not succeeding in receiving
the mysteries?"

<span class="margnote">Of those who procrastinate, saying they have many
births before them.</span>The Saviour answered and said unto his
disciples: "Herald unto the whole world and say unto men: Strive
thereafter that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light in this time
of affliction and enter into the Light-kingdom. Join not one day to
another, or one circuit to another, hoping that ye may succeed in
receiving the mysteries if ye come into the world in another circuit.

"And these know not when the number of the perfect souls will be at
hand; for if the number of the perfect souls shall be at hand, I will
now shut the gates of the Light, and no one from this hour onwards will
enter in, nor will

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

any one hereafter go forth, for the number of the perfect souls is
completed and the mystery of the First Mystery is completed, for the
sake of which the universe hath arisen,--that is: I am that Mystery.

<span class="margnote">Of the time of the completion.</span>"And from
this hour onwards no one will be able to enter into the Light and no one
be able to go forth. For at the completion of the time of the number of
the perfect souls, before I have set fire to the world, in order that it
may purify the æons and the veils and the firmaments and the whole earth
and also all the matters which are on it, mankind \|<span
class="rmargnote">**318**.</span> will be still existing.

<span class="margnote">Those who procrastinate are excluded from the
Light.</span>"At that time then the faith will reveal itself still more
and the mysteries in those days. And many souls will come by means of
the circuits of the changes of the body, and coming back into the world
are some of those in this present time who have hearkened unto me, how I
taught, who at the completion of the number of the perfect souls will
find the mysteries of the Light and receive them and come to the gates
of the Light and find that the number of the perfect souls is complete,
which is the completion of the First Mystery and the gnosis of the
universe. And they will find that I have shut the gates of the Light and
that it is impossible that any one should enter in or that any one
should go forth from this hour.

<span class="margnote">Their entreaties at the gates of
Light.</span>"Those souls then will knock at the gates of the Light,
saying: Lord, open unto us! And I will answer unto them: I know you not,
whence ye are. And they will say unto me: We have received of thy
mysteries and fulfilled thy whole teaching and thou hast taught us on
the high

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

ways. And I will answer and say unto them: I know you not, who ye are,
ye who are doers of iniquity and of evil even unto now. Wherefor go into
the outer darkness. And \|<span class="rmargnote">**319**.</span> from
that hour they will go into the outer darkness, there where is howling
and grinding of teeth.

"For this cause then, herald unto the whole world and say unto them:
'Strive thereafter, to renounce the whole world and the whole matter
therein, that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light before the
number of the perfect souls is completed, in order that they may not
make you stop before the gates of the Light and. lead you away into the
outer darkness.'

"Now, therefore, who hath ears to hear, let him hear."

<span class="margnote">Mary interpreteth the same.</span>When then the
Saviour had said this, Mary started forward again and said: "My Lord,
not only hath my light-man ears, but my soul hath heard and understood
all the words which thou sayest. Now, therefore, my Lord, concerning the
words which thou hast spoken: 'Herald unto the men of the world and say
unto them: Strive thereafter, to receive the mysteries of the Light, in
this time of affliction, that ye may inherit the Light-kingdom. . . .

.          .          .          .          .          .

### \[A CONSIDERABLE LACUNA HERE OCCURS IN THE TEXT.\]

.          .          .          .          .          .

 

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 126](ps131)
