[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps140) 
[Next](ps142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

# A FIFTH BOOK

### CHAPTER 136.

<span class="margnote">The disciples gather round Jesus.</span>IT came
to pass then, when Jesus our Lord had been crucified and had risen from
the dead on the third day, that his disciples gathered round him, adored
him and said: "Our Lord, have mercy upon us, for we have abandoned
father and mother and the whole world and have followed thee."

<span class="margnote">The invocation of Jesus.</span>At that time Jesus
stood with his disciples on the water of the Ocean and made invocation
with this prayer, saying: "Hear me, my Father, father of all fatherhood,
boundless Light: *aeēiouō iaō aōi ōia psinōther thernōps nōpsither
zagourē pagourē nethmomaōth nepsiomaōth marachachtha thōbarrabau
tharnachachan zorokothora ieou* \[= *Yew*\] *sabaōth*."

<span class="margnote">The grouping of the disciples.</span>And while
Jesus said this, \|<span class="rmargnote">**358**.</span> Thomas,
Andrew, James and Simon the Cananite were in the west with their faces
turned towards the east, and Philip and Bartholomew were in the south
turned towards the north, and the rest of the disciples and the
women-disciples stood back of Jesus. But Jesus stood at the altar.

<span class="margnote">The interpretation of *iaō*.</span>And Jesus made
invocation, turning himself towards the four corners of the world with
his disciples, who were all clad in linen garments, and saying:
"*iaō iaō iaō*." This is its interpretation: *iōta*, because the
universe hath gone

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

forth; *alpha*, because it will turn itself back again; *ōmega*, because
the completion of all the completeness will take place.

<span class="margnote">He continueth to make invocation.</span>And when
Jesus had said this, he said: "*iaphtha iaphtha mounaēr mounaēr
ermanouēr ermanouēr*." That is: "O father of all fatherhood of the
boundless \[spaces\], hear me for the sake of my disciples whom I have
led before thee, that they may have faith in all the words of thy truth,
and grant all for which I shall invoke thee; for I know the name of the
father of the Treasury of the Light."

<span class="margnote">The apocalypse of the heavens.</span>Again did
Jesus,--that is Aberamenthō,--make invocation, speaking the name of the
father of the Treasury of the Light, and said: "Let all the mysteries of
the rulers and the authorities and the angels and the archangels and all
powers and \|<span class="rmargnote">**359**.</span> all things of the
invisible god Agrammachamarei and Barbēlō draw near the Leech \[Bdella\]
on one side and withdraw to the right."

And in that hour all the heavens went to the west, and all the æons and
the sphere and their rulers and all their powers flew together to the
west to the left of the disk of the sun and the disk of the moon.

<span class="margnote">The figures of the disk of the sun and of the
moon.</span>And the disk of the sun was a great dragon whose tail was in
his mouth and who reached to seven powers of the Left and whom four
powers in the form of white horses drew.

And the base of the moon had the type of a ship which a male and a
female dragon steered and two white bulls drew. The figure of a babe was
on the stern of the moon who guided the dragons who robbed the light
from the rulers. And on its prow was a cat's face.

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

And the whole world and the mountains and the seas fled together to the
west to the left.

<span class="margnote">Jesus and the disciples are transported to the
ways of the midst.</span>And Jesus and his disciples remained in the
midst in an aëry region on the ways of the way of the midst, which lieth
below the sphere. And they came to the first order of the way of the
midst. And Jesus stood in the air of its region with his disciples.

The disciples of Jesus said unto him: "What is this region \|<span
class="rmargnote">**360**.</span> in which we are?

<span class="margnote">Of the repentant and unrepentant
rulers.</span>Jesus said: "These are the regions of the way of the
midst. For it came to pass, when the rulers of Adamas mutinied and
persistently practised congress, procreating rulers, archangels, angels,
servitors and decans, that Yew, the father of my father, came forth from
the Right and bound them to a Fate-sphere.

"For there are twelve æons; over six Sabaōth, the Adamas, ruleth, and
his brother Yabraōth ruleth over the other six. At that time then
Yabraōth with his rulers had faith in the mysteries of the Light and was
active in the mysteries of the Light and abandoned the mystery of
congress. But Sabaōth, the Adamas, and his rulers have persisted in the
practice of congress.

"And when Yew, the father of my father, saw that Yabraōth had faith, he
carried him and all the rulers who had had faith with him, took him unto
himself out of the sphere and led him into a purified air in face of the
light of the sun between the regions of those of the midst and between
\[?\] the regions of the invisible god. He posted him there with the
rulers who had had faith in him.

"But he carried Sabaōth, the Adamas, and his

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

rulers who had not been active in the mysteries of the Light, but have
been persistently active in the mysteries of congress, and inbound them
into the sphere.

<span class="margnote">Of the hierarchies of the un-repentant rulers and
the names of their five regents.</span>"He bound eighteen-hundred rulers
in every æon, and set three-hundred-and-sixty \|<span
class="rmargnote">**361**.</span> over them, and he set five other great
rulers as lords over the three-hundred-and-sixty and over all the bound
rulers, who in the whole world of mankind are called with these names:
the first is called Kronos, the second Arēs, the third Hermēs, the
fourth Aphroditē, the fifth Zeus."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 137](ps142)
