[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps139.md) 
[Next](ps141.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 135

Mary answered and said unto the Saviour: "My Lord, before thou didst
come to the region of the rulers and before thou didst come down into
the world, hath no soul entered into the Light?"

<span class="margnote">No soul had entered into the Light before the
coming of the First Mystery.</span>The Saviour answered and said unto
Mary: "Amēn, amēn, I say unto you Before I did come into the world, no
soul hath entered into the Light. And now, therefore, when I am come, I
have opened the gates of the Light and opened the ways which lead to the
Light. And now, therefore, let him who shall do what is worthy of the
mysteries, receive the mysteries and enter into the Light."

Mary continued and said: "But, my Lord, I have heard that the prophets
have entered into the Light."

<span class="margnote">Of the prophets.</span>The Saviour continued and
said unto Mary: "Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: No prophet hath entered
into the Light; but the rulers of the æons have discoursed with them out
of the æons and given them the mystery of the æons. And when I came to
the regions of the æons, I have turned Elias and sent him into the body
of John the Baptizer, and the rest also I turned into righteous bodies,
which will find the mysteries \|<span class="rmargnote">**356**.</span>
of the Light, go on high and inherit the Light-kingdom.

<span class="margnote">Of the patriarchs.</span>"Unto Abraham on the
other hand and Isaac and Jacob I have forgiven all their sins and their
iniquities and have given them the mysteries of the Light in the æons
and placed them in the region of Yabraōth and of all the rulers who have
repented. And when I go into the Height and

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

am on the point of going into the Light, I will carry their souls with
me into the Light. But, amēn, I say unto you, Mary: They will not go
into the Light before I have carried thy soul and those of all thy
brethren into the Light.

<span class="margnote">Of the souls of the righteous from Adam to
Jesus.</span>"The rest of the patriarchs and of the righteous from the
time of Adam unto now, who are in the æons and all the orders of the
rulers, when I came to the region of the æons, I have through the Virgin
of Light made to turn into bodies which will all be righteous,--those
which will find the mysteries of the Light, enter in and inherit the
Light-kingdom."

Mary answered and said: "Blessed are we before all men because of these
splendours which thou hast revealed unto us."

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary and all the disciples: "I will
still reveal unto you all the splendours of the Height, from the
interiors of the interiors to the exteriors of the exteriors, \|<span
class="rmargnote">**357**.</span> that ye may be perfected in all gnosis
and in all fulness and in the height of the heights and the depths of
the depths."

<span class="margnote">The disciples know of a surety that Jesus is the
Great Initiator.</span>And Mary continued and said to the Saviour: "Lo,
my Lord, we have openly, exactly and clearly known that thou hast
brought the keys of the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, which forgive
souls sins and purify them and make them into refined light and lead
them into the Light."

### \[SUB-SCRIPTION:\]

### A PORTION OF THE BOOKS OF THE SAVIOUR

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 136](ps141.md)
