[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps152.md) 
[Next](ps154.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 148

Mary said: "A man who hath committed all sins and all iniquities and
hath not found the mysteries of the Light, will he receive the
chastisements for them all at once?"

<span class="margnote">A sinner suffereth for each separate
sin.</span>Jesus answered: "Yea, he will receive it; if he hath
committed three sins, he will receive chastisement for three."

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

John said: "A man who hath committed all sins and all iniquities, but at
last hath found the mysteries of the Light, is it possible for him to be
saved?"

<span class="margnote">Even the greatest of sinners, if he repent, shall
inherit the kingdom.</span>Jesus said: "Such a man who hath committed
all sins and all iniquities, and he findeth the mysteries of the Light,
and performeth and fulfilleth them and ceaseth not nor doeth sins, will
inherit the Treasury of the Light."

<span class="margnote">Of the time favourable for the birth of those who
shall find the mysteries.</span>Jesus said unto his disciples: "When the
sphere turneth itself, and Kronos and Arēs come behind the Virgin of
Light and Zeus and Aphrodite come in face of the Virgin, they being in
their own æons, then the veils of the Virgin draw themselves aside and
she falleth into joy in that hour when she seeth these two light-stars
before her. And all the souls which she shall cast at that hour into the
circuit of the æons of the sphere, that \|<span
class="rmargnote">**390**.</span> they may come into the world, will be
righteous and good and find at this time the mysteries of the Light; she
sendeth them anew that they may find the mysteries of the Light.

"If on the other hand Arēs and Kronos come in face of the Virgin and
Zeus and Aphroditē behind her, so that she seeth them not, then all the
souls which she shall cast in that hour into the creatures of the
sphere, will be wicked and wrathful and do not find the mysteries of the
Light."

<span class="margnote">The disciples beseech Jesus to have mercy upon
them.</span>When then Jesus said this unto his disciples in the midst of
the Amente, the disciples cried and wept, \[saying\]: "Woe, woe unto
sinners, on whom the negligence and the forgetfulness of the rulers lie
until they come out of the body and are led to these chastisements! Have
mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, son of the Holy

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[One\], and have
compassion with us, that we may be saved from these chastisements and
these judgments which are prepared for the sinners; for we also have
sinned, our Lord and our Light."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Later Postscript](ps154.md)
