<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tawo17)  [Next](tawo19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3T8B0/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tales of Wonder*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1916\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f16"></span>

How Plash-Goo Came to the Land of None's Desire

In a thatched cottage of enormous size, so vast that we might consider
it a palace, but only a cottage in the style of its building, its
timbers and the nature of its interior, there lived Plash-Goo.

Plash-Goo was of the children of the giants, whose sire was Uph. And the
lineage of Uph had dwindled in bulk for the last five hundred years,
till the giants were now no more than fifteen foot high; but Uph ate
elephants which he caught with his hands.

Now on the tops of the mountains above the house of Plash-Goo, for
Plash-Goo lived in the plains, there dwelt the dwarf whose name was
Lrippity-Kang. And the dwarf used to walk at evening on the edge of the
tops of the mountains, and would walk up and down along it, and was
squat and ugly and hairy, and was plainly seen of Plash-Goo.

And for many weeks the giant had suffered the sight of him, but at
length grew irked at the sight (as men are by little things), and could
not sleep of a night and lost his taste for pigs. And at last there came
the day, as anyone might have known, when Plash-Goo shouldered his club
and went up to look for the dwarf.

And the dwarf though briefly squat was broader than may be dreamed,
beyond all breadth of man, and stronger than men may know; strength in
its very essence dwelt in that little frame, as a spark in the heart of
a flint: but to Plash-Goo he was no more than mis-shapen, bearded and
squat, a thing that dared to defy all natural laws by being more broad
than long.

When Plash-Goo came to the mountain he cast his chimahalk down (for so
he named the club of his heart's desire) lest the dwarf should defy him
with nimbleness; and stepped towards Lrippity-Kang with gripping hands,
who stopped in his mountainous walk without a word, and swung round his
hideous breadth to confront Plash-Goo. Already then Plash-Goo in the
deeps of his mind had seen himself seize the dwarf in one large hand and
hurl him with his beard and his hated breadth sheer down the precipice
that dropped away from that very place to the land of None's Desire. Yet
it was otherwise that Fate would have it. For the dwarf parried with his
little arms the grip of those monstrous hands, and gradually working
along the enormous limbs came at length to the giant's body where by
dwarfish cunning he obtained a grip; and turning Plash-Goo about, as a
spider does some great fly, till his little grip was suitable to his
purpose, he suddenly lifted the giant over his head. Slowly at first, by
the edge of that precipice whose base sheer distance hid, he swung his
giant victim round his head, but soon faster and faster; and at last
when Plash-Goo was streaming round the hated breadth of the dwarf and
the no less hated beard was flapping in the wind, Lrippity-Kang let go.
Plash-Goo shot over the edge and for some way further, out towards
Space, like a stone; then he began to fall. It was long before he
believed and truly knew that this was really he that fell from this
mountain, for we do not associate such dooms with ourselves; but when he
had fallen for some while through the evening and saw below him, where
there had been nothing to see, or began to see, the glimmer of tiny
fields, then his optimism departed; till later on when the fields were
greener and larger he saw that this was indeed (and growing now terribly
nearer) that very land to which he had destined the dwarf.

At last he saw it unmistakable, close, with its grim houses and its
dreadful ways, and its green fields shining in the light of the evening.
His cloak was streaming from him in whistling shreds.

So Plash-Goo came to the Land of None's Desire.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Three Sailors' Gambit](tawo19)

</div>
