[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft64)  [Next](sfft66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

# WITCHCRAFT.

### MACGILLICHALLUM OF RAZAY. <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98)

JOHN GARVE MACGILLICHALLUM, of Razay, was an ancient hero of great
celebrity. Distinguished in the age in which he lived for the gallantry
of his exploits, he has often been selected by the bard as the theme of
his poems and songs. Along with a constitution of body naturally
vigorous and powerful, Razay was gifted with all those noble qualities
of the mind which a true hero is supposed to possess. And what reflected
additional lustre on his character was that he never failed to apply his
talents and powers to the best uses. He was the active and inexorable
enemy of the weird sisterhood, many of whom he was the auspicious
instrument of sending to their "black inheritance" much sooner than they
either expected or desired. It was not therefore to be supposed that,
while those amiable actions endeared Razay to all good people, they were
at all calculated to win him the regard of those infernal hags to whom
he was so deadly a foe. As might be naturally expected, they cherished
towards him the most

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

implacable thirst of revenge, and sought, with unremitting vigilance,
for an opportunity of quenching it. That such an opportunity did
unhappily occur, and that the meditated revenge of these hags was too
well accomplished,--will speedily appear from this melancholy story.

It happened upon a time that Razay and a number of friends planned an
expedition to the island of Lewis, for the purpose of hunting the deer
of that place. They accordingly embarked on board the chieftain's yacht,
manned by the flower of the young men of Razay, and in a few hours they
chased the fleet-bounding hart on the mountains of Lewis. Their sport
proved excellent. Hart after hart, and hind after bind, were soon
levelled to the ground by the unerring hand of Razay; and when night
terminated the chase they retired to their shooting quarters, where they
spent the night with joviality and mirth, little dreaming of their
melancholy fate in the morning.

In the morning of next day, the chief of Razay and his followers rose
with the sun, with the view of returning to Razay. The day was squally
and occasionally boisterous) and the billows raged with great violence.
But Razay was determined to cross the channel to his residence, and
ordered his yacht to prepare for the voyage. The more cautious and less
courageous of his suite, however, urged on him to defer the expedition
till the weather should somewhat settle,--an advice which Razay, with a
courage which knew no fear, rejected, and expressed his firm
determination

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

to proceed without delay. Probably with a view to inspire his company
with the necessary degree of courage to induce them all to concur in the
undertaking, he adjourned with them to the ferry-house, where they had
recourse to that supporter of spirits under every trial, the usquebaugh,
a few bottles of which added vastly to the resolution of the company.
Just as the party were disputing the practicability of the proposed
adventure, an old woman, with wrinkled front, bending on a crutch,
entered the ferry-house; and Razay, in the heat of argument, appealed to
the old woman, whether the passage of the channel on such a day was not
perfectly practicable and free from danger. The woman, without
hesitation, replied in the affirmative, adding such observations,
reflecting on their courage, as immediately silenced every opposition to
the voyage; and accordingly the whole party embarked in the yacht for
Razay. But, alas! what were the consequences? No sooner were they
abandoned to the mercy of the waves than the elements seemed to conspire
to their destruction. All attempts to put back the vessel proved
unavailing, and she was speedily driven out before the wind in the
direction of Razay. The heroic chieftain laboured hard to animate his
company, and to dispel the despair which begun to seize them, by the
most exemplary courage and resolution. He took charge of the helm, and
in spite of the combined efforts of the sea, wind, and lightning, he
kept the vessel steadily on her course towards the lofty point of Aird,
in Skye. The drooping spirits of his crew began

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

to revive, and hope began to smile upon them,--when lo! to their great
astonishment, a large cat was seen to climb the rigging. This cat was
soon followed by another of equal size, and the last by a successor,
until at length the shrouds, masts, and whole tackle were actually
covered with them. Nor did the sight of all those cats, although he knew
well enough their real character, intimidate the resolute Razay, until a
large black cat, larger than any of the rest, appeared on the mast-head,
as commander-in-chief of the whole legion. Razay, on observing him,
instantly foresaw the result; he, however, determined to sell his life
as dearly as possible, and immediately commanded an attack upon the
cats; but, alas! it soon proved abortive. With a simultaneous effort the
cats overturned the vessel on her leeward wale, and every soul on board
was precipitated into a watery grave. Thus ended the glorious life of
*Jan Garbh Macgillichallum*, of Razay, to the lasting regret of the
brave clan Leod and all good people, and to the great satisfaction of
the abominable witches who thus accomplished his lamentable doom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[218:1](sfft65.htm#fr_98) W. Grant Stewart,
*Highland Superstitions*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witch Of Laggan](sfft66)
