[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfft45)  [Next](sfft47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THOM AND WILLIE. <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md)

THOM and Willie, two young fisher-mates of Lunna, in Shetland, were
rivals for the hand of the fair Osla, daughter of Jarm. Now it so
happened that, one October afternoon, they took their hand-lines and
went out fishing together in their boat.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Towards dusk the
wind rose, and it soon blew so hard as to compel the young men to run
for the nearest shelter--a haven in the islet of Linga in Whalsay Sound,
which they happily reached in safety. The islet was uninhabited, and the
fishermen had with them neither food nor the means of kindling a fire.
They had, however, a roof over their heads; for there was a hut, or
lodge, on the island,--used by fishermen in the fair weather season, but
deserted since the close of that period. For two days the storm raged
without ceasing, and at last the situation of the castaways began to
grow very serious. However, on the morning of the third day, a little
before daybreak, Willie, who was awake before his companion, discovered
that the weather had faired, and that the wind blew in a favouring
direction. Upon this, without rousing Thom, he proceeded to the boat,
which lay safely hauled up upon the shore, and by dint of great exertion
managed to launch her single-handed. Meantime Thom had awoke; and, at
last, as Willie did not come back, he followed him to the noust, or
place where boats are drawn up. And here a sight met his view which
filled him with dismay. The yawl had disappeared from her place; but,
raising his eyes, he beheld her already far out at sea and speeding
before the breeze in the direction of Lunna. At this sight poor Thom
gave way to despair. He realised that his comrade had basely and
heartlessly deserted him; he knew that it was not likely that the islet
would be visited until the fishing-season should have come round again;
and he had small hopes of

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

help from any exertions on his behalf which might be made by his
friends, seeing that they would be in ignorance where to look for him.
Amid melancholy thoughts and forebodings the day passed slowly, and at
nightfall he betook himself to his shake-down of straw within the lodge.
Darkness closed in, and he slept. But, towards the small hours of the
morning, he was suddenly awakened; when great was his astonishment to
see that the hut was lighted up with a strange illumination, whilst a
queer inhuman hum and chatter, accompanied by the patter of many pairs
of little feet and the jingle of gold and silver vessels, smote upon his
ear. A fairy banquet was, in fact, in course of preparation in the
lodge. Thom raised himself noiselessly upon his elbow, and watched the
proceedings. With infinite bustle and clatter, the table was at last
laid. Then there entered a party of trows, who bore between them in a
chair, or litter, a female fairy, to whom all appeared to pay honour.
The company took seats, and the banquet was on the point of commencing,
when in a moment the scene of festivity was changed to one of wild alarm
and confusion. A moment more, and Thom learnt to his cost the cause of
the sudden change. The presence of a human being had been detected, and
at a word from their queen the "grey people," swarming together, were
about to rush upon the intruder. But in this trying juncture Thom did
not lose his presence of mind. His loaded fowling-piece lay by his side,
and, as the fairies rushed upon him, he raised it to his shoulder and
fired. In an instant the light was

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

extinguished, and all was darkness, silence, and solitude.

Let us now return to the perfidious Willie. Reaching Lunna in safety, he
related a tragic tale (which he had invented on the voyage), to account
for the absence of his comrade; and, finding that his story was
believed, he began anew, without much loss of time, to urge his suit
with the fair Osla. Her father, Jarm, regarded him with favour; but the
maiden herself turned a deaf ear to all his entreaties. She felt that
she could not love him; and, besides, she was haunted by a suspicion
that Thom, in whose welfare she felt a tender interest,, had been the
victim of foul play. Pressure was, however, put upon her, and in spite
of her objections, an early day was fixed for the wedding. The poor girl
was in great distress. However, one night, when she had cried herself to
sleep, she dreamed a dream, the result of which was that next morning
she proceeded to the house of Thom's parents, and begged them to join
her in a search for their missing son. This, notwithstanding their love
for him, they were somewhat reluctant to do; arguing that, even
supposing him to have been abandoned, as she divined, upon one of the
rocky islets of the coast, he must ere now have perished from exposure
and starvation. But the girl persisted in her entreaties, which at last
prevailed. A boat was manned, and by Osla's direction was steered
towards Linga, upon approaching which, sure enough, as the girl had
predicted, it was discovered that the islet had a human tenant. Thom met
his friends on

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

the beach, and when the first eager greetings had passed, surprise was
expressed at the freshness and robustness of his appearance. But this
surprise increased tenfold when, in recounting his adventures, he
explained that, during the latter days of his isolation, he had
supported life upon the remains of the scarcely-tasted fairy banquet,
adding that never in his life before had he fared so delicately. On
their return to Lunna, the party were received with rejoicings; and it
is scarcely necessary to add that Thom and Osla were soon made man and
wife. From that time forward Willie prospered no more. The loss of his
health and fortune followed that of his good name, and he sank ere long
into an early and unregretted grave.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[144:2](sfft46.htm#fr_67.md) Arranged from Mr. J.
G. Ollason's MS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gloaming Bucht](sfft47.md)
