[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft36)  [Next](sfft38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

### FAIRY TRANSPORTATION. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56)

THE power of the fairies was not confined to unchristened children
alone; it was supposed frequently to be extended to full-grown persons,
especially such as in an unlucky hour were devoted to the devil by the
execration of parents and of masters; or those who were found asleep
under a rock, or on a green hill, belonging to the fairies, after
sunset, or, finally, to those who unwarily joined their orgies. A
tradition existed, during the seventeenth century, concerning an
ancestor of the noble family of Duffus, who, "walking abroad in the
fields, near to his own house, was suddenly carried away, and found the
next day at Paris, in the French king's cellar, with a silver cup in his
hand. Being brought into the king's presence, and questioned by him who
he was, and how he came thither, he told his name, his country, and the
place of his residence! and that on such a day of the month, which
proved to be the day immediately preceding, being in the fields, he
heard the noise of a whirlwind, and of voices, crying '*Horse and
Hattock*!' (this is the word which the fairies are said to use when they
remove from any place), whereupon he cried '*Horse and Hattock*' also,
and was immediately caught up and transported through the air by the
fairies, to that place, where, after he had drunk heartily, he fell
asleep, and before he woke, the rest of the company were gone, and had
left

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

him in the posture wherein he was found. It is said the king gave him
the cup which was found in his hand, and dismissed him." The narrator
affirms "that the cup was still preserved, and known by the name of the
Fairy Cup." He adds that Mr. Steward, tutor to the then Lord Duffus, had
informed him that, "when a boy at the school of Forres, he and his
school-fellows were upon a time whipping their tops in the churchyard,
before the door of the church, when, though the day was calm, they heard
a noise of a wind, and at some distance saw the small dust begin to rise
and turn round, which motion continued advancing till it came to the
place where they were, whereupon they began to bless themselves; but one
of their number being, it seems, a little more bold and confident than
his companions, said, "'*Horse and Hattock with my top*,' and
immediately they all saw the top lifted up from the ground, but could
not see which way it was carried, by reason of a cloud of dust which was
raised at the same time. They sought for the top all about the place
where it was taken up, but in vain; and it was found afterwards in the
churchyard, on the other side of the church."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[126:1](sfft37.htm#fr_56) Sir Waiter Scott,
*Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Poor Man of Peatlaw](sfft38)
