[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft75)  [Next](sfft77) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

### THE TALE OF THE SHIFTY LAD, THE WIDOW'S SON. <span id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_149)

#### I.

THERE was at some time or other before now a widow, and she had one son.
She gave him good schooling, and she was wishful that he should choose a
trade for himself; but he said he would not go to learn any art, but
that he would be a thief.

His mother said to him: "If that is the art that thou art going to
choose for thine ownself, thine end is to be hanged at the bridge of
Baile Cliabh, <span id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_150) in Eirinn."

But it was no matter, he would not go to any art, but to be a thief; and
his mother was always making a prophecy to him that the end of him would
be, hanging at the Bridge of Baile Cliabh, in Eirinn.

On a day of the days, the widow was going to the church to hear the
sermon, and was asking the Shifty Lad, her son, to go with her, and that
he should give over his bad courses; but he would not go with her; but
he said to her: "The first art of which thou hearest mention, after thou
hast come out of the sermon, is the art to which I will go afterwards."

She went to the church full of good courage, hoping that she would hear
some good thing.

He went away, and he went to a tuft of wood that

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

was near to the church; and he went in hiding in a place where he could
see his mother when she should come out of the church; and as soon as
she came out he shouted, "Thievery! thievery! thievery!" She looked
about, but she could not make out whence the voice was coming, and she
went home. He ran by the way of the short cut, and he was at the house
before her, and he was seated within beside the fire when she came home.
He asked her what tale she had got; and she said that she had not got
any tale at all, but that "thievery, thievery, thievery, was the first
speech she heard when she came out of the church."

He said "That was the art that he would have."

And she said, as she was accustomed to say: "Thine ending is to be
hanged at the bridge of Baile Cliabh, in Eirinn."

On the next day, his mother herself thought that, as nothing at all
would do for her son but that he should be a thief, she would try to
find him a good aid-to-learning; and she went to the black gallows bird
of Aachaloinne, a very cunning thief who was in that place; and though
they had knowledge that he was given to stealing, they were not finding
any way for catching him. The widow asked the Black Rogue if he would
take her son to teach him roguery. The Black Rogue said, "If he were a
clever lad that he would take him, and if there were a way of making a
thief of him that he could do it;" and a covenant was made between the
Black Rogue and the Shifty Lad.

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

'When the Shifty Lad, the widow's son, was making ready for going to the
Black Rogue, his mother was giving him counsel, and she said to him: "It
is against my will that thou are going to thievery; and I was telling
thee, that the end of thee is to be hanged at the bridge of Baile
Cliabh, Eirinn;" but the Shifty Lad went home to the Black Rogue.

The Black Rogue was giving the Shifty Lad every knowledge he might for
doing thievery; he used to tell him about the cunning things that he
must do, to get a chance to steal a thing; and when the Black Rogue
thought that the Shifty Lad was good enough at learning to be taken out
with him, he used to take him out with him to do stealing; and on a day
of these days the Black Rogue said to his lad--

"We are long enough thus, we must go and do something. There is a rich
tenant near to us, and he has much money in his chest. It was he who
bought all that there was of cattle to be sold in the country, and he
took them to the fair, and he sold them; he has got the money in his
chest, and this is the time to be at him, before the people are paid for
their lot of cattle; and unless we go to seek the money at this very
hour, when it is gathered together, we shall not get the same chance
again."

The Shifty Lad was as willing as himself; they went away to the house,
they got in at the coming on of the night, and they went up upon the
loft, <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151) and they went in hiding up
there; and it was the night of

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> SAMHAIN
(Halloween); and there assembled many people within to keep the Savain
hearty as they used to do. They sat together, and they were singing
songs, and at fun burning the nuts, and at merrymaking.

The Shifty Lad was wearying that the company was not scattering; he got
up and he went down to the byre, and he loosed the bands off the necks
of the cattle, and he returned and he went up upon the loft again. The
cattle began goring each other in the byre, and roaring. All that were
in the room ran to keep the cattle from each other till they, could be
tied again; and in the time while they were doing this, the Shifty Lad
went down to the room and he stole the nuts with him, and he went up
upon the loft again, and he lay down at the back of the Black Rogue.

There was a great leathern hide at the back of the Black Rogue, and the
Shifty Lad had a needle and thread, and he sewed the skirt of the Black
Rogue's coat to the leathern hide that was at his back; and when the
people of the house came back to the dwelling-room again, their nuts
were away; and they were seeking their nuts; and they thought that it
was some one who had come in to play them a trick that had taken Away
their nuts, and they sat down at the side of the fire quietly and
silently.

Said the Shifty Lad to the Black Rogue, "I will crack a nut."

"Thou shalt not crack one," said the Black Rogue; "they will hear thee,
and we shall be caught."

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

Said the Shifty Lad, "I never yet was a Savain night without cracking a
nut," and he cracked one.

Those who were seated in the dwelling-room heard him, and they said--

"There is some one up on the loft cracking our nuts; we will go and
catch them."

When the Black Rogue heard that, he sprang off the loft and he ran out,
and the hide dragging at the tail of his coat. Every one of them shouted
that there was the Black Rogue stealing the hide with him.

The Black Rogue fled, and the people of the house after him; and he was
a great distance from the house before he got the hide torn from him,
and was able to leave them. But in the time that the people of the house
were running after the Black Rogue, the Shifty Lad came down off the
loft; he went up about the house, he hit upon the chest where the gold
and the silver was; he opened the chest, and he took out of it the bags
in which the gold and silver was, that was in the chest; and he took
with him a load of the bread, and of the butter, and of the cheese, and
of everything that, was better than another which he found within; and
he was gone before the people of the, house came back from chasing the
Black Rogue.

When the Black Rogue reached his home, and he had nothing, his wife said
to him, "How hast thou failed this journey?"

Then the Black-Rogue told his own tale; and he was in great fury, at the
Shifty Lad, and swearing that he would serve him out when he got a
chance at him.

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

At the end of a little while after that,, the Shifty Lad came in with a
load upon him.

Said the wife of the Black Rogue, "But I fancy that thou art the better
thief!"

The Black Rogue said not a word till the Shifty lad showed the bags that
he had full of gold and silver; then said the Black Rogue, "But it is
thou that wert the smart lad!"

They made two halves of the gold and silver, and the Black Rogue got the
one half, and the Shifty Lad the other half. When the Black Rogue's wife
saw the share that came to them, she said, "Thou thyself art, the worthy
thief!" and she had more respect for him after that than she had for the
Black Rogue himself.

### II.

The Black Rogue and the Shifty Lad went on stealing till they had got
much money, and they thought that they had better buy a drove of cattle,
and go to the fair with it to sell, and that people would think that it
was at drovering they had made the money that they had got. The two
went, and they bought a great drove of cattle, and they went to a fair
that was far on the way from them. They sold the drove, and they got the
money for them, and they went away to go home. When they were on the
way, they saw a gallows on the top of a hill, and the Shifty Lad said to
the Black Rogue, "Come up till we see the gallows; some say that the
gallows is the end for the thieves at all events."

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

They went up where the gallows was, and they were looking all about it.
Said the Shifty Lad, "Might we not try what kind of death is in the
gallows, that we may know what is before us, if we should be caught at
roguery. I will try it myself first."

The Shifty Lad put the cord about his own neck, and he said to the Black
Rogue, "Here, draw me up, and when I am tired above I will shake my
legs, and then do thou let me down."

The Black Rogue drew the cord, and he raised the Shifty Lad aloft off
the earth, and at the end of a little blink the Shifty Lad shook his
legs, and the Black Rogue let him down.

The Shifty Lad took the cord off his neck, and he said to the Black
Rogue, "Thou thyself hast not ever tried anything that is so funny as
hanging. If thou wouldst try once, thou wouldst have no more fear for
hanging. I was shaking my legs for delight, and thou wouldst shake thy
legs for delight too if thou wert aloft."

Said the Black Rogue, "I will try it too, so that I may know what it is
like."

"Do," said the Shifty Lad; "and when thou art tired above, whistle and I
will let thee down."

The Black Rogue put the cord about his neck, and the Shifty Lad drew him
up aloft; and when the Shifty Lad found that the Black Rogue was aloft
against the gallows, he said to him, "Now, when thou wantest to come
down, whistle, and if thou art well pleased where thou art, shake thy
legs,"

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

When the Black Rogue was a little blink above, he began to shake his
legs and to kick; and the Shifty Lad would say, "Oh art thou not funny!
art thou not funny! art thou not funny! When it seems to thee that thou
art long enough above, whistle."

But the Black Rogue has not whistled yet. The Shifty Lad tied the cord
to the lower end of the tree of the gallows till the Black Rogue was
dead; then he went where he was, and he took the money out of his pouch,
and he said to him, "Now since thou hast no longer any use for this
money, I will take care of it for thee." And he went away, and he left
the Black Rogue hanging there. Then he went home where was the house of
the Black Rogue, and his wife asked where was his master?

The Shifty Lad said, "I left him where he was, upraised above the
earth."

The wife of the Black Rogue asked and asked him about her man, till at
last he told her; but he said to her, that he would marry her himself.
When she heard that, she cried that the Shifty Lad had killed his
master, and he was nothing but a thief. When the Shifty Lad heard that
he fled. The chase was set after him; but he found means to go in hiding
in a cave, and the chase went past him. He was in the cave all night,
and the next day he went another way, and he found means to fly to
Eirinn.

### III.

He reached the house of a wright, and he cried at the door, "Let me in."

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

"Who art thou?" said the wright.

"I am a good wright, if thou hast need of such," said the Shifty Lad.

The wright opened the door, and he let in the Shifty Lad, and the Shifty
Lad began to work at carpentering along with the wright.

When the Shifty Lad was a day or two in their house, he gave a glance
thither and a glance hither about the house, and he said, "O choin! what
a poor house you have, and the king's store-house so near you."

"What of that?" said the wright.

"It is," said the Shifty Lad, "that you might get plenty from the king's
store-house if you yourselves were smart enough."

The wright and his wife would say, "They would put us in prison if we
should begin at the like of that."

The Shifty Lad was always saying that they ought to break into the
king's store-house, and they would find plenty in it; but the wright
would not go with him; but the Shifty Lad took with him some of the
tools of the wright, and he went himself and he broke into the king's
store-house, and he took with him a load of the butter and of the cheese
of the king, and he took it to the house of the wright. The things
pleased the wife of the wright well, and she was willing that her own
husband should go there the next night. The wright himself went with his
lad the next night, and they got into the store-house of the king, and
they took with them great loads of each thing that

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

pleased them best of all that was within in the king's store-house.

But the king's people missed the butter and the cheese and the other
things that had been taken out of the store-house, and they told the
king how it had happened.

The king took the counsel of the Seanagal about the best way of catching
the thieves, and the counsel that the Seanagal gave them was that they
should set a hogshead of soft pitch under the hole where they were
coming in. That was done, and the next night the Shifty lad and his
master went to break into the king's store-house.

The Shifty Lad put his master in before him, and the master went down
into the soft pitch to his very middle, and he could not get out again.
The Shifty Lad went down, and he put a foot on each of his master's
shoulders, and he put out his two loads of the king's butter and of the
cheese at the hole; and at the last time when he was coming out, he
swept the head off his master, and he took the head with him, and he
left the trunk in the hogshead of pitch, and he went home with the
butter and with the cheese, and he took home the head, and he buried it
in the garden.

When the king's people went into the store-house, they found a body
without a head into the hogshead of pitch; but they could mot make out
who it was. They tried if they could find any one at all that could know
him by the clothes, but his clothes were covered with pitch so that they
could not make him out. The

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

king asked the counsel of the Seanagal about it; and the counsel that
the Seanagal gave was, that they should set the trunk aloft on the
points of the spears of the soldiers, to be carried from town to town,
to see if they could find any one at all that would take sorrow for it;
or to try if they could hear any one that would make a painful cry when
they should see it; or if they should not see one that should seem about
to make a painful cry when the soldiers should be going past with it.
The body was taken out, of the hogshead of pitch, and set on the points
of the spears; and the soldiers were bearing it aloft on the points of
their long wooden spears, and they were going from town to town with it;
and when they were going past the house of the wright, the wright's wife
made a tortured scream, and swift the Shifty Lad cut himself with the
adze; and he kept saying to the wright's wife, "The cut is not as bad as
thou thinkest."

The commander-in-chief, and his lot of soldiers, came in and they asked,

"What ailed the housewife?

Said the Shifty Lad, "It is that I have just cut my foot with the adze,
and she is afraid of blood;" and he would say to the wife of the wright,
"Do not be so much afraid; it will heal sooner than thou thinkest."

The soldiers thought that the Shifty Lad was the wright, and that the
wife whom they had seen was the wife of the Shifty Lad; and they went
out, and they went from town to town; but they found no one besides,

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

but the wife of the wright herself, that made cry or scream when they
were coming past her.

They took the body home to the king's house; and the king took another
counsel from his Seanagal, and that was to hang the body to a tree in an
open place, and soldiers to watch it that none should take it away, and
the soldiers to be looking if any should come the way that should take
pity or grief for it.

The Shifty Lad came past them, and he saw them; he went and he got a
horse, and he put a keg of whisky on each side of the horse in a sack,
and he went past the soldiers with it, as though he were hiding from
them. The soldiers thought that it was so, or that he had taken
something which he ought not to have; and some of them ran after him,
and they caught the old horse and the whisky; but the Shifty Lad fled,
and he left the horse and the whisky with them. The soldiers took the
horse and the kegs of whisky back to where the body was hanging against
the mast. They looked what was in the kegs; and when they understood
that it was whisky that was in them, they got a drinking cup, and they
began drinking until at last every one of them was drunk, and they lay
and they slept. When the Shifty Lad saw that, the soldiers were laid
down and asleep and drunk, he returned and took the body off the mast.
He set it crosswise on the horse's back, and he took it home; then he
went and he buried the body in the garden where the head was.

When the soldiers awoke out of their sleep, the body was stolen away;
they had nothing for it but to go and tell the king. Then the king took
the counsel

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

of the Seanagal; and the Seanagal said to them, all that were in his
presence, that his counsel to them was, to take out a great black pig
that was there, and that they should go with her from town to town; and
when they should come to any place where the body was buried, that she
would root it up. They went and they got the black pig, and they were
going from farm to farm with her, trying if they could find out where
the body was buried. They went from house to house with her, till at
last they came to the house where the Shifty Lad and the wright's widow
were dwelling. When they arrived they let the pig loose about the
grounds. The Shifty Lad said that he himself was sure that thirst and
hunger was on them; that they had better go into the house, and that
they should get meat and drink; and that they should let their weariness
from off them, in the time when the pig should be seeking about his
place.

They went in, and the Shifty Lad asked the wright's widow that she
should set meat and drink before the men. The widow of the wright set
meat and drink on the board, and she set it before them; and in the time
while they were eating their meat, the Shifty Lad went out to see after
the pig; and the pig had just hit upon the body in the garden; and the
Shifty Lad went and he got a great Knife and he cut the head off her,
and he buried herself and her head beside the body of the wright in the
garden.

When those who had the care of the pig came out, the pig was not to be
seen. They asked the Shifty Lad if he had seen her. He said that he had
seen her,

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

that her head was up and she was looking upwards, and going two or three
steps now and again; and they went with great haste to the side where
the Shifty Lad said the pig had gone.

When the Shifty Lad found that they had gone out of sight, he set
everything in such a way that they should not hit upon the pig. They on
whom the care of the pig was laid went and they sought her every way
that it was likely she might be. Then when they could not find her, they
had nothing for it but to go to the king's house and tell how it had
happened.

Then the counsel of the Seanagal was taken again; and the counsel that
the Seanagal gave them was, that they should set their soldiers out
about the country at free quarters; and at whatsoever place they should
get pig's flesh, or in whatsoever place they should see pig's flesh,
unless those people could show how they had got the pig's flesh that
they might have, that those were the people who killed the pig, and that
had done every evil that had been done.

The counsel of the Seanagal was taken, and the soldiers sent out to free
quarters about the country; and there was a band of them in the house of
the wright's widow where the Shifty Lad was. The wright's widow gave
their supper to the soldiers, and some of the pig's flesh was made ready
for them; and the soldiers were eating the pig's flesh, and praising it
exceedingly. The Shifty Lad understood what was the matter, but he did
not let on. <span id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152) The soldiers were

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

set to lie out in the barn; and when they were asleep the Shifty Lad
went out and he killed them. Then he went as fast as he could from house
to house, where the soldiers were at free quarters, and he set the
rumour afloat amongst the people of the houses, that the soldiers had
been sent out about the country to rise in the night and kill the people
in their beds; and he found means to make the people of the country
believe him, so that the people of each house killed all the soldiers
that were asleep in their barns; and when the soldiers did not come home
at the time they should, some went to see what had happened to them; and
when they arrived, it was so that they found the soldiers dead in the
barns where they had been asleep; and the people of each house denied
that they knew how the soldiers had been put to death, or who had done
it.

The people who were at the ransacking for the soldiers went to the
king's house, and they told how it had happened; then the king sent word
for the Seanagal to get counsel from him; the Seanagal came, and the
king told him how it had happened, and the king asked counsel from him.
This is the counsel that the Seanagal gave the king, that he should make
a feast and a ball, and invite the people of the country; and if the man
who did the evil should be there, that he was the man who would be the
boldest who would be there, and that he would ask the king's daughter
herself to dance with him. The people were asked to the feast and the
dance; and amongst the rest the Shifty Lad was asked. The

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

people came to the feast, and amongst the rest came the Shifty Lad. When
the feast was past, the dance began; and the Shifty Lad went and he
asked the king's daughter to dance with him; and the Seanagal had a vial
full of black stuff, and the Seanagal put a black dot of the stuff that
was in the vial on the Shifty Lad. But it seemed to the king's daughter
that her hair was not well enough in order, and she went to a side
chamber to put it right and the Shifty Lad went in with her; and when
she looked in the glass, he also looked in it, and he saw the black dot
that the Seanagal had put upon him. When they had danced till the tune
of music was finished, the Shifty Lad went and he got a chance to steal
the vial of the Seanagal from him unknown to him, and he put two black
dots on the Seanagal, and one black dot on twenty other men besides, and
he put the vial back again where he found it.

Between that and the end of another while, the Shifty Lad came again and
he asked the king's daughter to dance. The king's daughter had a vial
also, and she put a black dot on the face of the Shifty Lad; but the
Shifty Lad got the vial whipped out of her pocket, unknown to her; and
since there were two black dots on him, he put two dots on twenty other
men in the company, and four black dots on the Seanagal. Then when the
dancing was over, some were sent to see who was the man on whom were the
two black dots. When they looked amongst the people, they found twenty
men on whom there were two black dots, and there were four black dots on
the Seanagal;

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

and the Shifty Lad found means to go swiftly where the king's daughter
was, and to slip the vial back again into her pocket. The Seanagal
looked and he had his black vial; the king's daughter looked and she had
her own vial; then the Seanagal and the king took counsel; and the last
counsel that they made was that the king should come to the company, and
say, that the man who had done every trick that had been done must be
exceedingly clever; if he would come forward and give himself up, that
he should get the king's daughter to marry, and the one half of the
kingdom while the king was alive, and the whole of the kingdom after the
king's death. And every one of those who had the two black dots on their
faces came and they said that it was they who had done every cleverness
that had been done. Then the king and his high counsel went to try how
the matter should be settled; and the matter which they settled was,
that all the men who had the two black dots on their faces should be put
together in a chamber, and they were to get a child, and the king's
daughter was to give an apple to the child, and the child was to be put
in where the men with the two black dots on their faces were seated, and
to whatsoever one the child should give the apple, that was the one who
was to get the king's daughter.

That was done, and when the child went into the chamber in which the men
were, the Shifty Lad had a shaving and a drone, and the child went and
gave him the apple. Then the shaving and the drone were taken from the
Shifty Lad, and he was seated in an

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

other place, and the apple was given to the child again; and he was
taken out of the chamber, and sent in again to see to whom he would give
the apple; and since the Shifty Lad had the shaving and the drone
before, the child went where he was again, and he gave him the apple.
Then the Shifty Lad got the king's daughter to marry.

And shortly after that the king's daughter and the Shifty Lad were
taking a walk to Baile Cliabh; and when they were going over the bridge
of Baile Cliabh, the Shifty Lad asked the king's daughter what was the
name of that place; and the king's daughter told him that it was the
bridge of Baile Cliabh, in Eirinn; and the Shifty Lad said--

"Well, then, many is the time that my mother said to me, that my end
would be to be hanged at the bridge of Baile Cliabh, in Eirinn; and she
made me that prophecy many a time when I might play her a trick."

And the king's daughter said, "Well, then, if thou thyself shouldst
choose to hang over the little side wall of the bridge, I will hold thee
aloft a little space with my pocket napkin."

And they were at talk and fun about it; but at last it seemed to the
Shifty Lad that he would do it for sport, and the king's daughter took
out her pocket napkin, and the Shifty Lad went over the bridge, and he
hung by the pocket napkin of the king's daughter as she let it over the
little side wall of the bridge, and they were laughing to each other.

But the king's daughter heard a cry, "The king's

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

castle is going on fire!" and she started, and she lost her hold of the
napkin; and the Shifty Lad fell down, and his head struck against a
stone, and the brain went out of him; and there was in the cry but the
sport of children; and the king's daughter was obliged to go home a
widow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[275:1](sfft76.htm#fr_149) Campbell, *Popular
Tales of the West Highlands*.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[275:2](sfft76.htm#fr_150) Dublin.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[277:1](sfft76.htm#fr_151) The loft meant is
the space in the roof of a cottage which is above the rafters, and is
used as a kind of store.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[288:1](sfft76.htm#fr_152) Divulge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lothian Tom](sfft77)
