[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfft81)  [Next](sfft83.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COUSIN MATTIE. <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168.md)

AT the lone farm of Finagle, there lived for many years an industrious
farmer and his family. Several of his children died, and only one
daughter and one son remained to him. He had besides these a little
orphan niece, who was brought into the family, called Matilda; but all
her days she went by the familiar name of Cousin Mattie. At the time
this simple narrative commences, Alexander, the farmer's son, was six
years of age, Mattie was seven, and Flora, the farmer's only daughter,
about twelve.

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

How I do love a little girl about that age! There is nothing in nature
so fascinating, so lovely, so innocent; and, at the same time, so full
of gaiety and playfulness. The tender and delicate affections, to which
their natures are moulded, are then beginning unconsciously to form; and
everything beautiful or affecting in nature claims from them a deep but
momentary interest. They have a tear for the weaned lamb, for the
drooping flower, and even for the travelling mendicant, though afraid to
come near him. But the child of the poor female vagrant is to them, of
all others, an object of the deepest interest. How I have seen them look
at the little wretch, and then at their own parents alternately, the
feelings of the soul abundantly conspicuous in every muscle of the face
and turn of the eye! Their hearts are like softened wax, and the
impressions then made on them remain for ever. Such beings approach nigh
to the list where angels stand, and are, in fact, the connecting link
that joins us with the inhabitants of a better world. How I do love a
well-educated little girl of twelve or thirteen years of age!

At such an age was Flora of Finagle, with a heart moulded to every
tender impression, and a memory so retentive that whatever affected or
interested her was engraven there never to be cancelled.

One morning, after her mother had risen and gone to the byre to look
after the cows, Flora, who was lying in a bed by herself, heard the
following dialogue between the two children, who were lying prattling
together in another bed close beside hers

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

"Do you ever dream ony, little Sandy?"

"What is't like, cousin Mattie? Sandy no ken what it is til dream."

"It is to think ye do things when you are sleeping, when ye dinna do
them at a'."

Oh, Sandy deam a great deal yat way."

"If you will tell me ane o' your dreams, Sandy--I'll tell you ane o'
mine that I dreamed last night; and it was about you, Sandy?"

"Sae was mine, cousin. Sandy deamed that he fightit a gaet Englishman,
an' it was Yobin Hood; an' Sandy ding'd him's swold out o' him's hand,
an' noll'd him on ye face, an' ye back, till him geetit. An' yen thele
comed anodel littel despelyate Englishman, an' it was littel John; an'
Sandy fightit him till him was dead; an' yen Sandy got on o' ane gyand
holse, any gallompit away."

"But I wish that ye be nae making that dream just e'en now, Sandy?"

"Sandy 'hought it, atweel."

"But were you sleeping when you thought it?"

"Na, Sandy wasna' sleepin', but him was winking."

"Oh, but that's not a true dream; I'll tell you one that's a true dream.
I thought there was a bonny lady came to me, and she held out two roses,
a red one and a pale one, and bade me take my choice. I took the white
one; and she bade me keep it, and never part with it, for if I gave it
away, I would die. But when I came to on, you asked my rose, and I
refused to give you it. You then cried for it. and said I

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

did not love you; so I could not refuse you the flower, but wept too,
and you took it.

"Then the bonny lady came back to me, and was very angry, and said, 'Did
not I tell you to keep your rose? Now the boy that you have given it to
will be your murderer. He will kill you; and on this day fortnight you
will be lying in your coffin, and that pale rose upon your breast.'

"I said, 'I could not help it now.' But when I was told that you were to
kill me, I liked you aye better and better, and better and better." And
with these words Matilda clasped him to her bosom and wept. Sandy sobbed
bitterly too, and said, "She be geat lial, yon lady. Sandy no kill
cousin Mattie. When Sandy gows byaw man, an' gets a gyand house, him be
vely good till cousin an' feed hel wi' gingebead, an' yeam, an' tyankil,
an' take hel in him's bosy yis way." With that the two children fell
silent, and sobbed and wept till they fell sound asleep, clasped in each
other's arms.

This artless dialogue made a deep impression on Flora's sensitive heart.
It was a part of her mother's creed to rely on dreams, so that it had
naturally become Flora's too. She was shocked, and absolutely terrified,
when she heard her little ingenious cousin say that Sandy was to murder
her, and on that day fortnight she should be lying in her coffin; and
without informing her mother of what she had overheard, she resolved in
her own mind to avert, if possible, the impending evil. It was on a
Sabbath morning, and after little Sandy had got on his clothes, and
while

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

Matilda was out, he attempted to tell his mother cousin Mattie's dream,
to Flora's great vexation; but he made such a blundering story of it
that it proved altogether incoherent, and his mother took no further
notice of it than to bid him hold his tongue; "what was that he was
speaking about murdering?"

The next week Flora entreated of her mother that she would suffer cousin
Mattie and herself to pay a visit to their aunt at Kirkmichael; and,
though her mother was unwilling, she urged her suit so earnestly that
the worthy dame was fain to consent.

"What's ta'en the gowk <span id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169.md) lassie the
day?" said she; "I think she be gane fey. I never could get her to gang
to see her aunt, and now she has ta'en a tirrovy <span
id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_170.md) in her head, that she'll no be keepit. I
dinna like sic absolute freaks, an' sic langings, to come into the heads
o' bairns; they're ower aften afore something uncannie. Gae your ways
an' see your auntie, sin' ye will gang; but ye's no get little cousin
w'ye, sae never speak o't. Think ye that I can do wantin' ye baith out
o' the house till the Sabbath day be ower."

"Oh but, mother, it's sae gousty, <span id="fr_171"></span>[3](#fn_171.md)
an' sae eiry, to lie up in yon loft ane's lane; unless cousin Mattie
gang w' me, I canna' gang ava."

"Then just stay at hame, daughter, an' let us alane o' thae daft
nories <span id="fr_172"></span>[4](#fn_172.md) a' thegither."

Flora now had recourse to that expedient which never fails to conquer
the opposition of a fond

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

mother: she pretended to cry bitterly. The good dame was quite overcome,
and at once yielded, though not with a very good grace. "Saw ever
onybody, sic a fie-gae-to <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173.md) as this?
They that will to Cupar maun to Cupar! Gae your ways to Kirkmichael, an'
tak the hale town at your tail, gin ye like. What's this that I'm sped
wi'."

"Na, na, mother; I's no gang my foot length. Ye sanna hae that to
flyre <span id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_174.md) about. Ye keep me working
frae the tae year's end to the tither, an' winna gie me a day to mysel'.
I's no seek to be away again, as lang as I'm aneath your roof."

"Whisht now, an' baud your tongue, my bonny Flora. Ye hae been ower good
a bairn to me, no to get your ain way o' ten times mair nor that. Ye ken
laith wad your mother be to contrair you i' ought, if she wist it war
for your good. I'm right glad that it has come i' your ain side o' the
house, to gang an' see your auntie. Gang your ways, an' stay a day or
twa; an', if ye dinna like to sleep your lane, take billy Sandy w'ye,
an' leave little cousin wi' me, to help me w' bits o' turns till ye come
back."

This arrangement suiting Flora's intent equally well with the other, it
was readily agreed to, and everything soon amicably settled between the
mother and daughter. The former demurred a little on Sandy's inability
to perform the journey; but Flora, being intent on her purpose,
overruled this objection, though she knew it was but too well founded.

Accordingly, the couple set out on their journey

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

next morning, but before they were half way Sandy began to tire, and a
short time after gave fairly in'. Flora carried him on her back for a
space, but finding that would never do, she tried to cajole him into
further exertion. No, Sandy would not set a foot to the ground. He was
grown drowsy, and would not move. Flora knew not what to do, but at
length fell upon an expedient which an older person would scarcely have
thought of. She went to a gate of an enclosure, and, pulling a spoke out
of it, she brought that to Sandy, telling him she had now got him a fine
horse, and he might ride all the way. Sandy, who was uncommonly fond of
horses, swallowed the bait, and, mounting astride on his rung, he took
the road at a round pace, and for the last two miles of their journey
Flora could hardly keep in view of him.

She had little pleasure in her visit, further than the satisfaction that
she was doing what she could to avert a dreadful casualty, which she
dreaded to be hanging over the family; and on her return, from the time
that she came in view of her father, she looked only for the appearance
of Mattie running about the door; but no Mattie being seen, Flora's
heart began to tremble, and as she advanced nearer, her knees grew so
feeble that they would scarcely support her slender form; for she knew
that it was one of the radical principles of a dream to be ambiguous.

"'A's unco still about our hame the day, Sandy; I 'wish ilka ane there
may be weel. It's like death."

"Sandy no ken what death is like. What *is* it like, Sistel Flola?"

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

"You will maybe see that ower soon. It is death that kills a' living
things, Sandy."

"Aye; aih aye! Sandy saw a wee buldie, it could neilel pick, nol flee,
nol dab. It was vely ill done o' death! Sistel Flola, didna God make a'
living things?"

"Yes; be assured he did."

"Then, what has death ado to kill them? if Sandy wele God, him wad fight
him."

"Whisht, whisht, my dear; ye dinna ken what you're sayin'. Ye maunna
speak about these things."

"Weel, Sandy no speak ony maile about them. But if death should kill
cousin Mattie, oh! Sandy wish him might kill him too!"

"Wha do ye like best i' this world, Sandy?"

"Sandy like sistel Flola best."

"You are learning the art of flattery already; for I heard ye telling
Mattie the tither morning, that ye likit her better than a' the rest o'
the world put thegither."

"But yan Sandy coudna help yat. Cousin Mattie like Sandy, and what could
him say?"

Flora could not answer him for anxiety; for they were now drawing quite
near to the house, and still all was quiet. At length Mattie opened the
door, and, without returning to tell her aunt the joyful tidings, came
running like a little fairy to meet them; gave Flora a hasty kiss; and
then, clasping little Sandy about the neck, she exclaimed, in an
ecstatic tone, "Aih, Sandy man!" and pressed her cheek to his. Sandy
produced a small book of pictures,

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

and a pink rose knot that he had brought for his cousin, and was repaid
with another embrace, and a sly compliment to his gallantry.

Matilda was far beyond her years in acuteness. Her mother was an
accomplished English lady, though only the daughter of a poor curate,
and she had bred her only child with every possible attention. She could
read, she could sing, and play some airs on the spinnet; and was
altogether a most interesting little nymph. Both her parents came to an
untimely end, and to the lone cottage of Finagle was she then removed,
where she was still very much caressed. She told Flora all the news of
her absence in a breath. There was nothing disastrous had happened. But,
so strong was Flora's presentiment of evil, that she could not get quit
of it, until she had pressed the hands of both her parents. From that
day forth, she suspected that little faith was to be put in dreams. The
fourteen days was now fairly over, and no evil nor danger had happened
to Matilda, either from the hand of Sandy or otherwise. However, she
kept the secret of the dream locked up in her heart, and never either
mentioned or forgot it.

Shortly after that she endeavoured to reason her mother out of her
belief in dreams, for she would still gladly have been persuaded in her
own mind that this vision was futile, and of no avail. But she found her
mother staunch to her point. She reasoned on the principle that the
Almighty had made nothing in vain, and if dreams had been of no import
to man they would not have been given to him. And further,

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

she said we read in the Scriptures that dreams were fulfilled in the
days of old; but we didna read in the Scriptures that ever the nature of
dreaming was changed. On the contrary, she believed that since the days
of prophecy had departed, and no more warnings of futurity could be
derived by man from that, dreaming was of doubly more avail, and ought
to be proportionally more attended to, as the only mystical
communication remaining between God and man. To this reasoning Flora was
obliged to yield. It is no hard matter to conquer, where belief succeeds
argument.

Time flew on, and the two children were never asunder. They read
together, prayed together, and toyed and caressed without restraint,
seeming but to live for one another. But a heavy misfortune at length
befell the family. She who had been a kind mother and guardian angel to
all the three was removed by death to a better home. Flora was at that
time in her eighteenth year, and the charge of the family then devolved
on her. Great was their grief, but their happiness was nothing abated;
they lived together in the same kind love and amity as they had done
before. The two youngest in particular fondled each other more and more,
and this growing fondness, instead of being checked was constantly
encouraged, Flora still having a lurking dread that some deadly
animosity might breed between them.

Matilda and she always slept in the same bed, and very regularly told
each other their dreams in the morning--dreams pure and innocent as
their own

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

stainless bosoms. But one morning Flora was surprised by Matilda
addressing her as follows, in a tone of great perplexity and distress--

"Ah! my dear cousin, what a dream I have had last night! I thought I saw
my aunt, your late worthy mother, who was kind and affectionate to me,
as she always wont to be, and more beautiful than I ever saw her. She
took me in her arms, and wept over me; and charged me to go and leave
this place instantly, and by all means to avoid her son, otherwise he
was destined to be my murderer; and on that day seven-night I should be
lying in my coffin. She showed me a sight too that I did not know, and
cannot give a name to. But the surgeons came between us, and separated
us, so that I saw her no more."

Flora trembled and groaned in spirit; nor could she make any answer to
Matilda for a long space, save by repeated moans. "Merciful Heaven!"
said she at length, "what can such a dream portend? Do not you remember,
dear Mattie, of dreaming a dream of the same nature once long ago?"

Mattie had quite forgot of ever having dreamed such a dream; but Flora
remembered it well; and thinking that she might formerly have been the
means, under Heaven, of counterworking destiny, she determined to make a
further effort; and, ere ever she arose, advised Matilda to leave the
house, and avoid her brother, until the seven days had elapsed. "It can
do nae ill, Mattie," said she; "an' mankind hae whiles muckle i' their
ain hands to do or no to do;

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

to bring about, or to keep back." Mattie consented, solely to please the
amiable Flora; for she was no more afraid of Sandy than she was of one
of the flowers of the field. She went to Kirkmichael, stayed till the
week was expired, came home in safety, and they both laughed at their
superstitious fears. Matilda thought of the dream no more, but Flora
treasured it up in her memory, though all the coincidence that she could
discover between the two dreams was that they had both happened on a
Saturday, and both precisely at the same season of the year, which she
well remembered.

At the age of two and twenty, Flora was married to a young farmer, who
lived in a distant corner of the same extensive parish, and of course
left the charge of her father's household to cousin Mattie, who, with
the old farmer, his son, and one maidservant, managed and did all the
work of the farm. Still, as their number was diminished, their
affections seemed to be drawn the closer; but Flora scarcely saw them
any more, having the concerns of a family to mind at home.

One day, when her husband went to church, he perceived the old beadle
standing bent over his staff at the churchyard gate, distributing burial
letters to a few as they entered. He held out one to the husband of
Flora, and, at the same time, touched the front of his bonnet with the
other hand; and without regarding how the letter affected him who
received it, began instantly to look about for others to whom he had
letters directed.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

The farmer opened the letter, and had almost sunk down on the earth,
when he read as follows:--

"Sir,--The favour of your company, at twelve o, clock, on Tuesday next,
to attend the funeral of Matilda A------n, my niece, from this, to the
place of interment, in the churchyard of C------r, will much oblige,
Sir, your humble servant,

"JAMES A-----N.      

"*Finagle, April 12th*."

Think of Flora's amazement and distress, when her husband told her what
had happened, and showed her this letter. She took to her bed on the
instant, and wept herself into a fever for the friend and companion of
her youth. Her husband became considerably alarmed on her account, she
being in that state in which violent excitement often proves dangerous.
Her sickness was, however, only temporary; but she burned with
impatience to learn some particulars of her cousin's death. Her husband
could tell her nothing; only, that he heard one say *she died on
Saturday*.

This set Flora a calculating, and going over in her mind reminiscences
of their youth; and she soon discovered, to her utter astonishment and
even horror, that her cousin Matilda had died precisely on *that day
fourteen years* that she first dreamed the ominous dream, and that day
seven years that she dreamed it again!

Here was indeed matter of wonder! But her blood ran cold to her heart
when she thought what might have been the manner of her death. She
dreaded,

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

nay, she almost calculated upon it as certain, that her brother had
poisoned, or otherwise made away privately with the deceased, as she was
sure such an extraordinary coincidence behoved to be fulfilled in all
its parts. She durst no more make any inquiries concerning the
circumstances of her cousin's death; but she became moping and
unsettled, and her husband feared for her reason.

He went to the funeral; but dreading to leave Flora long by herself, he
only met the procession a small space from the churchyard; for his
father-in-law's house was distant fourteen miles from his own. On his
return, he could still give Flora very little additional information. He
said he had asked his father-in-law what had been the nature of the
complaint of which she died; but he had given him an equivocal answer,
and seemed to avoid entering into any explanation; and that he had then
made inquiry at others, who all testified their ignorance of the matter.
Flora at length, after long hesitation, ventured to ask *if her brother
was at the funeral*? and was told that he was not. This was a death-blow
to her lingering hopes, and all but confirmed the hideous catastrophe
that she dreaded; and for the remainder of that week she continued in a
state of mental agony.

On the Sunday following, she manifested a strong desire to go to church
to visit her cousin's grave. Her husband opposed it at first, but at
last consenting, in hopes she might be benefited by an overflow of
tenderness, he mounted her on a pad, and accompanied

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

her to the churchyard gate, leaving her there to give vent to her
feelings.

As she approached the new grave, which was by the side of her mother's,
she perceived two aged people whom she knew sitting beside it busily
engaged in conversation about the inhabitant below. Flora drew her hood
over her face, and came with a sauntering step towards them, to hill all
suspicion that she had any interest or concern in what they were saying;
and finally she leaned herself down on a flat grave-stone close beside
them, and made as if she were busied in deciphering the inscription.
There she heard the following dialogue, one may conceive with what sort
of feelings.

"An' then she was aye say kind, an' sae lively, an' sae affable to poor
an' rich, an' then sae bonny an' sae young. Oh, but my heart's sair for
her! When I saw the mortclaith drawn off the coffin, an' saw the silver
letters kythe, AGED 21, the tears ran down ower thae auld wizzened
cheeks, Janet; an' I said to myself', 'Wow but that is a bonny flower
cut off i' the bloom!' But, Janet, my joe, warna ye at the
corpse-kisting?" <span id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_175.md)

"An' what suppose I was, Matthew? What's your concern wi' that?"

"Because I heard say that there was nane there but you an' another that
ye ken weel. But canna you tell me, kimmer, what was the corpse like?
Was't a' fair an' bonny, an' nae blueness nor demmish to be seen?"

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

"An' what wad an auld fool body like You be the better, gin ye kend what
the corpse was like? Thae sights are nae for een like yours to see; an'
thae subjects are nae fit for tongues like yours to tattle about. What's
done canna be undone. The dead will lie still. But oh, what's to come o'
the living?"

"Ay, but I'm sure she had been a lusty weel plenished corpse, Janet; for
she was a heavy ane; an' a deeper coffin I never saw."

"Haud your auld souple untackit tongue. Gin I hear sic another hint come
ower the foul tap o't, it sal be the waur for ye. But lown be it spoken,
an' little be it said. Weel might the corpse be heavy, an' the coffin
deep! ay, weel might the coffin be made deep, Matthew, for there was a
stout lad bairn, a poor little pale flower, that hardly ever saw the
light o' heaven, was streekit <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176.md) on
her breast at the same time wi' hersel'."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[336:1](sfft82.htm#fr_168.md) James Hogg, *The
Ettrick Shepherd's Tales*.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[340:1](sfft82.htm#fr_169.md) Foolish.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[340:2](sfft82.htm#fr_170.md) Fit of passion.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[340:3](sfft82.htm#fr_171.md) Ghostly.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[340:4](sfft82.htm#fr_172.md) Whims.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[341:1](sfft82.htm#fr_173.md) Ado.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[341:2](sfft82.htm#fr_174.md) Complain.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[350:1](sfft82.htm#fr_175.md) Ceremony of
coffining.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[351:1](sfft82.htm#fr_176.md) Laid out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rat Hall](sfft83.md)
