[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfft43)  [Next](sfft45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### REDEMPTION FROM FAIRY LAND. <span id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64)

NEAR the town of Aberdeen, in Scotland, lived James Campbell, who had
one daughter, named

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mary, who, was
married to John Nelson, a young man of that neighbourhood. Shortly after
their marriage, they being a young couple, they went to live in the town
of Aberdeen, where he followed his trade, being a goldsmith; they lived
loving and agreeable together until the time of her lying-in, when there
was female attendants prepared suitable to her situation; when near the
hour of twelve at night they were alarmed with a dreadful noise, at
which of a sudden the candles went out, which drove the attendants in
the utmost confusion; soon as the women regained their half-lost senses,
they called in their neighbours who, after striking up lights, and
looking towards the lying-in woman, found her a corpse, which caused
great confusion in the family. There was no grief could exceed that of
her husband, who, next morning, prepared ornaments for her funeral;
people of all sects came to her wake, amongst others came the Rev. Mr.
Dodd, who, at first sight of the corpse, said, "It's not the body of any
Christian, but that Mrs. Nelson was taken away by the fairies, and what
they took for her was only some substance left in her place." He was not
believed, so he refused attending her funeral; they kept her in the
following night, and the next day she was interred.

Her husband, one evening after sunset, being riding in his own field,
heard a most pleasant concert of music, and soon after espied a woman
coming towards him dressed in white; she being veiled, he could not
observe her face, yet he rode near her, and asked very friendly who she
was that chose to walk

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

alone so late in the evening? at which she unveiled her face, and burst
into tears, saying, I am not permitted to tell you who I am. He knowing
her to be his wife, asked her in the name of God, what disturbed her, or
what occasioned her to appear at that hour? She said her appearing at
any hour was of no consequence; for though you believe me to be dead and
buried, I am not, but was taken away by the fairies the night of my
delivery; you only buried a piece of wood in my place; I can be
recovered if you take proper means; as for my child, it has three nurses
to attend it, but I fear it cannot be brought home; the greatest
dependence I have on any person is my brother Robert, who is a captain
of a merchant ship, and will be home in ten days hence. Her husband
asked her what means he should take to win her? She told him he should
find a letter the Sunday morning following, on the desk in his own room,
directed to her brother, wherein there would be directions for winning
her. Since my being taken from you I have had the attendance of a queen
or empress, and if you look over my right shoulder you will see several
of my companions; he then did as she desired, when, at a small distance,
he saw a king and queen sitting, beside a moat, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65) on a throne, in splendour.

She then desired him to look right and left, which he did, and observed
other kings on each side of the king and queen, well, guarded. He said,
I fear it is an impossibility to win you from such a place. No,

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

says she, were my brother Robert here in your place, he would bring me
home; but let it not encourage you to attempt the like, for that would
occasion the loss of me for ever; there is now severe punishment
threatened to me for speaking to you; but, to prevent that, do you ride
up to the moat, where (suppose you will see no person) all you now see
will be near you, and do you threaten to burn all the old thorns and
brambles that is round the moat, if you do not get a firm promise that I
shall get no punishment; I shall be forgiven; which he promised. She
then disappeared, and he lost sight of all he had seen; he then rode
very resolutely up to the moat, and went round it, vowing he would burn
all about it if he would not get a promise that his wife should get no
hurt. A voice desired him to cast away a book that was in his pocket,
and then demand his request; he answered he would not part with his
book, but grant his request, or they should find the effect of his rage.
The voice answered, that upon honour she should be forgave her fault,
but for him to suffer no prejudice to come to the moat, which he
promised to fulfil, at which he heard most pleasant music. He then
returned home, and sent for the Rev. Mr. Dodd, and related to him what
he had seen; Mr. Dodd stayed with him till Sunday morning following,
when as Mr. Nelson looked on the desk in his room, he espied a letter,
which he took up, it being directed to her brother, who in a few days
came home; on his receiving the letter he opened it, wherein he found
the following:

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

"DEAR BROTHER,--My husband can relate to you my present circumstances. I
request that you will (the first night after you see this) come to the
moat where I parted from my husband: let nothing daunt you, but stand in
the centre of the moat at the hour of twelve at night, and call me, when
I, with several others, will surround you; I shall have on the whitest
dress of any in company; then take hold of me, and do not forsake me;
all the frightful methods they shall use let it not surprise you, but
keep your hold, suppose they continue till cock crow, when they shall
vanish all of a sudden, and I shall be safe, when I will return home and
live with my husband. If you succeed in your attempt, you will gain
applause from all your friends, and have the blessing of your
ever-loving and affectionate sister,

"MARY NELSON."                         

No sooner had he read the letter than he vowed to win his sister and her
child, or perish in the attempt; he returned to the ship, and related to
his sailors the contents of the letter; he delayed till ten at night,
when his loyal sailors offered to go with him, which he refused,
thinking it best to go alone. As he left his ship a frightful lion came
roaring towards him; he drew his sword and struck at the lion,--which he
observed was of no substance, it being only the appearance of one, to
terrify him in his attempt; it only encouraged him, so that he proceeded
to the moat, in the centre of which he observed a white handkerchief

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

spread; on which he was surrounded with a number of women, the cries of
whom were the most frightful he ever heard; his sister being in the
whitest dress of any round him, he seized her by the right hand, and
said, With the help of God, I will preserve you from all infernal imps:
when of a sudden, the moat seemed to be on fire around him. He likewise
heard the most dreadful thunder could be imagined; frightful birds and
beasts seemed to make towards him out of the fire, which he knew was not
real; nothing daunted his courage; he kept hold of his sister for the
space of an hour and three-quarters, when the cocks began to crow; then
the fire disappeared, and all the frightful imps vanished. He held her
in his arms, and fell on his knees, and gave God thanks for his
proceedings that night: he believing her clothing to be light, put his
outside coat on her; she then embraced him, saying she was now safe, as
he put any of his clothing on her; he then brought her home to her
husband, which occasioned great rejoicing. Her husband and he began to
conclude to destroy the moat in revenge of the child they had away, when
instantly they heard a voice, which said, you shall have your son safe,
and well, on condition that you will not till the ground within three
perches of the moat, nor damage bushes or brambles round that place,
which they agreed to, when, in a few minutes, the child was left on his
mother's knee, which caused them to kneel and return thanks to God.

The circumstance of this terrifying affair was occasioned by leaving
Mrs. Nelson, the night of her

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

lying-in, in the care of women who were mostly intoxicated with liquor!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[138:2](sfft44.htm#fr_64) Sir Walter Scott,
*ibid*., "from a broadside still popular in Ireland."

<span id="fn_65"></span>[140:1](sfft44.htm#fr_65) A rising ground, a
knoll.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairy and the Bible-Reader](sfft45)
