[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfft72)  [Next](sfft74.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCJ10/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales*, by George Douglas, \[1901\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

### THE WITCHES OF DELNABO. <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112.md)

IN the time of my grandmother, the farm of Delnabo was proportionally
divided between three tenants. At first equally comfortable in their
circumstances, it was in the course of some time remarked by all, and by
none more forcibly than by one of the said three portioners, that,
although superior in point of industry and talent to his two
fellow-portioners, one of the tenants was daily lapsing into poverty,
while his two neighbours were daily improving in estate. Amazed and
grieved at the adverse fortune which thus attended his family, compared
to the prosperous condition of his neighbours, the wife of the poor man
was in the habit of expressing her astonishment at the circumstance, not
only to her own particular friends, but likewise to the wives of her
neighbours themselves.

On one of these occasions, the other two wives asked her what would she
do to ameliorate her condition, if it were in her power? She answered
them she would do anything whatever. (Here the other wives thought they
had got a gudgeon that would snap at any bait, and immediately resolved
to make her their confidante.) "Well, then,", says one of the other two
wives, "if you agree to keep our communications strictly secret, and
implicitly obey our instructions, neither poverty nor want shall ever
assail you more."

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This speech of the
other wife immediately impressed the poor man's wife with a strong
suspicion of their real character. Dissembling all surprise at the
circumstance, she promised to agree to all their conditions. She was
then directed, when she went to bed that night, to carry along with her
the floor broom, well known for its magical properties, which she was to
leave by her husband's side in the course of the night, and which would
represent her so exactly that the husband could not distinguish the
difference in the morning. They at the same time enjoined her to discard
all fears of detection, as their own husbands had been satisfied with
those lovely substitutes (the brooms) for a great number of years.
Matters being thus arranged, she was desired to join them at the hour of
midnight, in order to accompany them to that scene which was to realise
her future happiness.

Promising to attend to their instructions, the poor man's wife took
leave of her neighbours, full of those sensations of horror which the
discovery of such depravity was calculated to produce in a virtuous
mind. Hastening home to her husband, she thought it no crime to break
her promise to her wicked neighbours, and, like a dutiful and prudent
wife, to reveal to the husband of her bosom the whole particulars of
their interview. The husband greatly commended his wife's fidelity, and
immediately entered into a collusion with her, which displays no
ordinary degree of ingenuity. It was agreed that the husband should
exchange apparel with the wife, and that he should, in this disguise,
accompany the wives to the place appointed,

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

to see what cantrips they intended to perform.

He accordingly arrayed himself in his wife's habiliments, and, at the
hour of midnight, joined the party at the place appointed. The "bride,"
as they called him, was most cordially received by the two Ladies of the
Broom, who warmly congratulated the "bride" upon her good fortune, and
the speedy consummation of her happiness. He was then presented with a
fir torch, a broom, and a riddle, articles with which they themselves
were furnished. They directed their course along the banks of the
rolling Avon, until they reached Craic-pol-nain, or the Craig of the
Birdspool. Here, in consequence of the steepness of the craig, they
found it convenient to pass to the other side of the river. This passage
they effected without the use of the navy, the river being fordable at
the place. They then came in sight of Pol-nain, and lo! what human eye
ever witnessed such a scene before! The pool appeared as if actually
enveloped in a flame of fire. A hundred torches blazed aloft, reflecting
their beams on the towering woods of Loynchork. And what ear ever beard
such shrieks and yells as proceeded from the horrid crew engaged at
their hellish orgies on Pol-nain? Those cries were, however, sweet music
to the two wives of Delnabo. Every yell produced from them a burst of
unrestrained pleasure, and away they frisked, leaving the amiable bride
a considerable way behind. For the fact is, that he was in no hurry to
reach the scene, and when he did reach it, it was with a determination
to be only a spectator,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

and not a participator in the night's performance. On reaching the
pool's side he saw what was going on,--he saw abundance of hags steering
themselves to and fro in their riddles, by means of their oars (the
brooms), hallooing and skirling <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113.md)
worse than the bogles, and each holding in her left hand a torch of
fir,--whilst at other times they would swirl themselves into a row, and
make profound obeisance to a large black ugly tyke, <span
id="fr_114"></span>[2](#fn_114.md) perched on a lofty rock, and who was no
doubt the "muckle thief" himself, and who was pleased to acknowledge
most graciously those expressions of their loyalty and devotion, by
bowing, grinning, and clapping his paws. Having administered to the
*bride* some preliminary instructions, the impatient wives desired him
to remain by the pool's side until they should commune with his Satanic
Highness on the subject of *her* inauguration, directing *her*, as they
proceeded on their voyage across the pool, to speed them in their
master's name. To this order of the black pair the *bride* was resolved
to pay particular attention. As soon as they were embarked in their
riddles, and had wriggled themselves, by means of their brooms, into a
proper depth of water, "Go," says he, "in the name of the Best." A
horrid yell from the witches announced their instant fate--the magic
spell was now dissolved--crash went the riddles, and down sank the two
witches, never more to rise, amidst the shrieks and lamentations of the
Old Thief and all his infernal crew, whose combined power and policy
could not save them from a watery

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

end. All the torches were extinguished in an instant, and the affrighted
company fled in different directions, in such forms and similitudes as
they thought most convenient for them to adopt; and the *wily bride*
returned home at his leisure, enjoying himself vastly at the clever
manner in which he had executed the instructions of his deceased
friends. On arriving at his house, he dressed himself in his own
clothes, and, without immediately satisfying his wife's curiosity at the
result of his excursion, he yoked his cattle, and commenced his morning
labours with as little concern as usual. His two neighbours, who were
not even conscious of the absence of their wives (so ably substituted
were they by the brooms), did the same. Towards breakfast-time, however,
the two neighbours were not a little astonished that they observed no
signs of their wives having risen from bed--notwithstanding their
customary earliness--and this surprise they expressed to the *late
bride*, their neighbour. The latter archly remarked that he had great
suspicions, in his own mind, of their *rising* even that day. "What mean
you by that?" replied they. "We left our wives apparently in good health
when we ourselves arose." "Find them now," was the reply--the *bride*,
setting up as merry a whistle as before. Running each to his bed, what
was the astonishment of the husbands, when, instead of his wife, he only
found an old broom? Their neighbour then told them that, if they chose
to examine Pol-nain well, they would find both their dear doxies there.
The grieving husbands accordingly proceeded thither, and with the

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

necessary instruments dragged their late worthy partners to dry land,
and afterwards privately interred them. The shattered vessels and oars
of those unfortunate navigators, whirling about the pool, satisfied
their lords of the manner by which they came to their ends; and their
names were no longer mentioned by their kindred in the land. It need
scarcely be added that the poor man gradually recovered his former
opulence; and that, in the course of a short time, he was comparatively
as rich as he was formerly poor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[237:1](sfft73.htm#fr_112.md) W. Grant Stewart,
*Highland Superstitions*.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[240:1](sfft73.htm#fr_113.md) Shrieking.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[240:2](sfft73.htm#fr_114.md) Dog.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Brazen Brogues](sfft74.md)
