[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co1)  [Next](gal) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 2 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ by God's
will, and the brother Timotheus, to the assembly of God which is in
Corinth, with all the saints who are in the whole of Achaia.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you, and peace from God our
Father, and \[the\] Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed \[be\] the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of compassions, and God of all
encouragement;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who encourages us in all our tribulation,
that we may be able to encourage those who are in any tribulation
whatever, through the encouragement with which we ourselves are
encouraged of God.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Because, even as the sufferings of the
Christ abound towards us, so through the Christ does our encouragement
also abound.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But whether we are in tribulation, \[it
is\] for your encouragement and salvation, wrought in the endurance of
the same sufferings which \*we\* also suffer,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> (and our hope for you \[is\] sure;) or
whether we are encouraged, \[it is\] for your encouragement and
salvation: knowing that as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so also
of the encouragement.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For we do not wish you to be ignorant,
brethren, as to our tribulation which happened \[to us\] in Asia, that
we were excessively pressed beyond \[our\] power, so as to despair even
of living.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But we ourselves had the sentence of death
in ourselves, that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God
who raises the dead;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> who has delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver; in whom we confide that he will also yet
deliver;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> ye also labouring together by
supplication for us that the gift towards us, through means of many
persons, may be the subject of the thanksgiving of many for us.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For our boasting is this, the testimony
of our conscience, that in simplicity and sincerity before God, (not in
fleshly wisdom but in God's grace,) we have had our conversation in the
world, and more abundantly towards you.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For we do not write other things to you
but what ye well know and recognise; and I hope that ye will recognise
to the end,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> even as also ye have recognised us in
part, that we are your boast, even as \*ye\* \[are\] ours in the day of
the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And with this confidence I purposed to
come to you previously, that ye might have a second favour;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and to pass through to Macedonia by you,
and again from Macedonia to come to you, and to be set forward by you to
Judaea.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Having therefore this purpose, did I then
use lightness? Or what I purpose, do I purpose according to flesh, that
there should be with me yea yea, and nay nay?

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now God \[is\] faithful, that our word to
you is not yea and nay.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who
has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus),
did not become yea and nay, but yea \*is\* in him.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For whatever promises of God \[there
are\], in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Now he that establishes us with you in
Christ, and has anointed us, \[is\] God,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> who also has sealed us, and given the
earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> But I call God to witness upon my soul
that to spare you I have not yet come to Corinth.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Not that we rule over your faith, but are
fellow-workmen of your joy: for by faith ye stand.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But I have judged this with myself, not to
come back to you in grief.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For if \*I\* grieve you, who also \[is\] it
that gladdens me, if not he that is grieved through me?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I have written this very \[letter\]
\[to you\], that coming I may not have grief from those from whom I
ought to have joy; trusting in you all that my joy is \[that\] of you
all.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For out of much tribulation and distress of
heart I wrote to you, with many tears; not that ye may be grieved, but
that ye may know the love which I have very abundantly towards you.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But if any one has grieved, he has grieved,
not me, but in part (that I may not overcharge \[you\]) all of you.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Sufficient to such a one \[is\] this rebuke
which \[has been inflicted\] by the many;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> so that on the contrary ye should rather
shew grace and encourage, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up
with excessive grief.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Wherefore I exhort you to assure him of
\[your\] love.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For to this end also I have written, that I
might know, by putting you to the test, if as to everything ye are
obedient.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But to whom ye forgive anything, \*I\*
also; for I also, what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything,
\[it is\] for your sakes in \[the\] person of Christ;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> that we might not have Satan get an
advantage against us, for we are not ignorant of \*his\* thoughts.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now when I came to Troas for the
\[publication of the\] glad tidings of the Christ, a door also being
opened to me in \[the\] Lord,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I had no rest in my spirit at not finding
Titus my brother; but bidding them adieu, I came away to Macedonia.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But thanks \[be\] to God, who always
leads us in triumph in the Christ, and makes manifest the odour of his
knowledge through us in every place.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For we are a sweet odour of Christ to
God, in the saved and in those that perish:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> to the one an odour from death unto
death, but to the others an odour from life unto life; and who \[is\]
sufficient for these things?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For we do not, as the many, make a trade
of the word of God; but as of sincerity, but as of God, before God, we
speak in Christ.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Do we begin again to commend ourselves? or
do we need, as some, commendatory letters to you, or \[commendatory\]
from you?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> \*Ye\* are our letter, written in our
hearts, known and read of all men,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> being manifested to be Christ's epistle
ministered by us, written, not with ink, but \[the\] Spirit of \[the\]
living God; not on stone tables, but on fleshy tables of \[the\] heart.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And such confidence have we through the
Christ towards God:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> not that we are competent of ourselves to
think anything as of ourselves, but our competency \[is\] of God;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> who has also made us competent, \[as\]
ministers of \[the\] new covenant; not of letter, but of spirit. For the
letter kills, but the Spirit quickens.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> (But if the ministry of death, in letters,
graven in stones, began with glory, so that the children of Israel could
not fix their eyes on the face of Moses, on account of the glory of his
face, \[a glory\] which is annulled;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> how shall not rather the ministry of the
Spirit subsist in glory?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For if the ministry of condemnation \[be\]
glory, much rather the ministry of righteousness abounds in glory.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For also that \[which was\] glorified is
not glorified in this respect, on account of the surpassing glory.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For if that annulled \[was introduced\]
with glory, much rather that which abides \[subsists\] in glory.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Having therefore such hope, we use much
boldness:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and not according as Moses put a veil on
his own face, so that the children of Israel should not fix their eyes
on the end of that annulled.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But their thoughts have been darkened,
for unto this day the same veil remains in reading the old covenant,
unremoved, which in Christ is annulled.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But unto this day, when Moses is read,
the veil lies upon their heart.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> But when it shall turn to \[the\] Lord,
the veil is taken away.)

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Now the Lord is the Spirit, but where the
Spirit of \[the\] Lord \[is, there is\] liberty.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But \*we\* all, looking on the glory of
the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same
image from glory to glory, even as by \[the\] Lord \[the\] Spirit.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore, having this ministry, as we have
had mercy shewn us, we faint not.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> But we have rejected the hidden things of
shame, not walking in deceit, nor falsifying the word of God, but by
manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every conscience of
men before God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> But if also our gospel is veiled, it is
veiled in those that are lost;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> in whom the god of this world has blinded
the thoughts of the unbelieving, so that the radiancy of the glad
tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is \[the\] image of God, should
not shine forth \[for them\].

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For we do not preach ourselves, but Christ
Jesus Lord, and ourselves your bondmen for Jesus' sake.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Because \[it is\] the God who spoke that
out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts for the
shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in \[the\] face of
\[Jesus\] Christ.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not
from us:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> every way afflicted, but not straitened;
seeing no apparent issue, but our way not entirely shut up;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> persecuted, but not abandoned; cast down,
but not destroyed;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> always bearing about in the body the
dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our
body;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> for we who live are always delivered unto
death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested
in our mortal flesh;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> so that death works in us, but life in
you.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And having the same spirit of faith,
according to what is written, I have believed, therefore have I spoken;
\*we\* also believe, therefore also we speak;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> knowing that he who has raised the Lord
Jesus shall raise us also with Jesus, and shall present \[us\] with you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For all things \[are\] for your sakes,
that the grace abounding through the many may cause thanksgiving to
abound to the glory of God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Wherefore we faint not; but if indeed our
outward man is consumed, yet the inward is renewed day by day.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For our momentary \[and\] light
affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of
glory;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> while we look not at the things that are
seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen
\[are\] for a time, but those that are not seen eternal.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For we know that if our earthly tabernacle
house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For indeed in this we groan, ardently
desiring to have put on our house which \[is\] from heaven;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> if indeed being also clothed we shall not
be found naked.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For indeed we who are in the tabernacle
groan, being burdened; while yet we do not wish to be unclothed, but
clothed, that \[what is\] mortal may be swallowed up by life.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now he that has wrought us for this very
thing \[is\] God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Therefore \[we are\] always confident, and
know that while present in the body we are absent from the Lord,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> (for we walk by faith, not by sight;)

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> we are confident, I say, and pleased rather
to be absent from the body and present with the Lord.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Wherefore also we are zealous, whether
present or absent, to be agreeable to him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For we must all be manifested before the
judgment-seat of the Christ, that each may receive the things \[done\]
in the body, according to those he has done, whether \[it be\] good or
evil.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord
we persuade men, but have been manifested to God, and I hope also that
we have been manifested in your consciences.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> \[For\] we do not again commend ourselves
to you, but \[we are\] giving to you occasion of boast in our behalf,
that ye may have \[such\] with those boasting in countenance, and not in
heart.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For whether we are beside ourselves, \[it
is\] to God; or are sober, \[it is\] for you.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For the love of the Christ constrains us,
having judged this: that one died for all, then all have died;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and he died for all, that they who live
should no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for them and
has been raised.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> So that \*we\* henceforth know no one
according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh,
yet now we know \[him thus\] no longer.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> So if any one \[be\] in Christ, \[there
is\] a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold all things
have become new:

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> and all things \[are\] of the God who has
reconciled us to himself by \[Jesus\] Christ, and given to us the
ministry of that reconciliation:

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> how that God was in Christ, reconciling
the world to himself, not reckoning to them their offences; and putting
in us the word of that reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> We are ambassadors therefore for Christ,
God as \[it were\] beseeching by us, we entreat for Christ, Be
reconciled to God.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Him who knew not sin he has made sin for
us, that \*we\* might become God's righteousness in him.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> But \[as\] fellow-workmen, we also beseech
that ye receive not the grace of God in vain:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> (for he says, I have listened to thee in an
accepted time, and I have helped thee in a day of salvation: behold, now
\[is the\] well-accepted time; behold, now \[the\] day of salvation:)

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> giving no manner of offence in anything,
that the ministry be not blamed;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> but in everything commending ourselves as
God's ministers, in much endurance, in afflictions, in necessities, in
straits,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> in stripes, in prisons, in riots, in
labours, in watchings, in fastings,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> in pureness, in knowledge, in
longsuffering, in kindness, in \[the\] Holy Spirit, in love unfeigned,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> in \[the\] word of truth, in \[the\] power
of God; through the arms of righteousness on the right hand and left,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> through glory and dishonour, through evil
report and good report: as deceivers, and true;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> as unknown, and well known; as dying, and
behold, we live; as disciplined, and not put to death;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> as grieved, but always rejoicing; as
poor, but enriching many; as having nothing, and possessing all things.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Our mouth is opened to you, Corinthians,
our heart is expanded.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are
straitened in your affections;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> but for an answering recompense, (I speak
as to children,) let \*your\* heart also expand itself.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Be not diversely yoked with unbelievers;
for what participation \[is there\] between righteousness and
lawlessness? or what fellowship of light with darkness?

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> and what consent of Christ with Beliar,
or what part for a believer along with an unbeliever?

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> and what agreement of God's temple with
idols? for \*ye\* are \[the\] living God's temple; according as God has
said, I will dwell among them, and walk among \[them\]; and I will be
their God, and they shall be to me a people.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Wherefore come out from the midst of
them, and be separated, saith \[the\] Lord, and touch not \[what is\]
unclean, and \*I\* will receive you;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and I will be to you for a Father, and ye
shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith \[the\] Lord Almighty.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Having therefore these promises, beloved,
let us purify ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in God's fear.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Receive us: we have injured no one, we have
ruined no one, we have made gain of no one.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> I do not speak for condemnation, for I have
already said that ye are in our hearts, to die together, and live
together.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Great \[is\] my boldness towards you, great
my exulting in respect of you; I am filled with encouragement; I
overabound in joy under all our affliction.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For indeed, when we came into Macedonia,
our flesh had no rest, but \[we were\] afflicted in every way; without
combats, within fears.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But he who encourages those that are
\[brought\] low, \[even\] God, encouraged us by the coming of Titus;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and not by his coming only, but also
through the encouragement with which he was encouraged as to you;
relating to us your ardent desire, your mourning, your zeal for me; so
that I the more rejoiced.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For if also I grieved you in the letter, I
do not regret \[it\], if even I have regretted it; for I see that that
letter, if even \[it were\] only for a time, grieved you.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Now I rejoice, not that ye have been
grieved, but that ye have been grieved to repentance; for ye have been
grieved according to God, that in nothing ye might be injured by us.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For grief according to God works
repentance to salvation, never to be regretted; but the grief of the
world works death.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For, behold, this same thing, your being
grieved according to God, how much diligence it wrought in \*you\*, but
\[what\] excusing \[of yourselves\], but \[what\] indignation, but
\[what\] fear, but \[what\] ardent desire, but \[what\] zeal, but
\[what\] vengeance: in every way ye have proved yourselves to be pure in
the matter.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> So then, if also I wrote to you, \[it
was\] not for the sake of him that injured, nor for the sake of him that
was injured, but for the sake of our diligent zeal for you being
manifested to you before God.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For this reason we have been encouraged.
And we the rather rejoiced in our encouragement more abundantly by
reason of the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you
all.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Because if I boasted to him anything
about you, I have not been put to shame; but as we have spoken to you
all things in truth, so also our boasting to Titus has been \[the\]
truth;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> and his affections are more abundantly
towards you, calling to mind the obedience of you all, how with fear and
trembling ye received him.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I rejoice that in everything I am
confident as to you.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> But we make known to you, brethren, the
grace of God bestowed in the assemblies of Macedonia;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> that in a great trial of affliction the
abundance of their joy and their deep poverty has abounded to the riches
of their \[free-hearted\] liberality.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For according to \[their\] power, I bear
witness, and beyond \[their\] power, \[they were\] willing of their own
accord,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> begging of us with much entreaty \[to give
effect to\] the grace and fellowship of the service which \[was to be
rendered\] to the saints.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And not according as we hoped, but they
gave themselves first to the Lord, and to us by God's will.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> So that we begged Titus that, according as
he had before begun, so he would also complete as to you this grace
also;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> but even as ye abound in every way, in
faith, and word, and knowledge, and all diligence, and in love from you
to us, that ye may abound in this grace also.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> I do not speak as commanding \[it\], but
through the zeal of others, and proving the genuineness of your love.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that for your sakes he, being rich, became poor, in order that
\*ye\* by \*his\* poverty might be enriched.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And I give \[my\] opinion in this, for
this is profitable for you who began before, not only to do, but also to
be willing, a year ago.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> But now also complete the doing of it; so
that as \[there was\] the readiness to be willing, so also to complete
out of what ye have.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For if the readiness be there, \[a man
is\] accepted according to what he may have, not according to what he
has not.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> For \[it is\] not in order that there may
be ease for others, and for you distress,

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> but \[on the principle\] of equality; in
the present time your abundance for their lack, that their abundance may
be for your lack, so that there should be equality.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> According as it is written, He who
\[gathered\] much had no excess, and he who \[gathered\] little was
nothing short.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> But thanks \[be\] to God, who gives the
same diligent zeal for you in the heart of Titus.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For he received indeed the entreaty, but,
being full of zeal, he went of his own accord to you;

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> but we have sent with him the brother
whose praise \[is\] in the glad tidings through all the assemblies;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> and not only \[so\], but \[is\] also
chosen by the assemblies as our fellow-traveller with this grace,
ministered by us to the glory of the Lord himself, and \[a witness of\]
our readiness;

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> avoiding this, that any one should blame
us in this abundance \[which is\] administered by us;

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> for we provide for things honest, not
only before \[the\] Lord, but also before men.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And we have sent with them our brother
whom we have often proved to be of diligent zeal in many things, and now
more diligently zealous through the great confidence \[he has\] as to
you.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> Whether as regards Titus, \[he is\] my
companion and fellow-labourer in your behalf; or our brethren, \[they
are\] deputed messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Shew therefore to them, before the
assemblies, the proof of your love, and of our boasting about you.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> For concerning the ministration which
\[is\] for the saints, it is superfluous my writing to you.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For I know your readiness, which I boast of
as respects you to Macedonians, that Achaia is prepared since a year
ago, and the zeal \[reported\] of you has stimulated the mass \[of the
brethren\].

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> But I have sent the brethren, in order that
our boasting about you may not be made void in this respect, in order
that, as I have said, ye may be prepared;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> lest haply, if Macedonians come with me and
find you unprepared, \*we\*, that we say not \*ye\*, may be put to shame
in this confidence.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> I thought it necessary therefore to beg the
brethren that they would come to you, and complete beforehand your
fore-announced blessing, that this may be ready thus as blessing, and
not as got out of you.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But this \[is true\], he that sows
sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he that sows in \[the spirit
of\] blessing shall reap also in blessing:

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> each according as he is purposed in his
heart; not grievingly, or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> But God is able to make every gracious gift
abound towards you, that, having in every way always all-sufficiency, ye
may abound to every good work:

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> according as it is written, He has
scattered abroad, he has given to the poor, his righteousness remains
for ever.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Now he that supplies seed to the sower
and bread for eating shall supply and make abundant your sowing, and
increase the fruits of your righteousness:

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> enriched in every way unto all
free-hearted liberality, which works through us thanksgiving to God.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Because the ministration of this service
is not only filling up the measure of what is lacking to the saints, but
also abounding by many thanksgivings to God;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> they glorifying God through the proof of
this ministration, by reason of your subjection, by profession, to the
glad tidings of the Christ, and your free-hearted liberality in
communicating towards them and towards all;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> and in their supplication for you, full
of ardent desire for you, on account of the exceeding grace of God
\[which is\] upon you.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Thanks \[be\] to God for his unspeakable
free gift.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> But I myself, Paul, entreat you by the
meekness and gentleness of the Christ, who, as to appearance, \[when
present\] \[am\] mean among you, but absent am bold towards you;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> but I beseech that present I may not be
bold with the confidence with which I think to be daring towards some
who think of us as walking according to flesh.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For walking in flesh, we do not war
according to flesh.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For the arms of our warfare \[are\] not
fleshly, but powerful according to God to \[the\] overthrow of
strongholds;

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> overthrowing reasonings and every high
thing that lifts itself up against the knowledge of God, and leading
captive every thought into the obedience of the Christ;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and having in readiness to avenge all
disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Do ye look at what concerns appearance?
If any one has confidence in himself that he is of Christ, let him think
this again in himself, that even as he \[is\] of Christ, so also \[are\]
we.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> For and if I should boast even somewhat
more abundantly of our authority, which the Lord has given \[to us\] for
building up and not for your overthrowing, I shall not be put to shame;

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> that I may not seem as if I was
frightening you by letters:

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> because his letters, he says, \[are\]
weighty and strong, but his presence in the body weak, and his speech
naught.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Let such a one think this, that such as
we are in word by letters \[when\] absent, such also present in deed.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For we dare not class ourselves or
compare ourselves with some who commend themselves; but these, measuring
themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves, are
not intelligent.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Now \*we\* will not boast out of
measure, but according to the measure of the rule which the God of
measure has apportioned to us, to reach to you also.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> For we do not, as not reaching to you,
overstretch ourselves, (for we have come to you also in the glad tidings
of the Christ;)

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> not boasting out of measure in other
people's labours, but having hope, your faith increasing, to be enlarged
amongst you, according to our rule, yet more abundantly

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> to announce the glad tidings to that
\[which is\] beyond you, not to be boasting in another's rule of things
made ready to hand.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But he that boasts, let him boast in
the Lord.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For not \*he\* that commends himself is
approved, but whom the Lord commends.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Would that ye would bear with me \[in\] a
little folly; but indeed bear with me.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> For I am jealous as to you with a
jealousy \[which is\] of God; for I have espoused you unto one man, to
present \[you\] a chaste virgin to Christ.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But I fear lest by any means, as the
serpent deceived Eve by his craft, \[so\] your thoughts should be
corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For if indeed he that comes preaches
another Jesus, whom we have not preached, or ye get a different Spirit,
which ye have not got, or a different glad tidings, which ye have not
received, ye might well bear with \[it\].

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> For I reckon that in nothing I am behind
those who are in surpassing degree apostles.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But if \[I am\] a simple person in
speech, yet not in knowledge, but in everything making \[the truth\]
manifest in all things to you.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Have I committed sin, abasing myself in
order that \*ye\* might be exalted, because I gratuitously announced to
you the glad tidings of God?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> I spoiled other assemblies, receiving
hire for ministry towards you.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And being present with you and lacking, I
did not lazily burden any one, (for the brethren who came from Macedonia
supplied what I lacked,) and in everything I kept myself from being a
burden to you, and will keep myself.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> \[The\] truth of Christ is in me that
this boasting shall not be stopped as to me in the regions of Achaia.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Why? because I do not love you? God
knows.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> But what I do, I will also do, that I
may cut off the opportunity of those wishing \[for\] an opportunity,
that wherein they boast they may be found even as we.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For such \[are\] false apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And \[it is\] not wonderful, for Satan
himself transforms himself into an angel of light.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> It is no great thing therefore if his
ministers also transform themselves as ministers of righteousness; whose
end shall be according to their works.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Again I say, Let not any one think me
to be a fool; but if otherwise, receive me then even as a fool, that
\*I\* also may boast myself some little.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> What I speak I do not speak according
to \[the\] Lord, but as in folly, in this confidence of boasting.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Since many boast according to flesh,
\*I\* also will boast.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> For ye bear fools readily, being wise.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> For ye bear if any one bring you into
bondage, if any one devour \[you\], if any one get \[your money\], if
any one exalt himself, if any one beat you on the face.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> I speak as to dishonour, as though
\*we\* had been weak; but wherein any one is daring, (I speak in folly,)
\*I\* also am daring.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Are they Hebrews? \*I\* also. Are they
Israelites? \*I\* also. Are they seed of Abraham? \*I\* also.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak
as being beside myself) \*I\* above measure \[so\]; in labours
exceedingly abundant, in stripes to excess, in prisons exceedingly
abundant, in deaths oft.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> From the Jews five times have I
received forty \[stripes\], save one.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Thrice have I been scourged, once I
have been stoned, three times I have suffered shipwreck, a night and day
I passed in the deep:

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> in journeyings often, in perils of
rivers, in perils of robbers, in perils from \[my own\] race, in perils
from \[the\] nations, in perils in \[the\] city, in perils in \[the\]
desert, in perils on \[the\] sea, in perils among false brethren;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> in labour and toil, in watchings often,
in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Besides those things that are without,
the crowd \[of cares\] pressing on me daily, the burden of all the
assemblies.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is
stumbled, and I burn not?

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> If it is needful to boast, I will boast
in the things which concern my infirmity.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The God and Father of the Lord Jesus
knows -- he who is blessed for ever -- that I do not lie.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> In Damascus the ethnarch of Aretas the
king kept the city of the Damascenes shut up, wishing to take me;

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> and through a window in a basket I was
let down by the wall, and escaped his hands.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Well, it is not of profit to me to boast,
for I will come to visions and revelations of \[the\] Lord.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> I know a man in Christ, fourteen years
ago, (whether in \[the\] body I know not, or out of the body I know not,
God knows;) such \[a one\] caught up to \[the\] third heaven.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And I know such a man, (whether in
\[the\] body or out of the body I know not, God knows;)

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> that he was caught up into paradise, and
heard unspeakable things said which it is not allowed to man to utter.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Of such \[a one\] I will boast, but of
myself I will not boast, unless in my weaknesses.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For if I shall desire to boast, I shall
not be a fool; for I will say \[the\] truth; but I forbear, lest any one
should think as to me above what he sees me \[to be\], or whatever he
may hear of me.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And that I might not be exalted by the
exceeding greatness of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn
for the flesh, a messenger of Satan that he might buffet me, that I
might not be exalted.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For this I thrice besought the Lord that
it might depart from me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he said to me, My grace suffices
thee; for \[my\] power is perfected in weakness. Most gladly therefore
will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may
dwell upon me.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Wherefore I take pleasure in
weaknesses, in insults, in necessities, in persecutions, in straits, for
Christ: for when I am weak, then I am powerful.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> I have become a fool; \*ye\* have
compelled me; for \*I\* ought to have been commended by you; for I have
been nothing behind those who were in surpassing degree apostles, if
also I am nothing.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The signs indeed of the apostle were
wrought among you in all endurance, signs, and wonders, and works of
power.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> For in what is it that ye have been
inferior to the other assemblies, unless that I myself have not been in
laziness a charge upon you? Forgive me this injury.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Behold, this third time I am ready to
come to you, and I will not be in laziness a charge; for I do not seek
yours, but you; for the children ought not to lay up for the parents,
but the parents for the children.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Now \*I\* shall most gladly spend and
be utterly spent for your souls, if even in abundantly loving you I
should be less loved.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But be it so. \*I\* did not burden you,
but being crafty I took you by guile.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Did I make gain of you by any of those
whom I have sent to you?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> I begged Titus, and sent the brother
with \[him\]: did Titus at all make gain of you? have we not walked in
the same spirit? \[have we\] not in the same steps?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Ye have long been supposing that we
excuse ourselves to you: we speak before God in Christ; and all things,
beloved, for your building up.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> For I fear lest perhaps coming I find
you not such as I wish, and that \*I\* be found by you such as ye do not
wish: lest \[there might be\] strifes, jealousies, angers, contentions,
evil speakings, whisperings, puffings up, disturbances;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> lest my God should humble me as to you
when I come again, and that I shall grieve over many of those who have
sinned before, and have not repented as to the uncleanness and
fornication and licentiousness which they have practised.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> This third time I am coming to you. In
the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be established.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> I have declared beforehand, and I say
beforehand as present the second time, and now absent, to those that
have sinned before, and to all the rest, that if I come again I will not
spare.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking
in me, (who is not weak towards you, but is powerful among you,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> for if indeed he has been crucified in
weakness, yet he lives by God's power; for indeed \*we\* are weak in
him, but we shall live with him by God's power towards you,)

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> examine your own selves if ye be in the
faith; prove your own selves: do ye not recognise yourselves, that Jesus
Christ is in you, unless indeed ye be reprobates?

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Now I hope that ye will know that \*we\*
are not reprobates.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> But we pray to God that ye may do nothing
evil; not that \*we\* may appear approved, but that \*ye\* may do what
is right, and \*we\* be as reprobates.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> For we can do nothing against the truth,
but for the truth.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For we rejoice when \*we\* may be weak
and \*ye\* may be powerful. But this also we pray for, your perfecting.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> On this account I write these things
being absent, that being present I may not use severity according to the
authority which the Lord has given me for building up, and not for
overthrowing.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For the rest, brethren, rejoice; be
perfected; be encouraged; be of one mind; be at peace; and the God of
love and peace shall be with you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Salute one another with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> All the saints salute you.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, \[be\] with you
all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians](gal)
