[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lam)  [Next](dan) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Ezekiel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year,
in the fourth \[month\], on the fifth of the month, as I was among the
captives by the river Chebar, the heavens were opened, and I saw visions
of God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> On the fifth of the month, (it was the
fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity,)

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> the word of Jehovah came expressly unto
Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the
river Chebar; and the hand of Jehovah was there upon him.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And I looked, and behold, a stormy wind
came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a
brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the look of
glowing brass, out of the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Also out of the midst thereof, the likeness
of four living creatures. And this was their appearance: they had the
likeness of a man.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And every one had four faces, and every one
of them had four wings.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And their feet were straight feet; and the
sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled
as the look of burnished brass.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And they had the hands of a man under their
wings on their four sides; and they four had their faces and their
wings:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> their wings were joined one to another;
they turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And the likeness of their faces was the
face of a man; and they four had the face of a lion on the right side;
and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four had also
the face of an eagle.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And their faces and their wings were
parted above; two \[wings\] of every one were joined one to another, and
two covered their bodies.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And they went every one straight forward:
whither the Spirit was to go, they went; they turned not when they went.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And as for the likeness of the living
creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, as the
appearance of torches: it went up and down among the living creatures;
and the fire was bright; and out of the fire went forth lightning.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the living creatures ran and returned
as the appearance of a flash of lightning.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And I looked at the living creatures, and
behold, one wheel upon the earth beside the living creatures, toward
their four faces.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The appearance of the wheels and their
work was as the look of a chrysolite; and they four had one likeness;
and their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle
of a wheel.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> When they went, they went upon their four
sides; they turned not when they went.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> As for their rims, they were high and
dreadful; and they four had their rims full of eyes round about.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And when the living creatures went, the
wheels went beside them; and when the living creatures were lifted up
from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Whithersoever the Spirit was to go, they
went, thither would \[their\] spirit go; and the wheels were lifted up
along with them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the
wheels.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> When those went, they went; and when
those stood, they stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth,
the wheels were lifted up along with them: for the spirit of the living
creature was in the wheels.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And there was the likeness of an expanse
over the heads of the living creature, as the look of the terrible
crystal, stretched forth over their heads above.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And under the expanse were their wings
straight, the one toward the other: every one had two which covered on
this side, and every one had two which covered on that side their
bodies.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And when they went, I heard the noise of
their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the
Almighty, a tumultuous noise, as the noise of a host: when they stood,
they let down their wings;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> and there was a voice from above the
expanse that was over their heads. When they stood, they let down their
wings.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And above the expanse that was over their
heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire
stone; and upon the likeness of the throne was a likeness as the
appearance of a man above upon it.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And I saw as the look of glowing brass,
as the appearance of fire, within it round about; from the appearance of
his loins and upward, and from the appearance of his loins and downward,
I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness round
about.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> As the appearance of the bow that is in
the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness
round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of
Jehovah. And when I saw, I fell on my face, and I heard a voice of one
that spoke.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon
thy feet, and I will speak with thee.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the Spirit entered into me when he
spoke unto me, and set me upon my feet; and I heard him that spoke unto
me.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, I send
thee to the children of Israel, to nations that are rebellious, which
have rebelled against me: they and their fathers have transgressed
against me unto this very day;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and these children are impudent and
hard-hearted: I am sending thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And they, whether they will hear or whether
they will forbear -- for they are a rebellious house -- yet shall they
know that there hath been a prophet among them.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And thou, son of man, be not afraid of
them, and be not afraid of their words; for briars and thorns are with
thee, and thou dwellest among scorpions: be not afraid of their words,
and be not dismayed at their faces; for they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And thou shalt speak my words unto them,
whether they will hear or whether they will forbear; for they are
rebellious.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And thou, son of man, hear what I say unto
thee; be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house: open thy mouth,
and eat that I give thee.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And I looked, and behold, a hand was put
forth toward me; and behold, a roll of a book therein.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And he spread it out before me; and it
was written within and without; and there were written in it
lamentations, and mourning, and woe.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, eat what
thou findest; eat this roll, and go, speak unto the house of Israel.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to
eat that roll.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy
belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll which I give thee. And
I ate, and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get
thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For thou art not sent to a people of
strange language, and of difficult speech, \[but\] to the house of
Israel;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> not to many peoples of strange language and
of difficult speech, whose words thou canst not understand: had I sent
thee to them, would they not hearken unto thee?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the house of Israel will not hearken
unto thee, for none of them will hearken unto me. For all the house of
Israel are hard of forehead and stiff of heart.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Behold, I have made thy face hard against
their faces, and thy forehead hard against their foreheads.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> As an adamant harder than flint have I made
thy forehead. Fear them not, neither be dismayed at them, for they are a
rebellious house.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, all my
words which I shall speak unto thee, receive in thy heart, and hear with
thine ears;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> and go, get thee to them of the
captivity, unto the children of thy people, and speak unto them, and
tell them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, -- whether they will hear or
whether they will forbear.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And the Spirit lifted me up, and I heard
behind me the sound of a great rushing, \[saying,\] Blessed be the glory
of Jehovah from his place!

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> -- and the sound of the wings of the
living creatures that touched one another, and the sound of the wheels
beside them, and the sound of a great rushing.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And the Spirit lifted me up, and took me
away; and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit, and the hand
of Jehovah was strong upon me.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And I came to them of the captivity at
Tel-abib, that dwelt by the river Chebar, and I sat where they sat; and
I sat there astonied among them seven days.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And it came to pass at the end of seven
days, that the word of Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Son of man, I have appointed thee a
watchman unto the house of Israel, and thou shalt hear the word from my
mouth, and give them warning from me.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt
certainly die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the
wicked from his wicked way, that he may live: the same wicked \[man\]
shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy hand.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But if thou warn the wicked, and he turn
not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his
iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And when a righteous \[man\] doth turn
from his righteousness, and do what is wrong, and I lay a
stumbling-block before him, he shall die; because thou hast not given
him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his righteous acts which he
hath done shall not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thy
hand.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And if thou warn the righteous \[man\],
that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall certainly
live, for he hath taken warning; and thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the hand of Jehovah was there upon
me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the valley, and there I
will talk with thee.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And I arose, and went forth into the
valley, and behold, the glory of Jehovah stood there, like the glory
which I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell on my face.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And the Spirit entered into me, and set
me upon my feet; and he spoke with me, and said unto me, Go, shut
thyself within thy house.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And thou, son of man, behold, they shall
put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee therewith, and thou shalt not
go out among them.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And I will make thy tongue cleave to the
roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a
reprover; for they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And when I speak with thee, I will open
thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: He
that heareth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for
they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And thou, son of man, take thee a brick,
and lay it before thee, and portray upon it a city, -- Jerusalem:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and lay siege against it, and build forts
against it, and cast a mound against it, and set camps against it, and
place battering-rams against it round about.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And take thou unto thee an iron plate, and
put it \[for\] a wall of iron between thee and the city; and set thy
face against it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege
against it: this shall be a sign to the house of Israel.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And thou, lie upon thy left side, and lay
the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it: the number of the days that
thou liest upon it, thou shalt bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And I have appointed thee the years of
their iniquity, according to the number of the days, three hundred and
ninety days; and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And when thou hast accomplished them, thou
shalt lie again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity of
the house of Judah forty days: I have appointed thee each day for a
year.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And thou shalt set thy face toward the
siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm shall be uncovered, and thou shalt
prophesy against it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And behold, I lay bands upon thee, and thou
shalt not turn thyself from one side to the other, till thou hast ended
the days of thy siege.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And thou, take unto thee wheat, and barley,
and beans, and lentils, and millet, and spelt, and put them in one
vessel, and make thee bread thereof, \[according to\] the number of the
days that thou liest upon thy side: three hundred and ninety days shalt
thou eat thereof.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And thy meat which thou shalt eat shall
be by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And thou shalt drink water by measure,
the sixth part of a hin: from time to time shalt thou drink.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And thou shalt eat it \[as\] barley-cake,
and thou shalt bake it in their sight with dung that cometh out of man.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And Jehovah said, So shall the children
of Israel eat their bread unclean among the nations whither I will drive
them.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Then said I, Ah, Lord Jehovah! behold, my
soul hath not been defiled, and from my youth up even until now have I
not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or of that which is torn;
neither came there abominable flesh into my mouth.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And he said unto me, See, I have given
thee cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread
therewith.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, behold,
I break the staff of bread in Jerusalem; and they shall eat bread by
weight, and with anxiety; and they shall drink water by measure, and
with astonishment:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> because bread and water shall fail them,
and they shall be astonied one with another, and waste away in their
iniquity.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp
knife; a barber's razor shalt thou take; and cause it to pass upon thy
head and upon thy beard: and thou shalt take balances to weigh, and
divide the \[hair\].

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> A third part shalt thou burn in the fire in
the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled; and
thou shalt take a third part, \[and\] smite about it with a knife; and a
third part thou shalt scatter to the wind, and I will draw out a sword
after them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And thou shalt take thereof a few in
number, and bind them in thy skirts;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and thou shalt take of these again, and
cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire: from it
shall a fire come forth against all the house of Israel.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: This is
Jerusalem: I have set her in the midst of the nations, and the countries
are round about her.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And she hath rebelled against my judgments
in wickedness more than the nations, and against my statutes more than
the countries that are round about her: for mine ordinances have they
refused; and my statutes, they have not walked in them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because ye have been turbulent more than the nations that are round
about you, \[and\] have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept
mine ordinances, nor \[even\] have done according to the ordinances of
the nations that are round about you;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I, even I, am against thee, and will execute judgments in the
midst of thee in the sight of the nations;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> and I will do in thee that which I have not
done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of all
thine abominations.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons
in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will
execute judgments in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter
to all the winds.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Wherefore, \[as\] I live, saith the Lord
Jehovah, verily because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy
detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I
also withdraw mine eye, and it shall not spare, nor will I have any
pity.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> A third part of thee shall die by the
pestilence, and shall be consumed by the famine in the midst of thee;
and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee; and I will
scatter a third part to all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after
them.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And mine anger shall be accomplished, and
I will satisfy my fury upon them, and I will comfort myself; and they
shall know that I Jehovah have spoken in my jealousy, when I have
accomplished my fury upon them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And I will make thee a waste and a
reproach among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight of
all that pass by.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And it shall be a reproach, and a taunt,
an instruction, and an astonishment unto the nations that are round
about thee, when I shall execute judgments upon thee in anger, and in
fury, and in furious rebukes: I, Jehovah, have spoken.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> When I send upon them the evil arrows of
famine, that are for \[their\] destruction, which I send to destroy you,
then will I increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of
bread.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And I will send upon you famine and evil
beasts, which shall bereave thee of children; and pestilence and blood
shall pass through thee; and I will bring the sword upon thee: I,
Jehovah, have spoken.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Son of man, set thy face toward the
mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> and say, Mountains of Israel, hear the word
of the Lord Jehovah: thus saith the Lord Jehovah to the mountains and to
the hills, to the water-courses and to the valleys: Behold, I, \[even\]
I, do bring a sword upon you, and will destroy your high places.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And your altars shall be desolate, and your
sun-images shall be broken; and I will cast down your slain \[men\]
before your idols;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and I will lay the dead bodies of the
children of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones
round about your altars.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> In all your dwelling-places the cities
shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your
altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken
and cease, and your sun-images may be cut down, and your works may be
abolished.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the slain shall fall in the midst of
you, and ye shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Yet will I leave a remnant, in that ye
shall have some escaped from the sword among the nations, when ye shall
be scattered through the countries.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And they that escape of you shall remember
me among the nations whither they have been carried captives, when I
shall have broken their whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and
their eyes, which go a whoring after their idols; and they shall loathe
themselves for the evils which they have committed, in all their
abominations.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And they shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah: I have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Smite with
thy hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for all the
abominations of the iniquities of the house of Israel! for they shall
fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> He that is far off shall die of the
pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that is
left, and is besieged, shall die by the famine: and I will accomplish my
fury upon them.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And ye shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah,
when their slain shall be among their idols, round about their altars,
upon every high hill, on all the tops of the mountains, and under every
green tree, and under every thick terebinth, the places where they
offered sweet savour to all their idols.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And I will stretch out my hand upon them,
and make the land desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness of
Diblath, in all their dwellings; and they shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And thou, son of man, thus saith the Lord
Jehovah unto the land of Israel: An end, the end is come upon the four
corners of the land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Now is the end upon thee; and I will send
mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and
will bring upon thee all thine abominations.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither
will I have pity; but I will bring thy ways upon thee, and thine
abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I
\[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: An evil, an
only evil! behold, it is come.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> The end is come, the end is come; it
awaketh against thee: behold, it cometh.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> The doom is come unto thee, inhabitant of
the land; the time is come, the day is near, -- tumult, and not the
joyous cry from the mountains.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Now will I soon pour out my fury upon thee,
and accomplish mine anger against thee; and I will judge thee according
to thy ways, and will bring upon thee all thine abominations.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And mine eye shall not spare, neither will
I have pity: I will render unto thee according to thy ways, and thine
abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that it is
I, Jehovah, that smite.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Behold the day, behold, it is come: the
doom is gone forth; the rod hath blossomed, pride is full blown.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Violence is risen up into a rod of
wickedness: nothing of them \[shall remain\], nor of their multitude,
nor of their wealth, nor of the magnificence in the midst of them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The time is come, the day draweth near:
let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for fierce anger is
upon all the multitude thereof.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For the seller shall not return to that
which is sold, even though he were yet alive amongst the living: for the
vision is touching the whole multitude thereof; it shall not be revoked;
and none shall through his iniquity assure his life.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> They have blown the trumpet and made all
ready, but none goeth to the battle; for my fierce anger is upon all the
multitude thereof.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The sword is without, and the pestilence
and the famine within: he that is in the field shall die by the sword;
and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And they that escape of them shall
escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of
them moaning, every one for his iniquity.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> All hands shall be feeble, and all knees
shall melt into water.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And they shall gird on sackcloth, and
horror shall cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness
upon all their heads.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> They shall cast their silver in the
streets, and their gold shall be as an impurity: their silver and their
gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of Jehovah's wrath;
they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their belly; for it
hath been the stumbling-block of their iniquity.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And he set in majesty his beautiful
ornament; but they made therein the images of their abominations \[and\]
of their detestable things: therefore have I made it an impurity unto
them.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And I will give it into the hands of
strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and
they shall profane it.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And I will turn my face from them; and
they shall profane my secret \[place\]; and the violent shall enter into
it, and profane it.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Make the chain; for the land is full of
bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Therefore will I bring the worst of the
nations, and they shall possess their houses; and I will make the pride
of the strong to cease; and their sanctuaries shall be profaned.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Destruction cometh; and they shall seek
peace, but there shall be none.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Mischief shall come upon mischief, and
rumour shall be upon rumour; and they shall seek a vision from a
prophet; but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the
elders.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> The king shall mourn, and the prince
shall be clothed with dismay, and the hands of the people of the land
shall tremble: I will do unto them according to their way, and with
their judgments will I judge them; and they shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And it came to pass in the sixth year, in
the sixth \[month\], on the fifth of the month, that \[as\] I sat in my
house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, the hand of the Lord
Jehovah fell there upon me.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And I looked, and behold, a likeness as the
appearance of fire; from the appearance of his loins and downward, fire;
and from his loins and upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the
look of glowing brass.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he stretched forth the form of a hand,
and took me by a lock of my head; and the Spirit lifted me up between
the earth and the heavens, and brought me in the visions of God to
Jerusalem, to the entry of the inner gate that looketh toward the north,
where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to
jealousy.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And behold, the glory of the God of Israel
was there, according to the appearance that I saw in the valley.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, lift up
now thine eyes toward the north. And I lifted up mine eyes toward the
north, and behold, northward of the gate of the altar, this image of
jealousy in the entry.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, seest thou
what they do? the great abominations that the house of Israel commit
here, to cause \[me\] to go far off from my sanctuary? And yet again
thou shalt see great abominations.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And he brought me to the entry of the
court, and I looked, and behold, a hole in the wall.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, dig now
through the wall; and I digged through the wall, and behold, a door.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the
wicked abominations that they do here.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And I went in and looked, and behold,
every form of creeping thing and abominable beast, and all the idols of
the house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And there stood before them seventy men
of the elders of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood
Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand; and
a thick cloud of incense went up.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And he said unto me, Hast thou seen, son
of man, what the elders of the house of Israel do in the dark, every one
in his chambers of imagery? for they say, Jehovah seeth us not; Jehovah
hath forsaken the land.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And he said unto me, Yet again thou shalt
see great abominations which they do.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he brought me to the entry of the
gate of Jehovah's house that was toward the north; and behold, there sat
women weeping for Tammuz.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he said unto me, Seest thou, son of
man? Thou shalt yet again see greater abominations than these.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And he brought me into the inner court of
Jehovah's house, and behold, at the entry of the temple of Jehovah,
between the porch and the altar, were about five and twenty men, with
their backs toward the temple of Jehovah and their faces toward the
east; and they worshipped the sun toward the east.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And he said unto me, Seest thou, son of
man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah to commit the
abominations which they commit here, that they yet fill the land with
violence, and keep provoking me afresh to anger? And behold, they put
the branch to their nose.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And I also will deal in fury: mine eye
shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in mine
ears with a loud voice, I will not hear them.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And he cried in mine ears with a loud
voice, saying, Draw near, ye that have charge of the city, and every man
\[with\] his destroying weapon in his hand.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And behold, six men came from the way of
the upper gate, which is turned toward the north, and every man \[with\]
his slaughter weapon in his hand; and in the midst of them, one man
clothed with linen, with a writer's ink-horn by his side; and they went
in, and stood beside the brazen altar.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And the glory of the God of Israel was gone
up from the cherub, whereupon it was, to the threshold of the house; and
he called to the man clothed with linen, who had the writer's ink-horn
by his side;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> and Jehovah said unto him, Go through the
midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon
the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations
that are done in the midst thereof.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And to the others he said in my hearing, Go
after him through the city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither
have pity.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Slay utterly the old man, the young man,
and the maiden, and little children, and women; but come not near any
man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at
the elders who were before the house.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he said unto them, Defile the house,
and fill the courts with the slain: go forth. And they went forth, and
smote in the city.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And it came to pass, while they were
smiting, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said,
Ah, Lord Jehovah! wilt thou destroy all the remnant of Israel in thy
pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And he said unto me, The iniquity of the
house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of
blood, and the city full of perverseness; for they say, Jehovah hath
forsaken the earth, and Jehovah seeth not.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And as for me also, mine eye shall not
spare, neither will I have pity: I will recompense their way upon their
head.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And behold, the man clothed with linen,
who had the ink-horn by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have
done as thou hast commanded me.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And I looked, and behold, in the expanse
that was over the head of the cherubim there appeared above them as it
were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And he spoke unto the man clothed with
linen, and said, Come in between the wheels, under the cherub, and fill
the hollow of thy hands with coals of fire from between the cherubim,
and scatter them over the city. And he went in in my sight.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And the cherubim stood on the right side
of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner
court.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And the glory of Jehovah mounted up from
the cherub, \[and came\] over the threshold of the house; and the house
was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of
Jehovah's glory.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And the sound of the wings of the
cherubim was heard to the outer court, as the voice of the Almighty ùGod
when he speaketh.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And it came to pass when he had commanded
the man clothed with linen, saying, Take fire from between the wheels,
from between the cherubim, then he went in, and stood beside the wheel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And the cherub stretched forth his hand
from between the cherubim unto the fire that was between the cherubim,
and took and put it into the hands of him \[that was\] clothed with
linen; who took \[it\], and went out.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And there appeared in the cherubim the
form of a man's hand under their wings.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And I looked, and behold, four wheels
beside the cherubim, one wheel beside one cherub, and another wheel
beside another cherub; and the appearance of the wheels was as the look
of a chrysolite stone.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And as for their appearance, they four
had one likeness, as if a wheel were in the midst of a wheel.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> When they went, they went upon their
four sides; they turned not as they went, but to the place whither the
head looked they followed it: they turned not as they went.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And their whole body, and their backs,
and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels were full of eyes round
about, in them four \[and\] their wheels.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> As for the wheels, they were called in
my hearing, Galgal.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And every one had four faces: the first
face was the face of a cherub, and the second face the face of a man,
and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the cherubim mounted up. This was
the living creature that I saw by the river Chebar.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And when the cherubim went, the wheels
went beside them; and when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount
up from the earth, the same wheels also turned not from beside them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> When they stood, these stood; and when
they mounted up, these mounted up with them: for the spirit of the
living creature was in them.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the glory of Jehovah departed from
over the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubim.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the cherubim lifted up their wings,
and mounted up from the earth in my sight, when they went out; and the
wheels were beside them; and they stood at the door of the east gate of
Jehovah's house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> This is the living creature that I saw
under the God of Israel by the river Chebar; and I knew that they were
cherubim.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Each one had four faces, and every one
four wings; and the likeness of the hands of a man was under their
wings.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And as for the likeness of their faces,
they were the faces which I had seen by the river Chebar -- their
appearance and themselves: they went every one straight before them.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the Spirit lifted me up, and brought
me unto the east gate of Jehovah's house, which looketh eastward; and
behold, at the door of the gate were five and twenty men; and I saw in
the midst of them Jaazaniah the son of Azzur, and Pelatiah the son of
Benaiah, princes of the people.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, these
are the men that devise iniquity, and give wicked counsel in this city:

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> who say, It is not the time to build
houses: this is the cauldron, and we are the flesh.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Therefore prophesy against them,
prophesy, son of man.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the Spirit of Jehovah fell on me, and
said unto me, Speak, Thus saith Jehovah: Thus have ye said, O house of
Israel; and the things that come into your mind, I know them.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Ye have multiplied your slain in this
city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and
it is the cauldron; but you will I bring forth out of the midst of it.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Ye have feared the sword, and I will
bring a sword upon you, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And I will bring you out of the midst of
it, and give you into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments
among you.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Ye shall fall by the sword; I will
judge you in the borders of Israel; and ye shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> This shall not be your cauldron,
neither shall ye be the flesh in the midst of it: I will judge you in
the borders of Israel;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and ye shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah, in whose statutes ye have not walked, neither have done mine
ordinances, but have done after the ordinances of the nations that are
round about you.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And it came to pass, when I prophesied,
that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. And I fell down on my face, and
cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah, Lord Jehovah! wilt thou make a
full end of the remnant of Israel?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Son of man, \[it is\] thy brethren, thy
brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel, the whole
of it, unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem say, Get you far from
Jehovah: unto us is this land given for a possession.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Although I have removed them far off among the nations, and
although I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to
them as a little sanctuary in the countries whither they are come.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: I will even gather you from the peoples, and assemble you out
of the countries where ye are scattered, and I will give you the land of
Israel.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And they shall come thither, and they
shall take away from thence all its detestable things and all its
abominations.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And I will give them one heart, and I
will put a new spirit within you; and I will take away the stony heart
out of their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> that they may walk in my statutes, and
keep mine ordinances, and do them; and they shall be my people, and I
will be their God.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> But as for them whose heart walketh
well-pleased with their detestable things and their abominations, I will
recompense their way upon their heads, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And the cherubim lifted up their wings,
and the wheels were beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel was
over them above.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And the glory of Jehovah went up from
the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east
side of the city.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And the Spirit lifted me up, and
brought me in the vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of
the captivity; and the vision that I had seen went up from me.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And I spoke unto them of the captivity
all the things that Jehovah had shewn me.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of
a rebellious house, which have eyes to see, and see not, which have ears
to hear, and hear not; for they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And thou, son of man, prepare thee a
captive's baggage, and go captive by day in their sight; and thou shalt
go captive from thy place to another place in their sight. It may be
they will consider, though they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And bring forth thy baggage by day in
their sight, as a captive's baggage, and thou thyself, go forth at even
in their sight as they that go forth into captivity.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Dig thou through the wall in their sight,
and carry out thereby.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> In their sight shalt thou bear \[it\]
upon \[thy\] shoulder, and carry it forth in the dark; thou shalt cover
thy face, and thou shalt not see the ground: for I have appointed thee
for a sign unto the house of Israel.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And I did so as I was commanded: I
brought forth my baggage by day, as a captive's baggage, and in the even
I digged through the wall with my hand; I brought it forth in the dark,
\[and\] bore it upon \[my\] shoulder, in their sight.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And in the morning the word of Jehovah
came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Son of man, hath not the house of Israel,
the rebellious house, said unto thee, What doest thou?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: This burden \[concerneth\] the prince in Jerusalem, and all the
house of Israel that are among them.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Say, I am your sign: as I have done, so
shall it be done unto them: they shall go into exile, into captivity.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And the prince that is among them shall
bear upon \[his\] shoulder in the dark, and shall go forth; they shall
dig through the wall to carry out thereby; he shall cover his face, that
he see not the land with \[his\] eyes.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And I will spread my net upon him, and
he shall be taken in my snare; and I will bring him to Babylon to the
land of the Chaldeans; but he shall not see it, and there shall he die.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And I will scatter toward every wind
all that are about him to help him, and all his troops; and I will draw
out the sword after them.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And they shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah when I shall scatter them among the nations and disperse them
through the countries.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But I will leave a few men of them from
the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may
declare all their abominations among the nations whither they shall
come; and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking,
and drink thy water with trembling and with anxiety;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> and say unto the people of the land,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah concerning the inhabitants of Jerusalem, in
the land of Israel: They shall eat their bread with anxiety, and drink
their water with astonishment, because her land shall be left desolate
of all that is in it, for the violence of all them that dwell therein.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And the cities that are inhabited shall
be laid waste, and the land shall be a desolation; and ye shall know
that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Son of man, what is that proverb which
ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days shall be prolonged, and
every vision faileth?

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Tell them therefore, Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more
use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand,
and the accomplishment of every vision.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> For there shall be no more any vain
vision nor flattering divination in the midst of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> For I \[am\] Jehovah; I will speak, and
the word that I shall speak shall be performed, it shall be no more
deferred. For in your days, O rebellious house, will I speak the word
and will perform it, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Son of man, behold, they of the house
of Israel say, The vision that he seeth is for many days, and he
prophesieth of times that are far off.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: There shall none of my words be deferred any more, but the
word that I have spoken shall be done, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying:

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Son of man, prophesy against the prophets
of Israel that prophesy, and say unto them that prophesy out of their
own heart, Hear ye the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Woe unto the
foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> O Israel, thy prophets have been like
foxes in desert places.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Ye have not gone up into the breaches,
nor made up the fence for the house of Israel, to stand in the battle in
the day of Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> They have seen vanity and lying
divination, that say, Jehovah saith! and Jehovah hath not sent them; and
they make \[them\] to hope that the word will be fulfilled.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Have ye not seen a vain vision, and
spoken a lying divination, when ye say, Jehovah saith; and I have not
spoken?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because ye speak vanity, and have seen lies, therefore behold, I am
against you, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And my hand shall be against the prophets
that see vanity and that divine lies: they shall not be in the council
of my people, neither shall they be written in the register of the house
of Israel, and they shall not enter into the land of Israel: and ye
shall know that I \[am\] the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Because, yea because they have seduced
my people, saying, Peace! and there is no peace; and one buildeth up a
wall, and lo, they daub it with untempered \[mortar\] --

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> say unto them which daub it with
untempered \[mortar\] that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing
rain, and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall, and a stormy wind shall
burst forth.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And lo, when the wall is fallen, shall
it not be said unto you, Where is the daubing with which ye have daubed
\[it\]?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
I will cause to burst forth a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be
an overflowing rain in mine anger, and hail-stones in fury for utter
destruction.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And I will break down the wall that ye
have daubed with untempered \[mortar\], and bring it down to the ground,
so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered; and it shall fall,
and ye shall be destroyed in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I
\[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And I will accomplish my fury upon the
wall, and upon them that daub it with untempered \[mortar\], and will
say unto you, The wall is no \[more\], neither they that daubed it,

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> the prophets of Israel who prophesy
concerning Jerusalem, and who see a vision of peace for her, and there
is no peace, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And thou, son of man, set thy face
against the daughters of thy people, who prophesy out of their own
heart; and prophesy against them,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Woe unto the women that sew pillows for all wrists, and that make veils
for the head \[of persons\] of every stature to catch souls! Will ye
catch the souls of my people, and will ye save your own souls alive?

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And will ye profane me among my people
for handfuls of barley and for morsels of bread, to slay the souls that
should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by
your lying to my people that listen to lying?

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Wherefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I am against your pillows, that the souls which ye catch by
their means may fly away; and I will tear them from your arms, and will
let the souls go, the souls that ye catch, that they may fly away.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And I will tear your veils and deliver
my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be
hunted; and ye shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Because with falsehood ye have grieved
the heart of the righteous, whom I have not made sad; and have
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his
wicked way, to save his life:

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> therefore ye shall no more see vanity,
nor divine divinations; and I will deliver my people out of your hand:
and ye shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And there came certain of the elders of
Israel unto me, and sat before me.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Son of man, these men have set up their
idols in their heart, and put the stumbling-block of their iniquity
before their face: should I be inquired of at all by them?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Therefore speak to them, and say unto
them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Every man of the house of Israel that
setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumbling-block of
his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet, I Jehovah will
answer him according to this, according to the multitude of his idols:

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> that I may take the house of Israel by
their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their
idols.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Therefore say unto the house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Return ye, and turn yourselves from your
idols; and turn away your faces from all your abominations.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For every one of the house of Israel, or
of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, who separateth himself from me,
and setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumbling-block
of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet to inquire of
me by him, I Jehovah will answer him by myself;

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> and I will set my face against that man,
and will make him desolate, \[so that he shall be\] for a sign and for
proverbs, and I will cut him off from the midst of my people: and ye
shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And if the prophet be enticed and shall
speak a word, I Jehovah have enticed that prophet; and I will stretch
out my hand against him, and will destroy him from the midst of my
people Israel.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And they shall bear their iniquity: the
iniquity of the prophet shall be even as the iniquity of the inquirer;

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> that the house of Israel may go no more
astray from me, neither make themselves any more unclean with all their
transgressions; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Son of man, when a land sinneth against
me by working unfaithfulness, and I stretch out my hand upon it, and
break the staff of the bread thereof, and send famine upon it, and cut
off man and beast from it;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> though these three men, Noah, Daniel,
and Job, should be in it, they should deliver \[but\] their own souls by
their righteousness, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> If I cause evil beasts to pass through
the land, and they bereave it, and it become a desolation, so that no
one passeth through because of the beasts;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> -- though these three men should be in
it, \[as\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, they should deliver neither
sons nor daughters: they only should be delivered, and the land should
be a desolation.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Or \[if\] I bring the sword upon that
land, and say, Sword, go through the land, so that I cut off man and
beast from it,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> and these three men should be in it,
\[as\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, they should deliver neither sons
nor daughters, but they only themselves should be delivered.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Or \[if\] I send a pestilence into that
land, and pour out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and
beast,

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> and Noah, Daniel, and Job should be in
it, \[as\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, they should deliver neither
son nor daughter: they should \[but\] deliver their own souls by their
righteousness.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: How
much more when I send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword,
and the famine, and the evil beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from
it man and beast!

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> But behold, there shall be left in it
those that escape, who shall be brought out of \[it\], sons and
daughters. Behold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see
their way and their doings; and ye shall be comforted concerning the
evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, as to all that I have brought
upon it.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And they shall comfort you, when ye see
their way and their doings; and ye shall know that I have not done
without cause all that I have done in it, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Son of man, what is the wood of the vine
more than any wood, the vine-branch, which is among the trees of the
forest?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Shall wood be taken thereof to do any
work? or will \[men\] take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Behold, it is given to the fire for fuel:
the fire consumeth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned;
is it fit for \[any\] work?

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Behold, when it was whole, it was used
for no work; how much less when the fire hath consumed it, and it is
burned, should it yet be used for any work?

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: As
the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest, which I have given
to the fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And I will set my face against them: they
shall go forth from \[one\] fire, and \[another\] fire shall devour
them; and ye shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah when I set my face against
them.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And I will make the land a desolation,
because they have wrought unfaithfulness, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her
abominations,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah unto
Jerusalem: Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of the Canaanite:
thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And as for thy nativity, in the day thou
wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water for
cleansing; thou wast not rubbed with salt at all, nor swaddled at all.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> No eye pitied thee, to do any of these
unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the
open field, from abhorrence of thy person, in the day that thou wast
born.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And I passed by thee, and saw thee
weltering in thy blood, and I said unto thee, in thy blood, Live! yea, I
said unto thee, in thy blood, Live!

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> I caused thee to multiply, as the bud of
the field; and thou didst increase and grow great, and thou camest to
fulness of beauty; \[thy\] breasts were fashioned, and thy hair grew:
but thou wast naked and bare.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And I passed by thee, and looked upon
thee, and behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt
over thee, and covered thy nakedness; and I swore unto thee, and entered
into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord Jehovah, and thou becamest
mine.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And I washed thee with water, and
thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with
oil;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> and I clothed thee with embroidered
work, and shod thee with badgers' skin, and I bound thee about with
byssus, and covered thee with silk.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And I decked thee with ornaments, and I
put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> and I put a ring on thy nose, and
earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thy head.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Thus wast thou decked with gold and
silver, and thy raiment was byssus, and silk, and embroidered work. Thou
didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil; and thou becamest exceedingly
beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a kingdom.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And thy fame went forth among the
nations for thy beauty; for it was perfect through my magnificence,
which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> But thou didst confide in thy beauty,
and playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy
whoredoms on every one that passed by: his it was.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And of thy garments thou didst take,
and madest for thyself high places decked with divers colours, and didst
play the harlot thereupon: \[the like\] hath not come to pass, and shall
be no more.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And thou didst take thy fair jewels of
my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, and madest to thyself
images of males, and didst commit fornication with them.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And thou tookest thine embroidered
garments, and coveredst them; and thou didst set mine oil and mine
incense before them.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And my bread which I had given thee,
the fine flour and the oil and the honey wherewith I fed thee, thou
didst even set it before them for a sweet savour: thus it was, saith the
Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And thou didst take thy sons and thy
daughters, whom thou hadst borne unto me, and these didst thou sacrifice
unto them, to be devoured. Were thy whoredoms a small matter,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> that thou didst slay my children and
give them up in passing them over to them?

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And in all thine abominations and thy
whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast
naked and bare, when thou wast weltering in thy blood.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And it came to pass after all thy
wickedness (woe, woe unto thee! saith the Lord Jehovah),

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> that thou didst also build unto thee a
place of debauchery, and didst make thee a high place in every street:

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> thou didst build thy high place at
every head of the way, and madest thy beauty to be abhorred, and thou
didst open thy feet to every one that passed by, and multiply thy
whoredom.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And thou didst commit fornication with
the Egyptians thy neighbours, great of flesh; and didst multiply thy
whoredom to provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And behold, I stretched out my hand
over thee, and diminished thine appointed portion; and I gave thee over
unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines,
who were confounded at thy lewd way.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And thou didst commit fornication with
the Assyrians, because thou wast insatiable; yea, thou didst commit
fornication with them, and yet couldest not be satisfied.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> And thou didst multiply thy whoredom
with the land of merchants, Chaldea, and yet thou wast not satisfied
herewith.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> How weak is thy heart, saith the Lord
Jehovah, seeing thou doest all these \[things\], the work of a whorish
woman, under no restraint;

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> in that thou buildest thy place of
debauchery at the head of every way, and makest thy high place in every
street! And thou hast not been as a harlot, in that thou scornest
reward,

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> O adulterous wife, that taketh
strangers instead of her husband.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> They give rewards to all harlots; but
thou gavest thy rewards to all thy lovers, and rewardedst them, that
they might come unto thee on every side for thy whoredoms.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And in thee is the contrary from
\[other\] women, in thy whoredoms, in that none followeth thee to commit
fornication; and whereas thou givest a reward, and no reward is given
unto thee, so art thou contrary.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> Therefore, O harlot, hear the word of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because
thy money hath been poured out, and thy nakedness discovered through thy
fornications with thy lovers, and with all the idols of thine
abominations, and because of the blood of thy children which thou didst
give unto them;

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> therefore, behold, I will gather all
thy lovers with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all that thou hast
loved, with all that thou hast hated, -- I will even gather them round
about against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto them, that they
may see all thy nakedness.

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And I will judge thee with the
judgments of women that commit adultery and shed blood; and I will give
thee up to the blood of fury and jealousy;

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> and I will give thee into their hand,
and they shall throw down thy place of debauchery, and shall break down
thy high places; and they shall strip thee of thy garments, and shall
take thy fair jewels, and leave thee naked and bare.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> And they shall bring up an assemblage
against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee
through with their swords.

<span id="an_16:41">16:41</span> And they shall burn thy houses with
fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women; and I
will cause thee to cease from being a harlot, and thou also shalt give
no more any reward.

<span id="an_16:42">16:42</span> And I will appease my fury against
thee, and my jealousy shall depart from thee; and I will be quiet, and
will be no more angry.

<span id="an_16:43">16:43</span> Because thou hast not remembered the
days of thy youth, but hast raged against me in all these \[things\],
behold, therefore, I also will recompense thy way upon \[thy\] head,
saith the Lord Jehovah, and thou shalt not commit this lewdness besides
all thine abominations.

<span id="an_16:44">16:44</span> Behold, every one that useth proverbs
shall speak in a proverb against thee, saying, As the mother, \[so is\]
her daughter!

<span id="an_16:45">16:45</span> Thou art the daughter of thy mother
that loathed her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of
thy sisters, who loathed their husbands and their children. Your mother
was a Hittite, and your father an Amorite.

<span id="an_16:46">16:46</span> And thine elder sister is Samaria that
dwelleth at thy left hand, she and her daughters; and thy younger
sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

<span id="an_16:47">16:47</span> And thou hast not walked in their ways,
nor done according to their abominations; but as though that were a very
little, thou hast been more corrupt than they in all thy ways.

<span id="an_16:48">16:48</span> \[As\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah,
Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast
done, thou and thy daughters!

<span id="an_16:49">16:49</span> Behold, this was the iniquity of thy
sister Sodom: pride, fulness of bread, and careless ease was in her and
in her daughters, but she did not strengthen the hand of the poor and
needy.

<span id="an_16:50">16:50</span> And they were haughty, and committed
abomination before me, and I took them away when I saw \[it\].

<span id="an_16:51">16:51</span> And Samaria hath not sinned according
to the half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations
more than they, and hast justified thy sisters by all thine abominations
which thou hast done.

<span id="an_16:52">16:52</span> Thou also, who hast judged thy sisters,
bear thine own confusion, because of thy sins in which thou hast acted
more abominably than they: they are more righteous than thou. So be thou
ashamed also, and bear thy confusion, in that thou hast justified thy
sisters.

<span id="an_16:53">16:53</span> And I will bring again their captivity,
the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria
and her daughters, and the captivity of thy captives in the midst of
them;

<span id="an_16:54">16:54</span> that thou mayest bear thy confusion,
and mayest be confounded for all that thou hast done, in that thou
comfortest them.

<span id="an_16:55">16:55</span> And thy sisters, Sodom and her
daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her
daughters shall return to their former estate; thou also and thy
daughters, ye shall return to your former estate.

<span id="an_16:56">16:56</span> Yea, Sodom thy sister was not mentioned
by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,

<span id="an_16:57">16:57</span> before thy wickedness was discovered,
as at the time of the reproach of the daughters of Syria, and of all
that are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, who despise
thee on every side.

<span id="an_16:58">16:58</span> Thy lewdness and thine abominations,
thou bearest them, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:59">16:59</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
even deal with thee as thou hast done, who hast despised the oath, and
broken the covenant.

<span id="an_16:60">16:60</span> Nevertheless I will remember my
covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto
thee an everlasting covenant.

<span id="an_16:61">16:61</span> And thou shalt remember thy ways, and
be confounded, when thou shalt receive thy sisters who are older than
thou, together with those who are younger than thou; for I will give
them unto thee for daughters, but not by virtue of thy covenant.

<span id="an_16:62">16:62</span> And I will establish my covenant with
thee, and thou shalt know that I \[am\] Jehovah;

<span id="an_16:63">16:63</span> that thou mayest remember, and be
ashamed, and no more open thy mouth because of thy confusion, when I
forgive thee all that thou hast done, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak
a parable unto the house of Israel,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: A
great eagle with great wings, long-pinioned, full of feathers, which was
of divers colours, came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the
cedar.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> He cropped off the top of its young
shoots, and carried it into a merchants' land; he set it in a city of
traders.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And he took of the seed of the land, and
planted it in a fruitful field; he placed it by great waters, he set it
as a willow tree.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And it grew, and became a spreading vine
of low stature, so that its branches should turn toward him, and the
roots thereof be under him; and it became a vine, and brought forth
branches, and shot forth sprigs.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And there was another great eagle with
great wings and many feathers; and behold, from the beds of her
plantation, this vine did bend her roots unto him, and shot forth her
branches toward him, that he might water it.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> It was planted in a good field by many
waters, that it might bring forth branches and bear fruit, that it might
be a noble vine.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Shall
it prosper? Shall he not pull up its roots, and cut off its fruit, that
it may wither? All its fresh sprouting leaves shall wither, even without
a great arm and many people to pluck it up by its roots.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And behold, being planted, shall it
prosper? shall it not utterly wither when the east wind toucheth it? It
shall wither in the beds where it grew.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Say now to the rebellious house, Know
ye not what these things are? Say, Behold, the king of Babylon came to
Jerusalem, and took its king and its princes, and led them with him to
Babylon.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And he took of the king's seed, and
made a covenant with him, and brought him under an oath, and he took
away the mighty of the land;

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> that the kingdom might be abased, that
it might not lift itself up, that it might keep his covenant in order to
stand.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> But he rebelled against him in sending
his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much
people. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? shall
he break the covenant, and yet escape?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> \[As\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah,
verily in the place of the king that made him king, whose oath he
despised, and whose covenant he broke, even with him, in the midst of
Babylon, shall he die.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Neither shall Pharaoh with a mighty
army and a great assemblage do anything for him in the war, when they
cast up mounds and build forts to cut off many persons.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> He despised the oath, and broke the
covenant; and behold, he had given his hand, yet hath he done all these
things: he shall not escape.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
\[As\] I live, verily, mine oath which he hath despised, and my covenant
which he hath broken, even it will I recompense upon his head.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And I will spread my net upon him, and
he shall be taken in my snare; and I will bring him to Babylon, and will
enter into judgment with him there for his unfaithfulness in which he
hath been unfaithful against me.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> And all his fugitives with all his
bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered
toward every wind; and ye shall know that I Jehovah have spoken.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
also take of the highest branch of the lofty cedar, and will set it; I
will crop off from the top of its young shoots a tender one, and I will
plant it upon a high and eminent mountain:

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> upon the mountain of the height of
Israel will I plant it; and it shall bring forth branches, and bear
fruit, and become a noble cedar; and under it shall dwell all birds of
every wing; in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And all the trees of the field shall
know that I Jehovah have brought down the high tree, have exalted the
low tree, have dried up the green tree, and made the dry tree to
flourish: I Jehovah have spoken, and will do \[it\].

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> What mean ye, ye who use this proverb of
the land of Israel, saying, \[The\] fathers eat sour grapes, and the
children's teeth are set on edge?

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> \[As\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, ye
shall not have any more to use this proverb in Israel.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Behold, all the souls are mine; as the
soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that
sinneth, it shall die.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And if a man be righteous, and do
judgment and justice:

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> -- he hath not eaten upon the mountains,
nor lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, neither hath
defiled his neighbour's wife, nor come near to a woman in her
separation,

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> and hath not oppressed any; he hath
restored to the debtor his pledge, hath not exercised robbery, hath
given his bread to the hungry, and covered the naked with a garment;

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> he hath not given forth upon usury, nor
taken increase; he hath withdrawn his hand from unrighteousness, hath
executed true judgment between man and man,

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> hath walked in my statutes, and kept mine
ordinances, to deal faithfully: he is righteous, he shall certainly
live, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And if he have begotten a son that is
violent, a shedder of blood, and that doeth only one of any of these
\[things\],

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> and that doeth not any of those
\[duties\], but also hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his
neighbour's wife,

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> hath oppressed the poor and needy,
exercised robbery, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up his
eyes to the idols, committed abomination,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> given forth upon usury, and taken
increase; shall he then live? He shall not live: he hath done all these
abominations; he shall certainly die; his blood shall be upon him.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> But lo, if he have begotten a son that
seeth all his father's sins which he hath done, and considereth, and
doeth not such like:

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> -- he hath not eaten upon the
mountains, nor lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel;
he hath not defiled his neighbour's wife,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> and hath not oppressed any, nor
withholden the pledge, neither hath exercised robbery; he hath given his
bread to the hungry, and covered the naked with a garment;

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> he hath withdrawn his hand from the
poor, hath not received usury nor increase, hath executed my judgments,
\[and\] walked in my statutes: he shall not die for the iniquity of his
father, he shall certainly live.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> As for his father, because he practised
oppression, exercised robbery upon his brother, and did what was not
good among his people, behold, he shall die in his iniquity.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And ye say, Why doth not the son bear
the iniquity of the father? But the son hath done judgment and justice,
hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them; he shall certainly live.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> The soul that sinneth, it shall die.
The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the
father bear the iniquity of the son; the righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And the wicked, if he turn from all his
sins which he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do judgment
and justice, he shall certainly live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> None of his transgressions which he
hath committed shall be remembered against him; in his righteousness
which he hath done shall he live.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Have I any pleasure at all in the death
of the wicked? saith the Lord Jehovah; is it not in his turning from his
way, that he may live?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And when the righteous turneth from his
righteousness and practiseth what is wrong, \[and\] doeth according to
all the abominations that the wicked doeth, shall he live? None of his
righteous acts which he hath done shall be remembered: in his
unfaithfulness which he hath wrought, and in his sin which he hath
sinned, in them shall he die.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And ye say, The way of the Lord is not
equal. Hear then, house of Israel. Is not my way equal? are not your
ways unequal?

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> When the righteous turneth away from
his righteousness, and practiseth what is wrong, and dieth for it; in
his wrong that he hath done shall he die.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And when the wicked turneth from his
wickedness which he hath committed, and doeth judgment and justice, he
shall keep his soul alive.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Because he considereth, and turneth
from all his transgressions which he hath committed, he shall certainly
live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> But the house of Israel say, The way of
the Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? Is it
not your ways that are unequal?

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Therefore I will judge you, house of
Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord Jehovah. Return
ye, and turn from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your
snare.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Cast away from you all your
transgressions wherewith ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart
and a new spirit: why then will ye die, house of Israel?

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> For I have no pleasure in the death of
him that dieth, saith the Lord Jehovah; therefore turn ye and live.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And thou, take thou up a lamentation for
the princes of Israel,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and say, What was thy mother? A lioness:
she lay down among lions, she nourished her whelps in the midst of the
young lions.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And she brought up one of her whelps; it
became a young lion, and he learned to catch the prey; he devoured men.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And the nations heard of him; he was
taken in their pit, and they brought him with nose-rings into the land
of Egypt.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And when she saw that she had waited
\[and\] her hope was lost, she took another of her whelps, \[and\] made
him a young lion.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And he went up and down among the lions;
he became a young lion, and learned to catch the prey; he devoured men.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And he knew their \[desolate\] palaces,
and he laid waste their cities, so that the land was desolate, and all
it contained, by the noise of his roaring.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Then the nations set against him on every
side from the provinces, and spread their net over him; he was taken in
their pit.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And they put him in a cage with
nose-rings, and brought him to the king of Babylon; they brought him
into strongholds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the
mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Thy mother was as a vine, in thy rest,
planted by the waters: it was fruitful and full of branches by reason of
many waters.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And it had strong rods for sceptres of
them that bear rule, and its stature was exalted between the thick
boughs; and it was conspicuous by its height with the multitude of its
branches.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> But it was plucked up in fury, it was
cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up its fruit; its
strong rods were broken and withered; the fire consumed them.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And now it is planted in the
wilderness, in a dry and thirsty ground:

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> and a fire is gone out of a rod of its
branches, \[which\] hath devoured its fruit; so that it hath no strong
rod to be a sceptre for ruling. This is a lamentation, and shall be for
a lamentation.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And it came to pass in the seventh year,
in the fifth \[month\], the tenth of the month, \[that\] certain of the
elders of Israel came to inquire of Jehovah, and they sat before me.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Son of man, speak unto the elders of
Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Are ye come to
inquire of me? \[As\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, I will not be
inquired of by you.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Wilt thou judge them, wilt thou judge,
son of man? Cause them to know the abominations of their fathers,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: In the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up my hand unto the
seed of the house of Jacob, and made myself known unto them in the land
of Egypt, when I lifted up my hand unto them, saying, I \[am\] Jehovah
your God,

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> in that day I lifted up my hand unto
them, to bring them out of the land of Egypt into a land that I had
espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the ornament of
all lands;

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> and I said unto them, Cast ye away every
man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the
idols of Egypt: I \[am\] Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> But they rebelled against me, and would
not hearken unto me: none of them cast away the abominations of his
eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt. Then I thought to
pour out my fury upon them, so as to accomplish mine anger against them
in the midst of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> But I wrought for my name's sake, that it
should not be profaned in the sight of the nations among whom they were,
in whose sight I had made myself known unto them in bringing them forth
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And I caused them to go forth out of
the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And I gave them my statutes, and made
known unto them mine ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live by
them.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And I also gave them my sabbaths, to be
a sign between me and them, that they might know that I \[am\] Jehovah
that hallow them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But the house of Israel rebelled
against me in the wilderness: they walked not in my statutes, and they
rejected mine ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live by them; and
my sabbaths they greatly profaned: and I said I would pour out my fury
upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> But I wrought for my name's sake, that
it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in whose sight I
had brought them out.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And I also lifted up my hand unto them
in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land that I had
given \[them\], flowing with milk and honey, which is the ornament of
all lands;

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> because they rejected mine ordinances
and walked not in my statutes, and profaned my sabbaths: for their heart
went after their idols.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> But mine eye spared them so as not to
destroy them, neither did I make a full end of them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And I said unto their children in the
wilderness, Walk not in the statutes of your fathers, neither keep their
ordinances, nor defile yourselves with their idols.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> I \[am\] Jehovah your God: walk in my
statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them;

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> and hallow my sabbaths; and they shall
be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I \[am\] Jehovah
your God.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the children rebelled against me:
they walked not in my statutes, neither kept mine ordinances to do them,
which if a man do, he shall live by them; they profaned my sabbaths: and
I said I would pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish mine anger
against them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> But I withdrew my hand, and wrought for
my name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight of the
nations, in whose sight I had brought them out.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> I lifted up my hand also unto them in
the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the nations, and
disperse them through the countries;

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> because they performed not mine
ordinances, and rejected my statutes, and profaned my sabbaths, and
their eyes were after their fathers' idols.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And I also gave them statutes that were
not good, and ordinances whereby they should not live;

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> and I defiled them by their own gifts,
in that they devoted all that opened the womb, that I might make them
desolate, to the end that they might know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Therefore, son of man, speak unto the
house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In this
moreover have your fathers blasphemed me, in that they have wrought
unfaithfulness against me.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> When I had brought them into the land
which I had lifted up my hand to give unto them, then they saw every
high hill and all the thick trees, and they offered there their
sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of their offering;
and there they placed their sweet savour, and there poured out their
drink-offerings.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And I said unto them, What is the high
place whither ye go? And the name thereof is called Bamah unto this day.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Therefore say unto the house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Do ye defile yourselves after the manner of
your fathers? and do ye commit fornication after their abominations?

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And when ye offer your gifts, making
your sons to pass through the fire, ye defile yourselves with all your
idols, even unto this day; and shall I be inquired of by you, O house of
Israel? \[As\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, I will not be inquired of
by you.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And that which cometh into your mind
shall not be at all, that ye say, We will be as the nations, as the
families of the countries, in serving wood and stone.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> \[As\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah,
verily with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with fury
poured out, will I reign over you.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And I will bring you out from the
peoples, and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are
scattered, with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with
fury poured out;

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> and I will bring you into the
wilderness of the peoples, and there will I enter into judgment with you
face to face.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> Like as I entered into judgment with
your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I enter
into judgment with you, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And I will cause you to pass under the
rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant.

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> And I will purge out from among you the
rebels, and them that transgress against me; I will bring them forth out
of the country where they sojourn, but they shall not enter into the
land of Israel: and ye shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> As for you, O house of Israel, thus
saith the Lord Jehovah: Go ye, serve every one his idols henceforth
also, if none of you will hearken unto me; but profane my holy name no
more with your gifts and with your idols.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> For in my holy mountain, in the
mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah, there shall
all the house of Israel serve me, the whole of it, in the land; there
will I accept them, and there will I require your heave-offerings and
the first-fruits of your offerings, with all your holy things.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> As a sweet savour will I accept you,
when I bring you out from the peoples, and gather you out of the
countries wherein ye have been scattered; and I will be hallowed in you
in the sight of the nations.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> And ye shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah, when I have brought you into the land of Israel, into the
country which I lifted up my hand to give to your fathers.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> And there shall ye remember your ways,
and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall loathe
yourselves in your own sight for all your evils which ye have committed.

<span id="an_20:44">20:44</span> And ye shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah, when I have wrought with you for my name's sake, not according
to your wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O house of
Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:45">20:45</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_20:46">20:46</span> Son of man, set thy face toward the
south, and drop \[words\] against the south, and prophesy against the
forest of the south field;

<span id="an_20:47">20:47</span> and say to the forest of the south,
Hear the word of Jehovah. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will
kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and
every dry tree: the flashing flame shall not be quenched; and all that
it meets from the south to the north shall be burned thereby.

<span id="an_20:48">20:48</span> And all flesh shall see that I Jehovah
have kindled it: it shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_20:49">20:49</span> And I said, Ah, Lord Jehovah! they say
of me, Doth he not speak parables?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against
Jerusalem, and drop \[words\] against the holy places, and prophesy
against the land of Israel,

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and say to the land of Israel, Thus saith
Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, and I will draw forth my sword out
of its sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Seeing that I will cut off from thee the
righteous and the wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of its
sheath against all flesh, from the south to the north;

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> and all flesh shall know that I Jehovah
have drawn forth my sword out of its sheath: it shall not return any
more.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Sigh then, thou son of man; with breaking
of the loins, and with bitterness sigh before their eyes.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And it shall be, when they say unto thee,
Wherefore dost thou sigh? that thou shalt say, Because of the tidings,
for it cometh; and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be
feeble, and every spirit shall languish, and all knees shall melt into
water: behold, it cometh; it is here, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith
Jehovah: Say, A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> It is sharpened for sore slaughter, it
is furbished that it may glitter. Shall we then make mirth, \[saying,\]
The sceptre of my son contemneth all wood?

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And he hath given it to be furbished
that it may be handled. The sword, -- it is sharpened, and it is
furbished to give it into the hand of the slayer.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Cry and howl, son of man; for it shall
be against my people, it shall be against all the princes of Israel:
they are given up to the sword along with my people: smite therefore
upon the thigh.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> For the trial \[is made\]; and what if
even the contemning sceptre shall be no \[more\]? saith the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And thou, son of man, prophesy, and
smite thy hands together; for \[the strokes of\] the sword shall be
doubled the third time: it is the sword of the slain, the sword that
hath slain the great one, which encompasseth them privily.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> In order that the heart may melt, and
the stumbling-blocks be multiplied, I have set the threatening sword
against all their gates: ah! it is made glittering, it is whetted for
the slaughter.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Gather up \[strength\], go to the right
hand, turn thee, go to the left, whithersoever thy face is appointed.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And I myself will smite my hands
together, and I will satisfy my fury: I Jehovah have spoken \[it\].

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And thou, son of man, set thee two
ways, by which the sword of the king of Babylon may come -- out of one
land shall they both come -- and make thee a signpost, make it at the
head of the way to the city.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Appoint a way for the coming of the
sword to Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and to Judah at the fenced
\[city\] of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For the king of Babylon standeth at the
parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination: he
shaketh \[his\] arrows, he inquireth of the teraphim, he looketh in the
liver.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> In his right hand is the lot of
Jerusalem to appoint battering-rams, to open the mouth for bloodshed, to
lift up the voice with shouting, to appoint battering-rams against the
gates, to cast mounds, to build siege-towers.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And this shall be a false divination in
their sight, for them that have sworn oaths; but he will call to
remembrance the iniquity, that they may be taken.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because ye make your iniquity to be remembered in that your
transgressions are discovered, so that in all your doings your sins
appear; because ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the
hand.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And thou, profane, wicked prince of
Israel, whose day is come, at the time of the iniquity of the end,

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> -- thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Remove
the mitre and take off the crown; what is shall be no \[more\]. Exalt
that which is low, and abase that which is high.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> I will overturn, overturn, overturn it!
This also shall be no \[more\], until he come whose right it is; and I
will give it \[to him\].

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And thou, son of man, prophesy and say,
Thus speaketh the Lord Jehovah concerning the children of Ammon, and
concerning their reproach; and thou shalt say, A sword, a sword is
drawn; for the slaughter is it furbished, that it may consume, that it
may glitter:

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> whilst they see vanity for thee, whilst
they divine a lie unto thee, to lay thee upon the necks of the wicked
that are slain, whose day is come at the time of the iniquity of the
end.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> Restore \[it\] to its sheath. I will
judge thee in the place where thou wast created, in the land of thy
birth.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And I will pour out mine indignation
upon thee, I will blow upon thee the fire of my wrath, and give thee
into the hand of brutish men, skilful to destroy.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy
blood shall be in the midst of the land; thou shalt not be remembered:
for I Jehovah have spoken.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And thou, son of man, wilt thou judge,
wilt thou judge the bloody city? Yea, cause her to know all her
abominations,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: A
city that sheddeth blood in her midst, that her time may come, and
maketh idols against herself to defile herself.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Thou art become guilty by thy blood which
thou hast shed, and hast defiled thyself with thine idols which thou
hast made; and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and art come unto
thy years: therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the nations, and a
mocking unto all countries.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Those that are near, and those that are
far from thee, shall mock thee, who art infamous \[and\] full of tumult.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Behold, the princes of Israel have been
in thee to shed blood, each according to his power.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> In thee have they made light of father
and mother; in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the
stranger; in thee have they vexed the fatherless and the widow.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Thou hast despised my holy things, and
hast profaned my sabbaths.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> In thee there have been slanderous men to
shed blood; and in thee have they eaten upon the mountains; in the midst
of thee they have committed lewdness;

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> in thee have they discovered their
fathers' nakedness; in thee have they humbled her that was unclean in
her separation.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And one hath committed abomination with
his neighbour's wife; and another hath lewdly defiled his
daughter-in-law; and another in thee hath humbled his sister, his
father's daughter.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> In thee have they taken gifts to shed
blood; thou hast taken usury and increase, and thou hast overreached thy
neighbours by oppression, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And behold, I have smitten mine hand at
thine overreaching which thou hast done, and at thy bloodshed which hath
been in the midst of thee.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Shall thy heart endure, shall thy hands
be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I Jehovah have
spoken, and will do \[it\].

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And I will scatter thee among the
nations, and disperse thee through the countries, and will consume thy
filthiness out of thee.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And thou shalt be polluted through
thyself in the sight of the nations, and thou shalt know that I \[am\]
Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Son of man, the house of Israel is
become dross to me: they are all copper, and tin, and iron, and lead, in
the midst of the furnace: they are become the dross of silver.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because ye are all become dross, therefore behold, I will gather you
into the midst of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> \[As\] they gather silver, and copper,
and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the
fire upon it, to melt it, so will I gather you in mine anger and in my
fury, and I will lay you on and melt you.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Yea, I will collect you, and blow upon
you the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> As silver is melted in the midst of the
furnace, so shall ye be melted in the midst thereof: and ye shall know
that I Jehovah have poured out my fury upon you.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Son of man, say unto her, Thou art a
land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> There is a conspiracy of her prophets
in the midst of her like a roaring lion ravening the prey; they devour
souls; they take away treasure and precious things; they increase her
widows in the midst of her;

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> her priests do violence to my law, and
profane my holy things: they put no difference between the holy and
profane, neither do they make known \[the difference\] between the
unclean and the clean, and they hide their eyes from my sabbaths, and I
am profaned among them.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Her princes in the midst of her are
like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, to destroy souls, to get
dishonest gain.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And her prophets have daubed for them
with untempered \[mortar\], seeing vanity and divining lies unto them,
saying, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah! and Jehovah hath not spoken.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> The people of the land use oppression
and practise robbery; and they vex the poor and needy, and oppress the
stranger wrongfully.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And I sought for a man among them, that
should make up the fence, and stand in the breach before me for the
land, that I should not destroy it; but I found none.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> And I will pour out mine indignation
upon them; I will consume them in the fire of my wrath: their own way
will I recompense upon their head, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Son of man, there were two women,
daughters of one mother.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And they committed whoredom in Egypt;
they committed whoredom in their youth: there were their breasts
pressed, and there were handled the teats of their virginity.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And their names were Oholah the elder,
and Oholibah her sister; and they were mine, and they bore sons and
daughters. As for their names: Samaria is Oholah, and Jerusalem
Oholibah.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And Oholah played the harlot when she was
mine; and she lusted after her lovers, after the Assyrians \[her\]
neighbours,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> clothed with blue, governors and rulers,
all of them attractive young men, horsemen riding upon horses.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And she bestowed her whoredoms upon them,
all of them the choice of the children of Asshur; and with all after
whom she lusted, with all their idols she defiled herself.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Neither left she her whoredoms
\[brought\] from Egypt; for in her youth they had lain with her, and had
handled the breasts of her virginity, and poured their fornication upon
her.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Therefore I gave her into the hand of her
lovers, into the hand of the children of Asshur, after whom she lusted.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> These discovered her nakedness, they
took her sons and her daughters, and slew her with the sword; and she
became a name among women; and they executed judgment upon her.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And her sister Oholibah saw \[this\],
and was more corrupt in her passion than she, and in her fornications
more than the whoredoms of her sister.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> She lusted after the children of Asshur
\[her\] neighbours, governors and rulers, clothed most gorgeously,
horsemen riding upon horses, all of them attractive young men.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And I saw that she was defiled: both
took one way.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And she increased her fornications; for
she saw men portrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans
portrayed with vermilion,

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> girded with girdles upon their loins,
with flowing turbans on their heads, all of them captains in appearance,
\[after\] the likeness of the children of Babylon, of Chaldea, the land
of their nativity.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And as soon as she saw them with her
eyes, she lusted after them, and sent messengers unto them into Chaldea.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And the children of Babylon came to her
into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their fornication; she
too defiled herself with them, and her soul was alienated from them.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And she discovered her whoredoms, and
discovered her nakedness; and my soul was alienated from her, like as my
soul was alienated from her sister.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Yet she multiplied her whoredoms,
calling to remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she played the
harlot in the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> and she lusted after their paramours,
whose flesh is \[as\] the flesh of asses, and whose issue is \[as\] the
issue of horses.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And thou didst look back to the
lewdness of thy youth, in the handling of thy teats by the Egyptians,
for the breasts of thy youth.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Therefore, Oholibah, thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom
thy soul is alienated, and I will bring them against thee on every side.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> The children of Babylon, and all the
Chaldeans, Pekod and Shoa and Koa, all the children of Asshur with them;
all of them attractive young men, governors and rulers, great lords and
renowned, all of them riding upon horses.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And they shall come against thee
\[with\] armour, chariots and wheels, and with an assemblage of peoples;
they shall set themselves against thee \[with\] target, and shield, and
helmet round about; and I will put judgment before them, and they shall
judge thee according to their judgments.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And I will set my jealousy against
thee, and they shall deal furiously with thee: they shall cut off thy
nose and thine ears, and thy remnant shall fall by the sword; they shall
take thy sons and thy daughters; and thy residue shall be devoured by
the fire.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> They shall also strip the of thy
garments, and take away thy fair jewels.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> And I will make thy lewdness to cease
from thee, and thy whoredom \[brought\] from the land of Egypt; and thou
shalt not lift up thine eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any more.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I will give thee over into the hand of them whom thou hatest,
into the hand of them from whom thy soul is alienated.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> And they shall deal with thee in
hatred, and shall take away all thy labour, and shall leave thee naked
and bare; so that the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered,
both thy lewdness and thy fornications.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> These things shall be done unto thee,
because thou hast gone a whoring after the nations, because thou hast
defiled thyself with their idols.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Thou hast walked in the way of thy
sister; and I have given her cup into thy hand.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Thou shalt
drink of thy sister's cup deep and large; thou shalt be for a
laughing-stock and a derision, \[for\] it containeth much.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness
and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, the cup of thy
sister Samaria;

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> thou shalt even drink it and suck it
out, and thou shalt gnaw the sherds thereof, and pluck off thine own
breasts: for I have spoken \[it\], saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because thou hast forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore
bear thou also thy lewdness and thy fornications.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Son of man,
wilt thou judge Oholah and Oholibah? yea, declare unto them their
abominations.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> For they have committed adultery, and
blood is in their hands; and with their idols have they committed
adultery, and have also passed over unto them their children, whom they
bore unto me, to be devoured.

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Moreover this have they done unto me:
in the same day have they defiled my sanctuary and profaned my sabbaths.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For when they had slaughtered their
children unto their idols, they came the same day into my sanctuary to
profane it; and behold, thus have they done in the midst of my house.

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> And furthermore, they sent for men to
come from far, unto whom a messenger was sent; and behold, they came:
for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thine eyes, and deckedst
thyself with ornaments;

<span id="an_23:41">23:41</span> and satest upon a stately bed, with a
table prepared before it, whereupon thou hadst set mine incense and mine
oil.

<span id="an_23:42">23:42</span> And the voice of a multitude living
carelessly was with her; and with people of the common sort were brought
Sabeans from the wilderness, and they put bracelets upon their hands,
and a beautiful crown upon their heads.

<span id="an_23:43">23:43</span> And I said of her that was old in
adulteries, Will she now commit her fornications, even she.

<span id="an_23:44">23:44</span> And they went in unto her, as they go
in unto a whorish woman: so went they in unto Oholah and unto Oholibah
the lewd women.

<span id="an_23:45">23:45</span> And righteous men, they shall judge
them with the judgment of adulteresses, and with the judgment of women
that shed blood; for they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands.

<span id="an_23:46">23:46</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
bring up an assemblage against them, and will give them to be driven
hither and thither and spoiled.

<span id="an_23:47">23:47</span> And the assemblage shall stone them
with stones, and despatch them with their swords; they shall kill their
sons and their daughters, and burn their houses with fire.

<span id="an_23:48">23:48</span> And I will cause lewdness to cease out
of the land, and all women shall receive instruction and shall not do
according to your lewdness.

<span id="an_23:49">23:49</span> And they shall recompense your lewdness
upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols; and ye shall know
that I \[am\] the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And in the ninth year, in the tenth
month, on the tenth of the month, the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Son of man, write thee the name of the
day, of this selfsame day: on this selfsame day the king of Babylon
draws near to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And propose a parable unto the rebellious
house, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Set on the pot,
set \[it\] on, and also pour water into it.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Gather the pieces thereof into it, every
good piece, the thigh and the shoulder; fill \[it\] with the choice
bones:

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> take the choice of the flock; and also
\[put\] a pile of wood under it, for the bones; make it boil well, and
let the bones of it seethe therein.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Woe to the bloody city, to the pot whose rust is therein, and whose rust
is not gone out of it! Bring it out piece by piece; let no lot fall upon
it:

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> for her blood is in the midst of her; she
set it upon the bare rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover
it with dust.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> That it might cause fury to come up to
execute vengeance, I have set her blood upon the bare rock, that it
should not be covered.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Woe to the bloody city! I also will make the pile great.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Heap on the wood, kindle the fire, boil
thoroughly the flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be burned.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Then set it empty upon its coals, that
it may be hot, and the brass of it may burn, and that its filthiness may
be molten in it, \[and\] that its rust may be consumed.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> She hath exhausted \[her\] labours, yet
her great rust goeth not forth out of her: let her rust be in the fire.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> In thy filthiness is lewdness, for I
have purged thee, and thou art not pure. Thou shalt no more be purged
from thy filthiness, till I have satisfied my fury upon thee.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> I Jehovah have spoken \[it\]: it shall
come to pass, and I will do it; I will not go back, neither will I
spare, nor will I repent. According to thy ways, and according to thy
doings, shall they judge thee, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Son of man, behold, I take away from
thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke; yet thou shalt not mourn
nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Sigh in silence, make no mourning for
the dead; bind thy turban upon thee, and put thy sandals upon thy feet,
and cover not the beard, and eat not the bread of men.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> -- And I spoke unto the people in the
morning; and at even my wife died. And I did in the morning as I was
commanded.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And the people said unto me, Wilt thou
not tell us what these things are to us, which thou doest?

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> And I said to them, The word of Jehovah
came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Say unto the house of Israel, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the pride
of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and your soul's longing; and
your sons and your daughters whom ye have left behind shall fall by the
sword.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And ye shall do as I have done: ye
shall not cover the beard, neither eat the bread of men;

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> and your turbans shall be upon your
heads, and your sandals upon your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but
ye shall waste away in your iniquities and moan one toward another.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> Thus Ezekiel shall be unto you a sign;
according to all that he hath done shall ye do: when it cometh, then ye
shall know that I \[am\] the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And thou, son of man, shall it not be
in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory,
the desire of their eyes, and that whereunto they lift up their soul,
their sons and their daughters,

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> that in that day he that escapeth shall
come unto thee, to cause \[thine\] ears to hear \[it\]?

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> In that day shall thy mouth be opened
to him that is escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb. So
shalt thou be a sign unto them; and they shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against the
children of Ammon, and prophesy against them;

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> and say unto the children of Ammon, Hear
the word of the Lord Jehovah. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because thou
saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it was profaned; and against the
land of Israel, when it was made desolate; and against the house of
Judah, when they went into captivity:

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> therefore behold, I will give thee to the
children of the east for a possession, and they shall set their
encampments in thee, and make their dwellings in thee; they shall eat
thy fruits, and they shall drink thy milk.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And I will make Rabbah a pasture for
camels, and the children of Ammon a couching-place for flocks: and ye
shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because
thou hast clapped the hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced
with all the despite of thy soul against the land of Israel;

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> therefore behold, I will stretch out my
hand upon thee, and will give thee for a spoil to the nations; and I
will cut thee off from the peoples, and I will cause thee to perish out
of the countries: I will destroy thee, and thou shalt know that I \[am\]
Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because Moab
and Seir do say, Behold, the house of Judah is like unto all the
nations,

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> therefore behold, I will open the side of
Moab from the cities, from his cities even to the last of them, the
glory of the country, Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kirjathaim,

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> unto the children of the east, with
\[the land of\] the children of Ammon; and I will give it them for a
possession, that the children of Ammon may not be remembered among the
nations:

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> and I will execute judgments upon Moab,
and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because
Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath
made himself very guilty, and revenged himself upon them,

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
I will also stretch out my hand upon Edom; and will cut off man and
beast from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; and unto Dedan
shall they fall by the sword.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And I will execute my vengeance upon
Edom, by the hand of my people Israel; and they shall do in Edom
according to mine anger and according to my fury; and they shall know my
vengeance, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because
the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with
despite of soul, to destroy, from old hatred;

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I stretch out my hands upon the Philistines, and I will cut off
the Kerethites, and cause the remnant of the sea-coast to perish.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And I will execute great vengeance upon
them with furious rebukes; and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah,
when I shall lay my vengeance upon them.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh year,
on the first of the month, \[that\] the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Son of man, because Tyre hath said
against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken, the gate of the peoples! she is
turned unto me: I shall be replenished \[now\] she is laid waste;

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I am against thee, Tyre, and will cause many nations to come up
against thee, as the sea causeth its waves to come up.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre,
and break down her towers. And I will scrape her dust from her, and make
her a bare rock.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> She shall be \[a place\] for the
spreading of nets in the midst of the sea; for I have spoken \[it\],
saith the Lord Jehovah; and she shall become a spoil for the nations.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And her daughters that are in the field
shall be slain by the sword; and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold,
I will bring from the north, against Tyre, Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon, the king of kings, with horses, and with chariots, and with
horsemen, and an assemblage, and much people.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> He shall slay with the sword thy
daughters in the field, and he shall make forts against thee, and cast
up a mound against thee, and lift up the target against thee;

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> and he shall set his engines of attack
against thy walls, and with his spikes he shall break down thy towers.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> By reason of the abundance of his
horses their dust shall cover thee; thy walls shall shake at the noise
of the horsemen, and of the wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall
enter through thy gates, as a city is entered into, wherein is made a
breach.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> With the hoofs of his horses shall he
tread down all thy streets; he shall slay thy people by the sword, and
the pillars of thy strength shall go down to the ground.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And they shall make a spoil of thy
riches, and make a prey of thy wares; and they shall break down thy
walls, and destroy thy pleasant houses; and they shall lay thy stones
and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the waters.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And I will cause the noise of thy songs
to cease; and the sound of thy harps shall be no more heard.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And I will make thee a bare rock; thou
shalt be \[a place\] for the spreading of nets; thou shalt be built no
more: for I Jehovah have spoken \[it\], saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to Tyre:
Shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded
groan, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee?

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> And all the princes of the sea shall
come down from their thrones, and lay aside their robes, and put off
their broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with trembling,
they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble \[every\] moment, and
be astonied because of thee.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And they shall take up a lamentation
for thee, and say to thee, How hast thou perished, that wast inhabited
from the seas, O renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, -- she and
her inhabitants, who caused their terror to be on all them that dwell
therein!

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Now shall the isles tremble in the day
of thy fall; and the isles that are in the sea shall be troubled at thy
departure.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: When I
shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited;
when I bring up the deep upon thee, and the great waters cover thee:

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> then will I bring thee down, with them
that go down to the pit, to the people of old time, and will cause thee
to dwell in the lower parts of the earth, in places desolate of old,
with them that go down to the pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I
will set glory in the land of the living.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And I will make thee a terror, and thou
shalt be no \[more\]; and thou shalt be sought for, and shalt never be
found again, for ever, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying:

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And thou, son of man, take up a
lamentation for Tyre,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and say unto Tyre: O thou that art
situate at the entries of the sea, and traffickest with the peoples in
many isles, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Thou, Tyre, hast said, I am
perfect in beauty.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Thy borders are in the heart of the seas,
thy builders have perfected thy beauty.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> They made all thy double boards of
cypress-trees of Senir; they took cedars from Lebanon to make masts for
thee.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Of the oaks of Bashan did they make thine
oars; they made thy benches of ivory, inlaid in box-wood, out of the
isles of Chittim.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Byssus with broidered work from Egypt was
thy sail, to serve thee for a banner; blue and purple from the isles of
Elishah was thine awning.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were
thy rowers; thy wise men, O Tyre, who were in thee, were thy pilots.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> The elders of Gebal and the wise men
thereof were in thee repairing thy leaks; all the ships of the sea with
their mariners were in thee, to barter with thee.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Persia and Lud and Phut were in thine
army, thy men of war: they hanged shield and helmet in thee; they gave
splendour to thee.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> The children of Arvad with thine army
were upon thy walls round about, and the Gammadim were on thy towers:
they hanged their shields upon thy walls round about; they made thy
beauty perfect.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Tarshish dealt with thee by reason of
the abundance of all substance; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they
furnished thy markets.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were
thy traffickers: they bartered with thee the persons of men, and vessels
of bronze.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> They of the house of Togarmah furnished
thy markets with horses, and horsemen, and mules.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> The children of Dedan were thy
traffickers; many isles were the mart of thy hand: they rendered in
payment horns of ivory, and ebony.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Syria dealt with thee for the multitude
of thy handiworks: they traded in thy markets with carbuncles, purple,
and broidered work, and fine linen, and corals, and rubies.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Judah and the land of Israel were thy
traffickers: they bartered with thee wheat of Minnith, and sweet cakes,
and honey, and oil, and balm.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Damascus dealt with thee because of the
multitude of thy handiworks, by reason of the abundance of all
substance, with wine of Helbon, and white wool.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Vedan and Javan of Uzal traded in thy
markets: wrought iron, cassia, and calamus were in thy traffic.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Dedan was thy trafficker in precious
riding-cloths.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Arabia and all the princes of Kedar
were the merchants of thy hand: in lambs, and rams, and goats, in these
did they trade with thee.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> The merchants of Sheba and Raamah were
thy traffickers: they furnished thy markets with all the choice spices,
and with all precious stones and gold.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the
merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad traded with thee:

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> these traded with thee in sumptuous
clothes, in wrappings of blue and broidered work, and in chests full of
variegated stuffs, bound with cords and made of cedar-wood, amongst thy
merchandise.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The ships of Tarshish were thy caravans
for thy traffic; and thou wast replenished, and highly honoured, in the
heart of the seas.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Thy rowers have brought thee into great
waters; the east wind hath broken thee in the heart of the seas.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Thy substance, and thy markets, thy
merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, they that repair thy leaks,
and they that barter with thee, and all thy men of war that are in thee,
along with all thine assemblage which is in the midst of thee, shall
fall into the heart of the seas in the day of thy fall.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> The open places shall shake at the
sound of the cry of thy pilots.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> And all that handle the oar, the
mariners, all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships;
they shall stand upon the land,

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> and shall cause their voice to be heard
over thee, and shall cry bitterly; and they shall cast up dust upon
their heads; they shall wallow themselves in ashes.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And they shall make themselves utterly
bald for thee, and gird themselves with sackcloth; and they shall weep
for thee in bitterness of soul with bitter mourning.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And in their wailing they shall take up
a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, \[saying,\] Who is like
Tyre, like her that is destroyed in the midst of the sea?

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> When thy wares went forth over the
seas, thou filledst many peoples; thou didst enrich the kings of the
earth with the abundance of thy substance and of thy merchandise.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> In the time \[when\] thou art broken by
the seas, in the depths of the waters, thy merchandise and all thine
assemblage in the midst of thee have fallen.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> All the inhabitants of the isles are
amazed at thee, and their kings are horribly afraid, \[their\]
countenance is troubled.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> The merchants among the peoples hiss at
thee; thou art become a terror, and thou shalt never be any more.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyre,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because thy heart is lifted up, and thou
hast said, I am a ùgod, I sit \[in\] the seat of God, in the heart of
the seas, (and thou art a man, and not ùGod,) and thou settest thy heart
as the heart of God:

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> behold, thou art wiser than Daniel!
nothing secret is obscure for thee;

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> by thy wisdom and by thine understanding
thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy
treasures;

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> by thy great wisdom thou hast by thy
traffic increased thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up because of thy
riches.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because thou hast set thy heart as the heart of God,

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> therefore behold, I will bring strangers
upon thee, the terrible of the nations; and they shall draw their swords
against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall tarnish thy brightness.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> They shall bring thee down to the pit,
and thou shalt die the deaths of those that are slain in the heart of
the seas.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Wilt thou then say before him that
slayeth thee, I am God? but thou shalt be a man, and not ùGod, in the
hand of him that pierceth thee.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Thou shalt die the deaths of the
uncircumcised, by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken \[it\], saith
the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation upon
the king of Tyre, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Thou,
who sealest up the measure of perfection, full of wisdom and perfect in
beauty,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> thou wast in Eden, the garden of God.
Every precious stone was thy covering: the sardius, the topaz, and the
diamond, the chrysolite, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the
carbuncle, and the emerald, and gold. The workmanship of thy tambours
and of thy pipes was in thee: in the day that thou wast created were
they prepared.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Thou wast the anointed covering cherub,
and I had set thee \[so\]: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou
didst walk up and down in the midst of stones of fire.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Thou wast perfect in thy ways, from the
day that thou wast created, till unrighteousness was found in thee.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> By the abundance of thy traffic they
filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned; therefore
have I cast thee as profane from the mountain of God, and have destroyed
thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Thy heart was lifted up because of thy
beauty; thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I
have cast thee to the ground, I have laid thee before kings, that they
may behold thee.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> By the multitude of thine iniquities,
by the unrighteousness of thy traffic, thou hast profaned thy
sanctuaries: and I have brought forth a fire out of the midst of thee --
it hath consumed thee; and I have brought thee to ashes upon the earth,
in the sight of all them that behold thee.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> All they that know thee among the
peoples shall be amazed at thee: thou art become a terror, and thou
shalt never be any more.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> Son of man, set thy face towards Zidon,
and prophesy against it,

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I am against thee, Zidon, and I will be glorified in the midst
of thee; and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah, when I shall have
executed judgments in her, and shall be hallowed in her.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And I will send into her the
pestilence, and blood in her streets; and the wounded shall fall in the
midst of her, by the sword upon her on every side: and they shall know
that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And there shall be no more a wounding
sting for the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn, among all that
were round about them, that despised them: and they shall know that I
\[am\] the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: When I
shall have gathered the house of Israel from the peoples among whom they
are scattered, and shall be hallowed in them in the sight of the
nations, then shall they dwell in their land which I have given to my
servant Jacob.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> They shall dwell in it in safety, and
shall build houses and plant vineyards; and they shall dwell in safety,
when I have executed judgments upon all those that despised them round
about them: and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah their God.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> In the tenth year, in the tenth
\[month\], on the twelfth of the month, the word of Jehovah came unto
me, saying,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh
king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against the whole of Egypt;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great
monster that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which saith, My river is
mine own, and I made it for myself.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I
will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I will
bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy
rivers shall stick unto thy scales;

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> and I will cast thee into the wilderness,
thee and all the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon the open
field; thou shalt not be brought together nor gathered: I will give thee
for meat to the beasts of the earth and to the fowl of the heavens.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall
know that I \[am\] Jehovah, because they have been a staff of reed to
the house of Israel.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When they took hold of thee by thy hand,
thou didst give way and rend all their shoulder; and when they leaned
upon thee, thou didst break, and didst make all their loins to tremble.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and cut off man and beast from
thee.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And the land of Egypt shall be a
desolation and a waste: and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah,
because he saith, The river is mine, and I made it.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Therefore behold, I am against thee,
and against thy rivers, and I will make the land of Egypt deserts of
wasteness and desolation, from Migdol to Syene, even unto the border of
Ethiopia.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> No foot of man shall pass through it,
nor shall foot of beast pass through it, nor shall it be inhabited,
forty years.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And I will make the land of Egypt a
desolation in the midst of the countries that are desolated, and her
cities shall be, in the midst of the cities that are laid waste, a
desolation forty years; and I will scatter the Egyptians among the
nations, and will disperse them through the countries.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> Yet thus saith the Lord Jehovah: At the
end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the peoples whither
they were scattered;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> and I will turn again the captivity of
Egypt, and will cause them to return to the land of Pathros, into the
land of their birth, and they shall there be a base kingdom.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> It shall be the basest of kingdoms;
neither shall it exalt itself any more above the nations; and I will
diminish them, so that they shall no more rule over the nations.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And it shall be no more the confidence
of the house of Israel, bringing iniquity to remembrance, when they turn
after them: and they shall know that I \[am\] the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And it came to pass in the
twenty-seventh year, in the first \[month\], on the first of the month,
\[that\] the word of Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon caused his army to do hard service against Tyre; every head was
made bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had he from Tyre no wages,
nor his army, for the service that he had served against it.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon; and he shall carry away her multitude, and seize her spoil, and
take her prey; and it shall be the wages for his army.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> I have given him the land of Egypt for
his labour wherewith he served against it, because they wrought for me,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> In that day will I cause the horn of
the house of Israel to bud forth, and I will give thee the opening of
the mouth in the midst of them: and they shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith
the Lord Jehovah: Howl ye, Alas for the day!

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For the day is at hand, yea, the day of
Jehovah is at hand, a day of clouds; it shall be the time of the
nations.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and
there shall be anguish in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt,
and they shall take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be
overthrown.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Cush, and Phut, and Lud, and all the
mingled people, and Chub, and the children of the land that is in
league, shall fall with them by the sword.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Thus saith Jehovah: They also that uphold
Egypt shall fall; and the pride of her strength shall come down: from
Migdol to Syene shall they fall in her by the sword, saith the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And they shall be desolated in the midst
of the countries that are desolated, and her cities shall be in the
midst of the cities that are wasted.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And they shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah, when I have set a fire in Egypt, and all her helpers shall be
broken.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> In that day shall messengers go forth
from me in ships, to make careless Ethiopia afraid; and anguish shall
come upon them, as in the day of Egypt: for behold, it cometh!

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
also make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar
king of Babylon.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> He and his people with him, the
terrible of the nations, shall be brought to destroy the land; and they
shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with slain.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> And I will make the rivers dry, and
sell the land into the hand of the wicked; and I will make the land
desolate, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers: I Jehovah
have spoken \[it\].

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will
also destroy the idols, and I will cause the images to cease out of
Noph; and there shall be no more a prince out of the land of Egypt; and
I will put fear in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And I will make Pathros desolate, and
will set a fire in Zoan, and will execute judgment in No.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> And I will pour my fury upon Sin, the
stronghold of Egypt; and I will cut off the multitude of No.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And I will set a fire in Egypt: Sin
shall be in great anguish, and No shall be rent asunder, and at Noph
\[there shall be\] enemies in open day.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth
shall fall by the sword; and these shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> And at Tehaphnehes the day shall be
darkened, when I break there the yokes of Egypt, and the pride of her
strength shall cease in her; as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and
her daughters shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt;
and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh
year, in the first \[month\], on the seventh of the month, the word of
Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Son of man, I have broken the arm of
Pharaoh king of Egypt; and behold, it shall not be bound up to apply
remedies, to put a bandage to bind it, to make it strong to hold the
sword.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the
strong one, and that which was broken; and I will cause the sword to
fall out of his hand.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And I will scatter the Egyptians among
the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And I will strengthen the arms of the
king of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand; and I will break
Pharaoh's arms, so that he shall groan before him with the groanings of
a deadly-wounded \[man\].

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And I will strengthen the arms of the
king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall
know that I \[am\] Jehovah, when I have put my sword into the hand of
the king of Babylon, and he shall have stretched it out upon the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And I will scatter the Egyptians among
the nations, and disperse them through the countries: and they shall
know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh year,
in the third \[month\], on the first of the month, \[that\] the word of
Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Son of man, say unto Pharaoh king of
Egypt, and to his multitude: Whom art thou like in thy greatness?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Behold, Assyria was a cedar in Lebanon,
with fair branches and a shadowing shroud, and of a high stature: and
his top was amidst the thick boughs.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> The waters made him great, the deep set
him up on high; its streams ran round about his plantation, and it sent
out its rivulets unto all the trees of the field.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Therefore his height was exalted above
all the trees of the field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his
branches became long, because of great waters, when he shot forth.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> All the fowl of the heavens made their
nests in his boughs, and under his branches did all the beasts of the
field bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt all the great
nations.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the
length of his branches: because his root was by great waters.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> The cedars in the garden of God could not
hide him; the cypresses were not like his boughs, and the plane-trees
were not as his branches: no tree in the garden of God was like unto him
in his beauty.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> I had made him fair by the multitude of
his branches; and all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God,
envied him.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Because thou hast lifted up thyself in stature, ... and he hath set his
top amidst the thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his height,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> I have given him into the hand of the
mighty one of the nations; he shall surely deal with him: I have driven
him out for his wickedness.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And strangers, the terrible of the
nations, have cut him off and have left him; upon the mountains and in
all the valleys his branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken in
all the watercourses of the land; and all the peoples of the earth are
gone down from his shadow, and have left him.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Upon his fallen \[trunk\] do all the
fowl of the heavens dwell, and all the beasts of the field are upon his
branches:

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> to the end that none of all the trees
by the waters exalt themselves in their stature, nor set their top
amidst the thick boughs, and that none of them that drink water stand up
in his height by himself; for they are all given over unto death in the
lower parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of men, with them
that go down to the pit.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In the day
when he went down to Sheol, I caused a mourning: I covered the deep for
him, and I restrained the floods thereof, and the great waters were
stayed; and I made Lebanon black for him, and all the trees of the field
fainted for him.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> I made the nations to shake at the
sound of his fall, when I cast him down to Sheol, with them that go down
into the pit; and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon,
all that drink water, were comforted in the lower parts of the earth.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> They also went down into Sheol with him
unto them that were slain with the sword, and \[that were\] his arm,
that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the nations.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> To whom art thou thus like in glory and
in greatness among the trees of Eden? Yet shalt thou be brought down
with the trees of Eden, unto the lower parts of the earth; thou shalt
lie in the midst of the uncircumcised, with them that are slain by the
sword. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And it came to pass in the twelfth year,
in the twelfth month, on the first of the month, that the word of
Jehovah came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation for
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, Thou wast like a young lion
among the nations, and thou wast as a monster in the seas; and thou
didst break forth in thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy
feet, and fouledst their rivers.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will also
spread out my net over thee with an assemblage of many peoples; and they
shall bring thee up in my net.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And I will leave thee upon the land, I
will cast thee forth upon the open field, and will cause all the fowl of
the heavens to settle upon thee, and I will fill the beasts of the whole
earth with thee.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And I will lay thy flesh upon the
mountains, and fill the valleys with the heap of thy \[members\];

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> and I will water with thy blood the land
wherein thou swimmest, even to the mountains; and the water-courses
shall be full of thee.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And when I shall put thee out, I will
cover the heavens, and make the stars thereof black; I will cover the
sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give her light.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> All the bright lights of the heavens will
I make black over thee, and bring darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord
Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And I will vex the heart of many peoples,
when I bring \[the news of\] thy destruction among the nations, into the
countries that thou hast not known.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> And I will make many peoples amazed at
thee, and their kings shall be horribly afraid at thee, when I brandish
my sword before them; and they shall tremble at every moment, each one
for his life, in the day of thy fall.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: The
sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> By the swords of the mighty will I
cause thy multitude to fall: the terrible of the nations are they all:
and they shall spoil the pride of Egypt, and all the multitude thereof
shall be destroyed.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> And I will destroy all the beasts
thereof, from beside the great waters; and the foot of man shall not
trouble them any more, nor shall the cloven hoofs of beasts trouble
them.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Then will I make their waters clear,
and cause their rivers to run like oil, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> When I shall make the land of Egypt a
desolation, and the country shall be left desolate of all that was in
it, when I have smitten all them that dwell therein, then shall they
know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> It is a lamentation, and \[thus\] they
shall lament her: the daughters of the nations shall say it in
lamenting; they shall say it in lamenting over Egypt and over all her
multitude, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And it came to pass in the twelfth
year, on the fifteenth of the month, the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Son of man, wail for the multitude of
Egypt, and cast them down, her and the daughters of the famous nations,
unto the lower parts of the earth, with them that go down into the pit.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Whom dost thou surpass in beauty? Go
down, and be thou laid with the uncircumcised.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> They shall fall in the midst of them
that are slain by the sword. The sword hath been given: draw her out,
and all her multitudes.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> The strong among the mighty, with them
that helped him, shall speak to him out of the midst of Sheol: they are
gone down, they lie still, the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> There is Asshur and all his assemblage,
his graves round about him: all of them slain, fallen by the sword;

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> their graves are set in the sides of
the pit, and his assemblage is round about his grave; all of them slain,
fallen by the sword, -- who caused terror in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> There is Elam and all her multitude
round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who are
gone down uncircumcised unto the lower parts of the earth, who caused
their terror in the land of the living; yet have they borne their
confusion with them that go down to the pit.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> They have set him a bed in the midst of
the slain, with all his multitude: their graves are round about him, all
of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though their terror was
caused in the land of the living; and they have borne their confusion
with them that go down to the pit: he is put in the midst of them that
are slain.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> There is Meshech, Tubal, and all their
multitude, their graves round about them, all of them uncircumcised,
slain by the sword, though they caused their terror in the land of the
living.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And they lie not with the mighty,
\[that are\] fallen of the uncircumcised, who are gone down to Sheol
with their weapons of war; and whose swords are laid under their heads,
and whose iniquities are upon their bones, though they were the terror
of the mighty in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> Thou also shalt be broken in the midst
of the uncircumcised, and shalt lie with them that are slain with the
sword.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> There is Edom, her kings, and all her
princes, who in their might are laid with them that are slain by the
sword: they lie with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to
the pit.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> There are the princes of the north, all
of them, and all the Zidonians, that are gone down with the slain --
ashamed of the terror which they caused through their might; and they
lie uncircumcised with them that are slain by the sword, and bear their
confusion with them that go down to the pit.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be
comforted over all his multitude, Pharaoh and all his army slain by the
sword, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For I have caused my terror in the land
of the living; and he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised,
with them that are slain by the sword, Pharaoh and all his multitude,
saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Son of man, speak to the children of thy
people, and say unto them, When I bring the sword upon a land, and the
people of the land take one man from among them all, and set him for
their watchman:

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> if he see the sword coming upon the land,
and blow the trumpet, and warn the people;

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> then whosoever heareth the sound of the
trumpet, and taketh not warning, if the sword come and take him away,
his blood shall be upon his own head.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> He heard the sound of the trumpet, and
took not warning; his blood is upon him: whereas had he taken warning,
he would have delivered his soul.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> But if the watchman see the sword coming,
and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned, if the sword
come and take a person from among them, he is taken away in his
iniquity; but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> So thou, son of man, I have set thee a
watchman unto the house of Israel; and thou shalt hear the word from my
mouth, and warn them from me.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> When I say unto the wicked, Wicked
\[man\], thou shalt certainly die; and thou speakest not to warn the
wicked from his way, that wicked \[man\] shall die in his iniquity; but
his blood will I require at thy hand.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> But if thou warn the wicked of his way to
turn from it, and he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his
iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And thou, son of man, say unto the
house of Israel, Thus ye speak, saying, Our transgressions and our sins
are upon us, and we waste away in them, how then should we live?

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Say unto them, As I live, saith the
Lord Jehovah, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that
the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And thou, son of man, say unto the
children of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not
deliver him in the day of his transgression; and as for the wickedness
of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from
his wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live thereby in
the day that he sinneth.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> When I say to the righteous that he
shall certainly live, and he trusteth to his righteousness and doeth
what is wrong, none of his righteous acts shall be remembered; but in
his unrighteousness which he hath done, in it shall he die.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And when I say unto the wicked, Thou
shalt certainly die, and he turneth from his sin, and doeth judgment and
justice;

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> if the wicked restore the pledge, give
again that he had taken by robbery, walk in the statutes of life, doing
nothing that is wrong; he shall certainly live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> None of his sins which he hath
committed shall be remembered against him: he hath done judgment and
justice; he shall certainly live.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> Yet the children of thy people say, The
way of the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> When the righteous turneth from his
righteousness, and doeth what is wrong, then he shall die therein.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And when the wicked turneth from his
wickedness, and doeth judgment and justice, he shall live for these
things.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not
equal. O house of Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And it came to pass in the twelfth year
of our captivity, in the tenth \[month\], on the fifth of the month,
that one who had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying, The city
is smitten!

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> Now the hand of Jehovah had been upon
me in the evening, before he that had escaped came; and he had opened my
mouth against his coming to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened,
and I was no more dumb.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Son of man, they that inhabit those
waste places in the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, and
he inherited this land, and we are many: the land is given us for a
possession.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your
idols, and shed blood; and shall ye possess the land?

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> Ye stand upon your sword, ye work
abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife; and shall ye
possess the land?

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> Say thou thus unto them, Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: \[As\] I live, verily they that are in the waste places
shall fall by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give
to the beasts to be devoured, and they that are in the strongholds and
in the caves shall die of the pestilence.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> And I will make the land a desolation
and an astonishment, and the pride of her strength shall cease; and the
mountains of Israel shall be desolated, so that none shall pass through.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> And they shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah, when I have made the land a desolation and an astonishment
because of all their abominations which they have committed.

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> And as for thee, son of man, the
children of thy people keep talking of thee by the walls and in the
doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother,
saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth
from Jehovah.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> And they come unto thee as a people
cometh, and they sit before thee \[as\] my people, and they hear thy
words, but they do them not; for with their mouth they shew much love,
\[but\] their heart goeth after their dishonest gain.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> And behold, thou art unto them as a
lovely song, a pleasant voice, and one that playeth well on an
instrument; and they hear thy words, but they do them not.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> And when this cometh to pass (behold,
it will come), then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Son of man, prophesy against the
shepherds of Israel, prophesy; and say unto them, unto the shepherds,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Woe to the shepherds of Israel that feed
themselves! Should not the shepherds feed the flock?

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with
the wool; ye kill them that are fattened: \[but\] ye feed not the flock.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> The weak have ye not strengthened, nor
have ye healed the sick, and ye have not bound up \[what was\] broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have
ye sought for that which was lost; but with harshness and with rigour
have ye ruled over them.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And they were scattered because there was
no shepherd; and they became meat to all the beasts of the field, and
were scattered.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> My sheep wandered through all the
mountains, and upon every high hill, and my sheep have been scattered
upon all the face of the earth, and there was none that searched, or
that sought for them.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of
Jehovah:

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> \[As\] I live, saith the Lord Jehovah,
verily because my sheep have been a prey, and my sheep have been meat to
every beast of the field, because there was no shepherd, and my
shepherds searched not for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves,
and fed not my flock,

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> -- therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word
of Jehovah.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I
am against the shepherds; and I will require my sheep at their hand, and
cause them to cease from feeding the flock: that the shepherds may feed
themselves no more; and I will deliver my sheep from their mouth, that
they may not be food for them.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold
I, \[even\] I, will both search for my sheep, and tend them.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> As a shepherd tendeth his flock in the
day that he is among his scattered sheep, so will I tend my sheep, and
will deliver them out of all places whither they have been scattered in
the cloudy and dark day.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And I will bring them out from the
peoples, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to
their own land; and I will feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the
water-courses, and in all the habitable places of the country.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> I will feed them in a good pasture, and
upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be: there shall they
lie down in a good fold, and in a fat pasture they shall feed upon the
mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> I will myself feed my flock, and I will
cause them to lie down, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> I will seek the lost, and bring again
that which was driven away, and will bind up the broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick; but I will destroy the fat and the
strong: I will feed them with judgment.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> And as for you, my flock, thus saith
the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I judge between sheep and sheep, between the
rams and the he-goats.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Is it too small a thing unto you to
have eaten up the good pastures, but ye must tread down with your feet
the rest of your pastures; and to have drunk of the settled waters, but
ye must foul the rest with your feet?

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And my sheep have to eat that which ye
have trodden with your feet, and to drink that which ye have fouled with
your feet.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah
unto them: Behold, \[it is\] I, and I will judge between the fat sheep
and the lean sheep.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Because ye thrust with side and with
shoulder, and push all the weak ones with your horns, till ye have
scattered them abroad,

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> -- I will save my flock, that they may
no more be a prey; and I will judge between sheep and sheep.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> And I will set up one shepherd over
them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David: he shall feed them,
and he shall be their shepherd.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> And I Jehovah will be their God, and my
servant David a prince in their midst: I Jehovah have spoken \[it\].

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> And I will make with them a covenant of
peace, and will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land; and they
shall dwell in safety in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> And I will make them and the places
round about my hill a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down
in its season: there shall be showers of blessing.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And the tree of the field shall yield
its fruit, and the earth shall yield its increase; and they shall be in
safety in their land, and shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah, when I have
broken the bands of their yoke and delivered them out of the hand of
those that kept them in servitude.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And they shall no more be a prey to the
nations, neither shall the beast of the earth devour them; but they
shall dwell in safety, and none shall make them afraid.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And I will raise up for them a plant of
renown, and they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the land,
neither bear the ignominy of the nations any more.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And they shall know that I Jehovah
their God \[am\] with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are my
people, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And ye, my flock, the flock of my
pasture, are men: I \[am\] your God, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against mount
Seir, and prophesy against it,

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> and say unto it, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, mount Seir, and I will stretch out
my hand upon thee, and I will make thee a desolation and an
astonishment.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> I will lay thy cities waste, and thou
shalt be a desolation: and thou shalt know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred,
and hast given over the children of Israel to the power of the sword, in
the time of their calamity, in the time of the iniquity of the end;

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> therefore, \[as\] I live, saith the Lord
Jehovah, I will certainly appoint thee unto blood, and blood shall
pursue thee; since thou hast not hated blood, blood shall pursue thee.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And I will make mount Seir a desolation
and an astonishment, and cut off from it him that passeth out and him
that returneth;

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> and I will fill his mountains with his
slain. In thy hills, and in thy valleys, and in all thy water-courses
shall they fall that are slain with the sword.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> I will make thee perpetual desolations,
and thy cities shall not be inhabited: and ye shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Because thou hast said, These two
nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it,
whereas Jehovah was there:

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> therefore, \[as\] I live, saith the
Lord Jehovah, I will even do according to thine anger and according to
thine envy, as thou hast done out of thy hatred against them; and I will
make myself known among them, when I shall judge thee.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And thou shalt know that I Jehovah have
heard all thy reproaches, which thou hast uttered against the mountains
of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to devour.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> And ye have magnified yourselves
against me with your mouth, and have multiplied your words against me: I
have heard \[them\].

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: When the
whole earth rejoiceth, I will make thee a desolation.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> As thou didst rejoice at the
inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolated, so will I
do unto thee: thou shalt be a desolation, O mount Seir, and all Edom,
the whole of it: and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And thou, son of man, prophesy unto the
mountains of Israel, and say, Mountains of Israel, hear the word of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because the
enemy hath said against you, Aha! and, The ancient high places are
become ours in possession;

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith
the Lord Jehovah: Because, yea, because they have made \[you\] desolate,
and have swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a possession
unto the remnant of the nations, and ye are taken up in the lips of
talkers, and in the defaming of the people:

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear
the word of the Lord Jehovah. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to the
mountains and to the hills, to the water-courses and to the valleys, to
the desolate wastes and to the cities that are forsaken, which are
become a prey and a derision to the remnant of the nations that are
round about,

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> -- therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the remnant of
the nations, and against the whole of Edom, which have appointed my land
unto themselves for a possession with the joy of all \[their\] heart,
with despite of soul, to plunder it by pillage.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Prophesy therefore concerning the land of
Israel, and say to the mountains and to the hills, to the water-courses
and to the valleys, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I have spoken
in my jealousy and in my fury, because ye have borne the ignominy of the
nations;

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I
have lifted up my hand, \[saying,\] Verily the nations that are about
you, they shall bear their shame.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And ye mountains of Israel shall shoot
forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people Israel: for they
are at hand to come.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> For behold, I am for you, and I will turn
unto you, and ye shall be tilled and sown.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And I will multiply men upon you, all
the house of Israel, the whole of it; and the cities shall be inhabited,
and the waste places shall be builded.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And I will multiply upon you man and
beast, and they shall increase and bring forth fruit; and I will cause
you to be inhabited as \[in\] your former times, yea, I will make it
better than at your beginnings: and ye shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> And I will cause men to walk upon you,
even my people Israel; and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be
their inheritance, and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of
children.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because
they say unto you, Thou devourest men, and hast bereaved thy nation,

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> therefore thou shalt devour men no
more, neither bereave thy nation any more, saith the Lord Jehovah;

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> neither will I cause thee to hear the
ignominy of the nations any more, and thou shalt not bear the reproach
of the peoples any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nation to fall any
more, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Son of man, when the house of Israel
dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their way and by their
doings: their way was before me as the uncleanness of a woman in her
separation.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And I poured out my fury upon them for
the blood that they had shed upon the land, and because they had defiled
it with their idols.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> And I scattered them among the nations,
and they were dispersed through the countries: according to their way
and according to their doings I judged them.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And when they came to the nations
whither they went, they profaned my holy name, when it was said of them,
These are the people of Jehovah, and they are gone forth out of his
land.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> But I had pity for my holy name, which
the house of Israel had profaned among the nations whither they went.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Therefore say unto the house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I do not this for your sakes, O house of
Israel, but for my holy name, which ye have profaned among the nations
whither ye went.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And I will hallow my great name, which
was profaned among the nations, which ye have profaned in the midst of
them; and the nations shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah, saith the Lord
Jehovah, when I shall be hallowed in you before their eyes.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> And I will take you from among the
nations, and gather you out of all the countries, and will bring you
into your own land.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, and ye shall be clean: from all your uncleannesses and from all
your idols will I cleanse you.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> And I will give you a new heart, and I
will put a new spirit within you; and I will take away the stony heart
out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> And I will put my Spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my statutes and keep mine ordinances, and ye
shall do them.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> And ye shall dwell in the land that I
gave to your fathers, and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> And I will save you from all your
uncleannesses; and I will call for the corn and will multiply it, and
lay no famine upon you.

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> And I will multiply the fruit of the
trees and the increase of the field, so that ye may receive no more the
reproach of famine among the nations.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And ye shall remember your evil ways,
and your doings which were not good, and shall loathe yourselves for
your iniquities and for your abominations.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> Not for your sakes do I this, saith the
Lord Jehovah, be it known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your
ways, O house of Israel.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In the day
that I shall cleanse you from all your iniquities I will also cause the
cities to be inhabited, and the waste places shall be builded.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And the desolate land shall be tilled,
whereas it was a desolation in the sight of all that passed by.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And they shall say, This land that was
desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate
and ruined cities \[are\] fortified \[and\] inhabited.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> And the nations that shall be left
round about you shall know that I Jehovah build the ruined places
\[and\] plant that which was desolate: I Jehovah have spoken, and I will
do \[it\].

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will yet
for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it unto them; I
will increase them with men like a flock.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> As the holy flock, as the flock of
Jerusalem in her set feasts, so shall the waste cities be filled with
flocks of men: and they shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and
Jehovah carried me out in the Spirit, and set me down in the midst of a
valley; and it was full of bones.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And he caused me to pass by them round
about; and behold, there were very many in the open valley; and behold,
they were very dry.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, Shall
these bones live? And I said, Lord Jehovah, thou knowest.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And he said unto me, Prophesy over these
bones, and say unto them, Ye dry bones, hear the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah unto these
bones: Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And I will put sinews upon you, and will
bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you,
and ye shall live: and ye shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> And I prophesied as I was commanded; and
as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a rustling, and the bones
came together, bone to its bone.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And I looked, and behold, sinews and
flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them over; but there was
no breath in them.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And he said unto me, Prophesy unto the
wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these
slain, that they may live.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> And I prophesied as he had commanded
me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon
their feet, an exceeding great army.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, these
bones are the whole house of Israel. Behold, they say, Our bones are
dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut off!

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Therefore prophesy and say unto them,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will open your graves, and cause
you to come up out of your graves, O my people, and bring you into the
land of Israel.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And ye shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah, when I have opened your graves, and have caused you to come up
out of your graves, O my people.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And I will put my Spirit in you, and ye
shall live, and I will place you in your own land: and ye shall know
that I Jehovah have spoken, and have done \[it\], saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> And thou, son of man, take thee one
stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel, his
companions. And take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the
stick of Ephraim and all the house of Israel, his companions.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> And join them one to another into one
stick; and they shall become one in thy hand.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> And when the children of my people
speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not declare unto us what thou meanest
by these?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand
of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his companions, and will put them
with this, with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they
shall be one in my hand.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And the sticks whereon thou writest
shall be in thy hand before their eyes.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the
nations, whither they are gone, and will gather them from every side,
and bring them into their own land:

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> and I will make them one nation in the
land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them
all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be
divided into two kingdoms any more at all.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> And they shall not defile themselves
any more with their idols, or with their detestable things, or with any
of their transgressions; and I will save them out of all their
dwelling-places wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them; and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> And David my servant shall be king over
them; and they all shall have one shepherd: and they shall walk in mine
ordinances, and keep my statutes, and do them.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And they shall dwell in the land that I
have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and
they shall dwell therein, they, and their children, and their children's
children for ever: and David my servant shall be their prince for ever.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> And I will make a covenant of peace
with them: it shall be an everlasting covenant with them; and I will
place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of
them for ever.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> And my tabernacle shall be over them;
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And the nations shall know that I
Jehovah do hallow Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of
them for ever.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the
land of Magog, the prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, and prophesy
against him,

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And I will turn thee back, and put hooks
into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses
and horsemen, all of them thoroughly equipped, a great assemblage with
targets and shields, all of them handling swords:

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Persia, Cush, and Phut with them, all of
them with shield and helmet;

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Gomer, and all his bands; the house of
Togarmah from the uttermost north, and all his bands; -- many peoples
with thee.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself
thou, and all thine assemblage that are assembled unto thee, and be thou
a guard unto them.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> After many days shalt thou be visited; at
the end of years thou shalt come into the land brought back from the
sword \[and\] gathered out of many peoples, upon the mountains of Israel
which have been a perpetual waste: but it is brought forth out from the
peoples, and they shall all of them be dwelling in safety.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> And thou shalt ascend, thou shalt come
like a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and
all thy bands, and many peoples with thee.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: It shall
even come to pass in that day that things shall come into thy mind, and
thou shalt think an evil thought;

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> and thou shalt say, I will go up to the
land of unwalled villages; I will come to them that are in quiet, that
dwell in safety, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither
bars nor gates,

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> to seize a spoil, and to take a prey;
to turn thy hand against the waste places that are \[now\] inhabited,
and against a people gathered out of the nations, which have gotten
cattle and goods, that dwell in the middle of the land.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of
Tarshish, with all the young lions thereof, shall say unto thee, Art
thou come to seize a spoil? hast thou gathered thine assemblage to take
a prey? to carry away silver and gold, to take cattle and goods, to
seize a great spoil?

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> Therefore prophesy, son of man, and say
unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In that day when my people Israel
dwelleth in safety, shalt thou not know \[it\]?

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And thou shalt come from thy place out
of the uttermost north, thou and many peoples with thee, all of them
riding upon horses, a great assemblage and a mighty army.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> And thou shalt come up against my
people Israel as a cloud to cover the land -- it shall be at the end of
days -- and I will bring thee against my land, that the nations may know
me, when I shall be hallowed in thee, O Gog, before their eyes.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Art thou
not he of whom I have spoken in old time through my servants the
prophets of Israel, who prophesied in those days, for \[many\] years,
that I would bring thee against them?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
in the day when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the
Lord Jehovah, \[that\] my fury shall come up in my face;

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> for in my jealousy, in the fire of my
wrath have I spoken, Verily in that day there shall be a great shaking
in the land of Israel;

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> so that the fish of the sea, and the
fowl of the heavens, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping
things which creep upon the earth, and all mankind that are upon the
face of the earth shall shake at my presence; and the mountains shall be
thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall
to the ground.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> And I will call for a sword against him
throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord Jehovah: every man's sword
shall be against his brother.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And I will enter into judgment with him
with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his
bands, and upon the many peoples that are with him, overflowing rain and
great hailstones, fire and brimstone.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> And I will magnify myself, and sanctify
myself, and I will be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall
know that I \[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And thou, son of man, prophesy against
Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O
Gog, prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal;

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> and I will turn thee back, and lead thee,
and will cause thee to come up from the uttermost north, and will bring
thee upon the mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> And I will smite thy bow out of thy left
hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of
Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the peoples that are with thee: I
have given thee to be meat for the birds of prey of every wing, and to
the beasts of the field.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Thou shalt fall on the open field; for I
have spoken \[it\], saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And I will send a fire on Magog, and
among them that dwell at ease in the isles: and they shall know that I
\[am\] Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And my holy name will I make known in the
midst of my people Israel; and I will not suffer my holy name to be
profaned any more: and the nations shall know that I \[am\] Jehovah, the
Holy One in Israel.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> Behold, it cometh, and shall be done,
saith the Lord Jehovah. This is the day whereof I have spoken.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> And they that dwell in the cities of
Israel shall go forth, and shall kindle fire, and burn weapons, and
shields, and targets, bows, and arrows, and hand-staves, and spears: and
they shall make fires with them seven years.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And no wood shall be taken out of the
field, neither cut down out of the forests; for they shall make fire
with the weapons; and they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and
plunder those that plundered them, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
\[that\] I will give unto Gog a place there for burial in Israel, the
valley of the passers-by to the east of the sea; and it shall stop \[the
way\] of the passers-by; and there shall they bury Gog and all the
multitude; and they shall call it, Valley of Hamon-Gog.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> And seven months shall the house of
Israel be burying them, that they may cleanse the land;

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> and all the people of the land shall
bury \[them\]; and it shall be to them for renown in the day that I
shall be glorified, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> And they shall sever out men of
continual employment to go through the land, who, with the passers-by,
shall bury those that remain upon the face of the land, to cleanse it:
at the end of seven months shall they make a search.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And the passers-by shall pass through
the land, and when \[any\] seeth a man's bone, he shall set up a sign by
it, till the buriers have buried it in the Valley of Hamon-Gog.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And also the name of the city shall be
Hamonah. Thus shall they cleanse the land.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And thou, son of man, thus saith the
Lord Jehovah: Speak unto the birds of every wing, and to every beast of
the field, Gather yourselves together and come, assemble yourselves on
every side to my sacrifice which I sacrifice for you, a great sacrifice
upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty,
and drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and
of goats, \[and\] of bullocks, all of them fatted beasts of Bashan.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> And ye shall eat fat till ye are full,
and drink blood till ye are drunken, of my sacrifice which I sacrifice
for you.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> And ye shall be filled at my table with
horses and charioteers, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith
the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> And I will set my glory among the
nations, and all the nations shall see my judgment which I have
executed, and my hand which I have laid upon them.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> And the house of Israel shall know that
I \[am\] Jehovah their God from that day and forward.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> And the nations shall know that the
house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity, because they
were unfaithful against me; and I hid my face from them, and gave them
into the hand of their enemies, so that they fell all of them by the
sword.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> According to their uncleanness and
according to their transgressions I did unto them, and I hid my face
from them.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> Therefore, thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the
whole house of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name:

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> and they shall bear their confusion,
and all their unfaithfulness in which they have acted unfaithfully
against me, when they shall dwell safely in their land, and none shall
make them afraid;

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> when I have brought them again from the
peoples, and gathered them out of their enemies' lands, and am hallowed
in them in the sight of many nations.

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> And they shall know that I \[am\]
Jehovah their God, in that I caused them to be led into captivity among
the nations, and have gathered them unto their own land, and have left
none of them any more there.

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> And I will not hide my face any more
from them, for I shall have poured out my Spirit upon the house of
Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> In the twenty-fifth year of our
captivity, in the beginning of the year, on the tenth of the month, in
the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, on that same day
the hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he brought me thither.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> In the visions of God brought he me into
the land of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain; and upon it
was as the building of a city, on the south.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And he brought me thither, and behold,
there was a man whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with
a flax-cord in his hand, and a measuring-reed; and he stood in the gate.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And the man said unto me, Son of man,
behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon
all that I shall shew thee; for in order that it might be shewn unto
thee art thou brought hither. Declare to the house of Israel all that
thou seest.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And behold, there was a wall on the
outside of the house round about, and in the man's hand a measuring-reed
of six cubits, \[each\] of one cubit and a hand breadth. And he measured
the breadth of the building, one reed; and the height, one reed.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And he came to the gate which looked
toward the east, and went up its steps; and he measured the threshold of
the gate, one reed broad; and the other threshold one reed broad.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And \[each\] chamber was one reed long
and one reed broad; and between the chambers were five cubits; and the
threshold of the gate, beside the porch of the gate within, was one
reed.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> And he measured the porch of the gate
within, one reed.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And he measured the porch of the gate,
eight cubits; and the posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the
gate was inward.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> And the chambers of the gate which was
toward the east were three on this side and three on that side: they
three were of one measure; and the posts on this side and on that side
had one measure.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And he measured the breadth of the
entry of the gate, ten cubits; \[and\] the length of the gate, thirteen
cubits.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> And there was a border before the
chambers of one cubit, and a border of one cubit on the other side; and
the chambers were six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> And he measured the gate from the roof
of \[one\] chamber to the roof \[of the other\], a breadth of five and
twenty cubits, entry opposite entry.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> And he made posts, sixty cubits, and by
the post was the court of the gate round about.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> And from the front of the gate of the
entrance unto the front of the porch of the inner gate were fifty
cubits.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And there were closed windows to the
chambers, and to their posts within the gate round about, and likewise
to the projections; and the windows round about were inward; and upon
\[each\] post were palm-trees.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> And he brought me into the outer court,
and behold, there were cells, and a pavement made for the court round
about: thirty cells were upon the pavement.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> And the pavement was by the side of the
gates, answering to the length of the gates, \[namely\] the lower
pavement.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> And he measured the breadth from the
front of the lower gate unto the front of the inner court outside, a
hundred cubits eastward and northward.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And the gate of the outer court, that
looked toward the north, he measured its length and its breadth.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> And its chambers were three on this
side and three on that side; and its posts and its projections were
according to the measure of the first gate: its length was fifty cubits,
and breadth five and twenty cubits.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> And its windows, and its projections,
and its palm-trees were according to the measure of the gate that looked
toward the east; and they went up to it by seven steps; and the
projections thereof were before them.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> And the gate of the inner court was
opposite to the gate toward the north, and toward the east; and he
measured from gate to gate a hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> And he brought me toward the south: and
behold, there was a gate toward the south; and he measured its posts and
its projections according to these measures.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> And there were windows to it and to its
projections round about, like those windows: the length was fifty
cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> And there were seven steps to go up to
it; and its projections were before them; and it had palm-trees, one on
this side and one on that side, upon its posts.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> And there was a gate to the inner court
toward the south; and he measured from gate to gate toward the south, a
hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> And he brought me into the inner court
by the south gate; and he measured the south gate according to these
measures:

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> and its chambers, and its posts, and
its projections, according to these measures; and there were windows to
it and to its projections round about: the length was fifty cubits, and
the breadth twenty-five cubits.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> And there were projections round about,
twenty-five cubits long, and five cubits broad.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> And its projections were toward the
outer court; and there were palm-trees upon its posts: and its ascent
was \[by\] eight steps.

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> And he brought me into the inner court
toward the east; and he measured the gate according to these measures:

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> and its chambers, and its posts, and
its projections, according to these measures; and there were windows to
it and to its projections round about: the length was fifty cubits, and
the breadth twenty-five cubits.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> And its projections were toward the
outer court; and there were palm-trees upon its posts on this side and
on that side: and its ascent was \[by\] eight steps.

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> And he brought me to the north gate,
and he measured \[it\] according to these measures:

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> its chambers, its posts, and its
projections; and there were windows to it round about: the length was
fifty cubits, and the breadth twenty-five cubits.

<span id="an_40:37">40:37</span> And its posts were toward the outer
court; and there were palm-trees upon its posts, on this side and on
that side: and its ascent was \[by\] eight steps.

<span id="an_40:38">40:38</span> And there was a cell and its entry by
the posts of the gates; there they rinsed the burnt-offering.

<span id="an_40:39">40:39</span> And in the porch of the gate were two
tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slay thereon the
burnt-offering and the sin-offering and the trespass-offering.

<span id="an_40:40">40:40</span> And at the side without, at the ascent
to the entry of the north gate, were two tables; and on the other side,
which was at the porch of the gate, were two tables:

<span id="an_40:41">40:41</span> four tables on this side, and four
tables on that side, by the side of the gate, -- eight tables, whereon
they slew \[the sacrifice\],

<span id="an_40:42">40:42</span> -- and at the ascent, four tables of
hewn stone, of a cubit and a half long, and a cubit and a half broad,
and one cubit high; whereon also they laid the instruments with which
they slew the burnt-offering and the sacrifice.

<span id="an_40:43">40:43</span> And the double hooks of a hand breadth
were fastened round about within; and upon the tables \[they put\] the
flesh of the offering.

<span id="an_40:44">40:44</span> And outside the inner gate were two
cells in the inner court, one at the side of the north gate, and its
front towards the south; the other was at the side of the south gate,
the front towards the north.

<span id="an_40:45">40:45</span> And he said unto me, This cell whose
front is towards the south is for the priests, the keepers of the charge
of the house.

<span id="an_40:46">40:46</span> And the cell whose front is toward the
north is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar. These
are the sons of Zadok, those who, from among the sons of Levi, approach
unto Jehovah to minister unto him.

<span id="an_40:47">40:47</span> And he measured the court, the length a
hundred cubits, and the breadth a hundred cubits, four square: and the
altar was before the house.

<span id="an_40:48">40:48</span> And he brought me to the porch of the
house; and he measured the post of the porch, five cubits on this side,
and five cubits on that side; and the breadth of the gate, three cubits
on this side, and three cubits on that side.

<span id="an_40:49">40:49</span> The length of the porch was twenty
cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits, even by the steps whereby they
went up to it; and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side,
and one on that side.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> And he brought me to the temple; and he
measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits
broad on the other side, the breadth of the tent.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> And the breadth of the entry was ten
cubits, and the sides of the entry were five cubits on this side, and
five cubits on that side; and he measured its length, forty cubits, and
the breadth, twenty cubits.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> And he went inwards, and measured the
post of the entry, two cubits; and the entry, six cubits; and the
breadth of the entry, seven cubits.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> And he measured its length, twenty
cubits; and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said
unto me, This is the most holy \[place\].

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> And he measured the wall of the house,
six cubits; and the breadth of the side-chambers, four cubits, round
about the house on every side.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And the side-chambers were three, chamber
over chamber, and thirty in order; and they entered into the wall which
the house had for the side-chambers round about, that they might have
hold; but they had not hold in the wall of the house.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And for the side-chambers there was an
enlarging, and it went round about \[the house\] increasing upward; for
the surrounding of the house increased upward round about the house;
therefore the house had width upward, and so ascended \[from\] the lower
\[story\] to the upper, by the middle one.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> And I saw that the house had an elevation
round about: the foundations of the side-chambers, a full reed, six
cubits to the joint.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> The thickness of the wall, which was for
the side-chambers without, was five cubits, as also what was left free
along the building of the side-chambers that pertained to the house.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> And between the cells \[and the house\]
was a width of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> And the entry of the side-chambers was
toward what was left free, one entry toward the north, and one entry
toward the south; and the width of the space left free was five cubits
round about.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> And the building that was before the
separate place at the end toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and
the wall of the building was five cubits thick round about; and its
length ninety cubits.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> And he measured the house: the length a
hundred cubits; and the separate place, and the building, and its walls,
the length a hundred cubits;

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> and the breadth of the front of the
house, and of the separate places toward the east, a hundred cubits.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> And he measured the length of the
building before the separate place, which was at the back of it, with
its galleries on the one side and on the other side, a hundred cubits;
and the inner temple, and the porches of the court.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> The thresholds, and the closed windows,
and the galleries round about the three of them (opposite the thresholds
it was wainscoted with wood round about, and from the ground up to the
windows, and the windows were covered),

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> \[and\] above, over the entry, even
unto the inner house, and without, and by all the wall round about,
within and without, \[all was\] by measure.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> And it was made with cherubim and
palm-trees, and a palm-tree was between cherub and cherub; and the
cherub had two faces:

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> the face of a man was toward the
palm-tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion toward the
palm-tree on the other side: \[so\] was it made upon all the house round
about.

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> From the ground unto above the entry
were the cherubim and the palm-trees made, and \[on\] the wall of the
temple.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> As for the temple, the door-posts were
squared; and the front of the sanctuary had the same appearance.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> The altar was of wood, three cubits
high, and its length two cubits; and its corners, and its length, and
its walls were of wood. And he said unto me, This is the table which is
before Jehovah.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> And the temple and the sanctuary had
two doors.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> And the doors had two leaves, two
turning-leaves: two for the one door, and two leaves for the other.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> And there were made on them, on the
doors of the temple, cherubim and palm-trees, as there were made upon
the walls; and there was a wooden portal in front of the porch without,

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> and closed windows and palm-trees on
the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the porch and the
side chambers of the house and the portals.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> And he brought me forth into the outer
court, the way toward the north; and he brought me to the cells that
were over against the separate place and which were over against the
building, toward the north,

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> before the length of the hundred cubits:
the entry was on the north, and the breadth was fifty cubits,

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> over against the twenty \[cubits\] that
pertained to the inner court, and over against the pavement that
pertained to the outer court; there was gallery against gallery in the
third \[story\];

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> and before the cells was a walk of ten
cubits in breadth, \[and\] a way of a hundred cubits inward; and their
entries were toward the north.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> And the upper cells, because the
galleries encroached on them, were shorter than the lower, and than the
middle-most of the building.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> For they were in three \[stories\], but
had not pillars as the pillars of the courts; therefore \[the third
story\] was straitened more than the lowest and the middle-most from the
ground.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And the wall that was without, answering
to the cells, toward the outer court in the front of the cells, its
length was fifty cubits:

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> for the length of the cells that were
against the outer court was fifty cubits; but behold, before the temple
it was a hundred cubits.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> And under these cells was the entry from
the east, as one goeth into them from the outer court.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> In the breadth of the wall of the court
toward the south, before the separate place, and before the building,
were cells;

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> and a passage before them, like the
appearance of the cells that were toward the north, according to their
length, according to their breadth and all their goings out, and
according to their fashions, and according to their doors.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And according to the doors of the cells
that were toward the south there was a door at the head of the way, the
way directly before the corresponding wall toward the east as one
entereth into them.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> And he said unto me, The north cells
\[and\] the south cells, which are before the separate place, they are
holy cells, where the priests that come near unto Jehovah shall eat the
most holy things; there shall they lay the most holy things, both the
oblation and the sin-offering and the trespass-offering: for the place
is holy.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> When the priests enter in, they shall
not go forth from the sanctuary into the outer court, but there they
shall lay their garments wherein they minister, for they are holy; and
they shall put on other garments, and shall approach to that which is
for the people.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> And when he had made an end of
measuring the inner house, he brought me forth toward the gate whose
front was toward the east, and measured \[the enclosure\] round about.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> He measured the east side with the
measuring-reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring-reed round about.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> He measured the north side, five
hundred reeds, with the measuring-reed round about.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> He measured the south side, five
hundred reeds, with the measuring-reed.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> He turned about to the west side,
\[and\] measured five hundred reeds with the measuring-reed.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> He measured it on the four sides; it
had a wall round about, five hundred long, and five hundred broad, to
make a separation between that which was holy and that which was common.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> And he brought me unto the gate, the gate
which looked toward the east.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> And behold, the glory of the God of
Israel came from the way of the east; and his voice was like the voice
of many waters; and the earth was lit up with his glory.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> And the appearance of the vision that I
saw was according to the vision that I had seen when I came to destroy
the city; and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river
Chebar: and I fell upon my face.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> And the glory of Jehovah came into the
house by the way of the gate whose front was toward the east.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> And the Spirit lifted me up, and brought
me into the inner court; and behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the
house.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> And I heard one speaking unto me out of
the house; and a man was standing by me.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, \[this
is\] the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet,
where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever; and
the house of Israel shall no more defile my holy name, they nor their
kings, with their fornication, and with the carcases of their kings
\[in\] their high places,

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> in that they set their threshold by my
threshold, and their post by my post, and \[there was only\] a wall
between me and them, and they defiled my holy name with their
abominations which they committed; and I consumed them in mine anger.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Now let them put away their fornication,
and the carcases of their kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the
midst of them for ever.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> Thou, son of man, shew the house to the
house of Israel, that they may be confounded at their iniquities; and
let them measure the pattern.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> And if they be confounded at all that
they have done, make known to them the form of the house, and its
fashion, and its goings out, and its comings in, and all its forms, and
all its statutes, yea, all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof;
and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof,
and all the statutes thereof, and do them.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> This is the law of the house: Upon the
top of the mountain all its border round about is most holy. Behold,
this is the law of the house.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> And these are the measures of the altar
in cubits: the cubit is a cubit and a hand breadth. The bottom was a
cubit \[in height\] and the breadth a cubit, and its border on the edge
thereof round about, one span: and this was the base of the altar.

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> And from the bottom upon the ground to
the lower settle was two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the
small settle to the great settle, four cubits, and the breadth a cubit.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> And the upper altar was four cubits;
and from the hearth of ùGod and upward were four horns.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> And the hearth of ùGod was twelve
\[cubits\] long, by twelve broad, square in the four sides thereof.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> And the settle was fourteen \[cubits\]
long by fourteen broad in the four sides thereof; and the border about
it, half a cubit; and the bottom thereof a cubit round about: and its
steps looked toward the east.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, thus
saith the Lord Jehovah: These are the ordinances of the altar in the day
when they shall make it, to offer up burnt-offerings thereon, and to
sprinkle blood thereon.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> And thou shalt give to the priests the
Levites that are of the seed of Zadok, who come near unto me, to
minister unto me, saith the Lord Jehovah, a young bullock for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> And thou shalt take of its blood, and
put it on the four horns thereof, and on the four corners of the settle,
and upon the border round about: so shalt thou purge and make atonement
for it.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> And thou shalt take the bullock of the
sin-offering, and it shall be burned in the appointed place of the
house, outside the sanctuary.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> And on the second day thou shalt
present a he-goat without blemish for a sin-offering; and they shall
purge the altar, as they purged it with the bullock.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> When thou hast ended purging it, thou
shalt present a young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the
flock without blemish;

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> and thou shalt present them before
Jehovah; and the priests shall cast salt upon them, and they shall offer
them up for a burnt-offering unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> Seven days shalt thou offer daily a
goat for a sin-offering; they shall also offer a young bullock, and a
ram out of the flock without blemish.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Seven days shall they make atonement
for the altar and purify it, and consecrate it.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> And when these days are ended, it shall
be that upon the eighth day and onwards the priests shall offer your
burnt-offerings upon the altar, and your peace-offerings; and I will
accept you, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> And he brought me back toward the outer
gate of the sanctuary which looked toward the east; and it was shut.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> And Jehovah said unto me, This gate shall
be shut; it shall not be opened, and no one shall enter in by it: for
Jehovah, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it; and it shall be shut.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> As for the prince, he, the prince, shall
sit in it to eat bread before Jehovah: he shall enter by the way of the
porch of the gate, and shall go out by the way of the same.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And he brought me the way of the north
gate before the house; and I beheld, and lo, the glory of Jehovah filled
the house of Jehovah: and I fell upon my face.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Son of man,
apply thy heart, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears
all that I say unto thee concerning all the statutes of the house of
Jehovah, and all the laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the
house, with every going forth of the sanctuary;

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> and say to the rebellious, to the house
of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Let it suffice you of all your
abominations, O house of Israel,

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> in that ye have brought strangers,
uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my
sanctuary, to profane it, \[even\] my house, when ye offered my bread,
the fat and the blood; and they have broken my covenant besides all your
abominations.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> And ye have not kept the charge of my
holy things, but have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for
yourselves.

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: No stranger,
uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my
sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> But the Levites who went away far from
me, when Israel went astray, going astray from me after their idols,
they shall even bear their iniquity;

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> but they shall be ministers in my
sanctuary, having oversight at the gates of the house, and doing the
service of the house: they shall slaughter the burnt-offering and the
sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister
unto them.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> Because they ministered unto them
before their idols, and were unto the house of Israel a stumbling-block
of iniquity; therefore have I lifted up my hand against them, saith the
Lord Jehovah, that they shall bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> And they shall not draw near unto me,
to do the office of a priest unto me, nor to draw near to any of my holy
things, \[even\] to the most holy; but they shall bear their confusion,
and their abominations which they have committed.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> And I will make them keepers of the
charge of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall
be done therein.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> But the priests, the Levites, the sons
of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the children of
Israel went astray from me, they shall approach unto me to minister unto
me, and they shall stand before me to present unto me the fat and the
blood, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> They shall enter into my sanctuary, and
they shall approach unto my table, to minister unto me, and they shall
keep my charge.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> And it shall come to pass when they
enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with
linen garments; and no wool shall come upon them, when they minister in
the gates of the inner court, and towards the house.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They shall have linen tires upon their
heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not
gird on anything that causeth sweat.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> And when they go forth into the outer
court, into the outer court to the people, they shall put off their
garments wherein they ministered, and lay them in the holy cells; and
they shall put on other garments, that they may not hallow the people
with their garments.

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> Neither shall they shave their heads,
nor suffer their locks to grow long: they shall duly poll their heads.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> Neither shall any priest drink wine
when they enter into the inner court.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> And they shall not take for their wives
a widow, nor her that is put away; but they shall take maidens of the
seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that is the widow of a priest.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> And they shall teach my people \[the
difference\] between holy and profane, and cause them to discern between
unclean and clean.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> And in controversy they shall stand to
judge: they shall judge it according to my judgments; and they shall
keep my laws and my statutes in all my solemnities; and they shall
hallow my sabbaths.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> And they shall come at no dead person
to become unclean; but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for
daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may
become unclean.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> And after he is cleansed, they shall
count unto him seven days.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> And on the day that he goeth into the
sanctuary, unto the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall
present his sin-offering, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> And it shall be unto them for an
inheritance; I am their inheritance: and ye shall give them no
possession in Israel; I am their possession.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> They shall eat the oblation and the
sin-offering and the trespass-offering; and every devoted thing in
Israel shall be theirs.

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> And the first of all the first-fruits
of every \[kind\], and every heave-offering of every \[kind\], of all
your heave-offerings, shall be for the priests; ye shall also give unto
the priest the first of your dough, that he may cause the blessing to
rest on thy house.

<span id="an_44:31">44:31</span> The priests shall not eat of anything
that dieth of itself, or of that which is torn, whether of fowl or of
beast.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> And when ye shall divide by lot the land
for inheritance, ye shall offer a heave-offering unto Jehovah, a holy
portion of the land: the length shall be the length of five and twenty
thousand \[cubits\], and the breadth ten thousand. This shall be holy in
all the borders thereof round about.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> Of this there shall be for the sanctuary
five hundred \[reeds\] by five hundred, square round about; and fifty
cubits round about for the suburbs thereof.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And of this measure shalt thou measure
the length of five and twenty thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand;
and in it shall be the sanctuary, the holy of holies.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> This is the holy \[portion\] of the land;
it shall be for the priests who do the service of the sanctuary, who
draw near to serve Jehovah, and it shall be a place for their houses,
and a holy place for the sanctuary.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> And \[a space of\] five and twenty
thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth, shall the Levites, who
do the service of the house, have for themselves, for a possession, for
their habitations.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> And ye shall appoint the possession of
the city five thousand in breadth, and five and twenty thousand in
length, alongside of the holy heave-offering: it shall be for the whole
house of Israel.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> And the prince shall have \[his portion\]
on the one side and on the other side of the holy heave-offering and of
the possession of the city, over against the holy heave-offering, and
over against the possession of the city, from the west side westward,
and from the east side eastward; and in length answering to one of the
portions \[of the tribes\] from the west border unto the east border.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> As land shall it be his for a possession
in Israel; and my princes shall no more oppress my people; but they
shall give the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Let it
suffice you, princes of Israel! Put away violence and spoil, and execute
judgment and justice; take off your exactions from my people, saith the
Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> Ye shall have just balances, and a just
ephah, and a just bath.

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> The ephah and the bath shall be of one
measure, so that the bath may contain the tenth part of a homer, and the
ephah the tenth part of a homer: the measure thereof shall be according
to the homer.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs;
twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your
maneh.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> This is the heave-offering which ye
shall offer: the sixth part of an ephah out of a homer of wheat, and ye
shall give the sixth part of an ephah out of a homer of barley;

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> and the set portion of oil, by the bath
of oil, the tenth part of a bath out of a cor, \[which is\] a homer of
ten baths, for ten baths are a homer;

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> and one lamb out of the flock, out of
two hundred, from the well-watered pastures of Israel; -- for an
oblation, and for a burnt-offering, and for peace-offerings, to make
atonement for them, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> All the people of the land shall be
\[held\] to this heave-offering for the prince in Israel.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> And it shall be the prince's part \[to
supply\] the burnt-offerings, and the oblation, and the drink-offering,
at the feasts, and at the new moons, and on the sabbaths, in all the
solemnities of the house of Israel: it is he that shall prepare the
sin-offering, and the oblation, and the burnt-offering, and the
peace-offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In the
first \[month\], on the first of the month, thou shalt take a young
bullock, without blemish, and thou shalt purge the sanctuary.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> And the priest shall take of the blood
of the sin-offering, and put it upon the posts of the house, and upon
the four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the
gate of the inner court.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> So thou shalt do also on the seventh of
the month for every one that erreth, and for the simple; and ye shall
make atonement for the house.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> In the first \[month\], on the
fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the passover, a feast of
seven days: unleavened bread shall be eaten.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> And upon that day shall the prince
offer for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> And the seven days of the feast he
shall offer a burnt-offering to Jehovah, seven bullocks and seven rams
without blemish daily for the seven days; and a he-goat daily for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> And he shall offer an oblation of an
ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram; and oil, a hin for an
ephah.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> In the seventh \[month\], on the
fifteenth day of the month, at the feast, shall he do the like seven
days, according to the sin-offering, according to the burnt-offering,
and according to the oblation, and according to the oil.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: The gate of
the inner court that looketh toward the east shall be shut the six
working-days; but on the sabbath-day it shall be opened, and on the day
of the new moon it shall be opened.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> And the prince shall enter by the way of
the porch of \[that\] gate from without, and shall stand by the post of
the gate, and the priests shall offer his burnt-offering and his
peace-offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate, and
shall go forth: but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> And the people of the land shall worship
at the door of this gate before Jehovah on the sabbaths and on the new
moons.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> And the burnt-offering that the prince
shall present unto Jehovah on the sabbath-day shall be six lambs without
blemish, and a ram without blemish.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> And the oblation shall be an ephah for a
ram, and the oblation for the lambs as he shall be able to give; and
oil, a hin for an ephah.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> And on the day of the new moon, a young
bullock without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall be without
blemish.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> And he shall offer an oblation, an ephah
for the bullock, and an ephah for the ram, and for the lambs according
to what his hand may attain unto; and oil, a hin for an ephah.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> And when the prince cometh in, he shall
come in by the way of the porch of the gate, and he shall go out by the
way thereof.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> And when the people of the land come in
before Jehovah in the set feasts, he that cometh in by the way of the
north gate to worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he
that cometh in by the way of the south gate shall go out by the way of
the north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate by which he
came in, but shall go out straight before him.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> And the prince shall come in in the
midst of them, when they come in; and when they go out, they shall go
out \[together\].

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> And on the feast-days, and in the
solemnities, the oblation shall be an ephah for a bullock and an ephah
for a ram, and for the lambs as he is able to give; and oil, a hin for
an ephah.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> And when the prince shall offer a
voluntary burnt-offering or voluntary peace-offerings unto Jehovah, the
gate that looketh toward the east shall be opened for him and he shall
offer his burnt-offering and his peace-offerings as he did on the
sabbath-day, and he shall go out again, and the gate shall be shut after
he hath gone out.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> And thou shalt daily offer a
burnt-offering unto Jehovah, of a yearling-lamb without blemish: thou
shalt prepare it morning by morning.

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> And thou shalt prepare an oblation with
it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and of oil the third part
of a hin, to moisten the fine flour: an oblation unto Jehovah
continually by a perpetual ordinance.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> They shall offer the lamb, and the
oblation, and the oil, every morning for a continual burnt-offering.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: If the
prince give a gift unto any of his sons, it shall be that one's
inheritance, for his sons: it shall be their possession by inheritance.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> But if he give a gift of his
inheritance to one of his servants, it shall be his until the year of
liberty; and it shall return to the prince: to his sons alone shall his
inheritance remain.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> And the prince shall not take of the
people's inheritance, to thrust them by oppression out of their
possession: he shall give his sons an inheritance out of his own
possession: that my people be not scattered every one from his
possession.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> Then he brought me through the passage
which was at the side of the gate, into the holy cells which were for
the priests, which looked toward the north; and behold, a place was
there at the end westward.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> And he said unto me, This is the place
where the priests shall boil the trespass-offering, and the
sin-offering, \[and\] where they shall bake the oblation, that they
bring them not out into the outer court, so as to hallow the people.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> And he brought me forth into the outer
court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and
behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> In the four corners of the court there
were enclosed courts, forty \[cubits\] long and thirty broad: these four
corner courts were of one measure.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> And there was a row \[of building\]
round about in them, round about those four, and it was made with
boiling places under the rows round about.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> And he said unto me, These are the
boiling-houses, where those who do the service of the house shall boil
the sacrifice of the people.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> And he brought me back to the door of the
house; and behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the
house eastward: for the front of the house was eastward. And the waters
came down from under, from the right side of the house, south of the
altar.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> And he brought me out by the way of the
gate northward, and led me round outside unto the outer gate towards
\[the gate\] that looketh eastward; and behold, waters ran out on the
right side.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> When the man went forth eastward, a line
was in his hand; and he measured a thousand cubits, and he caused me to
pass through the waters: the waters were to the ankles.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> And he measured a thousand \[cubits\],
and caused me to pass through the waters: the waters were to the knees.
And he measured a thousand and caused me to pass through: the waters
were to the loins.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> And he measured a thousand: it was a
river that I could not pass through, for the waters were risen, waters
to swim in, a river that could not be passed through.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, hast
thou seen \[this\]? And he led me, and brought me back to the bank of
the river.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> When I returned, behold, on the bank of
the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> And he said unto me, These waters issue
out toward the east district, and go down into the plain, and go into
the sea; when they are brought forth into the sea, the waters
\[thereof\] shall be healed.

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> And it shall come to pass that every
living thing which moveth, whithersoever the double river shall come,
shall live. And there shall be a very great multitude of fish; for these
waters shall come thither, and \[the waters of the sea\] shall be
healed; and everything shall live whither the river cometh.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> And it shall come to pass, that fishers
shall stand upon it; from En-gedi even unto En-eglaim shall be \[a
place\] to spread forth nets: their fish shall be according to their
kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> But its marshes and its pools shall not
be healed; they shall be given up to salt.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> And by the river, upon its bank, on the
one side and on the other, shall grow all trees for food, whose leaf
shall not fade, nor their fruit fail: it shall bring forth new fruit
every month, for its waters issue out of the sanctuary; and the fruit
thereof shall be for food, and the leaf thereof for medicine.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: This shall
be the border whereby ye shall allot the land as inheritance according
to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph \[shall have two\] portions.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> And ye shall inherit it, one as well as
another, \[the land\] concerning which I lifted up my hand to give it
unto your fathers; and this land shall fall to you for inheritance.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> And this shall be the border of the
land: toward the north side, from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as
one goeth to Zedad,

<span id="an_47:16">47:16</span> Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is
between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazer-hatticon,
which is by the border of Hauran.

<span id="an_47:17">47:17</span> And the border from the sea shall be
Hazar-enan, the border of Damascus, and the north northward, and the
border of Hamath: this is the north side.

<span id="an_47:18">47:18</span> -- And on the east side ye shall
measure between Hauran and Damascus, and Gilead and the land of Israel
\[by\] the Jordan, from the border unto the east sea: this is the east
side.

<span id="an_47:19">47:19</span> -- And the south side southward, from
Tamar to the waters of Meribah-Kadesh, by the torrent, unto the great
sea: this is the south side southward.

<span id="an_47:20">47:20</span> -- And the west side shall be the great
sea from the border, as far as over against the entering into Hamath:
this is the west side.

<span id="an_47:21">47:21</span> And ye shall divide this land unto you
according to the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_47:22">47:22</span> And it shall come to pass that ye shall
divide it by lot for an inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that
sojourn among you, who shall beget children among you; and they shall be
unto you as the home-born among the children of Israel: with you shall
they draw by lot inheritance among the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_47:23">47:23</span> And it shall come to pass that in the
tribe in which the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give \[him\] his
inheritance, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> And these are the names of the tribes:
From the north end along the way of Hethlon, as one entereth into
Hamath, Hazar-enan, the border of Damascus northward unto near Hamath --
the east and west side \[belonging\] to him -- shall Dan have one
\[portion\].

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> And by the border of Dan, from the east
side unto the west side, Asher one.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> And by the border of Asher, from the east
side even unto the west side, Naphtali one.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> And by the border of Naphtali, from the
east side unto the west side, Manasseh one.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> And by the border of Manasseh, from the
east side unto the west side, Ephraim one.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> And by the border of Ephraim, from the
east side even unto the west side, Reuben one.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> And by the border of Reuben, from the
east side unto the west side, Judah one.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> And by the border of Judah, from the east
side unto the west side, shall be the heave-offering that ye shall
offer, five and twenty thousand \[cubits\] in breadth, and in length as
one of the parts from the east side unto the west side: and the
sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> The heave-offering that ye shall offer
unto Jehovah shall be five and twenty thousand in length, and ten
thousand in breadth.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> And for them, for the priests, shall be
the holy heave-offering, toward the north five and twenty thousand, and
toward the west the breadth ten thousand, and toward the east the
breadth ten thousand, and toward the south the length five and twenty
thousand: and the sanctuary of Jehovah shall be in the midst of it.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> \[It shall be\] for the priests that
are hallowed of the sons of Zadok, who kept my charge and went not
astray when the children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went
astray.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> And this offering heaved from the
heave-offering of the land shall be unto them a thing most holy, by the
border of the Levites.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And answering to the border of the
priests, the Levites shall have five and twenty thousand in length, and
ten thousand in breadth: the whole length shall be five and twenty
thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> And they shall not sell of it, neither
exchange, nor alienate the first-fruits of the land: for it is holy unto
Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> And the five thousand that are left in
the breadth over against the five and twenty thousand, shall be a common
\[place\] for the city, for dwellings and for suburbs: and the city
shall be in the midst of it.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> And these shall be the measures
thereof: the north side four thousand and five hundred \[cubits\], and
the south side four thousand and five hundred, and the east side four
thousand and five hundred, and the west side four thousand and five
hundred.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> And the suburbs of the city shall be
toward the north two hundred and fifty \[cubits\], and toward the south
two hundred and fifty, and toward the east two hundred and fifty, and
toward the west two hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> And the residue in length, alongside
the holy heave-offering, shall be ten thousand eastward and ten thousand
westward: it shall be alongside the holy heave-offering; and the
increase thereof shall be for the support of them that serve the city.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> And they that serve the city shall
serve it out of all the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> The whole heave-offering shall be five
and twenty thousand by five and twenty thousand; ye shall offer the holy
heave-offering foursquare with the possession of the city.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And the rest shall be for the prince,
on the one side and on the other of the holy heave-offering and of the
possession of the city, in front of the five and twenty thousand of the
heave-offering toward the east border, and westward in front of the five
and twenty thousand toward the west border, answering to the \[other\]
portions: it shall be for the prince; and the holy heave-offering and
the sanctuary of the house shall be in the midst of it.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> And from the possession of the Levites
and from the possession of the city, being in the midst of that which
shall be the prince's, between the border of Judah and the border of
Benjamin, shall be for the prince.

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> And as for the rest of the tribes: from
the east side unto the west side, Benjamin one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> And by the border of Benjamin, from the
east side unto the west side, Simeon one.

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> And by the border of Simeon, from the
east side unto the west side, Issachar one.

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> And by the border of Issachar, from the
east side unto the west side, Zebulun one.

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> And by the border of Zebulun, from the
east side unto the west side, Gad one.

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> And by the border of Gad, at the south
side southward, the border shall be from Tamar \[to\] the waters of
Meribah-Kadesh, by the torrent, unto the great sea.

<span id="an_48:29">48:29</span> This is the land which ye shall divide
by lot unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their
portions, saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:30">48:30</span> And these are the goings out of the
city. On the north side, four thousand and five hundred \[cubits\] by
measure.

<span id="an_48:31">48:31</span> And the gates of the city shall be
after the names of the tribes of Israel: three gates northward: the gate
of Reuben, one; the gate of Judah, one; the gate of Levi, one.

<span id="an_48:32">48:32</span> And at the east side four thousand and
five hundred, and three gates: the gate of Joseph, one; the gate of
Benjamin, one; the gate of Dan, one.

<span id="an_48:33">48:33</span> And at the south side four thousand and
five hundred \[cubits\] by measure, and three gates: the gate of Simeon,
one; the gate of Issachar, one; the gate of Zebulun, one.

<span id="an_48:34">48:34</span> At the west side four thousand and five
hundred, \[and\] their three gates: the gate of Gad, one; the gate of
Asher, one; the gate of Naphtali, one.

<span id="an_48:35">48:35</span> Round about it was eighteen thousand
\[cubits\]; and the name of the city from that day, Jehovah is there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel](dan)
