[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co2)  [Next](eph) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Galatians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, apostle, not from men nor through
man, but through Jesus Christ, and God \[the\] Father who raised him
from among \[the\] dead,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and all the brethren with me, to the
assemblies of Galatia.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Grace to you, and peace, from God \[the\]
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who gave himself for our sins, so that he
should deliver us out of the present evil world, according to the will
of our God and Father;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> to whom \[be\] glory to the ages of ages.
Amen.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> I wonder that ye thus quickly change, from
him that called you in Christ's grace, to a different gospel,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> which is not another \[one\]; but there are
some that trouble you, and desire to pervert the glad tidings of the
Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But if even \*we\* or an angel out of
heaven announce as glad tidings to you \[anything\] besides what we have
announced as glad tidings to you, let him be accursed.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> As we have said before, now also again I
say, If any one announce to you as glad tidings \[anything\] besides
what ye have received, let him be accursed.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For do I now seek to satisfy men or God?
or do I seek to please men? If I were yet pleasing men, I were not
Christ's bondman.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> But I let you know, brethren, \[as to\]
the glad tidings which were announced by me, that they are not according
to man.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For neither did I receive them from man,
neither was I taught \[them\], but by revelation of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For ye have heard \[what was\] my
conversation formerly in Judaism, that I excessively persecuted the
assembly of God, and ravaged it;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and advanced in Judaism beyond many
\[my\] contemporaries in my nation, being exceedingly zealous of the
doctrines of my fathers.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> But when God, who set me apart \[even\]
from my mother's womb, and called \[me\] by his grace,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that
I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations, immediately I took
not counsel with flesh and blood,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> nor went I up to Jerusalem to those \[who
were\] apostles before me; but I went to Arabia, and again returned to
Damascus.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Then after three years I went up to
Jerusalem to make acquaintance with Peter, and I remained with him
fifteen days;

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> but I saw none other of the apostles, but
James the brother of the Lord.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Now what I write to you, behold, before
God, I do not lie.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Then I came into the regions of Syria and
Cilicia.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But I was unknown personally to the
assemblies of Judaea which \[are\] in Christ;

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> only they were hearing that he who
persecuted us formerly now announces the glad tidings of the faith which
formerly he ravaged:

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> and they glorified God in me.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then after a lapse of fourteen years I went
up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus also with \[me\];

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and I went up according to revelation, and
I laid before them the glad tidings which I preach among the nations,
but privately to those conspicuous \[among them\], lest in any way I run
or had run in vain;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> (but neither was Titus, who was with me,
being a Greek, compelled to be circumcised;)

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and \[it was\] on account of the false
brethren brought in surreptitiously, who came in surreptitiously to spy
out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us
into bondage;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> to whom we yielded in subjection not even
for an hour, that the truth of the glad tidings might remain with you.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But from those who were conspicuous as
being somewhat -- whatsoever they were, it makes no difference to me:
God does not accept man's person; for to me those who were conspicuous
communicated nothing;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> but, on the contrary, seeing that the glad
tidings of the uncircumcision were confided to me, even as to Peter that
of the circumcision,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> (for he that wrought in Peter for \[the\]
apostleship of the circumcision wrought also in me towards the
Gentiles,)

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and recognising the grace given to me,
James and Cephas and John, who were conspicuous as being pillars, gave
to me and Barnabas \[the\] right hands of fellowship, that \*we\*
\[should go\] to the nations, and \*they\* to the circumcision;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> only that we should remember the poor,
which same thing also I was diligent to do.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But when Peter came to Antioch, I
withstood him to \[the\] face, because he was to be condemned:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> for before that certain came from James,
he ate with \[those of\] the nations; but when they came, he drew back
and separated himself, fearing those of \[the\] circumcision;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> and the rest of the Jews also played the
same dissembling part with him; so that even Barnabas was carried away
too by their dissimulation.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But when I saw that they do not walk
straightforwardly, according to the truth of the glad tidings, I said to
Peter before all, If \*thou\*, being a Jew, livest as the nations and
not as the Jews, how dost thou compel the nations to Judaize?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> We, Jews by nature, and not sinners of
\[the\] nations,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> but knowing that a man is not justified
on the principle of works of law \[nor\] but by the faith of Jesus
Christ, \*we\* also have believed on Christ Jesus, that we might be
justified on the principle of \[the\] faith of Christ; and not of works
of law; because on the principle of works of law no flesh shall be
justified.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Now if in seeking to be justified in
Christ we also have been found sinners, then \[is\] Christ minister of
sin? Far be the thought.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For if the things I have thrown down,
these I build again, I constitute myself a transgressor.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For \*I\*, through law, have died to law,
that I may live to God.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> I am crucified with Christ, and no longer
live, \*I\*, but Christ lives in me; but \[in\] that I now live in
flesh, I live by faith, the \[faith\] of the Son of God, who has loved
me and given himself for me.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I do not set aside the grace of God; for
if righteousness \[is\] by law, then Christ has died for nothing.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> O senseless Galatians, who has bewitched
you; to whom, as before your very eyes, Jesus Christ has been portrayed,
crucified \[among you\]?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> This only I wish to learn of you, Have ye
received the Spirit on the principle of works of law, or of \[the\]
report of faith?

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Are ye so senseless? having begun in
Spirit, are ye going to be made perfect in flesh?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Have ye suffered so many things in vain, if
indeed also in vain?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He therefore who ministers to you the
Spirit, and works miracles among you, \[is it\] on the principle of
works of law, or of \[the\] report of faith?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Even as Abraham believed God, and it was
reckoned to him as righteousness.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Know then that they that are on the
principle of faith, these are Abraham's sons;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and the scripture, foreseeing that God
would justify the nations on the principle of faith, announced
beforehand the glad tidings to Abraham: In thee all the nations shall be
blessed.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> So that they who are on the principle of
faith are blessed with believing Abraham.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For as many as are on the principle of
works of law are under curse. For it is written, Cursed is every one who
does not continue in all things which \[are\] written in the book of the
law to do them;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> but that by law no one is justified with
God \[is\] evident, because The just shall live on the principle of
faith;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> but the law is not on the principle of
faith; but, He that shall have done these things shall live by them.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Christ has redeemed us out of the curse
of the law, having become a curse for us, (for it is written, Cursed
\[is\] every one hanged upon a tree,)

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> that the blessing of Abraham might come
to the nations in Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the
Spirit through faith.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Brethren, (I speak according to man,)
even man's confirmed covenant no one sets aside, or adds other
dispositions to.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> But to Abraham were the promises
addressed, and to his seed: he does not say, And to seeds, as of many;
but as of one, And to thy seed; which is Christ.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Now I say this, A covenant confirmed
beforehand by God, the law, which took place four hundred and thirty
years after, does not annul, so as to make the promise of no effect.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> For if the inheritance \[be\] on the
principle of law, \[it is\] no longer on the principle of promise; but
God gave it in grace to Abraham by promise.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Why then the law? It was added for the
sake of transgressions, until the seed came to whom the promise was
made, ordained through angels in \[the\] hand of a mediator.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> But a mediator is not of one, but God is
one.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> \[Is\] then the law against the promises
of God? Far be the thought. For if a law had been given able to quicken,
then indeed righteousness were on the principle of law;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> but the scripture has shut up all things
under sin, that the promise, on the principle of faith of Jesus Christ,
should be given to those that believe.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> But before faith came, we were guarded
under law, shut up to faith \[which was\] about to be revealed.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> So that the law has been our tutor up to
Christ, that we might be justified on the principle of faith.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> But, faith having come, we are no longer
under a tutor;

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> for ye are all God's sons by faith in
Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> For ye, as many as have been baptised
unto Christ, have put on Christ.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> There is no Jew nor Greek; there is no
bondman nor freeman; there is no male and female; for ye are all one in
Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> but if \*ye\* \[are\] of Christ, then ye
are Abraham's seed, heirs according to promise.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now I say, As long as the heir is a child,
he differs nothing from a bondman, though he be lord of all;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> but he is under guardians and stewards
until the period fixed by the father.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> So we also, when we were children, were
held in bondage under the principles of the world;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> but when the fulness of the time was come,
God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> that he might redeem those under law, that
we might receive sonship.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> But because ye are sons, God has sent out
the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> So thou art no longer bondman, but son; but
if son, heir also through God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> But then indeed, not knowing God, ye were
in bondage to those who by nature are not gods;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> but now, knowing God, but rather being
known by God, how do ye turn again to the weak and beggarly principles
to which ye desire to be again anew in bondage?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Ye observe days and months and times and
years.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I am afraid of you, lest indeed I have
laboured in vain as to you.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Be as \*I\* \[am\], for \*I\* also \[am\]
as \*ye\*, brethren, I beseech you: ye have not at all wronged me.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But ye know that in weakness of the flesh
I announced the glad tidings to you at the first;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> and my temptation, which \[was\] in my
flesh, ye did not slight nor reject with contempt; but ye received me as
an angel of God, as Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> What then \[was\] your blessedness? for I
bear you witness that, if possible, plucking out your own eyes ye would
have given \[them\] to me.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> So I have become your enemy in speaking
the truth to you?

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> They are not rightly zealous after you,
but desire to shut you out \[from us\], that ye may be zealous after
them.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But \[it is\] right to be zealous at all
times in what is right, and not only when I am present with you --

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> my children, of whom I again travail in
birth until Christ shall have been formed in you:

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and I should wish to be present with you
now, and change my voice, for I am perplexed as to you.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Tell me, ye who are desirous of being
under law, do ye not listen to the law?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For it is written that Abraham had two
sons; one of the maid servant, and one of the free woman.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> But he \[that was\] of the maid servant
was born according to flesh, and he \[that was\] of the free woman
through the promise.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Which things have an allegorical sense;
for these are two covenants: one from mount Sinai, gendering to bondage,
which is Hagar.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> For Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and
corresponds to Jerusalem which \[is\] now, for she is in bondage with
her children;

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> but the Jerusalem above is free, which is
our mother.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren
that bearest not; break out and cry, thou that travailest not; because
the children of the desolate are more numerous than \[those\] of her
that has a husband.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> But \*ye\*, brethren, after the pattern
of Isaac, are children of promise.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But as then he that was born according to
flesh persecuted him \[that was born\] according to Spirit, so also \[it
is\] now.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> But what says the scripture? Cast out the
maid servant and her son; for the son of the maid servant shall not
inherit with the son of the free woman.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> So then, brethren, we are not maid
servant's children, but \[children\] of the free woman.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Christ has set us free in freedom; stand
fast therefore, and be not held again in a yoke of bondage.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Behold, I, Paul, say to you, that if ye are
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And I witness again to every man \[who is\]
circumcised, that he is debtor to do the whole law.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Ye are deprived of all profit from the
Christ as separated \[from him\], as many as are justified by law; ye
have fallen from grace.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> For we, by \[the\] Spirit, on the principle
of faith, await the hope of righteousness.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
has any force, nor uncircumcision; but faith working through love.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Ye ran well; who has stopped you that ye
should not obey the truth?

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> The persuasibleness \[is\] not of him that
calls you.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> A little leaven leavens the whole lump.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> \*I\* have confidence as to you in
\[the\] Lord, that ye will have no other mind; and he that is troubling
you shall bear the guilt \[of it\], whosoever he may be.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But \*I\*, brethren, if I yet preach
circumcision, why am I yet persecuted? Then the scandal of the cross has
been done away.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> I would that they would even cut
themselves off who throw you into confusion.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For \*ye\* have been called to liberty,
brethren; only \[do\] not \[turn\] liberty into an opportunity to the
flesh, but by love serve one another.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For the whole law is fulfilled in one
word, in Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> but if ye bite and devour one another,
see that ye are not consumed one of another.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> But I say, Walk in \[the\] Spirit, and ye
shall no way fulfil flesh's lust.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For the flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh: and these things are opposed one to
the other, that ye should not do those things which ye desire;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> but if ye are led by the Spirit, ye are
not under law.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Now the works of the flesh are manifest,
which are fornication, uncleanness, licentiousness,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> idolatry, sorcery, hatred, strifes,
jealousies, angers, contentions, disputes, schools of opinion,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> envyings, murders, drunkennesses, revels,
and things like these; as to which I tell you beforehand, even as I also
have said before, that they who do such things shall not inherit God's
kingdom.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, fidelity,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> meekness, self-control: against such
things there is no law.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> But they that \[are\] of the Christ have
crucified the flesh with the passions and the lusts.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> If we live by the Spirit, let us walk
also by the Spirit.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Let us not become vain-glorious,
provoking one another, envying one another.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Brethren, if even a man be taken in some
fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness,
considering thyself lest \*thou\* also be tempted.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Bear one another's burdens, and thus fulfil
the law of the Christ.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> For if any man reputes himself to be
something, being nothing, he deceives himself;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> but let each prove his own work, and then
he will have his boast in what belongs to himself alone, and not in what
belongs to another.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For each shall bear his own burden.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Let him that is taught in the word
communicate to him that teaches in all good things.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Be not deceived: God is not mocked; for
whatever a man shall sow, that also shall he reap.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> For he that sows to his own flesh, shall
reap corruption from the flesh; but he that sows to the Spirit, from the
Spirit shall reap eternal life:

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> but let us not lose heart in doing good;
for in due time, if we do not faint, we shall reap.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> So then, as we have occasion, let us do
good towards all, and specially towards those of the household of faith.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> See how long a letter I have written to
you with my own hand.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> As many as desire to have a fair
appearance in \[the\] flesh, these compel you to be circumcised, only
that they may not be persecuted because of the cross of Christ.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For neither do they that are circumcised
themselves keep the law; but they wish you to be circumcised, that they
may boast in your flesh.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> But far be it from me to boast save in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom \[the\] world is
crucified to me, and I to the world.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> For \[in Christ Jesus\] neither is
circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision; but new creation.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And as many as shall walk by this rule,
peace upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For the rest let no one trouble me, for
\*I\* bear in my body the brands of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[be\]
with your spirit, brethren. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians](eph)
