[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sol)  [Next](jer) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Isaiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The vision of Isaiah the son of Amos, which
he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear, \[ye\] heavens, and give ear,
\[thou\] earth! for Jehovah hath spoken: I have nourished and brought up
children; and they have rebelled against me.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his
master's crib; Israel doth not know, my people hath no intelligence.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Ah sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that corrupt themselves! They
have forsaken Jehovah; they have despised the Holy One of Israel; they
are turned away backward.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Why should ye be smitten any more? ye will
revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> From the sole of the foot even unto the
head there is no soundness in him; wounds, and weals, and open sores:
they have not been dressed, nor bound up, nor mollified with oil.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Your country is desolate; your cities are
burned with fire; your land, strangers eat it up in your presence, and
it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the daughter of Zion is left, as a
booth in a vineyard, as a night-lodge in a cucumber-garden, as a
besieged city.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Unless Jehovah of hosts had left us a very
small residue, we should have been as Sodom, we should have been like
unto Gomorrah.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Hear the word of Jehovah, rulers of
Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, people of Gomorrah!

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices unto me? saith Jehovah. I am sated with burnt-offerings of
rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and in the blood of bullocks, and of
lambs, and of he-goats I take no pleasure.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> When ye come to appear before me, who
hath required this from your hand -- to tread my courts?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Bring no more vain oblations! Incense is
an abomination unto me, -- new moon and sabbath, the calling of
convocations -- wickedness and the solemn meeting I cannot bear.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Your new moons and your set feasts my
soul hateth: they are a burden to me; I am wearied of bearing \[them\].

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And when ye spread forth your hands, I
will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not
hear: your hands are full of blood.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Wash you, make you clean; put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes; -- cease to do evil,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> learn to do well: seek judgment, gladden
the oppressed, do justice to the fatherless, plead for the widow.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Come now, let us reason together, saith
Jehovah: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> If ye be willing and hearken, ye shall
eat the good of the land;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the sword: for the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> How is the faithful city become a harlot!
It was full of judgment; righteousness used to lodge in it, but now
murderers.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Thy silver is become dross, thy wine is
mixed with water:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> thy princes are rebellious, and
companions of thieves; every one loveth presents, and hunteth after
rewards; they judge not the fatherless, and the cause of the widow
cometh not unto them.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Therefore saith the Lord, Jehovah of
hosts, the Mighty One of Israel: Ah! I will ease me of mine adversaries,
and avenge me of mine enemies.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And I will turn my hand upon thee, and
will thoroughly purge away thy dross, and take away all thine alloy;

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> and I will restore thy judges as at the
first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning. Afterwards thou shalt be
called, Town of righteousness, Faithful city.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and
they that return of her with righteousness.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> But the ruin of the transgressors and of
the sinners \[shall be\] together; and they that forsake Jehovah shall
be consumed.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> For they shall be ashamed of the
terebinths that ye have desired, and ye shall blush for the gardens that
ye have chosen.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> For ye shall be as a terebinth whose leaf
fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And the strong shall be for tow, and his
work a spark; and they shall both burn together, and there shall be none
to quench \[them\].

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw
concerning Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And it shall come to pass in the end of
days, \[that\] the mountain of Jehovah's house shall be established on
the top of the mountains, and shall be lifted up above the hills; and
all the nations shall flow unto it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And many peoples shall go and say, Come,
and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of
Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.
For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and Jehovah's word from
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And he shall judge among the nations, and
shall reprove many peoples; and they shall forge their swords into
ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-knives: nation shall not
lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> House of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in
the light of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For thou hast cast off thy people, the
house of Jacob, because they are filled \[with what comes\] from the
east, and use auguries like the Philistines, and ally themselves with
the children of foreigners.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And their land is full of silver and gold,
and there is no end of their treasures: their land also is full of
horses, and there is no end of their chariots.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And their land is full of idols; they bow
themselves down to the work of their own hands, to that which their
fingers have made.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And the mean man shall be bowed down, and
the great man shall be brought low: and do not thou forgive them!

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the
dust, from before the terror of Jehovah, and from the glory of his
majesty.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The lofty eyes of man shall be brought
low, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and Jehovah alone
shall be exalted in that day.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For there shall be a day of Jehovah of
hosts upon everything proud and lofty, and upon everything lifted up,
and it shall be brought low;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> and upon all the cedars of Lebanon, high
and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and upon all the lofty mountains, and
upon all the hills that are lifted up;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and upon every high tower, and upon every
fenced wall;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and
upon all pleasant works of art.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the loftiness of man shall be bowed
down, and the haughtiness of men shall be brought low; and Jehovah alone
shall be exalted in that day:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and the idols shall utterly pass away.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And they shall go into the caves of the
rocks, and into the holes of the earth, from before the terror of
Jehovah, and from the glory of his majesty, when he shall arise to
terrify the earth.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> In that day men shall cast away their
idols of silver and their idols of gold, which they made \[each\] for
himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> to go into the clefts of the rocks, and
into the fissures of the cliffs, from before the terror of Jehovah, and
from the glory of his majesty, when he shall arise to terrify the earth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his
nostrils; for what account is to be made of him?

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For behold, the Lord, Jehovah of hosts,
will take away from Jerusalem and from Judah stay and staff, the whole
stay of bread, and the whole stay of water,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> the mighty man and the man of war, the
judge and the prophet, and the diviner and the elder,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> the captain of fifty, and the honourable
man, and the counsellor, and the clever among artificers, and the one
versed in enchantments.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And I will appoint youths as their princes,
and children shall rule over them.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And the people shall be oppressed one by
the other, and each by his neighbour; the child will be insolent against
the elder, and the base against the honourable.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> When a man shall take hold of his brother,
in his father's house, \[and shall say:\] Thou hast clothing; be our
chief, and let this ruin be under thy hand;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> he will lift up \[his hand\] in that day,
saying, I cannot be a healer, and in my house there is neither bread nor
clothing; ye shall not make me a chief of the people.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For Jerusalem stumbleth and Judah falleth,
because their tongue and their doings are against Jehovah, to provoke
the eyes of his glory.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> The look of their face doth witness against
them, and they declare their sin as Sodom: they hide it not. Woe unto
their soul! for they have brought evil upon themselves.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Say ye of the righteous that it shall be
well \[with him\], for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill
\[with him\], because the desert of his hands shall be rendered unto
him.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> \[As for\] my people, children are their
oppressors, and women rule over them. My people! they that guide thee
mislead \[thee\], and destroy the way of thy paths.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Jehovah setteth himself to plead, and
standeth to judge the peoples.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Jehovah will enter into judgment with the
elders of his people and their princes, \[saying:\] It is ye that have
eaten up the vineyard: the spoil of the poor is in your houses.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> What mean ye that ye crush my people, and
grind the faces of the afflicted? saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And Jehovah said, Because the daughters
of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched-out neck and wanton eyes,
and go along mincing, and making a tinkling with their feet;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> therefore the Lord will make bald the
crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and Jehovah will lay bare
their secret parts.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> In that day the Lord will take away the
ornament of anklets, and the little suns and crescents,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> the pearl-drops, and the bracelets, and
the veils,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> the head-dresses, and the stepping
chains, and the girdles, and the scent-boxes, and the amulets;

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> the finger-rings, and the nose-rings;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> the festival-robes, and the tunics, and
the mantles, and the wallets;

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> the mirrors, and the fine linen bodices,
and the turbans, and the flowing veils.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And it shall come to pass, instead of
perfume there shall be rottenness; and instead of a girdle, a rope; and
instead of well-set hair, baldness; and instead of a robe of display, a
girding of sackcloth; brand instead of beauty.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy
mighty in the fight;

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> and her gates shall lament and mourn;
and, stripped, she shall sit upon the ground.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And seven women shall take hold of one man
in that day, saying, Our own bread will we eat, and with our own
garments will we be clothed; only let us be called by thy name; -- take
away our reproach!

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> In that day there shall be a sprout of
Jehovah for beauty and glory, and the fruit of the earth for excellency
and for ornament for those that are escaped of Israel.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And it shall come to pass that he who
remaineth in Zion, and he that is left in Jerusalem, shall be called
holy, -- every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> when the Lord shall have washed away the
filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have scoured out the blood of
Jerusalem from its midst, by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit
of burning.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And Jehovah will create over every
dwelling-place of mount Zion, and over its convocations, a cloud by day
and a smoke, and the brightness of a flame of fire by night: for over
all the glory shall be a covering.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And there shall be a tabernacle for shade
by day from the heat, and for a shelter and for a covert from storm and
from rain.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> I will sing to my well-beloved a song of my
beloved touching his vineyard: My well-beloved had a vineyard upon a
fruitful hill.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And he dug it, and gathered out the stones
thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine; and he built a tower in
the midst of it, and also hewed out a winepress therein; and he looked
that it should bring forth grapes, but it brought forth wild grapes.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And now, inhabitants of Jerusalem and men
of Judah, judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> What was there yet to do to my vineyard
that I have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should
bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? --

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And now, let me tell you what I am about to
do to my vineyard: I will take away its hedge, and it shall be eaten up;
I will break down its wall, and it shall be trodden under foot;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> and I will make it a waste -- it shall not
be pruned nor cultivated, but there shall come up briars and thorns; and
I will command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For the vineyard of Jehovah of hosts is the
house of Israel, and the men of Judah the plant of his delight: and he
looked for justice, and behold, blood-shedding; for righteousness, and
behold, a cry.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Woe unto them that add house to house, that
join field to field, until there is no more room, and that ye dwell
yourselves alone in the midst of the land!

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> In mine ears Jehovah of hosts \[hath
said\], Many houses shall assuredly become a desolation, great and
excellent ones, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield
one bath, and a homer of seed shall yield an ephah.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Woe unto them that, rising early in the
morning, run after strong drink; that linger till twilight, \[till\]
wine inflameth them!

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And harp and lyre, tambour and flute, and
wine are in their banquets; but they regard not the work of Jehovah, nor
do they see the operation of his hands.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Therefore my people are led away captive
from lack of knowledge, and their nobility die of famine, and their
multitude are parched with thirst.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Therefore doth Sheol enlarge its desire,
and open its mouth without measure; and her splendour shall descend
\[into it\], and her multitude, and her tumult, and \[all\] that is
joyful within her.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And the mean man shall be bowed down, and
the great man brought low, and the eyes of the lofty shall be brought
low;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> and Jehovah of hosts shall be exalted in
judgment, and the holy ùGod hallowed in righteousness.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And the lambs shall feed as on their
pasture, and the waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Woe unto them that draw iniquity with
cords of vanity, and sin as with cart-ropes!

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> who say, Let him hasten, let him speed
his work, that we may see \[it\]; and let the counsel of the Holy One of
Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it!

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Woe unto them who call evil good, and
good evil; who put darkness for light, and light for darkness; who put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Woe unto them that are wise in their own
eyes, and intelligent in their own esteem!

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Woe unto them that are mighty for
drinking wine, and men valiant to mix strong drink;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> who justify the wicked for a bribe, and
turn away the righteousness of the righteous from them!

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Therefore as a tongue of fire devoureth
the stubble, and dry grass sinketh down in the flame, their root shall
be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust; for they have
rejected the law of Jehovah of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy
One of Israel.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Therefore is the anger of Jehovah kindled
against his people, and he hath stretched out his hand against them and
hath smitten them; and the mountains trembled, and their carcases are
become as dung in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is
not turned away, and his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And he will lift up a banner to the
nations afar off, and will hiss for one from the end of the earth; and
behold, it will come rapidly \[and\] lightly.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> None among them is weary, none stumbleth;
they slumber not, nor sleep; none hath the girdle of his loins loosed,
nor the thong of his sandals broken;

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> their arrows are sharp, and all their
bows bent; their horses' hoofs are reckoned as the flint, and their
wheels as a whirlwind.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Their roaring is like a lioness, they
roar as the young lions; yea, they growl, and snatch the prey, and carry
it away safe, and there is none to deliver;

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> and they shall roar against them in that
day like the roaring of the sea. And if one look upon the earth, behold
darkness \[and\] distress, and the light is darkened in the heavens
thereof.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> In the year of the death of king Uzziah, I
saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up; and his train
filled the temple.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Seraphim were standing above him: each had
six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his
feet, and with twain he flew.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And one called to the other and said, Holy,
holy, holy is Jehovah of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory!

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And the foundations of the thresholds shook
at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And I said, Woe unto me! for I am undone;
for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And one of the seraphim flew unto me, and
he had in his hand a glowing coal, which he had taken with the tongs
from off the altar;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and he made it touch my mouth, and said,
Behold, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away,
and thy sin expiated.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And I heard the voice of the Lord saying,
Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? And I said, Here am I; send
me.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And he said, Go; and thou shalt say unto
this people, Hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand, and seeing
ye shall see and shall not perceive.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and blind their eyes; lest they see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be
converted, and healed.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And I said, Lord, how long? And he said,
Until the cities be wasted, without inhabitant, and the houses without
man, and the land become an utter desolation,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> and Jehovah have removed men far away,
and the solitude be great in the midst of the land.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> But a tenth part shall still be therein,
and it shall return and be eaten; as the terebinth and as the oak whose
trunk \[remaineth\] after the felling: the holy seed shall be the trunk
thereof.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz,
the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, \[that\] Rezin the
king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, came up to
Jerusalem to make war against it, but they were not able to fight
against it.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And it was told the house of David saying,
Syria is allied with Ephraim. Then his heart and the heart of his people
shook, as the trees of the forest are shaken with the wind.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And Jehovah said to Isaiah, Go out now to
meet Ahaz, thou and thy son Shear-jashub, at the end of the aqueduct of
the upper pool, on the highway of the fuller's field;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> and thou shalt say unto him, Take heed and
be quiet; fear not, and let not thy heart faint before these two ends of
smoking firebrands, because of the fierce anger of Rezin and Syria, and
of the son of Remaliah.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Inasmuch as Syria hath taken evil counsel
against thee, Ephraim \[also\] and the son of Remaliah, saying,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Let us go up against Judah, and harass it,
and make a breach therein for us, and set up a king therein -- the son
of Tabeal;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> thus saith the Lord Jehovah: It shall not
stand, nor come to pass;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> for the head of Syria is Damascus, and the
head of Damascus is Rezin; and within sixty-five years shall Ephraim be
broken, so as to be no \[more a\] people;

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> and the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the
head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye believe not, surely ye shall
not be established.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And Jehovah spoke again to Ahaz, saying,

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Ask for thee a sign from Jehovah thy God;
ask for it in the deep, or in the height above.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And Ahaz said, I will not ask, and will
not tempt Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And he said, Hear then, house of David:
Is it a small matter for you to weary men, that ye weary also my God?

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Therefore will the Lord himself give you
a sign: Behold, the virgin shall conceive and shall bring forth a son,
and call his name Immanuel.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Butter and honey shall he eat, that he
may know to refuse the evil, and to choose the good.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For before the child knoweth to refuse
the evil and to choose the good, the land whose two kings thou fearest
shall be forsaken.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Jehovah will bring upon thee, and upon
thy people, and upon thy father's house, days which have not come since
the day when Ephraim turned away from Judah -- \[even\] the king of
Assyria.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that Jehovah will hiss for the fly which is at the extremity of the
streams of Egypt, and for the bee which is in the land of Assyria;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> and they shall come and settle all of
them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and on all
thorn-bushes, and on all the pastures.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> In that day will the Lord, with a razor
which is hired beyond the river, with the king of Assyria, shave the
head and the hair of the feet, yea, the beard also will it take away.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
\[that\] a man shall nourish a young cow and two sheep,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> and it shall come to pass, from the
abundance of milk they shall give, \[that\] he shall eat butter; for
every one that remaineth in the midst of the land shall eat butter and
honey.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
\[that\] every place, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand
silver pieces, shall become briars and thorns:

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> with arrows and with the bow shall they
come thither, for the whole land shall become briars and thorns.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And all mountains that have been dug up
with the hoe -- thither will they not come, from fear of briars and
thorns; and they shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the
treading of small cattle.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Jehovah said to me, Take thee a great
tablet, and write thereon with a man's style, concerning
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And I took unto me to witness, sure
witnesses, Urijah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And I came near to the prophetess, and she
conceived and bore a son; and Jehovah said unto me, Call his name,
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> For before the lad knoweth to cry, My
father! and, My mother! the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria
shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Jehovah spoke again to me, saying,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Forasmuch as this people refuseth the
waters of Shiloah which flow softly, and rejoiceth in Rezin and in the
son of Remaliah,

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> therefore behold, the Lord will bring up
upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, the king of Assyria
and all his glory; and he shall mount up over all his channels, and go
over all his banks:

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> and he shall pass through Judah; he shall
overflow it and go further, he shall reach even to the neck; and the
stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O
Immanuel!

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Rage, ye peoples, and be broken in pieces!
And give ear, all ye distant parts of the earth: Gird yourselves, and be
broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and be broken in pieces!

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Settle a plan, and it shall come to
nought; speak a word, and it shall not stand: for ùGod is with us.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For Jehovah spoke thus to me with a
strong hand, and he instructed me not to walk in the way of this people,
saying,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Ye shall not say, Conspiracy, of
everything of which this people saith, Conspiracy; and fear ye not their
fear, and be not in dread.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Jehovah of hosts, him shall ye sanctify;
and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he will be for a sanctuary; and for a
stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offence to both the houses of
Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And many among them shall stumble, and
fall, and be broken, and snared, and taken.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Bind up the testimony, seal the law among
my disciples.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And I will wait for Jehovah, who hideth
his face from the house of Jacob; and I will look for him.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Behold, I and the children that Jehovah
hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel, from Jehovah of
hosts, who dwelleth in mount Zion.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And when they shall say unto you, Seek
unto the necromancers and unto the soothsayers, who chirp and who
mutter, \[say,\] Shall not a people seek unto their God? \[Will they
go\] for the living unto the dead?

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> To the law and the testimony! If they
speak not according to this word, for them there is no daybreak.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And they shall pass through it, hard
pressed and hungry; and it shall come to pass when they are hungry, they
will fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and will gaze
upward:

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> and they will look to the earth; and
behold, trouble and darkness, gloom of anguish; and they shall be driven
into thick darkness.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Nevertheless the darkness shall not be as
when the distress was in the \[land\], at the time he at first lightly,
and afterwards heavily, visited the land of Zebulun and the land of
Naphtali, -- the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the
nations:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> the people that walked in darkness have
seen a great light; they that dwelt in the land of the shadow of death,
upon them light hath shone.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Thou hast multiplied the nation, hast
increased its joy: they joy before thee like to the joy in harvest; as
\[men\] rejoice when they divide the spoil.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden
and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day
of Midian.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For every boot of him that is shod for the
tumult, and the garment rolled in blood, shall be for burning, fuel for
fire.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For unto us a child is born, unto us a son
is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name is
called Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty ùGod, Father of Eternity, Prince of
Peace.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Of the increase of his government and of
peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David and over his
kingdom, to establish it, and to uphold it with judgment and with
righteousness, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of Jehovah of
hosts will perform this.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The Lord sent a word unto Jacob, and it
lighteth upon Israel.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And all the people shall know \[it\],
Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, that say in pride and stoutness
of heart,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The bricks are fallen down, but we will
build with hewn stones; the sycamore trees are cut down, but we will
replace them with cedars.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And Jehovah will set up the adversaries
of Rezin against him, and arm his enemies,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> the Syrians on the east, and the
Philistines on the west; and they shall devour Israel with open mouth.
For all this his anger is not turned away, and his hand is stretched out
still.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But the people turneth not unto him that
smiteth them, and they do not seek Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And Jehovah will cut off from Israel head
and tail, palm-branch and rush, in one day:

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> the ancient and honourable, he is the
head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For the guides of this people mislead
\[them\]; and they that are guided by them are swallowed up.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Therefore the Lord will not rejoice in
their young men, neither will he have mercy on their fatherless and on
their widows; for every one is a hypocrite and an evildoer, and every
mouth speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, and his
hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> For wickedness burneth as a fire: it
devoureth briars and thorns, and kindleth in the thickets of the forest,
and they go rolling up like a pillar of smoke.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Through the wrath of Jehovah of hosts is
the land burned up, and the people is as fuel for fire: a man spareth
not his brother;

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> and he snatcheth on the right hand, and
is hungry, and eateth on the left hand; and they are not satisfied. They
eat every man the flesh of his own arm:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Manasseh, Ephraim, and Ephraim, Manasseh;
\[and\] they together are against Judah. For all this his anger is not
turned away, and his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Woe unto them that decree iniquitous
decrees, and to the writers that prescribe oppression,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> to turn away the poor from judgment, and
to take away the right from the afflicted of my people; that widows may
be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless!

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And what will ye do in the day of
visitation, and in the sudden destruction \[which\] shall come from far?
To whom will ye flee for help, and where will ye leave your glory?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> They can but crouch under the prisoners,
and they shall fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not
turned away, and his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Ah! the Assyrian! the rod of mine anger!
and the staff in their hand is mine indignation.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> I will send him against a hypocritical
nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge; to
take the spoil, and to seize the prey, and to tread them down like the
mire of the streets.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> But he meaneth not so, neither doth his
heart think so; for it is in his heart to extirpate and cut off nations
not a few.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> For he saith, Are not my princes all
kings?

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Is not Calno as Karkemish? Is not Hamath
as Arpad? Is not Samaria as Damascus?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> As my hand hath found the kingdoms of
the idols, -- and their graven images exceeded those of Jerusalem and
Samaria,

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> -- shall I not, as I have done unto
Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her images?

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And it shall come to pass, when the
Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and upon Jerusalem, I
will punish the fruit of the stoutness of heart of the king of Assyria,
and the glory of his high looks.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For he saith, By the strength of my
hand I have done \[it\], and by my wisdom, for I am intelligent; and I
have removed the bounds of the peoples, and have robbed their treasures,
and, like a valiant man, I have brought down them that sit \[on
thrones\];

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> and my hand hath found as a nest the
riches of the peoples, and as one gathereth forsaken eggs, have I
gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or
opened the mouth, or chirped.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> -- Shall the axe boast itself against
him that heweth therewith? shall the saw magnify itself against him that
wieldeth it? As if the rod should wield them that lift it up; as if the
staff should lift up \[him who is\] not wood!

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Therefore shall the Lord, Jehovah of
hosts, send among his fat ones leanness, and under his glory he shall
kindle a burning, like the burning of a fire:

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> and the light of Israel shall be for a
fire, and his Holy One for a flame; and it shall burn and devour his
thorns and his briars in one day,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and it shall consume the glory of his
forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body; and they shall be
as when a sick man fainteth.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the remainder of the trees of his
forest shall be few: yea, a child might write them.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
\[that\] the remnant of Israel and such as are escaped of the house of
Jacob shall no more again rely upon him that smote them; but they shall
rely upon Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The remnant shall return, the remnant
of Jacob, unto the mighty ùGod.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> For though thy people Israel be as the
sand of the sea, \[only\] a remnant of them shall return: the
consumption determined shall overflow in righteousness.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> For a consumption, and \[one\]
determined, will the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, accomplish in the midst of
all the land.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord, Jehovah
of hosts: O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the
Assyrian; he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff
against thee, after the manner of Egypt:

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> for yet a very little while, and the
indignation shall be accomplished, and mine anger, in their destruction.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And Jehovah of hosts will stir up a
scourge against him, according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of
Oreb; and his rod \[shall be\] upon the sea, and he will lift it up
after the manner of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
\[that\] his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his
yoke from off thy neck; and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the
anointing. ...

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> He is come to Aiath, he hath passed
through Migron; at Michmash he layeth up his baggage.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> They are gone through the pass; they
make their lodging at Geba: Ramah trembleth, Gibeah of Saul is fled.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Lift up thy voice, daughter of Gallim!
Hearken, O Laish! -- Poor Anathoth!

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Madmenah is fugitive; the inhabitants
of Gebim take to flight.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Still a day of halting at Nob; he
shaketh his hand \[against\] the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill
of Jerusalem. ...

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Behold the Lord, Jehovah of hosts,
shall lop the boughs with violence; and the high ones of stature shall
be hewn down, and the haughty shall be brought low;

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> and he shall make clearings in the
thickets of the forest with iron; and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty
one.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And there shall come forth a shoot out of
the stock of Jesse, and a branch out of his roots shall be fruitful;

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> and the Spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And his delight will be in the fear of
Jehovah; and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither
reprove after the hearing of his ears;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> but with righteousness shall he judge the
poor, and reprove with equity the meek of the earth: and he shall smite
the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips
shall he slay the wicked.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And righteousness shall be the girdle of
his reins, and faithfulness the girdle of his loins.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb,
and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young
lion and the fatted beast together, and a little child shall lead them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And the cow and the she-bear shall feed;
their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw
like the ox.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And the sucking child shall play on the
hole of the adder, and the weaned child shall put forth its hand to the
viper's den.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of Jehovah,
as the waters cover the sea.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And in that day there shall be a root
of Jesse, standing as a banner of the peoples: the nations shall seek
it; and his resting-place shall be glory.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
\[that\] the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to acquire
the remnant of his people which shall be left, from Assyria, and from
Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar,
and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And he shall lift up a banner to the
nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together
the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And the envy of Ephraim shall depart,
and the troublers of Judah shall be cut off; Ephraim will not envy
Judah, and Judah will not trouble Ephraim:

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> but they shall fly upon the shoulder of
the Philistines towards the west; together shall they spoil the sons of
the east; they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab, and the children
of Ammon shall obey them.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And Jehovah will utterly destroy the
tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind will he shake his
hand over the river, and will smite it into seven streams, and make
\[men\] go over dryshod.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And there shall be a highway for the
remnant of his people which will be left, from Assyria; like as it was
to Israel in the day when he went up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And in that day thou shalt say, Jehovah,
I will praise thee; for though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is
turned away, and thou hast comforted me.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Behold, ùGod is my salvation: I will
trust, and not be afraid; for Jah, Jehovah, is my strength and song, and
he is become my salvation.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And with joy shall ye draw water out of
the wells of salvation.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And in that day shall ye say, Give ye
thanks to Jehovah, call upon his name, declare his deeds among the
peoples, make mention that his name is exalted.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Sing psalms of Jehovah, for he hath done
excellent things: this is known in all the earth.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Cry out and shout, thou inhabitress of
Zion; for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the
son of Amoz saw.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Lift up a banner upon a bare mountain,
raise the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may enter the gates
of the nobles.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> I have commanded my hallowed ones, I have
also called my mighty men for mine anger, them that rejoice in my
highness.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The noise of a multitude on the
mountains, as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of
nations assembled together: Jehovah of hosts mustereth the host of the
battle.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> They come from a far country, from the
end of the heavens -- Jehovah, and the weapons of his indignation -- to
destroy the whole land.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Howl, for the day of Jehovah is at hand;
it cometh as destruction from the Almighty.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Therefore shall all hands be feeble, and
every heart of man shall melt,

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> and they shall be terrified: pangs and
sorrows shall take hold of them, they shall writhe as a woman that
travaileth; they shall be amazed one at another, their faces shall be as
flames.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Behold, the day of Jehovah cometh, cruel
both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the earth desolate; and he will
destroy the sinners thereof out of it.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> For the stars of the heavens and the
constellations thereof shall not give their light; the sun shall be
darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to
shine.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And I will punish the world for evil,
and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will make the arrogance of the
proud to cease, and will bring low the haughtiness of the violent.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> I will make a man more precious than
fine gold, even man than the gold of Ophir.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore I will make the heavens to
shake, and the earth shall be removed out of her place, at the wrath of
Jehovah of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And it shall be as with a chased roe,
and as with a flock that no man gathereth together; every one shall turn
to his own people, and every one flee into his own land.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> All that are found shall be thrust
through; and every one that is in league \[with them\] shall fall by the
sword.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And their infants shall be dashed in
pieces before their eyes, their houses shall be rifled, and their women
ravished.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Behold, I will stir up the Medes
against them, who do not regard silver, and as for gold, they have no
delight in it.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And \[their\] bows shall dash the young
men to pieces, and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb:
their eye shall not spare children.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the
beauty of the Chaldeans' pride, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> It shall never be inhabited, neither
shall it be dwelt in, even to generation and generation; nor shall
Arabian pitch tent there, nor shepherds make fold there.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But beasts of the desert shall lie
there, and their houses shall be full of owls; and ostriches shall dwell
there, and wild goats shall dance there.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And jackals shall cry to one another in
their palaces, and wild dogs in the pleasant castles. And her time is
near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> For Jehovah will have mercy on Jacob, and
will yet choose Israel, and set them in rest in their own land; and the
stranger shall be united to them, and they shall be joined to the house
of Jacob.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And the peoples shall take them and bring
them to their place; and the house of Israel shall possess them in the
land of Jehovah for servants and handmaids; and they shall take them
captive whose captives they were, and they shall rule over their
oppressors.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And it shall come to pass in the day that
Jehovah shall give thee rest from thy sorrow and from thy trouble and
from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve,

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> that thou shalt take up this proverb
against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased, --
the exactress of gold ceased!

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Jehovah hath broken the staff of the
wicked, the sceptre of the rulers.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He that smote the peoples in wrath with a
relentless stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted
unsparingly.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> The whole earth is at rest, is quiet:
they break forth into singing.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Even the cypresses rejoice at thee, the
cedars of Lebanon, \[saying,\] Since thou art laid down, no feller is
come up against us.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Sheol from beneath is moved for thee to
meet \[thee\] at thy coming, stirring up the dead for thee, all the
he-goats of the earth; making to rise from their thrones all the kings
of the nations.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> All of them shall answer and say unto
thee, Art thou also become powerless as we; art thou become like unto
us!

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> -- Thy pomp is brought down to Sheol,
the noise of thy lyres: the maggot is spread under thee, and worms cover
thee.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> How art thou fallen from heaven,
Lucifer, son of the morning! Thou art cut down to the ground, that didst
prostrate the nations!

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And thou that didst say in thy heart, I
will ascend into the heavens, I will exalt my throne above the stars of
ùGod, and I will sit upon the mount of assembly, in the recesses of the
north;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I will ascend above the heights of the
clouds, I will be like the Most High:

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> none the less art thou brought down to
Sheol, to the recesses of the pit.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> They that see thee shall narrowly look
upon thee; they shall consider thee, \[saying,\] Is this the man that
made the earth to tremble, that shook kingdoms;

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> \[that\] made the world as a
wilderness, and overthrew the cities thereof; \[that\] dismissed not his
prisoners homewards?

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> -- All the kings of the nations, all of
them, lie in glory, every one in his own house;

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> but thou art cast out of thy grave like
an abominable branch, covered with the slain -- those thrust through
with the sword, that go down to the stones of the pit: like a carcase
trodden under foot.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Thou shalt not be joined with them in
burial; for thou hast destroyed thy land, hast slain thy people. Of the
seed of evildoers no mention shall be made for ever.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Prepare ye slaughter for his children,
because of the iniquity of their fathers; that they may not rise up and
possess the earth, nor fill the face of the world with cities.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> For I will rise up against them, saith
Jehovah of hosts, and cut off from Babylon name and remnant, and scion
and descendant, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And I will make it a possession for the
bittern, and pools of water; and I will sweep it with the besom of
destruction, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> Jehovah of hosts hath sworn saying,
Assuredly as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have
purposed, it shall stand:

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> to break the Assyrian in my land; and
upon my mountains will I tread him under foot; and his yoke shall depart
from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> This is the counsel which is purposed
concerning the whole earth; and this is the hand which is stretched out
upon all the nations.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> For Jehovah of hosts hath purposed, and
who shall frustrate \[it\]? And his hand is stretched out, and who shall
turn it back?

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In the year of the death of king Ahaz
was this burden:

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Rejoice not thou, Philistia, all of
thee, because the rod that smote thee is broken; for out of the
serpent's root shall come forth a viper, and his fruit shall be a fiery
flying serpent.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And the firstborn of the poor shall
feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety; but I will kill thy root
with famine, and thy remnant shall be slain.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Howl, O gate! cry, O city! thou,
Philistia, art wholly dissolved; for there cometh from the north a
smoke, and none remaineth apart in his gatherings \[of troops\].

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And what shall be answered to the
messengers of the nation? That Jehovah hath founded Zion, and the
afflicted of his people find refuge in it.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> The burden of Moab: For in the night of
being laid waste, Ar of Moab is destroyed; for in the night of being
laid waste, Kir of Moab is destroyed!

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, to
the high places, to weep; Moab howleth over Nebo, and over Medeba; on
all their heads is baldness, every beard is cut off.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> In their streets they are girded with
sackcloth; on their roofs, and in their broadways, every one howleth,
melted into tears.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And Heshbon crieth, and Elealeh: their
voice is heard unto Jahaz. Therefore the armed men of Moab cry out: his
soul trembleth in him.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> My heart crieth out for Moab; their
fugitives \[have fled\] unto Zoar, unto Eglath-Sheli-shijah: for by the
ascent of Luhith, with weeping they go up by it; for in the way of
Horonaim they raise up a cry of destruction.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> For the waters of Nimrim shall be
desolate; for the herbage is withered away, the grass hath failed, there
is no green thing.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Therefore the abundance they have gotten,
and that which they have laid up, do they carry away to the torrent of
the willows.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> For the cry goeth round about the borders
of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto
Beer-elim.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> For the waters of Dimon are full of
blood, for I will lay yet more upon Dimon: a lion upon them that are
escaped of Moab, and upon that which remaineth of the land.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Send the lamb of the ruler of the land
from the rock to the wilderness, -- unto the mount of the daughter of
Zion.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And it shall be \[that\] as a wandering
bird, \[as\] a scattered nest, so shall the daughters of Moab be at the
fords of the Arnon.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Bring in counsel, execute justice; make
thy shadow as the night in the midst of noonday; hide the outcasts,
discover not the fugitive.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab;
be thou a covert to them from the face of the waster. For the
extortioner is at an end, the wasting hath ceased, the oppressors are
consumed out of the land.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And a throne shall be established in
mercy: and in the tent of David there shall sit upon it, in truth, one
judging and seeking justice and hastening righteousness.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> We have heard of the arrogance of Moab,
-- \[he is\] very proud, -- of his pride, and his arrogance, and his
wrath: his pratings are vain.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab; every
one of them shall howl. For the foundations of Kirhareseth shall ye
mourn, verily afflicted.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> For the fields of Heshbon languish, the
vine of Sibmah; the lords of the nations have broken down its choice
plants: they reached unto Jaazer, they wandered \[through\] the
wilderness; its shoots stretched out, they went beyond the sea.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Therefore I will weep with the weeping of
Jaazer for the vine of Sibmah; with my tears will I water thee, Heshbon,
and Elealeh, for a cry is fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy
harvest.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And joy and gladness is taken away out
of the fruitful field; and in the vineyards there is no singing, neither
is there shouting: the treaders tread out no wine in the presses, I have
made the cry \[of the winepress\] to cease.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Therefore my bowels sound like a harp
for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kirheres.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And it shall come to pass, when Moab
shall appear, shall weary himself on the high place, and enter into his
sanctuary to pray, that he shall not prevail.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> This is the word which Jehovah hath
spoken from of old concerning Moab.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And now Jehovah speaketh saying, Within
three years, as the years of a hired servant, and the glory of Moab
shall be brought to nothing, with all that great multitude; and the
remnant shall be small, few, of no account.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus
is taken away from \[being\] a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they
shall be for flocks; and they shall lie down and there shall be none to
make them afraid.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The fortress also shall cease from
Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they
shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And in that day it shall come to pass,
that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh
shall become lean.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And it shall be as when the reaper
gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; yea, it shall be
as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And a gleaning shall be left in it, as at
the shaking of an olive-tree: two, three berries above, in the tree-top;
four, five in its fruitful boughs, saith Jehovah, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> In that day shall man look to his Maker,
and his eyes shall have regard to the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And he will not look to the altars, the
work of his hands, nor have regard to what his fingers have made,
neither the Asherahs nor the sun-images.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> In that day shall his strong cities be as
the forsaken tract in the woodland, and the mountain-top which they
forsook before the children of Israel; and there shall be desolation.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> For thou hast forgotten the God of thy
salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength;
therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plantations, and shalt set them with
foreign slips:

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> in the day of thy planting wilt thou
make \[them\] to grow, and on the morrow wilt thou make thy seed to
flourish; \[but\] the harvest will flee in the day of taking possession,
and the sorrow will be incurable.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Ha! a tumult of many peoples! they make
a noise as the noise of the seas; -- and the rushing of nations! they
rush as the rushing of mighty waters.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> The nations rush as the rushing of many
waters; but he will rebuke them, and they shall flee far away, and shall
be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a
whirling \[of dust\] before the whirlwind:

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> behold, at eventide, trouble; before
the morning they are not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and
the lot of them that rob us.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Ha! land shadowing with wings, which art
beyond the rivers of Cush,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> that sendest ambassadors over the sea,
and in vessels of papyrus upon the waters, \[saying,\] Go, swift
messengers, to a nation scattered and ravaged, to a people terrible from
their existence and thenceforth; to a nation of continued waiting and of
treading down, whose land the rivers have spoiled!

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> All ye inhabitants of the world, and
dwellers on the earth, when a banner is lifted up on the mountains, see
ye, and when a trumpet is blown, hear ye!

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> For thus hath Jehovah said unto me: I
will take my rest, and I will observe from my dwelling-place like clear
heat upon herbs, like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For before the harvest, when the
blossoming is over, and the flower becometh a ripening grape, he shall
both cut off the sprigs with pruning-knives, and take away \[and\] cut
down the branches.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> They shall be left together unto the
mountain birds of prey, and to the beasts of the earth; and the birds of
prey shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall
winter upon them.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> In that time shall a present be brought
unto Jehovah of hosts of a people scattered and ravaged, -- and from a
people terrible from their existence and thenceforth, a nation of
continued waiting and of treading down, whose land the rivers have
spoiled, ... to the place of the name of Jehovah of hosts, the mount
Zion.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> The burden of Egypt. Behold, Jehovah
rideth upon a swift cloud, and cometh to Egypt; and the idols of Egypt
are moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt melteth in the midst
of it.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And I will incite the Egyptians against
the Egyptians; and they shall fight every one against his brother, and
every one against his neighbour; city against city, kingdom against
kingdom.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the
midst of it, and I will destroy the counsel thereof; and they shall seek
unto the idols and unto the conjurers, and unto the necromancers, and
unto the soothsayers.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And the Egyptians will I give over into
the hand of a cruel lord, and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith
the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And the waters shall fail from the sea,
and the river shall be wasted and dried up;

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> and the rivers shall stink, and the
streams of Egypt shall be diminished and drain away: the reeds and
sedges shall wither.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> The meadows by the Nile, on the banks of
the Nile, and everything sown by the Nile, shall be dried up, be driven
away, and be no \[more\].

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And the fishers shall mourn, and all they
that cast fish-hook into the Nile shall lament, and they that spread net
upon the waters shall languish.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And they that work in fine flax, and they
that weave white stuffs shall be ashamed.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And her pillars shall be broken in
pieces, and all workers for hire shall be sad of soul.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> They are but fools, the princes of
Zoan, the wise counsellors of Pharaoh: \[their\] counsel is become
senseless. How say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of
ancient kings?

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Where are they then, thy wise \[men\]?
Let them now tell thee, and let them make known what Jehovah of hosts
hath purposed upon Egypt.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> The princes of Zoan are become foolish,
the princes of Noph are deceived; and the corner-stones of its tribes
have caused Egypt to err.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Jehovah hath mingled a spirit of
perverseness in the midst thereof; and they have caused Egypt to err in
every work thereof, as a drunkard staggereth in his vomit.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Neither shall there be any work for
Egypt, which the head or tail, palm-branch or rush, may do.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> In that day shall Egypt be like unto
women; and it shall tremble and fear because of the shaking of the hand
of Jehovah of hosts, which he shaketh over it.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And the land of Judah shall be a dismay
unto Egypt: every one that thinketh of it shall be afraid for himself,
because of the counsel of Jehovah of hosts, which he hath purposed
against it.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> In that day shall there be five cities
in the land of Egypt speaking the language of Canaan, and swearing by
Jehovah of hosts: one shall be called, The city of Heres.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> In that day shall there be an altar to
Jehovah in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border
thereof to Jehovah:

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> and it shall be for a sign and for a
witness to Jehovah of hosts in the land of Egypt; for they shall cry
unto Jehovah because of the oppressors, and he will send them a saviour
and defender, who shall deliver them.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And Jehovah shall be known to the
Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall know Jehovah in that day, and shall
serve with sacrifice and oblation; and they shall vow a vow unto
Jehovah, and perform it.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And Jehovah will smite Egypt; he will
smite and heal: and they shall return to Jehovah, and he will be
entreated of them, and will heal them.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> In that day shall there be a highway
out of Egypt to Assyria; and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the
Egyptian into Assyria; and Egypt shall serve with Assyria.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> In that day shall Israel be the third
with Egypt and with Assyria, a blessing in the midst of the earth;

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> whom Jehovah of hosts will bless,
saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands,
and Israel mine inheritance!

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> In the year that Tartan came to Ashdod,
when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him, (and he fought against Ashdod
and took it,)

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> at that time spoke Jehovah by Isaiah the
son of Amoz, saying, Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and
put off thy sandal from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and
barefoot.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And Jehovah said, Like as my servant
Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years, a sign and a wonder
concerning Egypt and concerning Ethiopia,

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> so shall the king of Assyria lead away
the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, naked
and barefoot, and with buttocks uncovered, \[to\] the shame of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And they shall be terrified and ashamed
of Ethiopia their confidence, and of Egypt their boast.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And the inhabitants of this coast shall
say in that day, Behold, such is our confidence, whither we fled for
help to be delivered from the king of Assyria; and how shall we escape?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The burden of the desert of the sea. As
whirlwinds in the south pass through, so it cometh from the desert, from
a terrible land.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> A grievous vision is declared unto me:
the treacherous dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up,
Elam! besiege, Media! All the sighing thereof have I made to cease.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Therefore are my loins filled with pain;
anguish hath taken hold upon me, as the anguish of a woman in travail: I
am bowed down so as not to hear, I am dismayed so as not to see.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> My heart panteth, horror affrighteth me:
the night of my pleasure hath he turned into trembling unto me.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Prepare the table, appoint the watch;
eat, drink: arise, ye princes, anoint the shield.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> For thus hath the Lord said unto me: Go,
set a watchman, let him declare what he seeth.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And he saw chariots, horsemen by pairs, a
chariot with asses, a chariot with camels; and he hearkened diligently
with much heed.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And he cried \[as\] a lion, Lord, I stand
continually upon the watchtower in the daytime, and I am set in my ward
whole nights.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> -- And behold, there cometh a chariot of
men; horsemen by pairs. And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the
ground.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> O my threshing, and the corn of my
floor! What I have heard of Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, have I
declared unto you.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> The burden of Dumah. He calleth to me
out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> The watchman said, The morning cometh,
and also the night: if ye will inquire, inquire; return, come.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> The burden against Arabia. In the
forest of Arabia shall ye lodge, \[ye\] caravans of Dedanites.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Bring ye water to meet the thirsty! The
inhabitants of the land of Tema come forth with their bread for him that
fleeth.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> For they flee from the swords, from the
drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> For thus hath the Lord said unto me:
Within a year, according to the years of a hired servant, and all the
glory of Kedar shall fail;

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> and the residue of the number of the
archers, the mighty men of the sons of Kedar, shall be diminished: for
Jehovah, the God of Israel, hath spoken.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> The burden of the valley of vision. What
aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the housetops?

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Thou that wast full of stir, a town of
tumult, a joyous city: thy slain men are not slain with the sword, nor
dead in battle.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> All thy rulers have fled together, they
are taken prisoners without the bow: all that are found of thee are made
prisoners together; they were fleeing far off.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Therefore said I, Look away from me; let
me weep bitterly: labour not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of
the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> For it is a day of trouble, and of
treading down, and of perplexity, from the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, in
the valley of vision; \[a day of\] breaking down the wall, and of crying
to the mountain:

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> -- Elam beareth the quiver with chariots
of men \[and\] horsemen; and Kir uncovereth the shield.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And it shall come to pass \[that\] thy
choicest valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set
themselves in array at the gate.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And he uncovereth the covering of Judah:
and thou didst look in that day to the armour in the house of the
forest;

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> and ye have seen the breaches of the city
of David, that they are many; and ye have gathered together the waters
of the lower pool;

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> and ye have numbered the houses of
Jerusalem, and have broken down the houses to fortify the wall;

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> and ye have made a reservoir between
the two walls for the water of the old pool: but ye have not had regard
unto the maker thereof, neither have ye looked unto him that fashioned
it long ago.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And in that day did the Lord Jehovah of
hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding
with sackcloth;

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> and behold joy and rejoicing, slaying
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: -- Let us eat
and drink, for to-morrow we die.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And it was revealed in mine ears by
Jehovah of hosts: Assuredly this iniquity shall not be purged from you
till ye die, saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah of hosts:
Go, get thee in unto this steward, unto Shebna, who is over the house,
\[and say,\]

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> What hast thou here? and whom hast thou
here, that thou hast hewn thee out a sepulchre here, \[as\] he that
heweth out his sepulchre on high, cutting out in the rock a habitation
for himself?

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Behold, Jehovah will hurl thee with the
force of a mighty man, and will cover thee entirely.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Rolling thee up completely, he will
roll thee as a ball into a wide country: there shalt thou die, and there
shall be the chariots of thy glory, O shame of thy lord's house!

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And I will drive thee from thine
office, and from thy station will I pull thee down.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkijah;

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> and I will clothe him with thy robe,
and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government
into his hand; and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and to the house of Judah.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And the key of the house of David will
I lay upon his shoulder; and he shall open, and none shall shut; and he
shall shut, and none shall open.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And I will fasten him \[as\] a nail in
a sure place; and he shall be for a throne of glory to his father's
house:

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> and they shall hang upon him all the
glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, all the small
vessels, as well the vessels of cups as all the vessels of flagons.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> In that day, saith Jehovah of hosts,
shall the nail that is fastened in a sure place be removed, and be cut
down, and fall; and the burden that was upon it shall be cut off: for
Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of
Tarshish! for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, none entering
in. From the land of Chittim it is revealed to them.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle! The
merchants of Sidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished thee.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And on great waters, the seed of Shihor,
the harvest of the Nile, was her revenue; and she was the market of the
nations.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Be thou ashamed, Sidon, for the sea hath
spoken, the strength of the sea, saying, I have not travailed nor
brought forth, neither have I nourished young men \[nor\] brought up
virgins.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> -- When the report came into Egypt, they
were sorely pained at the news of Tyre.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Pass over to Tarshish; howl, ye
inhabitants of the coast!

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Is this your joyous \[city\], whose
antiquity is of ancient days? Her feet shall carry her afar off to
sojourn.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Who hath purposed this against Tyre, the
distributor of crowns, whose merchants were princes, whose dealers were
the honourable of the earth?

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Jehovah of hosts hath purposed it, to
profane the pride of all glory, to bring to nought all the honourable of
the earth.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Overflow thy land like the Nile,
daughter of Tarshish: there is no more restraint.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> He hath stretched out his hand over the
sea, he shaketh the kingdoms. Jehovah hath given a commandment
concerning Canaan, to destroy the strongholds thereof,

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> and hath said, Thou shalt no more
exult, \[thou\] oppressed virgin, daughter of Sidon: get thee up, pass
over to Chittim; even there shalt thou have no rest.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Behold the land of the Chaldeans: this
people did not exist; the Assyrian founded it for the dwellers in the
desert: they set up their towers, they destroyed the palaces thereof; he
brought it to ruin.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Howl, ships of Tarshish! for your
fortress is laid waste.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one
king. At the end of seventy years it shall be for Tyre as the harlot's
song.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Take a harp, go about the city, thou
forgotten harlot! Make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest
be remembered.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And it shall come to pass at the end of
seventy years, that Jehovah will visit Tyre; and she will return to her
hire, and will commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the earth
upon the face of the ground.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And her merchandise and her hire shall
be holy to Jehovah: it shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her
merchandise shall be for them that dwell before Jehovah, to eat and be
sufficed, and for excellent clothing.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Behold, Jehovah maketh the land empty,
and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad
its inhabitants.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And it shall be, as with the people, so
with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the
maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as
with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so
with him from whom usury is taken.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> The land shall be utterly emptied, and
utterly spoiled; for Jehovah hath spoken this word.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> The land mourneth, it fadeth away; the
world languisheth, it fadeth away: the haughty people of the land do
languish.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And the land is polluted under the
inhabitants thereof; for they have violated the laws, changed the
statute, broken the everlasting covenant.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Therefore doth the curse devour the
earth, and they that dwell therein are held guilty; therefore the
inhabitants of the earth are consumed, and few men are left.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> The new wine mourneth, the vine
languisheth, all that were merry-hearted do sigh;

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> the mirth of tambours ceaseth, the noise
of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> They do not drink wine with a song;
strong drink is bitter to them that drink it.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> The city of solitude is broken down;
every house is shut up, so that none entereth in.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> There is a crying for wine in the
streets; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone;

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> desolation remaineth in the city, and
the gate is smitten, -- a ruin.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> For so will it be in the midst of the
land among the peoples, as the shaking of an olive-tree, as the
grape-gleanings when the vintage is done.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> These shall lift up their voice, they
shall shout for the majesty of Jehovah, they shall cry aloud from the
sea.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Therefore glorify Jehovah in the east,
the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel, in the isles of the west.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> From the end of the earth have we heard
songs: Glory to the righteous! And I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe
unto me! The treacherous have dealt treacherously; yea, the treacherous
have dealt very treacherously.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Fear, and the pit, and the snare are
upon thee, inhabitant of the land.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And it shall come to pass, \[that\] he
who fleeth from the sound of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he
that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare;
for the windows on high are open, and the foundations of the earth
shake.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> The earth is utterly broken down, the
earth is completely dissolved, the earth is violently moved.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> The earth reeleth to and fro like a
drunkard, and is shaken like a night hut; and its transgression is heavy
upon it; and it falleth and shall not rise again.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
\[that\] Jehovah will punish the host of the high ones on high, and the
kings of the earth upon the earth.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And they shall be brought together,
\[as\] an assemblage of prisoners for the pit, and shall be shut up in
prison, and after many days shall they be visited.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And the moon shall be confounded, and
the sun ashamed; for Jehovah of hosts shall reign on mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem, and before his ancients in glory.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Jehovah, thou art my God: I will exalt
thee; I will celebrate thy name, for thou hast done wonderful things;
counsels of old \[which are\] faithfulness \[and\] truth.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> For thou hast made of the city a heap, of
the fortified town a ruin, the palace of strangers to be no city; it
shall never be built up.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Therefore shall the mighty people glorify
thee, the city of terrible nations shall fear thee.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> For thou hast been a fortress to the
poor, a fortress for the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm,
a shadow from the heat: for the blast of the terrible ones \[has been\]
as the storm \[against\] a wall.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Thou hast subdued the tumult of
strangers, as the heat in a dry place; \[as\] the heat, by the shadow of
a cloud, \[so\] the song of the terrible ones is brought low.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And in this mountain will Jehovah of
hosts make unto all peoples a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on
the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well
refined.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And he will destroy in this mountain the
face of the veil which veileth all the peoples, and the covering that is
spread over all the nations.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> He will swallow up death in victory. And
the Lord Jehovah will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the
reproach of his people will he take away from off all the earth: for
Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And it shall be said in that day, Behold,
this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is
Jehovah, we have waited for him; we will be glad and rejoice in his
salvation.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> For in this mountain shall the hand of
Jehovah rest, and Moab shall be trodden down under him, as straw is
trodden down in the dunghill;

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> and he shall spread forth his hands in
the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth them forth to swim; and
he shall bring down their pride together with the plots of their hands.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And the fortress of the high defences
of thy walls will he bring down, lay low, bring to the ground, into the
dust.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> In that day shall this song be sung in
the land of Judah: We have a strong city; salvation doth he appoint for
walls and bulwarks.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Open ye the gates, and the righteous
nation which keepeth faithfulness shall enter in.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Thou wilt keep in perfect peace the mind
stayed \[on thee\], for he confideth in thee.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Confide ye in Jehovah for ever; for in
Jah, Jehovah, is the rock of ages.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> For he bringeth down them that dwell on
high; the lofty city, he layeth it low, he layeth it low to the ground,
he bringeth it even to the dust.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> The foot shall tread it down, -- the feet
of the afflicted, the steps of the poor.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> The way of the just is uprightness: thou,
the Upright, dost make the path of the just even.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O
Jehovah, have we waited for thee; the desire of \[our\] soul is to thy
name, and to thy memorial.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> With my soul have I desired thee in the
night; yea, with my spirit within me I seek thee early: for when thy
judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn
righteousness.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> If favour be shewn to the wicked, he
doth not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness he dealeth
unjustly, and beholdeth not the majesty of Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Jehovah, thy hand is lifted up, but
they do not see: \[yet\] they shall see \[thy\] jealousy \[for\] the
people, and be ashamed; yea, the fire which is for thine adversaries
shall devour them.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Jehovah, thou wilt ordain peace for us;
for thou also hast wrought all our works for us.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Jehovah our God, other lords than thee
have had dominion over us; by thee only will we make mention of thy
name.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> \[They are\] dead, they shall not live;
deceased, they shall not rise: for thou hast visited and destroyed them,
and made all memory of them to perish.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Thou hast increased the nation,
Jehovah, thou hast increased the nation: thou art glorified. Thou hadst
removed \[it\] far \[unto\] all the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Jehovah, in trouble they sought thee;
they poured out \[their\] whispered prayer when thy chastening was upon
them.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> As a woman with child, that draweth
near her delivery, is in travail, \[and\] crieth out in her pangs; so
have we been before thee, Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> We have been with child, we have been
in travail, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought
the deliverance of the land, neither have the inhabitants of the world
fallen.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Thy dead shall live, my dead bodies
shall arise. Awake and sing in triumph, ye that dwell in dust; for thy
dew is the dew of the morning, and the earth shall cast forth the dead.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Come, my people, enter into thy
chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself just for a little
moment, until the indignation be past.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> For behold, Jehovah cometh out of his
place to visit the iniquity of the inhabitants of the earth upon them;
and the earth shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her
slain.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> In that day Jehovah, with his sore and
great and strong sword, will visit leviathan the fleeing serpent, and
leviathan the crooked serpent; and he will slay the monster that is in
the sea.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> In that day \[there shall be\] a vineyard
of pure wine; sing concerning it:

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> I Jehovah keep it, I will water it every
moment; lest any harm it, I will keep it night and day.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Fury is not in me. Oh that I had briars
\[and\] thorns in battle against me! I would march against them, I would
burn them together.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Or let him take hold of my strength; let
him make peace with me: \[yea,\] let him make peace with me.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> In the future Jacob shall take root;
Israel shall blossom and bud, and they shall fill the face of the world
with fruit.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Hath he smitten him according to the
smiting of those that smote him? Is he slain according to the slaughter
of those slain by him?

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> In measure, when sending her away, didst
thou contend with her: he hath taken \[her\] away with his rough wind in
the day of the east wind.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> By this, therefore, shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit of the taking away of his
sin: when he shall make all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that
are crumbled in pieces, -- the Asherahs and the sun-images shall not
stand.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> For the fortified city is solitary, a
habitation abandoned and forsaken like a wilderness; there shall the
calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume its boughs.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> When its branches are withered they
shall be broken off; women shall come \[and\] set them on fire. For it
is a people of no intelligence; therefore he that made them will not
have mercy on them, and he who formed them will shew them no favour.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that Jehovah shall beat out from the flood of the river unto the torrent
of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, \[ye\] children of
Israel.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
\[that\] the great trumpet shall be blown; and they shall come that were
perishing in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt,
and they shall worship Jehovah in the holy mountain at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Woe to the crown of pride of the
drunkards of Ephraim, and to the fading flower of his glorious
adornment, which is on the head of the fat valley of them that are
overcome with wine.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong
one, as a storm of hail \[and\] a destroying tempest; as a storm of
mighty waters overflowing, shall he cast down to the earth with might.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> The crown of pride of the drunkards of
Ephraim shall be trodden under feet;

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> and the fading flower of his glorious
adornment which is on the head of the fat valley shall be like an early
fig before the summer: as soon as he that seeth it perceiveth it,
scarcely is it in his hand, he swalloweth it down.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> In that day will Jehovah of hosts be for
a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the remnant of his
people;

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> and for a spirit of judgment to him that
sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to
the gate.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> But these also have erred through wine,
and through strong drink are they gone astray. The priest and the
prophet have erred through strong drink; they are overpowered by wine,
they are gone astray through strong drink; they have erred in vision,
they have stumbled \[in\] judgment.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> For all tables are full of filthy vomit,
so that there is no \[more\] place.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom
shall he make to understand the report? Them that are weaned from the
milk, withdrawn from the breasts?

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> For \[it is\] precept upon precept,
precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little,
there a little. ...

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> For with stammering lips and a strange
tongue will he speak to this people;

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> to whom he said, This is the rest:
cause the weary to rest; and this is the refreshing. But they would not
hear.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And the word of Jehovah was unto them
precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon
line, here a little, there a little: that they might go, and fall
backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Therefore hear the word of Jehovah, ye
scornful men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> For ye have said, We have made a
covenant with death, and with Sheol have we made an agreement; when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for
we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, I lay for foundation in Zion a stone, a tried stone, a precious
corner-stone, a sure foundation: he that trusteth shall not make haste.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And I will appoint judgment for a line,
and righteousness for a plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the
refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding-place.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And your covenant with death shall be
annulled, and your agreement with Sheol shall not stand; when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, ye shall be trodden down by it.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> As it passeth through it shall take
you; for morning by morning shall it pass through, by day and by night;
and it shall be terror only to understand the report.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> For the bed is too short to stretch
oneself on, and the covering too narrow when he would wrap himself in
it.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> For Jehovah will rise up as on mount
Perazim, he will be moved with anger as in the valley of Gibeon; that he
may do his work, his strange work, and perform his act, his unwonted
act.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Now therefore be ye not scorners, lest
your bonds be made strong; for I have heard from the Lord Jehovah of
hosts a consumption, and \[one\] determined, upon the whole land.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> Give ear, and hear my voice; hearken,
and hear my speech.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Doth the ploughman plough all day to
sow? Is he \[all day\] opening and breaking the clods of his land?

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Doth he not, when he hath levelled the
face thereof, cast abroad dill, and scatter cummin, and set the wheat in
rows, and the barley in an appointed place, and the rye in its border?

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> His God doth instruct him in \[his\]
judgment, he doth teach him.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For the dill is not threshed with a
threshing instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon the
cummin; but dill is beaten out with a staff, and cummin with a rod.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Bread \[corn\] is crushed, because he
will not ever be threshing it; and if he drove the wheels of his cart
and his horses \[over it\], he would not crush it.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> This also cometh forth from Jehovah of
hosts; he is wonderful in counsel, great in wisdom.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city of
David's encampment! Add ye year to year; let the feasts come round.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> But I will distress Ariel, and there
shall be sorrow and sadness; and it shall be unto me as an Ariel.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And I will camp against thee round about,
and will lay siege against thee with watch-posts, and I will raise forts
against thee.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And thou shalt be brought low, thou shalt
speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall come low out of the dust,
and thy voice shall be as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the
ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And the multitude of thine enemies shall
be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones as chaff that
passeth away; and it shall be in an instant, suddenly.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> Thou shalt be visited by Jehovah of hosts
with thunder and with earthquake and great noise, with whirlwind and
tempest, and the flame of devouring fire.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And the multitude of all the nations that
war against Ariel, even all that war against her and her fortifications,
and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> It shall even be as when the hungry
dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; and he awaketh, and his soul is empty;
or as when the thirsty dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; and he
awaketh, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul craveth: so shall the
multitude of all the nations be that war against mount Zion.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Be astounded and astonished, blind
yourselves and be blind! They are drunken, but not with wine; they
stagger, but not with strong drink.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> For Jehovah hath poured out upon you a
spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes; the prophets and your
chiefs, the seers, hath he covered.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And the whole vision is become unto you
as the words of a book that is sealed, which they give to one that can
read, saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he saith, I cannot, for it is
sealed.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And they give the book to him that
cannot read, saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he saith, I cannot
read.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And the Lord saith, Forasmuch as this
people draw near with their mouth, and honour me with their lips, but
their heart is removed far from me, and their fear of me is a
commandment taught of men;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> therefore, behold, I will proceed to do
marvellously with this people, to do marvellously, even with wonder, and
the wisdom of their wise \[men\] shall perish, and the understanding of
their intelligent ones shall be hid.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Woe unto them that hide deep, far from
Jehovah, their counsel! And their works are in the dark, and they say,
Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> \[Oh\] your perverseness! -- Shall the
potter be esteemed as the clay, so that the work should say of him that
made it, He made me not; or the thing formed say of him that formed it,
He hath no understanding?

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Is it not yet a very little while, and
Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field
shall be esteemed as a forest?

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And in that day shall the deaf hear the
words of the book, and, out of obscurity and out of darkness, the eyes
of the blind shall see;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> and the meek shall increase their joy
in Jehovah, and the needy among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of
Israel.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> For the terrible one shall come to
nought, and the scorner shall be no more, and all that watch for
iniquity shall be cut off,

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> that make a man an offender for a word,
and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and pervert \[the
judgment of\] the righteous by futility.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah who
redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob: Jacob shall not now be
ashamed, neither shall his face now be pale;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> for when he seeth his children, the
work of my hands, in the midst of him, they shall hallow my name, and
hallow the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And they that are of erring spirit
shall know understanding, and the disobedient shall learn doctrine.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> Woe to the rebellious children, saith
Jehovah, who take counsel, but not of me, and who make leagues, but not
by my Spirit, that they may heap sin upon sin;

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> who walk to go down into Egypt, and have
not asked of my mouth, -- to take refuge under the protection of
Pharaoh, and trust in the shadow of Egypt!

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For to you the protection of Pharaoh
shall be a shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt a confusion.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> For his princes were at Zoan, and his
ambassadors came to Hanes.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> They were all ashamed of a people
\[that\] did not profit them, nor were a help or profit, but a shame,
and also a reproach.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> -- The burden of the beasts of the south:
Through a land of trouble and anguish, whence come the lioness and lion,
the viper and fiery flying serpent, they carry their riches upon the
shoulders of asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels, to
the people that shall not profit \[them\].

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> For Egypt shall help in vain, and to no
purpose; therefore have I named her, Arrogance, that doeth nothing.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Now go, write it before them on a tablet,
and record it in a book, that it may be for the time to come, as a
witness for ever,

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> that this is a rebellious people, lying
children, children that will not hear the law of Jehovah;

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> who say to the seers, See not; and to
the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things; speak unto us smooth
things, prophesy deceits;

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> get you out of the way, turn aside out
of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us!

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> Therefore thus saith the Holy One of
Israel: Because ye reject this word, and confide in oppression and
wilfulness, and depend thereon,

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> therefore this iniquity shall be to you
as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a towering wall, whose
breaking shall come suddenly in an instant.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And he shall break it as the breaking
of a potter's vessel, that is broken in pieces unsparingly; and in the
pieces of it there shall not be found a sherd to take fire from the
hearth, or to scoop water out of the cistern.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah, the
Holy One of Israel: In returning and rest shall ye be saved, in
quietness and confidence shall be your strength; but ye would not.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And ye said, No, but we will flee upon
horses, -- therefore shall ye flee; and, We will ride upon the swift, --
therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> One thousand \[shall flee\] at the
rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a
beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as a banner on a hill.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> And therefore will Jehovah wait, that
he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he lift himself up, that
he may have mercy upon you; for Jehovah is a God of judgment: blessed
are all they that wait for him.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> For the people shall dwell in Zion, at
Jerusalem. Thou shalt weep no more; he will be very gracious unto thee
at the voice of thy cry; as he heareth it, he will answer thee.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And the Lord will give you the bread of
adversity, and the water of oppression; yet thy teachers shall not be
hidden any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And when ye turn to the right hand or
when ye turn to the left, thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And ye shall defile the silver covering
of your graven images, and the gold overlaying of your molten images;
thou shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloth: Out! shalt thou say
unto it.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And he will give the rain of thy seed
with which thou shalt sow the ground; and bread, the produce of the
ground, and it shall be fat and rich. In that day shall thy cattle feed
in large pastures;

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> and the oxen and the asses that till
the ground shall eat salted provender, which hath been winnowed with the
shovel and with the fan.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And there shall be upon every high
mountain and upon every hill that is lifted up, brooks \[and\]
water-courses, in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And the light of the moon shall be as
the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as
the light of seven days, in the day that Jehovah bindeth up the breach
of his people, and healeth the wound of their stroke.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> Behold, the name of Jehovah cometh from
far, burning \[with\] his anger -- a grievous conflagration; his lips
are full of indignation, and his tongue as a consuming fire;

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> and his breath as an overflowing
torrent, which reacheth even to the neck, to sift the nations with the
sieve of destruction, and \[to put\] a bridle into the jaws of the
peoples, that causeth them to go astray.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> Ye shall have a song, as in the night
when a feast is sanctified; and joy of heart, as of one who goeth with a
pipe to come unto the mountain of Jehovah, to the Rock of Israel.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> And Jehovah will cause the majesty of
his voice to be heard, and will shew the lighting down of his arm with
indignation of anger, and a flame of consuming fire, with waterflood and
storm and hailstones.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> For through the voice of Jehovah shall
the Assyrian be broken down: he will smite \[him\] with the rod.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> And wherever shall pass the appointed
staff, which Jehovah shall lay upon him, it shall be with tambours and
harps; and with tumultuous battles will he fight with it.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> For Topheth is prepared of old; for the
king also it is prepared: he hath made it deep and large; its pile is
fire and much wood; the breath of Jehovah, like a stream of brimstone,
doth kindle it.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Woe to them that go down to Egypt for
help, and depend on horses, and confide in chariots because \[they are\]
many, and in horsemen because they are very strong; and who look not
unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek Jehovah!

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> But he also is wise, and he bringeth
evil, and recalleth not his words; and he will arise against the house
of evildoers, and against the help of workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> And the Egyptians are men, and not ùGod,
and their horses flesh, and not spirit; and Jehovah shall stretch forth
his hand, and he that helpeth shall stumble, and he that is helped shall
fall, and they all shall perish together.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> For thus hath Jehovah said unto me: Like
as the lion and the young lion growling over his prey, when a multitude
of shepherds is called forth against him, is not afraid of their voice,
nor giveth way before the multitude of them; so will Jehovah of hosts
come down to war upon mount Zion, and on the hill thereof.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> As birds with outstretched wings, so will
Jehovah of hosts cover Jerusalem; covering, he will also deliver,
passing over, he will rescue \[it\].

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Turn unto him from whom ye have deeply
revolted, ye children of Israel;

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> for in that day every man shall cast away
his idols of silver and his idols of gold, which your sinful hands have
made unto you.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And Asshur shall fall by the sword, not
of a great man; and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: and
he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall become tributary;

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> and for fear, he shall pass over to his
rock, and his princes shall be afraid of the banner, saith Jehovah,
whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Behold, a king shall reign in
righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And a man shall be as a hiding-place from
the wind, and a covert from the storm; as brooks of water in a dry
place, as the shadow of a great rock in a thirsty land.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And the eyes of them that see shall not
be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall hearken;

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> and the heart of the rash shall
understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to
speak plainly.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> The vile man shall be no more called
noble, nor the churl said to be bountiful:

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> for the vile man will speak villainy, and
his heart will work iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and to utter error
against Jehovah, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and to cause the
drink of the thirsty to fail.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> The instruments also of the churl are
evil: he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the meek with lying words,
even when the needy speaketh right.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> But the noble deviseth noble things; and
to noble things doth he stand.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> Rise up, ye women that are at ease, hear
my voice; ye careless daughters, give ear unto my speech.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> In a year and \[some\] days shall ye be
troubled, ye careless women; for the vintage shall fail, the ingathering
shall not come.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be
troubled, ye careless ones; strip you, and make you bare, and gird
\[sackcloth\] on your loins!

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> They shall smite on the breasts \[in
lamentation\] for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vineyards.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Upon the land of my people shall come
up thistles \[and\] briars, yea, upon all the houses of joy in the
joyous city.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> For the palace shall be deserted, the
multitude of the city shall be forsaken; hill and watchtower shall be
caves for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks;

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> until the Spirit be poured upon us from
on high, and the wilderness become a fruitful field, and the fruitful
field be counted for a forest.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And judgment shall inhabit the
wilderness, and righteousness dwell in the fruitful field.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And the work of righteousness shall be
peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for
ever.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> And my people shall dwell in a
peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet
resting-places.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And it shall hail, coming down on the
forest; and the city shall be low in a low place.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Blessed are ye that sow beside all
waters, that send forth the feet of the ox and the ass.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast
not spoiled; and that dealest treacherously, and they dealt not
treacherously with thee! When thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be
spoiled; when thou shalt make an end of dealing treacherously, they
shall deal treacherously with thee.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Jehovah, be gracious unto us; we have
waited for thee: be their arm every morning, yea, our salvation in the
time of trouble.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> At the noise of the tumult the peoples
fled; at the lifting up of thyself the nations were scattered.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And your spoil shall be gathered \[like\]
the gathering of the caterpillar: as the running of locusts shall they
run upon it.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> Jehovah is exalted; for he dwelleth on
high: he hath filled Zion with justice and righteousness;

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> and he shall be the stability of thy
times, the riches of salvation, wisdom and knowledge: the fear of
Jehovah shall be your treasure.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Behold, their valiant ones cry without;
the messengers of peace weep bitterly.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> The highways are desolate, the wayfaring
man ceaseth. He hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities,
he regardeth no man.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> The land mourneth, it languisheth;
Lebanon is ashamed, is withered; the Sharon is become as a desert, and
Bashan and Carmel are stripped.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Now will I arise, saith Jehovah; now
will I be exalted, now will I lift up myself.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Ye shall conceive dry grass, ye shall
bring forth stubble: your breath shall devour you \[as\] fire.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And the peoples shall be \[as\]
burnings of lime, \[as\] thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Hear, ye that are far off, what I have
done; and ye that are near, acknowledge my might.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> The sinners in Zion are afraid;
trembling hath surprised the hypocrites: Who among us shall dwell with
the consuming fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting flames?

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> -- He that walketh righteously, and
speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that
shaketh his hands from taking hold of bribes, that stoppeth his ears
from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil:

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> he shall dwell on high, the fortresses
of the rocks shall be his high retreat; bread shall be given him, his
water shall be sure.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> Thine eyes shall see the King in his
beauty; they shall behold the land that is far off.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> Thy heart shall meditate on terror:
Where is the scribe? where is the receiver? where is he that counted the
towers?

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> Thou shalt no more see the fierce
people, a people of a deeper speech than thou canst comprehend, of a
stammering tongue that cannot be understood.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Look upon Zion, the city of our
solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tent
that shall not be removed, the stakes whereof shall never be pulled up,
neither shall any of its cords be broken;

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> but there Jehovah is unto us glorious,
-- a place of rivers, of broad streams: no galley with oars shall go
there, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> For Jehovah is our judge, Jehovah, our
lawgiver, Jehovah, our king: he will save us.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> Thy tacklings are loosed; they
strengthen not the socket of their mast, they cannot spread the sail:
then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And the inhabitant shall not say, I am
sick: the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven \[their\]
iniquity.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Come near, ye nations, to hear; and
hearken, ye peoples: let the earth hear, and all its fulness; the world,
and all that cometh forth of it.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> For the wrath of Jehovah is against all
the nations, and \[his\] fury against all their armies: he hath devoted
them to destruction, he hath delivered them to the slaughter.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> And their slain shall be cast out, and
their stink shall come up from their carcases, and the mountains shall
be melted with their blood.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And all the host of the heavens shall be
dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll; and all
their host shall fade away, as a leaf fadeth from off the vine, and as
the withered \[fruit\] from the fig-tree.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> For my sword is bathed in the heavens;
behold, it shall come down upon Edom, and upon the people of my ban, to
judgment.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> The sword of Jehovah is filled with
blood, it is made fat with fatness, with the blood of lambs and goats,
with the fat of the kidneys of rams; for Jehovah hath a sacrifice in
Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Edom.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And the buffaloes shall come down with
them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be soaked
with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> For it is the day of Jehovah's vengeance,
the year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And the torrents thereof shall be turned
into pitch, and its dust into brimstone; yea, the land thereof shall
become burning pitch:

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> it shall not be quenched night nor day;
the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: from generation to generation it
shall lie waste; none shall pass through it for ever and ever.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> And the pelican and the bittern shall
possess it, and the great owl and the raven shall dwell in it. And he
shall stretch out upon it the line of waste, and the plummets of
emptiness.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Of her nobles who should proclaim the
kingdom, none are there; and all her princes shall be nought.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And thorns shall come up in her
palaces, nettles and brambles in her fortresses; and it shall be a
dwelling-place of wild dogs, a court for ostriches.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> And there shall the beasts of the
desert meet with the jackals, and the wild goat shall cry to his fellow;
the lilith also shall settle there, and find for herself a place of
rest.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> There shall the arrow-snake make her
nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow; there also shall
the vultures be gathered one with another.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> Search ye in the book of Jehovah and
read: not one of these shall fail, one shall not have to seek for the
other; for my mouth, it hath commanded, and his Spirit, it hath gathered
them.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> For he himself hath cast the lot for
them, and his hand hath divided it unto them with the line: they shall
possess it for ever; from generation to generation shall they dwell
therein.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> The wilderness and the dry land shall be
gladdened; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> It shall blossom abundantly and rejoice
even with joy and shouting: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it,
the excellency of Carmel and Sharon. They shall see the glory of
Jehovah, the excellency of our God.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> Strengthen the weak hands and confirm the
tottering knees.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> Say to them that are of a timid heart, Be
strong, fear not; behold your God: vengeance cometh, the recompense of
God! He will come himself, and save you.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Then the eyes of the blind shall be
opened, and the ears of the deaf be unstopped;

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> then shall the lame \[man\] leap as a
hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall
waters break out, and torrents in the desert.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And the mirage shall become a pool, and
the thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of wild dogs, where
they lay down, shall be grass with reeds and rushes.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And a highway shall be there and a way,
and it shall be called, The way of holiness: the unclean shall not pass
through it; but it shall be for these. Those that go \[this\] way --
even fools, -- shall not err \[therein\].

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> No lion shall be there, nor shall
ravenous beast go up thereon, nor be found there; but the redeemed shall
walk \[there\].

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> And the ransomed of Jehovah shall
return, and come to Zion with singing; and everlasting joy shall be upon
their heads: they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And it came to pass in the fourteenth
year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against
all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And the king of Assyria sent Rab-shakeh
from Lachish to Jerusalem, to king Hezekiah, with a strong force. And he
stood by the aqueduct of the upper pool, on the highway of the fuller's
field.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> Then came forth to him Eliakim the son of
Hilkijah, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah
the son of Asaph, the chronicler.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And Rab-shakeh said to them, Say now to
Hezekiah, Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria: What confidence
is this in which thou trustest?

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Thou sayest, but it is a word of the
lips, \[There is\] counsel and strength for war. Now on whom dost thou
rely, that thou hast revolted against me?

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Behold, thou reliest upon the staff of
that broken reed, upon Egypt, on which if a man lean, it goes into his
hand, and pierces it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that rely upon
him.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> And if thou say to me, We rely upon
Jehovah our God: is it not he, whose high places and whose altars
Hezekiah has removed, saying to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship
before this altar?

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And now engage, I pray thee, with my
master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if
thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> How then wilt thou turn away the face of
one captain of the least of my master's servants? And thou reliest upon
Egypt for chariots and for horsemen!

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And now am I come up without Jehovah
against this land to destroy it? Jehovah said to me, Go up against this
land and destroy it.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And Eliakim and Shebna and Joah said to
Rab-shakeh, Speak, we pray thee, to thy servants in Syriac, for we
understand it; and speak not to us in the Jewish \[language\] in the
ears of the people that are upon the wall.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> And Rab-shakeh said, Is it to thy
master and to thee that my master sent me to speak these words? Is it
not to the men that sit on the wall, that they may eat their own dung,
and drink their own urine with you?

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And Rab-shakeh stood and cried with a
loud voice in the Jewish \[language\], and said, Hear the words of the
great king, the king of Assyria!

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Thus says the king: Let not Hezekiah
deceive you; for he will not be able to deliver you.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> Neither let Hezekiah make you rely upon
Jehovah, saying, Jehovah will certainly deliver us; this city shall not
be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Hearken not to Hezekiah; for thus says
the king of Assyria: Make peace with me and come out to me; and eat
every one of his vine, and every one of his fig-tree, and drink every
one the waters of his own cistern;

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> until I come and take you away to a
land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and
vineyards.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Let not Hezekiah persuade you, saying,
Jehovah will deliver us. Has any of the gods of the nations delivered
his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Where are the gods of Hamath and of
Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria
out of my hand?

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> Who are they among all the gods of
these countries that have delivered their country out of my hand, that
Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> And they were silent, and answered him
not a word; for the king's command was, saying, Answer him not.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> And Eliakim the son of Hilkijah, who
was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of
Asaph, the chronicler, came to Hezekiah, with their garments rent, and
told him the words of Rab-shakeh.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And it came to pass when king Hezekiah
heard \[it\], that he rent his garments, and covered himself with
sackcloth, and went into the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And he sent Eliakim, who was over the
household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered
with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And they said to him, Thus says Hezekiah:
This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of reviling; for the
children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring
forth.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> It may be Jehovah thy God will hear the
words of Rab-shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master has sent to
reproach the living God, and will rebuke the words which Jehovah thy God
hath heard. Therefore lift up a prayer for the remnant that is left.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> And the servants of king Hezekiah came to
Isaiah.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye
say to your master, Thus saith Jehovah: Be not afraid of the words that
thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have
blasphemed me.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> Behold, I will put a spirit into him, and
he shall hear tidings, and shall return to his own land; and I will
cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And Rab-shakeh returned, and found the
king of Assyria warring against Libnah; for he had heard that he had
departed from Lachish.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And he heard say of Tirhakah king of
Ethiopia, He has come forth to make war with thee. And when he heard
\[it\], he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of
Judah, saying: Let not thy God, upon whom thou reliest, deceive thee,
saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of
Assyria.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Behold, thou hast heard what the kings
of Assyria have done to all countries, destroying them utterly; and
shalt thou be delivered?

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Have the gods of the nations which my
fathers have destroyed delivered them, Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and
the children of Eden that were in Thelassar?

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> Where is the king of Hamath, and the
king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and
Ivvah?

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And Hezekiah received the letter from
the hand of the messengers, and read it; and Hezekiah went up into the
house of Jehovah, and spread it before Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And Hezekiah prayed to Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel,
who sittest \[between\] the cherubim, thou, the Same, thou alone art the
God of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast made the heavens and the
earth.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> Incline thine ear, O Jehovah, and hear;
open, Jehovah, thine eyes, and see; and hear all the words of
Sennacherib, who hath sent to reproach the living God.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Of a truth, Jehovah, the kings of
Assyria have laid waste all the lands, and their countries,

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> and have cast their gods into the fire;
for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone; and
they have destroyed them.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And now, Jehovah our God, save us out
of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art
Jehovah, thou only.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to
Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel, Whereas thou
hast prayed to me concerning Sennacherib king of Assyria,

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> this is the word which Jehovah hath
spoken against him: The virgin-daughter of Zion despiseth thee, laugheth
thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem shaketh her head at thee.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> Whom hast thou reproached and
blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted the voice? Against the
Holy One of Israel hast thou lifted up thine eyes on high.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> By thy servants thou hast reproached
the Lord, and hast said, With the multitude of my chariots am I come up
to the height of the mountains, to the recesses of Lebanon; and I will
cut down its tall cedars, the choice of its cypresses; and I will enter
into its furthest height, \[into\] the forest of its fruitful field.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> I have digged and drunk water; and with
the sole of my feet have I dried up all the streams of Matsor.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> Hast thou not heard that long ago I did
it, and that from ancient days I formed it? Now have I brought it to
pass, that thou shouldest lay waste fortified cities \[into\] ruinous
heaps.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> And their inhabitants were powerless,
they were dismayed and put to shame; they were \[as\] the grass of the
field and the green herb, \[as\] the grass on the housetops, and grain
blighted before it be grown up.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> But I know thine abode, and thy going
out, and thy coming in, and thy raging against me.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> Because thy raging against me and thine
arrogance is come up into mine ears, I will put my ring in thy nose, and
my bridle in thy lips, and I will make thee go back by the way by which
thou camest.

<span id="an_37:30">37:30</span> And this \[shall be\] the sign unto
thee: there shall be eaten this year such as groweth of itself; and in
the second year that which springeth of the same; but in the third year
sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards and eat the fruit thereof.

<span id="an_37:31">37:31</span> And the remnant that is escaped of the
house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward;

<span id="an_37:32">37:32</span> for out of Jerusalem shall go forth a
remnant, and out of mount Zion they that escape: the zeal of Jehovah of
hosts shall do this.

<span id="an_37:33">37:33</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning
the king of Assyria: He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an
arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it.

<span id="an_37:34">37:34</span> By the way that he came, by the same
shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_37:35">37:35</span> And I will defend this city, to save
it, for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.

<span id="an_37:36">37:36</span> And an angel of Jehovah went forth, and
smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five thousand.
And when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead
bodies.

<span id="an_37:37">37:37</span> And Sennacherib king of Assyria
departed, and went and returned, and abode at Nineveh.

<span id="an_37:38">37:38</span> And it came to pass, as he was
worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and
Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the
land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> In those days Hezekiah was sick unto
death. And the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz came to him, and said to
him, Thus saith Jehovah: Set thy house in order; for thou shalt die, and
not live.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> And Hezekiah turned his face to the wall,
and prayed to Jehovah,

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> and said, Ah, Jehovah, remember, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept
much.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Isaiah,
saying,

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Go and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith
Jehovah, the God of David thy father: I have heard thy prayer, I have
seen thy tears: behold, I will add to thy days fifteen years.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And I will deliver thee and this city out
of the hand of the king of Assyria, and I will defend this city.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And this \[shall be\] the sign to thee
from Jehovah, that Jehovah will do this thing that he hath spoken:

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> behold, I will bring again the shadow of
the degrees which hath gone down with the sun on the dial of Ahaz, ten
degrees backward. So the sun returned on the dial ten degrees, by which
it had gone down.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah,
when he had been sick and had recovered from his sickness:

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> I said, In the meridian of my days I
shall go to the gates of Sheol: I am deprived of the rest of my years.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> I said, I shall not see Jah, Jah in the
land of the living. With those who dwell where all has ceased to be, I
shall behold man no more.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> Mine age is departed, and is removed
from me as a shepherd's tent. I have cut off like a weaver my life. He
separateth me from the thrum: -- from day to night thou wilt make an end
of me.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> I kept still until the morning; ... as
a lion, so doth he break all my bones. From day to night thou wilt make
an end of me.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> Like a swallow \[or\] a crane, so did I
chatter; I mourned as a dove; mine eyes failed \[with looking\] upward:
Lord, I am oppressed; undertake for me.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> What shall I say? He hath both spoken
unto me, and himself hath done \[it\]. I shall go softly all my years in
the bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> Lord, by these things \[men\] live, and
in all these things is the life of my spirit; and thou hast recovered
me, and made me to live.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Behold, instead of peace I had
bitterness upon bitterness; but thou hast in love delivered my soul from
the pit of destruction; for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> For not Sheol shall praise thee, nor
death celebrate thee; they that go down into the pit do not hope for thy
truth.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> The living, the living, he shall praise
thee, as I this day: the father to the children shall make known thy
truth.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> Jehovah was \[purposed\] to save me. --
And we will play upon my stringed instruments all the days of our life,
in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> Now Isaiah had said, Let them take a
cake of figs, and lay it for a plaster upon the boil, and he shall
recover.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And Hezekiah had said, What is the sign
that I shall go up into the house of Jehovah?

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> At that time Merodach-Baladan, the son of
Baladan, king of Babylon, sent a letter and a present to Hezekiah; for
he had heard that he had been sick and had recovered.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed
them the house of his precious things, the silver and the gold, and the
spices and the fine oil, and all the house of his armour, and all that
was found amongst his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in
all his dominion, that Hezekiah did not shew them.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> Then came the prophet Isaiah to king
Hezekiah, and said to him, What said these men? and from whence came
they to thee? And Hezekiah said, They came from a far country to me,
from Babylon.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And he said, What have they seen in thy
house? And Hezekiah said, All that is in my house have they seen: there
is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewn them.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Hear the
word of Jehovah of hosts:

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Behold, days come when all that is in thy
house, and that which thy fathers have laid up until this day, shall be
carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And of thy sons that shall issue from
thee, whom thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be
eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is the
word of Jehovah which thou hast spoken. And he said, For there shall be
peace and truth in my days.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith
your God.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Speak to the heart of Jerusalem, and cry
unto her, that her time of suffering is accomplished, that her iniquity
is pardoned; for she hath received of Jehovah's hand double for all her
sins.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> The voice of one crying in the
wilderness: Prepare ye the way of Jehovah, make straight in the desert a
highway for our God!

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> Every valley shall be raised up, and
every mountain and hill shall be brought low; and the crooked shall be
made straight, and the rough places a plain.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And the glory of Jehovah shall be
revealed, and all flesh shall see \[it\] together: for the mouth of
Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> A voice saith, Cry. And he saith, What
shall I cry? -- All flesh is grass, and all the comeliness thereof as
the flower of the field.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> The grass withereth, the flower fadeth,
for the breath of Jehovah bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> The grass withereth, the flower fadeth;
but the word of our God abideth for ever.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> O Zion, that bringest glad tidings, get
thee up into a high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest glad tidings,
lift up thy voice with strength: lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the
cities of Judah, Behold your God!

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> Behold, the Lord Jehovah will come with
might, and his arm shall rule for him; behold, his reward is with him,
and his recompence before him.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> He will feed his flock like a shepherd:
he will gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom; he
will gently lead those that give suck.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Who hath measured the waters in the
hollow of his hand, and meted out the heavens with \[his\] span, and
grasped the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in
a balance, and the hills in scales?

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Who hath directed the Spirit of
Jehovah, and, \[as\] his counsellor, hath taught him?

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> With whom took he counsel, and \[who\]
gave him intelligence, and instructed him in the path of judgment, and
taught him knowledge, and shewed him the way of understanding?

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> Behold, the nations are esteemed as a
drop of the bucket, and as the fine dust on the scales; behold, he
taketh up the isles as an atom.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn,
nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> All the nations are as nothing before
him; they are esteemed by him less than a cipher, and vanity.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> To whom then will ye liken ùGod? and
what likeness will ye compare unto him?

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> The workman casteth a graven image, and
the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains
\[for it\].

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> He that is impoverished, so that he
hath no offering, chooseth a tree that doth not rot; he seeketh unto him
a skilled workman to prepare a graven image that shall not be moved.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> -- Do ye not know? Have ye not heard?
Hath it not been told you from the beginning? Have ye not understood the
foundation of the earth?

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> \[It is\] he that sitteth upon the
circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers;
that stretcheth out the heavens as a gauze curtain, and spreadeth them
out as a tent to dwell in;

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> that bringeth the princes to nothing,
that maketh the judges of the earth as vanity.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> Scarcely are they planted, scarcely are
they sown, scarcely hath their stock taken root in the earth, but he
also bloweth upon them and they wither, and the whirlwind taketh them
away as stubble.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> To whom then will ye liken me, or shall
I be equal? saith the Holy One.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> Lift up your eyes on high, and see! Who
hath created these things, bringing out their host by number? He calleth
them all by name; through the greatness of his might and strength of
power, not one faileth.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> Why sayest thou, Jacob, and speakest, O
Israel, My way is hid from Jehovah, and my right is passed away from my
God?

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> Dost thou not know, hast thou not
heard, that the everlasting God, Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the
earth, fainteth not nor tireth? There is no searching of his
understanding.

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> He giveth power to the faint; and to
him that hath no might he increaseth strength.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> Even the youths shall faint and shall
tire, and the young men shall stumble and fall;

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> but they that wait upon Jehovah shall
renew \[their\] strength: they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they
shall run, and not tire; they shall walk, and not faint.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Keep silence before me, islands; and let
the peoples renew \[their\] strength: let them come near; then let them
speak: let us draw near together to judgment.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Who raised up from the east him whom
righteousness calleth to its foot? He gave the nations before him, and
caused him to have dominion over kings; he gave them as dust to his
sword, as driven stubble to his bow.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> He pursued them, he passed on in safety,
by a way he had never come with his feet.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Who hath wrought and done \[it\], calling
the generations from the beginning? I, Jehovah, the first; and with the
last, I \[am\] HE.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> The isles saw \[it\], and feared; the
ends of the earth trembled: they drew near, and came.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> They helped every one his neighbour, and
\[each\] said to his brother, Take courage.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And the artizan encouraged the founder,
he that smootheth \[with\] the hammer him that smiteth on the anvil,
saying of the soldering, It is good; and he fasteneth it with nails,
that it be not moved.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> But thou, Israel, my servant, Jacob, whom
I have chosen, the seed of Abraham, my friend

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> -- thou whom I have taken from the ends
of the earth, and called from the extremities thereof, and to whom I
said, Thou art my servant, I have chosen thee and not rejected thee,

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> -- Fear not, for I \[am\] with thee; be
not dismayed, for I \[am\] thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I will
help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Lo, all that are incensed against thee
shall be ashamed and confounded; they that strive with thee shall be as
nothing, and shall perish.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not
find them -- them that contend with thee; they that war against thee
shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> For I, Jehovah, thy God, hold thy right
hand, saying unto thee, Fear not; I will help thee.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Fear not, thou worm Jacob, ye men of
Israel; I will help thee, saith Jehovah, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One
of Israel.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> Behold, I have made of thee a new sharp
threshing instrument having double teeth: thou shalt thresh and beat
small the mountains, and shalt make the hills as chaff;

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall
carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them; and thou shalt
rejoice in Jehovah, thou shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> The afflicted and the needy seek water,
and there is none; their tongue faileth for thirst: I, Jehovah, will
answer them, \[I\], the God of Israel, will not forsake them.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> I will open rivers on the bare heights,
and fountains in the midst of the valleys; I will make the wilderness
into a pool of water, and the dry land into water-springs.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> I will give in the wilderness the
cedar, acacia, myrtle, and oleaster; I will set in the desert the
cypress, pine, and box-tree together;

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> that they may see, and know, and
consider, and understand together, that the hand of Jehovah hath done
this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> Produce your cause, saith Jehovah;
bring forward your arguments, saith the King of Jacob.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> Let them bring them forward, and
declare to us what shall happen: shew the former things, what they are,
that we may give attention to them, and know the end of them; -- or let
us hear things to come:

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> declare the things that are to happen
hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods; yea, do good, or do evil,
that we may be astonished, and behold it together.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> Behold, ye are less than nothing, and
your work is of nought; an abomination is he that chooseth you. ...

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> I have raised up one from the north,
and he shall come, -- from the rising of the sun, he who will call upon
my name; and he shall come upon princes as on mortar, and as the potter
treadeth clay.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> Who hath declared \[it\] from the
beginning, that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say, \[It is\]
right? Indeed, there is none that declareth; no, none that sheweth; no,
none that heareth your words.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> The first, \[I said\] to Zion, Behold,
behold them! and to Jerusalem, I will give one that bringeth glad
tidings.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> And I beheld, and there was no man;
even among them, -- and there was no counsellor, that, when I asked of
them, could answer a word.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> Behold, they are all vanity, their
works are nought, their molten images are wind and emptiness.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine
elect \[in whom\] my soul delighteth! I will put my Spirit upon him; he
shall bring forth judgment to the nations.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause
his voice to be heard in the street.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> A bruised reed shall he not break, and
smoking flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment
according to truth.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> He shall not faint nor be in haste, till
he have set justice in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Thus saith ùGod, Jehovah, he that created
the heavens and stretched them out, he that spread forth the earth and
its productions, he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and
spirit to them that walk therein:

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> I, Jehovah, have called thee in
righteousness, and will take hold of thy hand; and I will preserve thee,
and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the nations,

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> to open the blind eyes, to bring forth
the prisoner from the prison, them that sit in darkness out of the house
of restraint.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> I am Jehovah, that is my name; and my
glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> Behold, the former things are come to
pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth will I cause
you to hear them.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> Sing unto Jehovah a new song, his
praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all
that is therein, the isles and their inhabitants.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Let the wilderness and the cities
thereof lift up \[their voice\], the villages that Kedar doth inhabit;
let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the
mountains:

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> let them give glory unto Jehovah, and
declare his praise in the islands.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> Jehovah will go forth as a mighty man,
he will stir up jealousy like a man of war: he will cry, yea, he will
shout; he will shew himself mighty against his enemies.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> Long time have I holden my peace; I
have been still, I have restrained myself: I will cry like a woman that
travaileth; I will blow and pant at once.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> I will lay waste mountains and hills,
and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I
will dry up the pools.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> And I will bring the blind by a way
that they know not, in paths that they know not will I lead them; I will
make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. These
things will I do unto them, and not forsake them.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> They shall be turned back, they shall
be covered with shame, that confide in graven images, that say to the
molten images, Ye are our gods.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> -- Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind,
that ye may see.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> Who is blind, but my servant? and deaf,
as my messenger whom I sent? Who is blind as he in whom I have trusted,
and blind as Jehovah's servant,

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> -- seeing many things, and thou
observest not? With opened ears, he heareth not.

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> Jehovah had delight \[in him\] for his
righteousness' sake: he hath magnified the law, and made it honourable.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> But this is a people robbed and
spoiled; they are all of them snared in holes, and hidden in
prison-houses; they are become a prey, and none delivereth, -- a spoil,
and none saith, Restore.

<span id="an_42:23">42:23</span> Who among you will give ear to this,
\[who\] will hearken and hear what is to come?

<span id="an_42:24">42:24</span> Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel
to the robbers? Did not Jehovah, he against whom we have sinned? And
they would not walk in his ways, neither did they hearken unto his law.

<span id="an_42:25">42:25</span> And he hath poured upon him the fury of
his anger, and the strength of battle: and it set him on fire round
about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he took it not to heart.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> But now thus saith Jehovah, that created
thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel: Fear not, for I have
redeemed thee, I have called \[thee\] by thy name; thou art mine.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> When thou passest through the waters, I
\[will be\] with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee; when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> For I \[am\] Jehovah thy God, the Holy
One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and
Seba for thee.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> Since thou wast precious in my sight,
thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee; and I will give men
for thee, and peoples for thy life.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> Fear not, for I \[am\] with thee: I will
bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> I will say to the north, Give up; and to
the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from afar, and my daughters from
the end of the earth,

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> every one that is called by my name, and
whom I have created for my glory: I have formed him, yea, I have made
him.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> Bring forth the blind people that have
eyes, and the deaf that have ears.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Let all the nations be gathered together,
and let the peoples be assembled: who among them declareth this, or
causeth us to hear former things? let them bring forth their witnesses,
that they may be justified; or let them hear, and say, \[It is\] truth.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, and
my servant whom I have chosen; that ye may know and believe me, and
understand that I \[am\] HE: before me there was no ùGod formed, neither
shall there be after me.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> I, I \[am\] Jehovah; and besides me
there is no saviour.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> It is I that have declared, and have
saved, and have shewed, when there was no strange \[god\] among you; and
ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, that I \[am\] ùGod.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> Yea, since the day was, I \[am\] HE,
and there is none that delivereth out of my hand: I will work, and who
shall hinder it?

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> Thus saith Jehovah, your Redeemer, the
Holy One of Israel: For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have
brought all of them down as fugitives, even the Chaldeans, whose cry is
in the ships.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> I \[am\] Jehovah, your Holy One, the
Creator of Israel, your King.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> Thus saith Jehovah, who maketh a way in
the sea, and a path in the mighty waters,

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> who bringeth forth chariot and horse,
army and power -- they lie down together, they shall not rise; they are
extinct, they are quenched as tow:

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> -- Remember not the former things,
neither consider the ancient things:

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> behold, I do a new thing; now it shall
spring forth: shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the
wilderness, rivers in the waste.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> The beast of the field shall glorify
me, the jackals and the ostriches; for I will give waters in the
wilderness, rivers in the waste, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> This people have I formed for myself:
they shall shew forth my praise.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> -- But thou hast not called upon me,
Jacob; for thou hast been weary of me, O Israel:

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> thou hast not brought me the small
cattle of thy burnt-offerings, neither hast thou glorified me with thy
sacrifices. I have not caused thee to toil with an oblation, nor wearied
thee with incense.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with
money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices; but
thou hast made me to toil with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine
iniquities.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> -- I, I \[am\] He that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and I will not remember thy sins.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Put me in remembrance, let us plead
together; rehearse thine own \[cause\], that thou mayest be justified.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> Thy first father hath sinned, and thy
mediators have rebelled against me.

<span id="an_43:28">43:28</span> And I have profaned the princes of the
sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the ban, and Israel to reproaches.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> And now hear, Jacob, my servant, and
Israel, whom I have chosen:

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> thus saith Jehovah, that made thee, and
formed thee from the womb, who helpeth thee, Fear not, Jacob, my
servant, and thou, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> For I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And they shall spring up among the grass,
as willows by the water-courses.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> One shall say, I am Jehovah's; and
another shall call \[himself\] by the name of Jacob; and another shall
write with his hand: \[I am\] Jehovah's, and surname \[himself\] by the
name of Israel.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> Thus saith Jehovah, the King of Israel,
and his Redeemer, Jehovah of hosts: I \[am\] the first, and I \[am\] the
last, and beside me there is no God.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> And who, as I, shall call, and shall
declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the ancient
people? And the coming things, and those that shall happen, let them
declare unto them.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> Fear not, neither be afraid. Have I not
caused thee to hear from that time, and have declared it? and ye are my
witnesses. Is there a +God beside me? yea, there is no Rock: I know not
any.

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> They that form a graven image are all of
them vanity, and their delectable things are of no profit; and they are
their own witnesses: they see not, nor know; -- that they may be
ashamed.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> Who hath formed a ùgod, or molten a
graven image that is profitable for nothing?

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Behold, all his fellows shall be
ashamed; and the workmen are but men. Let them all be gathered together,
let them stand up: they shall fear, they shall be ashamed together.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> The iron-smith \[hath\] a chisel, and
he worketh in the coals, and he fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh
it with his strong arm; -- but he is hungry, and his strength faileth;
he hath not drunk water, and he is faint.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> The worker in wood stretcheth out a
line; he marketh it out with red chalk; he formeth it with sharp tools,
and he marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure
of a man, according to the beauty of man: that it may remain in the
house.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> When he heweth him down cedars, he
taketh also a holm-oak and a terebinth -- he chooseth for himself among
the trees of the forest: he planteth a pine, and the rain maketh \[it\]
grow.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> And it shall be for a man to burn, and
he taketh thereof, and warmeth himself; he kindleth it also, and baketh
bread; he maketh also a ùgod, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven
image, and falleth down thereto.

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> He burneth part thereof in the fire;
with part thereof he eateth flesh, he roasteth roast, and is satisfied;
yea, he is warm, and saith, Aha, I am become warm, I have seen the fire.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> And with the remainder thereof he
maketh a ùgod, his graven image; he falleth down unto it, and
worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me, for thou art
my ùgod.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They have no knowledge, and understand
not; for he hath plastered their eyes, that they may not see; and their
hearts, that they may not understand.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> And none taketh it to heart, neither is
there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in
the fire, and have also baked bread upon the coals thereof, I have
roasted flesh, and eaten \[it\], and with the rest thereof shall I make
an abomination? shall I bow down to a block of wood?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> He feedeth on ashes; a deceived heart
hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is
there not a lie in my right hand?

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> Remember these things, O Jacob, and
Israel, for thou art my servant; I have formed thee: thou art my
servant, Israel; thou shalt not be forgotten of me.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> I have blotted out, as a thick cloud,
thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I
have redeemed thee.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> Sing, ye heavens; for Jehovah hath done
it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth; break forth into singing, ye
mountains, the forest, and every tree therein! For Jehovah hath redeemed
Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer, and
he that formed thee from the womb: I \[am\] Jehovah, the maker of all
things; who alone stretched out the heavens, who did spread forth the
earth by myself;

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> -- he that frustrateth the tokens of
the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and
maketh their knowledge foolish;

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> that confirmeth the word of his
servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers; that saith to
Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall
be built up, and I will raise up their ruins;

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> that saith to the deep, Be dry, and I
will dry up thy rivers;

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> that saith of Cyrus, \[He is\] my
shepherd, and he shall perform all my pleasure; even saying to
Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall
be laid.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> Thus saith Jehovah to his anointed, to
Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him --
and I will loose the loins of kings; to open before him the two-leaved
doors, and the gates shall not be shut:

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> I will go before thee, and make the
elevated places plain; I will break in pieces the brazen doors, and cut
asunder the bars of iron;

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> and I will give thee the treasures of
darkness, and hidden riches of secret places; that thou mayest know that
I, Jehovah, who call thee by name, \[am\] the God of Israel.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel
mine elect, I have called thee by thy name; I surnamed thee, though thou
didst not know me;

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> I \[am\] Jehovah, and there is none else;
there is no God beside me: I girded thee, and thou hast not known me;

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> -- that they may know from the rising of
the sun, and from the going down, that there is none beside me. I \[am\]
Jehovah, and there is none else;

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> forming the light and creating darkness,
making peace and creating evil: I, Jehovah, do all these things.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> Drop down, \[ye\] heavens, from above,
and let the skies pour down righteousness; let the earth open, and let
them bring forth salvation, and with it let righteousness spring up. I,
Jehovah, have created it.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Woe unto him that striveth with his
Maker! Let a potsherd \[strive\] with the potsherds of the earth. Shall
the clay say to him that formeth it, What makest thou? Or thy work, He
hath no hands?

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> Woe unto him that saith unto \[his\]
father, What begettest thou? Or to \[his\] mother, What hast thou
brought forth?

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> Thus saith Jehovah, the Holy One of
Israel, and his Maker: Ask me of the things to come; concerning my sons,
and concerning the work of my hands, command ye me.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> It is I that have made the earth, and
created man upon it; it is I, my hands, that have stretched out the
heavens, and all their host have I commanded.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> It is I that have raised him up in
righteousness, and I will make all his ways straight: he shall build my
city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith
Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> Thus saith Jehovah: The wealth of
Egypt, and the merchandise of Ethiopia and the Sabeans, men of stature,
shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine: they shall walk
after thee; in chains they shall come over, and they shall bow down unto
thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, \[saying,\] Surely ùGod is
in thee; and there is none else, no other God. ...

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> Verily thou art a ùGod that hidest
thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour. ...

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> They shall be ashamed, and also
confounded, all of them; they shall go away in confusion together, the
makers of idols.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> Israel shall be saved by Jehovah with
an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded, unto
the ages of ages.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> For thus saith Jehovah who created the
heavens, God himself who formed the earth and made it, he who
established it, -- not as waste did he create it: he formed it to be
inhabited: -- I \[am\] Jehovah, and there is none else.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> I have not spoken in secret, in a dark
place of the earth; I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek me in vain:
I \[am\] Jehovah, speaking righteousness, declaring things which are
right.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> Gather yourselves and come; draw near
together, ye that are escaped of the nations. They have no knowledge
that carry the wood of their graven image, and pray unto a ùgod that
cannot save.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> Declare and bring \[them\] near; yea,
let them take counsel together: who hath caused this to be heard from
ancient time? \[who\] hath declared it long ago? Is it not I, Jehovah?
And there is no God else beside me; a just ùGod and a Saviour, there is
none besides me.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the
ends of the earth: for I \[am\] ùGod, and there is none else.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> I have sworn by myself, the word is
gone out of my mouth \[in\] righteousness and shall not return, that
unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> Only in Jehovah, shall one say, have I
righteousness and strength. To him shall \[men\] come; and all that are
incensed against him shall be ashamed.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> In Jehovah shall all the seed of Israel
be justified, and shall glory.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> Bel is bowed down, Nebo bendeth; their
idols are upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: the things ye carried
are laid on, a burden to the weary \[beast\].

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> They bend, they are bowed down together;
they could not deliver the burden, and themselves are gone into
captivity.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> Hearken unto me, house of Jacob, and all
the remnant of the house of Israel, ye who have been borne from the
belly, who have been carried from the womb:

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> Even to old age, I \[am\] HE, and unto
hoary hairs I will carry \[you\]: It is I that have made, and I will
bear, and I will carry, and will deliver.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> To whom will ye liken me and make me
equal, or compare me, that we may be like?

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> -- They lavish gold out of the bag, and
weigh silver in the balance; they hire a goldsmith, and he maketh it a
ùgod: they fall down, yea, they worship.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> They bear him on the shoulder, they carry
him, and set him in his place; there he standeth, he doth not remove
from his place: yea, one crieth unto him, and he answereth not; he
saveth him not out of his trouble.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> Remember this, and shew yourselves men;
call it to mind, ye transgressors.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> Remember the former things of old; for I
\[am\] ùGod, and there is none else; \[I am\] God, and there is none
like me;

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> declaring the end from the beginning,
and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure;

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> calling a bird of prey from the east,
the man of my counsel from a far country. Yea, I have spoken, I will
also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> Hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted, that
are far from righteousness:

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> I bring near my righteousness; it shall
not be far off, and my salvation shall not delay; and I will give
salvation in Zion, \[and\] unto Israel my glory.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> Come down and sit in the dust,
virgin-daughter of Babylon! Sit on the ground, -- \[there is\] no
throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans; for thou shalt no more be called
tender and delicate.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Take the millstones, and grind meal;
remove thy veil, lift up the train, uncover the leg, pass over rivers:

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea,
thy shame shall be seen. I will take vengeance, and I will meet none
\[to stay me\]. ...

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> Our Redeemer, Jehovah of hosts is his
name, the Holy One of Israel. ...

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Sit silent, and get thee into darkness,
daughter of the Chaldeans; for thou shalt no more be called, Mistress of
kingdoms.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> I was wroth with my people, I polluted
mine inheritance, and gave them into thy hand: thou didst shew them no
mercy; upon the aged didst thou very heavily lay thy yoke;

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> and thou saidst, I shall be a mistress
for ever; so that thou didst not take these things to heart, thou didst
not remember the end thereof.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> And now hear this, thou voluptuous one,
that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thy heart, It is I, and there
is none but me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know loss of
children:

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> yet these two things shall come upon thee
in a moment, in one day, loss of children and widowhood; they shall come
upon thee in full measure for the multitude of thy sorceries, for the
great abundance of thine enchantments.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> For thou hast confided in thy
wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge,
it hath seduced thee; and thou hast said in thy heart, It is I, and
there is none but me.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> But evil shall come upon thee -- thou
shalt not know from whence it riseth; and mischief shall fall upon thee,
which thou shalt not be able to ward off; and desolation that thou
suspectest not shall come upon thee suddenly.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> Stand now with thine enchantments and
with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy
youth; if so be thou shalt be able to turn them to profit, if so be thou
mayest cause terror.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> Thou art wearied in the multitude of
thy counsels. Let now the interpreters of the heavens, the observers of
the stars, who predict according to the new moons what shall come upon
thee, stand up, and save thee.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> Behold, they shall be as stubble, the
fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power
of the flame: there shall not be a coal to warm at, \[nor\] fire to sit
before it.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> Thus shall they be unto thee with whom
thou hast laboured, they that trafficked with thee from thy youth: they
shall wander every one to his own quarter; there is none to save thee.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Hear ye this, house of Jacob, who are
called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of
Judah, who swear by the name of Jehovah, and make mention of the God of
Israel, not in truth, nor in righteousness.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> For they are named after the holy city,
and stay themselves upon the God of Israel: Jehovah of hosts is his
name.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> I have declared the former things long
ago; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I caused them to be heard:
I wrought suddenly, and they came to pass.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> Because I knew that thou art obstinate,
and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass,

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> so I have long ago declared \[them\] to
thee; before they came to pass I caused thee to hear \[them\]; lest thou
shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, or my
molten image hath commanded them.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> Thou heardest, see all this; -- and ye,
will not ye declare \[it\]? I have caused thee to hear new things from
this time, and things hidden, and that thou knewest not:

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> they are created now, and not long ago;
and before this day thou hast not heard them, lest thou shouldest say,
Behold, I knew them.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> Yea, thou heardest not, yea, thou knewest
not, yea, from of old thine ear was not opened; for I knew that thou
wouldest ever deal treacherously, and thou wast called a transgressor
from the womb.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> For my name's sake I will defer mine
anger, and \[for\] my praise will I refrain as to thee, that I cut thee
not off.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Behold, I have refined thee, but not as
silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> For mine own sake, for mine own sake,
will I do \[it\]; for how should \[my name\] be profaned? and I will not
give my glory unto another.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Hearken unto me, Jacob, and \[thou\]
Israel, my called. I \[am\] HE; I, the first, and I, the last.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> Yea, my hand hath laid the foundation
of the earth, and my right hand hath spread abroad the heavens: I call
unto them, they stand up together.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> All ye, gather yourselves together, and
hear: which among them hath declared these things? He whom Jehovah hath
loved shall execute his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm \[shall be on\]
the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> I, \[even\] I, have spoken; yea, I have
called him; I have brought him, and his way shall be prosperous.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> Come near unto me, hear ye this: I have
not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it was,
there am I; and now the Lord Jehovah hath sent me, and his Spirit.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer, the
Holy One of Israel; I \[am\] Jehovah thy God, who teacheth thee for
\[thy\] profit, who leadeth thee in the way that thou shouldest go.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> Oh that thou hadst hearkened to my
commandments! Then would thy peace have been as a river, and thy
righteousness as the waves of the sea;

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> and thy seed would have been as the
sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof: their
name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> Go ye forth from Babylon, flee from the
Chaldeans, with a voice of singing; declare, cause this to be heard,
utter it to the end of the earth; say ye, Jehovah hath redeemed his
servant Jacob.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And they thirsted not when he led them
through the deserts; he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for
them; yea, he clave the rock, and the waters gushed out.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> There is no peace, saith Jehovah, unto
the wicked.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye
peoples from afar. Jehovah hath called me from the womb; from the bowels
of my mother hath he made mention of my name.

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> And he hath made my mouth like a sharp
sword, he hath concealed me under the shadow of his hand, and he hath
made me a polished shaft: in his quiver hath he hidden me.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> And he said unto me, Thou art my servant,
Israel, in whom I will glorify myself.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> -- And I said, I have laboured in vain, I
have spent my strength for nought and in vain; nevertheless my judgment
is with Jehovah, and my work with my God.

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> And now, saith Jehovah, that formed me
from the womb to be his servant, that I should bring Jacob again to him;
(though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorified in the eyes of
Jehovah, and my God shall be my strength;)

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> -- and he saith, It is a small thing that
thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the preserved of Israel; I have even given thee for a light of
the nations, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Thus saith Jehovah, the Redeemer of
Israel, his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation
abhorreth, to the servant of rulers: Kings shall see and arise, princes,
and they shall worship, because of Jehovah who is faithful, the Holy One
of Israel, who hath chosen thee.

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> Thus saith Jehovah: In a time of
acceptance have I answered thee, and in the day of salvation have I
helped thee; and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of
the people, to establish the land, to cause to inherit the desolate
heritages;

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> saying to the prisoners, Go forth; to
them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways,
and their pasture shall be on all bare hills.

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> They shall not hunger nor thirst,
neither shall the heat nor sun smite them; for he that hath mercy on
them will lead them, and by the springs of water will he guide them.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> And I will make all my mountains a way,
and my highways shall be raised up.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> Behold, these shall come from afar; and
behold, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land
of Sinim.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> Shout, ye heavens; and be joyful, thou
earth; and break forth into singing, ye mountains: for Jehovah hath
comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted ones.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> But Zion said, Jehovah hath forsaken
me, and the Lord hath forgotten me.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> Can a woman forget her sucking child,
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Even these
forget, but I will not forget thee.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> Lo, I have graven thee upon the palms
of \[my\] hands; thy walls are continually before me.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Thy sons shall make haste; thy
destroyers and they that laid thee waste shall go forth from thee.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> Lift up thine eyes round about and
behold: they all gather themselves together, they come to thee. As I
live, saith Jehovah, thou shalt indeed clothe thee with them all as with
an ornament, and bind them on as a bride doth.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> For \[in\] thy waste and thy desolate
places, and thy destroyed land, thou shalt even now be too straitened by
reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far
away.

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> The children of thy bereavement shall
yet say in thine ears, The place is too narrow for me: make room for me,
that I may dwell.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> And thou shalt say in thy heart, Who
hath borne me these, seeing I had lost my children and was desolate, an
exile, and driven about? and who hath brought up these? behold, I was
left alone; these, where were they?

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I
will lift up my hand to the nations, and set up my banner to the
peoples; and they shall bring thy sons in \[their\] bosom, and thy
daughters shall be carried upon the shoulder.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> And kings shall be thy nursing-fathers,
and their princesses thy nursing-mothers: they shall bow down to thee
with the face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet. And
thou shalt know that I \[am\] Jehovah; for they shall not be ashamed who
wait on me.

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> Shall the prey be taken from the
mighty? and shall he that is rightfully captive be delivered?

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Even the
captive of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible
shall be delivered; and I will strive with him that striveth with thee,
and I will save thy children.

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> And I will feed them that oppress thee
with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as
with new wine. And all flesh shall know that I, Jehovah, \[am\] thy
Saviour and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Where is the bill of
your mother's divorce, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is
it to whom I have sold you? Behold, through your iniquities have ye sold
yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> Wherefore did I come, and there was no
man? I called, and there was none to answer? Is my hand at all shortened
that I cannot redeem, or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my
rebuke I dry up the sea, I make rivers a wilderness; their fish stink
because there is no water, and die for thirst.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> I clothe the heavens with blackness, and
I make sackcloth their covering.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue
of the instructed, that I should know how to succour by a word him that
is weary. He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear
as the instructed.

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> The Lord Jehovah hath opened mine ear,
and I was not rebellious; I turned not away back.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> I gave my back to smiters, and my cheeks
to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face from shame and
spitting.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> But the Lord Jehovah will help me:
therefore shall I not be confounded; therefore have I set my face like a
flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> He is near that justifieth me: who will
contend with me? let us stand together; who is mine adverse party? let
him draw near unto me.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> Behold, the Lord Jehovah will help me;
who is he that shall condemn me? Behold, they all shall grow old as a
garment; the moth shall eat them up.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> Who is among you that feareth Jehovah,
that hearkeneth to the voice of his servant? he that walketh in
darkness, and hath no light, -- let him confide in the name of Jehovah,
and stay himself upon his God.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that
compass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire,
and among the sparks \[that\] ye have kindled. This shall ye have of my
hand: ye shall lie down in sorrow.

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> Hearken unto me, ye that follow after
righteousness, ye that seek Jehovah: look unto the rock \[whence\] ye
were hewn, and to the hole of the pit \[whence\] ye were digged.

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> Look unto Abraham your father, and unto
Sarah that bore you; for I called him when he was alone, and blessed
him, and multiplied him.

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> For Jehovah shall comfort Zion, he shall
comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden,
and her desert like the garden of Jehovah: gladness and joy shall be
found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of song.

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> Listen unto me, my people; and give ear
unto me, my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will
establish my judgment for a light of the peoples.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> My righteousness is near, my salvation is
gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the peoples: the isles shall wait
for me, and in mine arm shall they trust.

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and
look on the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke,
and the earth shall grow old like a garment, and they that dwell therein
shall die in like manner; but my salvation shall be for ever, and my
righteousness shall not be abolished.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> Hearken unto me, ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear not the
reproach of men, and be not afraid of their revilings.

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> For the moth shall eat them up like a
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool; but my righteousness
shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation.

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of
Jehovah; awake, as in the days of old, \[as in\] the generations of
passed ages. Is it not thou that hath hewn Rahab in pieces, \[and\]
pierced the monster?

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> Is it not thou that dried up the sea,
the waters of the great deep; that made the depths of the sea a way for
the redeemed to pass over?

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> So the ransomed of Jehovah shall
return, and come to Zion with singing; and everlasting joy shall be upon
their heads: they shall obtain gladness and joy; sorrow and sighing
shall flee away.

<span id="an_51:12">51:12</span> I, \[even\] I, am he that comforteth
you: who art thou, that thou fearest a man that shall die, and the son
of man that shall become as grass;

<span id="an_51:13">51:13</span> and forgettest Jehovah thy Maker, who
hath stretched out the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth;
and thou art afraid continually all the day because of the fury of the
oppressor, when he prepareth to destroy? And where is the fury of the
oppressor?

<span id="an_51:14">51:14</span> He that is bowed down shall speedily be
loosed, and he shall not die in the pit, nor shall his bread fail.

<span id="an_51:15">51:15</span> And I am Jehovah thy God, who raiseth
the sea, so that its waves roar: Jehovah of hosts is his name.

<span id="an_51:16">51:16</span> And I have put my words in thy mouth,
and covered thee with the shadow of my hand, to plant the heavens, and
to lay the foundations of the earth, and to say unto Zion, Thou art my
people.

<span id="an_51:17">51:17</span> Arouse thyself, arouse thyself, stand
up, Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of Jehovah the cup of his
fury. Thou hast drunk, hast drained out the goblet-cup of bewilderment:

<span id="an_51:18">51:18</span> -- there is none to guide her among all
the children that she hath brought forth; neither is there any to take
her by the hand of all the children that she hath brought up.

<span id="an_51:19">51:19</span> These two \[things\] are come unto
thee; who will bemoan thee? -- desolation and destruction, and famine
and sword: how shall I comfort thee?

<span id="an_51:20">51:20</span> Thy children have fainted, they lie at
the head of all the streets, as an oryx in a net: they are full of the
fury of Jehovah, the rebuke of thy God.

<span id="an_51:21">51:21</span> Therefore hear now this, thou
afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine:

<span id="an_51:22">51:22</span> thus saith thy Lord, Jehovah, and thy
God, who pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I take out of thy
hand the cup of bewilderment, the goblet-cup of my fury; thou shalt no
more drink it again:

<span id="an_51:23">51:23</span> and I will put it into the hand of them
that afflict thee; who have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go
over; and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the street to
them that went over.

<span id="an_52:1">52:1</span> Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O
Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, Jerusalem, the holy city: for
henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the
unclean.

<span id="an_52:2">52:2</span> Shake thyself from the dust; arise, sit
down, Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, captive
daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_52:3">52:3</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Ye have sold
yourselves for nought, and ye shall be redeemed without money.

<span id="an_52:4">52:4</span> For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: My
people went down at the first into Egypt to sojourn there, and Assyria
oppressed them without cause;

<span id="an_52:5">52:5</span> and now, what have I here, saith Jehovah,
that my people hath been taken away for nought? They that rule over them
make them to howl, saith Jehovah; and continually all the day is my name
scorned.

<span id="an_52:6">52:6</span> Therefore my people shall know my name;
therefore \[they shall know\] in that day that I \[am\] HE, that saith,
Here am I.

<span id="an_52:7">52:7</span> How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that announceth glad tidings, that publisheth peace; that
announceth glad tidings of good, that publisheth salvation, that saith
unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!

<span id="an_52:8">52:8</span> -- The voice of thy watchmen, they lift
up the voice, they sing aloud together; for they shall see eye to eye,
when Jehovah shall bring again Zion.

<span id="an_52:9">52:9</span> Break forth, sing aloud together, waste
places of Jerusalem; for Jehovah comforteth his people, he hath redeemed
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_52:10">52:10</span> Jehovah hath made bare his holy arm in
the sight of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see
the salvation of our God.

<span id="an_52:11">52:11</span> -- Depart, depart, go out from thence,
touch not what is unclean; go out of the midst of her, be ye clean, that
bear the vessels of Jehovah.

<span id="an_52:12">52:12</span> For ye shall not go out with haste, nor
go by flight; for Jehovah will go before you, and the God of Israel will
be your rear-guard.

<span id="an_52:13">52:13</span> Behold, my servant shall deal
prudently; he shall be exalted and be lifted up, and be very high.

<span id="an_52:14">52:14</span> As many were astonished at thee -- his
visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the
children of men

<span id="an_52:15">52:15</span> -- so shall he astonish many nations;
kings shall shut their mouths at him: for what had not been told them
shall they see, and what they had not heard shall they consider.

<span id="an_53:1">53:1</span> Who hath believed our report? and to whom
hath the arm of Jehovah been revealed?

<span id="an_53:2">53:2</span> For he shall grow up before him as a
tender sapling, and as a root out of dry ground: he hath no form nor
lordliness, and when we see him, there is no beauty that we should
desire him.

<span id="an_53:3">53:3</span> He is despised and left alone of men; a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and like one from whom
\[men\] hide their faces; -- despised, and we esteemed him not.

<span id="an_53:4">53:4</span> Surely \*he\* hath borne our griefs and
carried our sorrows; and we, we did regard him stricken, smitten of God,
and afflicted.

<span id="an_53:5">53:5</span> But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.

<span id="an_53:6">53:6</span> All we like sheep have gone astray, we
have turned every one to his own way; and Jehovah hath laid upon him the
iniquity of us all.

<span id="an_53:7">53:7</span> He was oppressed, and he was afflicted,
but he opened not his mouth; he was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and
was as a sheep dumb before her shearers, and he opened not his mouth.

<span id="an_53:8">53:8</span> He was taken from oppression and from
judgment; and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out
of the land of the living; for the transgression of my people was he
stricken.

<span id="an_53:9">53:9</span> And \[men\] appointed his grave with the
wicked, but he was with the rich in his death, because he had done no
violence, neither was there guile in his mouth.

<span id="an_53:10">53:10</span> Yet it pleased Jehovah to bruise him;
he hath subjected \[him\] to suffering. When thou shalt make his soul an
offering for sin, he shall see a seed, he shall prolong \[his\] days,
and the pleasure of Jehovah shall prosper in his hand.

<span id="an_53:11">53:11</span> He shall see of \[the fruit of\] the
travail of his soul, \[and\] shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall
my righteous servant instruct many in righteousness; and \*he\* shall
bear their iniquities.

<span id="an_53:12">53:12</span> Therefore will I assign him a portion
with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong: because
he hath poured out his soul unto death, and was reckoned with the
transgressors; and he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for
the transgressors.

<span id="an_54:1">54:1</span> Exult, thou barren, that didst not bear;
break forth into singing, and shout for joy, thou that didst not travail
with child: for more are the children of the desolate than the children
of the married wife, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_54:2">54:2</span> Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let
them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations: spare not, lengthen
thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes.

<span id="an_54:3">54:3</span> For thou shalt spread abroad on the right
hand and on the left; and thy seed shall possess nations, and they shall
make desolate cities to be inhabited.

<span id="an_54:4">54:4</span> Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed;
neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou
shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach
of thy widowhood any more.

<span id="an_54:5">54:5</span> For thy Maker is thy husband: Jehovah of
hosts is his name, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: the God of
the whole earth shall he be called.

<span id="an_54:6">54:6</span> For Jehovah hath called thee as a woman
forsaken and grieved in spirit, and as a wife of youth, that hath been
refused, saith thy God.

<span id="an_54:7">54:7</span> For a small moment have I forsaken thee;
but with great mercies will I gather thee.

<span id="an_54:8">54:8</span> In the outpouring of wrath have I hid my
face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting loving-kindness will I
have mercy on thee, saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer.

<span id="an_54:9">54:9</span> For this is \[as\] the waters of Noah
unto me, since I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go
over the earth: so have I sworn that I will no more be wroth with thee,
nor rebuke thee.

<span id="an_54:10">54:10</span> For the mountains shall depart, and the
hills be removed; but my loving-kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither shall my covenant of peace be removed, saith Jehovah, that hath
mercy on thee.

<span id="an_54:11">54:11</span> \[Thou\] afflicted, tossed with
tempest, not comforted! Behold, I will set thy stones in antimony, and
lay thy foundations with sapphires;

<span id="an_54:12">54:12</span> and I will make thy battlements of
rubies, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of precious
stones.

<span id="an_54:13">54:13</span> And all thy children \[shall be\]
taught of Jehovah, and great shall be the peace of thy children.

<span id="an_54:14">54:14</span> In righteousness shalt thou be
established: thou shalt be far from oppression, for thou shalt not fear;
and from terror, for it shall not come near thee.

<span id="an_54:15">54:15</span> Behold, they shall surely gather
together, \[but\] not by me: whosoever gathereth together against thee
shall fall because of thee.

<span id="an_54:16">54:16</span> Behold, it is I who have created the
smith that bloweth in the fire of coal, and that bringeth forth an
instrument for his work; and I have created the destroyer to ravage.

<span id="an_54:17">54:17</span> No weapon that is prepared against thee
shall prosper; and every tongue that riseth against thee in judgment,
thou shalt condemn. This is the inheritance of the servants of Jehovah;
and their righteousness is of me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_55:1">55:1</span> Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy, and eat: yea, come,
buy wine and milk without money and without price!

<span id="an_55:2">55:2</span> Wherefore do ye spend money for \[that
which is\] not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not?
Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye \[that which is\] good, and let
your soul delight itself in fatness.

<span id="an_55:3">55:3</span> Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear,
and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with
you, the sure mercies of David.

<span id="an_55:4">55:4</span> Behold, I have given him \[for\] a
witness to the peoples, a prince and commander to the peoples.

<span id="an_55:5">55:5</span> Behold, thou shalt call a nation thou
knowest not, and a nation \[that\] knew not thee shall run unto thee,
because of Jehovah thy God, and the Holy One of Israel; for he hath
glorified thee.

<span id="an_55:6">55:6</span> Seek ye Jehovah while he may be found,
call ye upon him while he is near.

<span id="an_55:7">55:7</span> Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto Jehovah, and he
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

<span id="an_55:8">55:8</span> For my thoughts are not your thoughts,
neither are your ways my ways, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_55:9">55:9</span> For \[as\] the heavens are higher than
the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than
your thoughts.

<span id="an_55:10">55:10</span> For as the rain cometh down, and the
snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and
maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and
bread to the eater:

<span id="an_55:11">55:11</span> so shall my word be that goeth forth
out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall do that
which I please, and it shall accomplish that for which I send it.

<span id="an_55:12">55:12</span> For ye shall go out with joy, and be
led forth with peace; the mountains and the hills shall break forth
before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands.

<span id="an_55:13">55:13</span> Instead of the thorn shall come up the
cypress, and instead of the nettle shall come up the myrtle; and it
shall be to Jehovah for a name, for an everlasting sign \[that\] shall
not be cut off.

<span id="an_56:1">56:1</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Keep ye judgment and
do righteousness; for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness
to be revealed.

<span id="an_56:2">56:2</span> Blessed is the man that doeth this, and
the son of man that holdeth fast to it; that keepeth the sabbath from
profaning it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil.

<span id="an_56:3">56:3</span> And let not the son of the alien, that
hath joined himself to Jehovah, speak saying, Jehovah hath entirely
separated me from his people; neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a
dry tree;

<span id="an_56:4">56:4</span> for thus saith Jehovah: Unto the eunuchs
that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and hold
fast to my covenant,

<span id="an_56:5">56:5</span> even unto them will I give in my house
and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and
daughters; I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut
off.

<span id="an_56:6">56:6</span> Also the sons of the alien, that join
themselves to Jehovah, to minister unto him and to love the name of
Jehovah, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from
profaning it, and holdeth fast to my covenant;

<span id="an_56:7">56:7</span> even them will I bring to my holy
mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer; their
burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar:
for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples.

<span id="an_56:8">56:8</span> The Lord Jehovah, who gathereth the
outcasts of Israel, saith: Yet will I gather \[others\] to him, with
those of his that are gathered.

<span id="an_56:9">56:9</span> All ye beasts of the field, come to
devour, all ye beasts in the forest.

<span id="an_56:10">56:10</span> His watchmen are all of them blind,
they are without knowledge; they are all dumb dogs that cannot bark,
dreaming, lying down, loving to slumber:

<span id="an_56:11">56:11</span> and the dogs are greedy, they know not
to be satisfied, and these are shepherds that know not how to discern:
they all turn to their own way, every one for his gain, even to the last
of them:

<span id="an_56:12">56:12</span> Come, \[say they,\] I will fetch wine,
and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to-morrow shall be as
this day, \[and\] much more abundant.

<span id="an_57:1">57:1</span> The righteous perisheth, and no man
layeth it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering
that the righteous is taken away from before the evil.

<span id="an_57:2">57:2</span> He entereth into peace: they rest in
their beds, \[each one\] that hath walked in his uprightness.

<span id="an_57:3">57:3</span> But draw near hither, ye sons of the
sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the harlot.

<span id="an_57:4">57:4</span> Against whom do ye sport yourselves?
Against whom do ye make a wide mouth, \[and\] draw out the tongue? Are
ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood,

<span id="an_57:5">57:5</span> inflaming yourselves with idols under
every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clefts
of the rocks?

<span id="an_57:6">57:6</span> Among the smooth \[stones\] of the
torrent is thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou
poured out a drink-offering, thou hast offered an oblation. Shall I be
comforted myself as to these things?

<span id="an_57:7">57:7</span> Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou
set thy bed: even thither didst thou go up to offer sacrifice.

<span id="an_57:8">57:8</span> Behind the doors also and the posts hast
thou set up thy remembrance: for apart from me, thou hast uncovered
thyself, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and hast made
agreement with them; thou lovedst their bed, thou sawest their
nakedness.

<span id="an_57:9">57:9</span> And thou wentest to the king with
ointment, and didst multiply thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers
afar off, and didst debase thyself unto Sheol.

<span id="an_57:10">57:10</span> Thou wast wearied by the multitude of
thy ways; \[but\] thou saidst not, It is of no avail. Thou didst find a
quickening of thy strength; therefore thou wast not sick \[of it\].

<span id="an_57:11">57:11</span> And of whom hast thou been afraid or
feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor taken it to
heart? Have not I even of long time held my peace, and thou fearest me
not?

<span id="an_57:12">57:12</span> I will declare thy righteousness, and
thy works; and they shall not profit thee.

<span id="an_57:13">57:13</span> When thou criest, let them that are
gathered by thee deliver thee! But a wind shall carry them all away, a
breath shall take them; but he that putteth his trust in me shall
inherit the land, and possess my holy mountain.

<span id="an_57:14">57:14</span> And it shall be said, Cast up, cast up,
prepare the way, take up the stumbling-blocks out of the way of my
people.

<span id="an_57:15">57:15</span> For thus saith the high and lofty One
that inhabiteth eternity, and whose name is Holy: I dwell in the high
and holy \[place\], and with him that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones.

<span id="an_57:16">57:16</span> For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth; for the spirit would fail before me, and
the souls \[which\] I have made.

<span id="an_57:17">57:17</span> For the iniquity of his covetousness
was I wroth, and smote him; I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on
backslidingly in the way of his heart.

<span id="an_57:18">57:18</span> I have seen his ways, and will heal
him; and I will lead him, and will restore comforts unto him and to
those of his that mourn.

<span id="an_57:19">57:19</span> I create the fruit of the lips: peace,
peace to him \[that is\] afar off, and to him \[that is\] nigh, saith
Jehovah; and I will heal him.

<span id="an_57:20">57:20</span> But the wicked are like the troubled
sea, which cannot rest, and whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

<span id="an_57:21">57:21</span> There is no peace, saith my God, to the
wicked.

<span id="an_58:1">58:1</span> Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, and declare unto my people their transgression, and to
the house of Jacob their sins.

<span id="an_58:2">58:2</span> Yet they seek me daily, and delight to
know my ways, as a nation that doeth righteousness, and hath not
forsaken the ordinance of their God; they ask of me the ordinances of
righteousness, they take delight in approaching to God:

<span id="an_58:3">58:3</span> -- Wherefore have we fasted, and thou
seest not; have afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge?
Behold, in the day of your fast ye find what pleaseth \[you\], and exact
all your labours.

<span id="an_58:4">58:4</span> Behold, ye have fasted for strife and
debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness; ye do not at present
fast, to cause your voice to be heard on high.

<span id="an_58:5">58:5</span> Is such the fast that I have chosen, a
day for a man to afflict his soul, -- that he should bow down his head
as a bulrush, and spread sackcloth and ashes \[under him\]? Wilt thou
call this a fast, and a day acceptable to Jehovah?

<span id="an_58:6">58:6</span> Is not this the fast which I have chosen:
to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the thongs of the yoke, and to
send forth free the crushed, and that ye break every yoke?

<span id="an_58:7">58:7</span> Is it not to deal thy bread to the
hungry, and that thou bring to thy house the needy wanderers; when thou
seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself
from thine own flesh?

<span id="an_58:8">58:8</span> Then shall thy light break forth as the
dawn, and thy health shall spring forth speedily; and thy righteousness
shall go before thee, the glory of Jehovah shall be thy rearguard.

<span id="an_58:9">58:9</span> Then shalt thou call, and Jehovah will
answer; thou shalt cry, and he will say, Here I am. If thou take away
from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger and the
unjust speech,

<span id="an_58:10">58:10</span> and thou proffer thy soul to the
hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul: then shall thy light rise in the
darkness, and thine obscurity be as midday;

<span id="an_58:11">58:11</span> and Jehovah will guide thee
continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and strengthen thy bones;
and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a water-spring, whose
waters deceive not.

<span id="an_58:12">58:12</span> And they \[that come\] of thee shall
build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations \[that
have remained\] from generation to generation; and thou shalt be called,
Repairer of the breaches, restorer of frequented paths.

<span id="an_58:13">58:13</span> If thou turn back thy foot from the
sabbath, \[from\] doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the
sabbath a delight, the holy \[day\] of Jehovah, honourable; and thou
honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking \[idle\] words;

<span id="an_58:14">58:14</span> then shalt thou delight thyself in
Jehovah, and I will cause thee to ride on the high places of the earth,
and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of
Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_59:1">59:1</span> Behold, Jehovah's hand is not shortened
that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear;

<span id="an_59:2">59:2</span> but your iniquities have separated
between you and your God, and your sins have hid \[his\] face from you,
that he doth not hear.

<span id="an_59:3">59:3</span> For your hands are stained with blood,
and your fingers with iniquity; your lips speak lies, your tongue
muttereth unrighteousness:

<span id="an_59:4">59:4</span> none calleth for justice, none pleadeth
in truthfulness. They trust in vanity, and speak falsehood; they
conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.

<span id="an_59:5">59:5</span> They hatch serpents' eggs, and weave the
spider's web: he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is
crushed breaketh out into a viper.

<span id="an_59:6">59:6</span> Their webs shall not become garments,
neither shall they cover themselves with their works; their works are
works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands.

<span id="an_59:7">59:7</span> Their feet run to evil, and they make
haste to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity;
wasting and destruction are in their paths;

<span id="an_59:8">59:8</span> the way of peace they know not, and there
is no judgment in their goings; they have made their paths crooked:
whoso goeth therein knoweth not peace.

<span id="an_59:9">59:9</span> Therefore is justice far from us, and
righteousness overtaketh us not: we wait for light, and behold darkness;
for brightness, \[but\] we walk in obscurity.

<span id="an_59:10">59:10</span> We grope for the wall like the blind,
and we grope as if we had no eyes: we stumble at midday as in the
twilight; amongst the flourishing we are as the dead.

<span id="an_59:11">59:11</span> We roar all like bears, and mourn
grievously like doves: we look for judgment, and there is none; for
salvation, \[but\] it is far from us.

<span id="an_59:12">59:12</span> For our transgressions are multiplied
before thee, and our sins testify against us; for our transgressions are
with us; and our iniquities, we know them:

<span id="an_59:13">59:13</span> in transgressing and lying against
Jehovah, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and
revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.

<span id="an_59:14">59:14</span> And judgment is turned away backward,
and righteousness standeth afar off; for truth stumbleth in the street,
and uprightness cannot enter.

<span id="an_59:15">59:15</span> And truth faileth; and he that
departeth from evil maketh himself a prey. And Jehovah saw \[it\], and
it was evil in his sight that there was no judgment.

<span id="an_59:16">59:16</span> And he saw that there was no man, and
he wondered that there was no intercessor; and his arm brought him
salvation, and his righteousness, it sustained him.

<span id="an_59:17">59:17</span> And he put on righteousness as a
breastplate, and a helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on
garments of vengeance \[for\] clothing, and was clad with zeal as a
cloak.

<span id="an_59:18">59:18</span> According to deeds, so will he repay:
fury to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he
will repay recompence.

<span id="an_59:19">59:19</span> And they shall fear the name of Jehovah
from the west, and from the rising of the sun, his glory. When the
adversary shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of Jehovah will lift up
a banner against him.

<span id="an_59:20">59:20</span> And the Redeemer will come to Zion, and
unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_59:21">59:21</span> And as for me, this is my covenant with
them, saith Jehovah: My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith
Jehovah, from henceforth and for ever.

<span id="an_60:1">60:1</span> Arise, shine! for thy light is come, and
the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee.

<span id="an_60:2">60:2</span> For behold, darkness shall cover the
earth, and gross darkness the peoples; but Jehovah will arise upon thee,
and his glory shall be seen on thee.

<span id="an_60:3">60:3</span> And the nations shall walk by thy light,
and kings by the brightness of thy rising.

<span id="an_60:4">60:4</span> Lift up thine eyes round about, and see:
all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons come
from afar, and thy daughters are carried upon the side.

<span id="an_60:5">60:5</span> Then thou shalt see, and shalt be
brightened, and thy heart shall throb, and be enlarged; for the
abundance of the sea shall be turned unto thee, the wealth of the
nations shall come unto thee.

<span id="an_60:6">60:6</span> A multitude of camels shall cover thee,
young camels of Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come: they
shall bring gold and incense; and they shall publish the praises of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_60:7">60:7</span> All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered
unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall serve thee: they shall come up
with acceptance on mine altar, and I will beautify the house of my
magnificence.

<span id="an_60:8">60:8</span> Who are these that come flying as a
cloud, and as doves to their dove-cotes?

<span id="an_60:9">60:9</span> For the isles shall await me, and the
ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from afar, their silver and
their gold with them, unto the name of Jehovah thy God, and to the Holy
One of Israel, for he hath glorified thee.

<span id="an_60:10">60:10</span> And the sons of the alien shall build
up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee. For in my wrath
I smote thee, but in my favour have I had mercy on thee.

<span id="an_60:11">60:11</span> And thy gates shall stand open
continually: (they shall not be shut day nor night,) that the wealth of
the nations may be brought unto thee, and that their kings may be led
\[to thee\].

<span id="an_60:12">60:12</span> For the nation and the kingdom that
will not serve thee shall perish; and those nations shall be utterly
wasted.

<span id="an_60:13">60:13</span> The glory of Lebanon shall come unto
thee, the cypress, pine, and box-tree together, to beautify the place of
my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious.

<span id="an_60:14">60:14</span> And the children of them that afflicted
thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall
bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee
The city of Jehovah, the Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_60:15">60:15</span> Instead of thy being forsaken and
hated, so that no one went through \[thee\], I will make thee an eternal
excellency, a joy from generation to generation.

<span id="an_60:16">60:16</span> And thou shalt suck the milk of the
nations, and shalt suck the breast of kings; and thou shalt know that I,
Jehovah, \[am\] thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.

<span id="an_60:17">60:17</span> For bronze I will bring gold, and for
iron I will bring silver, and for wood bronze, and for stones iron; and
I will make thine officers peace, and thy rulers righteousness.

<span id="an_60:18">60:18</span> Violence shall no more be heard in thy
land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call
thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.

<span id="an_60:19">60:19</span> The sun shall be no more thy light by
day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee; but
Jehovah shall be thine everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

<span id="an_60:20">60:20</span> Thy sun shall no more go down, neither
shall thy moon withdraw itself; for Jehovah shall be thine everlasting
light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

<span id="an_60:21">60:21</span> Thy people also shall be all righteous:
they shall possess the land for ever -- the branch of my planting, the
work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

<span id="an_60:22">60:22</span> The little one shall become a thousand,
and the smallest a mighty nation: I, Jehovah, will hasten it in its
time.

<span id="an_61:1">61:1</span> The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah is upon
me, because Jehovah hath anointed me to announce glad tidings unto the
meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty
to the captives, and opening of the prison to them that are bound;

<span id="an_61:2">61:2</span> to proclaim the acceptable year of
Jehovah, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;

<span id="an_61:3">61:3</span> to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion,
that beauty should be given unto them instead of ashes, the oil of joy
instead of mourning, the garment of praise instead of the spirit of
heaviness: that they might be called terebinths of righteousness, the
planting of Jehovah, that he may be glorified.

<span id="an_61:4">61:4</span> And they shall build the old wastes, they
shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste
cities, the places desolate from generation to generation.

<span id="an_61:5">61:5</span> And strangers shall stand and feed your
flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your ploughmen and your
vinedressers.

<span id="an_61:6">61:6</span> But as for you, ye shall be called
priests of Jehovah; it shall be said of you: Ministers of our God. Ye
shall eat the wealth of the nations, and into their glory shall ye
enter.

<span id="an_61:7">61:7</span> Instead of your shame \[ye shall have\]
double; instead of confusion they shall celebrate with joy their
portion: therefore in their land they shall possess the double;
everlasting joy shall be unto them.

<span id="an_61:8">61:8</span> For I, Jehovah, love judgment, I hate
robbery with wrong; and I will give their recompence in truth, and I
will make an everlasting covenant with them.

<span id="an_61:9">61:9</span> And their seed shall be known among the
nations, and their offspring among the peoples: all that see them shall
acknowledge them, that they are a seed that Jehovah hath blessed.

<span id="an_61:10">61:10</span> I will greatly rejoice in Jehovah, my
soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments
of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a
bridegroom decketh himself with the priestly turban, and as a bride
adorneth herself with her jewels.

<span id="an_61:11">61:11</span> For as the earth bringeth forth her
bud, and as a garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring
forth, so the Lord Jehovah will cause righteousness and praise to spring
forth before all the nations.

<span id="an_62:1">62:1</span> For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace,
and for Jerusalem's sake I will not be still, until her righteousness go
forth as brightness, and her salvation as a torch that burneth.

<span id="an_62:2">62:2</span> And the nations shall see thy
righteousness, and all kings thy glory; and thou shalt be called by a
new name, which the mouth of Jehovah will name.

<span id="an_62:3">62:3</span> And thou shalt be a crown of beauty in
the hand of Jehovah, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

<span id="an_62:4">62:4</span> Thou shalt no more be termed, Forsaken;
neither shall thy land any more be termed, Desolate: but thou shalt be
called, My delight is in her, and thy land, Married; for Jehovah
delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married.

<span id="an_62:5">62:5</span> For \[as\] a young man marrieth a virgin,
shall thy sons marry thee; and with the joy of the bridegroom over the
bride, shall thy God rejoice over thee.

<span id="an_62:6">62:6</span> I have set watchmen upon thy walls,
Jerusalem; all the day and all the night they shall never hold their
peace: ye that put Jehovah in remembrance, keep not silence,

<span id="an_62:7">62:7</span> and give him no rest, till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

<span id="an_62:8">62:8</span> Jehovah hath sworn by his right hand and
by the arm of his strength, I will indeed no more give thy corn \[to
be\] food for thine enemies; and the sons of the alien shall not drink
thy new wine, for which thou hast laboured;

<span id="an_62:9">62:9</span> for they that have garnered it shall eat
it, and praise Jehovah; and they that have gathered it shall drink it in
the courts of my holiness.

<span id="an_62:10">62:10</span> Go through, go through the gates;
prepare the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out
the stones; lift up a banner for the peoples.

<span id="an_62:11">62:11</span> Behold, Jehovah hath proclaimed unto
the end of the earth, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy
salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his recompence
before him.

<span id="an_62:12">62:12</span> And they shall call them, The holy
people, The redeemed of Jehovah; and thou shalt be called, The sought
out, The city not forsaken.

<span id="an_63:1">63:1</span> Who is this that cometh from Edom, with
deep-red garments from Bozrah, this that is glorious in his apparel,
travelling in the greatness of his strength? -- I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save.

<span id="an_63:2">63:2</span> -- Wherefore is redness in thine apparel,
and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winevat?

<span id="an_63:3">63:3</span> I have trodden the winepress alone, and
of the peoples not a man was with me; and I have trodden them in mine
anger, and trampled them in my fury; and their blood is sprinkled upon
my garments, and I have stained all mine apparel.

<span id="an_63:4">63:4</span> For the day of vengeance was in my heart,
and the year of my redeemed had come.

<span id="an_63:5">63:5</span> And I looked, and there was none to help;
and I wondered that there was none to uphold: and mine own arm brought
salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.

<span id="an_63:6">63:6</span> And I have trodden down the peoples in
mine anger, and made them drunk in my fury; and their blood have I
brought down to the earth.

<span id="an_63:7">63:7</span> I will record the loving-kindnesses of
Jehovah, the praises of Jehovah, according to all that Jehovah hath
bestowed upon us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel
which he hath bestowed upon them according to his mercies, and according
to the multitude of his loving-kindnesses.

<span id="an_63:8">63:8</span> And he said, They are indeed my people,
children that will not lie; and he became their Saviour.

<span id="an_63:9">63:9</span> In all their affliction he was afflicted,
and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he
redeemed them; and he bore them and carried them all the days of old.

<span id="an_63:10">63:10</span> But they rebelled and grieved his holy
Spirit: and he turned to be their enemy; himself, he fought against
them.

<span id="an_63:11">63:11</span> But he remembered the days of old,
Moses \[and\] his people: Where is he that brought them up out of the
sea with the shepherds of his flock? Where is he that put his holy
Spirit within him,

<span id="an_63:12">63:12</span> his glorious arm leading them by the
right hand of Moses, dividing the waters before them, to make himself an
everlasting name,

<span id="an_63:13">63:13</span> -- who led them through the depths,
like a horse in the wilderness, \[and\] they stumbled not?

<span id="an_63:14">63:14</span> As cattle go down into the valley, the
Spirit of Jehovah gave them rest; so didst thou lead thy people, to make
thyself a glorious name.

<span id="an_63:15">63:15</span> Look down from the heavens, and behold
from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory! Where is thy zeal
and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy tender mercies?
Are they restrained toward me?

<span id="an_63:16">63:16</span> For thou art our Father, though Abraham
be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, Jehovah, art our
Father; our Redeemer, from everlasting, is thy name.

<span id="an_63:17">63:17</span> Why, O Jehovah, hast thou made us to
err from thy ways, hast hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy
servants' sake, the tribes of thine inheritance.

<span id="an_63:18">63:18</span> Thy holy people have possessed \[it\]
but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.

<span id="an_63:19">63:19</span> We have become \[like those\] over whom
thou never barest rule, those not called by thy name.

<span id="an_64:1">64:1</span> Oh, that thou wouldest rend the heavens,
that thou wouldest come down, -- that the mountains might flow down at
thy presence,

<span id="an_64:2">64:2</span> -- as fire kindleth brushwood, as the
fire causeth water to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries,
that the nations might tremble at thy presence!

<span id="an_64:3">64:3</span> When thou didst terrible things \[which\]
we looked not for, thou camest down, and the mountains flowed down at
thy presence.

<span id="an_64:4">64:4</span> Never have \[men\] heard, nor perceived
by the ear, nor hath eye seen a God beside thee, who acteth for him that
waiteth for him.

<span id="an_64:5">64:5</span> Thou meetest him that rejoiceth to do
righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways: (behold, thou wast
wroth, and we have sinned:) in those is perpetuity, and we shall be
saved.

<span id="an_64:6">64:6</span> And we are all become as an unclean
\[thing\], and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all
fade as a leaf, and our iniquities, like the wind, have carried us away;

<span id="an_64:7">64:7</span> and there is none that calleth upon thy
name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee; for thou hast
hidden thy face from us, and hast caused us to melt away through our
iniquities.

<span id="an_64:8">64:8</span> And now, Jehovah, thou art our Father; we
are the clay, and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand.

<span id="an_64:9">64:9</span> Be not wroth very sore, O Jehovah,
neither remember iniquity for ever. Behold, see, we beseech thee, we are
all thy people.

<span id="an_64:10">64:10</span> Thy holy cities are become a
wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.

<span id="an_64:11">64:11</span> Our holy and our beautiful house, where
our fathers praised thee, is burnt up with fire, and all our precious
things are laid waste.

<span id="an_64:12">64:12</span> Wilt thou restrain thyself in presence
of these things, Jehovah? Wilt thou hold thy peace, and afflict us very
sore?

<span id="an_65:1">65:1</span> I am sought out of them that inquired not
\[for me\], I am found of them that sought me not; I have said, Behold
me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called by my name.

<span id="an_65:2">65:2</span> I have stretched out my hands all the day
unto a rebellious people, who walk in a way not good, after their own
thoughts;

<span id="an_65:3">65:3</span> the people that provoke me to anger
continually to my face, sacrificing in gardens and burning incense upon
the bricks;

<span id="an_65:4">65:4</span> who sit down among the graves, and lodge
in the secret places; who eat swine's flesh, and broth of abominable
things \[is in\] their vessels;

<span id="an_65:5">65:5</span> who say, Stand by thyself, come not near
to me; for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire
that burneth all the day.

<span id="an_65:6">65:6</span> Behold, it is written before me: I will
not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom,

<span id="an_65:7">65:7</span> your iniquities, and the iniquities of
your fathers together, saith Jehovah, who have burned incense upon the
mountains, and outraged me upon the hills; and I will measure their
former work into their bosom.

<span id="an_65:8">65:8</span> Thus saith Jehovah: As the new wine is
found in the cluster, and it is said, Destroy it not, for a blessing is
in it; so will I do for my servants' sakes, that I may not destroy
\[them\] all.

<span id="an_65:9">65:9</span> And I will bring forth a seed out of
Jacob, and out of Judah a possessor of my mountains; and mine elect
shall possess it, and my servants shall dwell there.

<span id="an_65:10">65:10</span> And the Sharon shall be a fold for
flocks, and the valley of Achor a couching-place of the herds, for my
people that have sought me.

<span id="an_65:11">65:11</span> But ye who forsake Jehovah, who forget
my holy mountain, who prepare a table for Gad, and fill up mixed wine
unto Meni:

<span id="an_65:12">65:12</span> I will even assign you to the sword,
and ye shall all bow down in the slaughter; because I called, and ye did
not answer, I spoke, and ye did not hear; but ye did what was evil in
mine eyes, and chose that wherein I delight not.

<span id="an_65:13">65:13</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, my servants shall eat, and \*ye\* shall be hungry; behold, my
servants shall drink, and \*ye\* shall be thirsty; behold, my servants
shall rejoice, and \*ye\* shall be ashamed;

<span id="an_65:14">65:14</span> behold, my servants shall sing aloud
for gladness of heart, and \*ye\* shall cry out for sorrow of heart, and
shall howl for vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_65:15">65:15</span> And ye shall leave your name for a
curse unto mine elect; for the Lord Jehovah will slay thee, and will
call his servants by another name:

<span id="an_65:16">65:16</span> so that he who blesseth himself in the
land shall bless himself by the God of truth; and he that sweareth in
the land shall swear by the God of truth: because the former troubles
shall be forgotten, and because they shall be hidden from mine eyes.

<span id="an_65:17">65:17</span> For behold, I create new heavens and a
new earth; and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

<span id="an_65:18">65:18</span> But be glad and rejoice for ever in
that which I create. For behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her
people a joy.

<span id="an_65:19">65:19</span> And I will rejoice over Jerusalem, and
will joy in my people; and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard
in her, nor the voice of crying.

<span id="an_65:20">65:20</span> There shall be no more thenceforth an
infant of days, nor an old man that hath not completed his days; for the
youth shall die a hundred years old, and the sinner being a hundred
years old shall be accursed.

<span id="an_65:21">65:21</span> And they shall build houses, and
inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof:

<span id="an_65:22">65:22</span> they shall not build, and another
inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a
tree shall be the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the
work of their hands.

<span id="an_65:23">65:23</span> They shall not labour in vain, nor
bring forth for terror; for they are the seed of the blessed of Jehovah,
and their offspring with them.

<span id="an_65:24">65:24</span> And it shall come to pass, that before
they call, I will answer; while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

<span id="an_65:25">65:25</span> The wolf and the lamb shall feed
together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox; and dust shall be
the serpent's meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_66:1">66:1</span> Thus saith Jehovah: The heavens are my
throne, and the earth is my footstool: what is the house that ye will
build unto me? and what is the place of my rest?

<span id="an_66:2">66:2</span> Even all these things hath my hand made,
and all these things have been, saith Jehovah. But to this man will I
look: to the afflicted and contrite in spirit, and who trembleth at my
word.

<span id="an_66:3">66:3</span> He that slaughtereth an ox, smiteth a
man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, breaketh a dog's neck; he that offereth
an oblation, \[it is as\] swine's blood; he that presenteth a memorial
of incense, \[is as\] he that blesseth an idol. As they have chosen
their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations,

<span id="an_66:4">66:4</span> I also will choose their calamities, and
will bring their fears upon them; because I called, and none answered, I
spoke, and they did not hear, but did that which was evil in mine eyes,
and chose that wherein I delight not.

<span id="an_66:5">66:5</span> Hear the word of Jehovah, ye that tremble
at his word: Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my
name's sake, said, Let Jehovah be glorified, and let us see your joy!
but they shall be ashamed.

<span id="an_66:6">66:6</span> A voice of tumult from the city, a voice
from the temple, a voice of Jehovah that rendereth recompence to his
enemies!

<span id="an_66:7">66:7</span> Before she travailed, she brought forth;
before her pain came, she was delivered of a man-child.

<span id="an_66:8">66:8</span> Who hath heard such a thing? who hath
seen such things? Can a land be made to bring forth in one day? shall a
nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth
her sons.

<span id="an_66:9">66:9</span> Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause
to bring forth? saith Jehovah; I who cause to bring forth, shall I shut
\[the womb\]? saith thy God.

<span id="an_66:10">66:10</span> Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad for
her, all ye that love her; rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn
over her:

<span id="an_66:11">66:11</span> because ye shall suck, and be satisfied
with the breasts of her consolations; because ye shall drink out, and be
delighted with the abundance of her glory.

<span id="an_66:12">66:12</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will
extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the nations like an
overflowing torrent; and ye shall suck, ye shall be carried upon the
side, and be dandled upon the knees.

<span id="an_66:13">66:13</span> As one whom his mother comforteth, so
will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_66:14">66:14</span> And ye shall see \[this\], and your
heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like the grass; and
the hand of Jehovah shall be known toward his servants, and he will have
indignation toward his enemies.

<span id="an_66:15">66:15</span> For behold, Jehovah will come with
fire, and his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury,
and his rebuke with flames of fire.

<span id="an_66:16">66:16</span> For by fire and by his sword will
Jehovah enter into judgment with all flesh: and the slain of Jehovah
shall be many.

<span id="an_66:17">66:17</span> They that sanctify themselves, and
purify themselves in the gardens behind one in the midst; that eat
swine's flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall perish
together, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_66:18">66:18</span> And I, -- their works and their
thoughts \[are before me\]. ... \[The time\] cometh for the gathering of
all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my glory.

<span id="an_66:19">66:19</span> And I will set a sign among them, and I
will send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul,
and Lud, that draw the bow; to Tubal and Javan, to the isles afar off,
that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory: and they shall
declare my glory among the nations.

<span id="an_66:20">66:20</span> And they shall bring all your brethren
out of all the nations as an oblation unto Jehovah, upon horses, and in
chariots, and in covered waggons, and upon mules, and upon dromedaries,
to my holy mountain, to Jerusalem, saith Jehovah, as the children of
Israel bring an oblation in a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_66:21">66:21</span> And I will also take of them for
priests \[and\] for Levites, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_66:22">66:22</span> For as the new heavens and the new
earth which I will make shall remain before me, saith Jehovah, so shall
your seed and your name remain.

<span id="an_66:23">66:23</span> And it shall come to pass from new moon
to new moon, and from sabbath to sabbath, all flesh shall come to
worship before me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_66:24">66:24</span> And they shall go forth, and look upon
the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me: for their
worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall
be an abhorrence unto all flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah](jer)
