[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](isa)  [Next](lam) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Jeremiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkijah,
of the priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to whom the word of Jehovah came in the
days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of
his reign;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> it came also in the days of Jehoiakim the
son of Josiah, king of Judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of
Zedekiah the son of Josiah, king of Judah, unto the carrying away of
Jerusalem captive, in the fifth month.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Before I formed thee in the belly I knew
thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I hallowed thee, I
appointed thee a prophet unto the nations.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And I said, Alas, Lord Jehovah! behold, I
cannot speak; for I am a child.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But Jehovah said unto me, Say not, I am a
child; for thou shalt go to whomsoever I shall send thee, and whatsoever
I command thee thou shalt speak.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Be not afraid of them; for I am with thee
to deliver thee, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And Jehovah put forth his hand and touched
my mouth; and Jehovah said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy
mouth.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> See, I have this day set thee over the
nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up, and to break down, and to
destroy, and to overthrow, to build and to plant.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying, Jeremiah, what seest thou? And I said, I see a rod of an
almond-tree.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Thou hast well
seen; for I am watchful over my word to perform it.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the word of Jehovah came to me the
second time, saying, What seest thou? And I said, I see a seething-pot,
and its face is from the north.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Out of the
north shall evil break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For behold, I am calling all the families
of the kingdoms of the north, saith Jehovah, and they shall come, and
they shall set every one his throne at the entering of the gates of
Jerusalem, and against all the walls thereof round about, and against
all the cities of Judah:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and I will pronounce my judgments against
them for all their wickedness, in that they have forsaken me, and have
burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own
hands.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Thou, therefore, gird up thy loins, and
arise, and speak unto them all that I shall command thee: be not
dismayed at them, lest I cause thee to be dismayed before them.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And I, behold, I appoint thee this day as
a strong city, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls, against the whole
land; against the kings of Judah, against its princes, against its
priests, and against the people of the land.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And they shall fight against thee, but
they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee, saith Jehovah,
to deliver thee.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,
saying, Thus saith Jehovah: I remember for thee the kindness of thy
youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the
wilderness, in a land not sown.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Israel was holiness unto Jehovah, the
first-fruits of his increase: all that devour him are guilty; evil shall
come upon them, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Hear the word of Jehovah, house of Jacob,
and all the families of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Thus saith Jehovah: What injustice have
your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have
walked after vanity, and become vain?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And they said not, Where is Jehovah, that
brought us up out of the land of Egypt, that led us in the wilderness,
in a land of deserts and of pits, in a land of drought and of the shadow
of death, in a land that no one passeth through, and where no man
dwelleth?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And I brought you into a fruitful land, to
eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof; and ye entered and defiled
my land, and made my heritage an abomination.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The priests said not, Where is Jehovah? and
they that handled the law knew me not; and the shepherds transgressed
against me; and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after
\[things that\] do not profit.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore will I yet plead with you, saith
Jehovah, and with your children's children will I plead.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For pass over to the isles of Chittim,
and see; and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there
have been such a thing.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Hath a nation changed \[its\] gods? and
they are no gods; -- but my people have changed their glory for that
which doth not profit.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Be astonished, ye heavens, at this, and
shudder; be amazed very much, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For my people have committed two evils:
they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, to hew them out
cisterns, broken cisterns that hold no water.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Is Israel a bondman? Is he a home-born
\[slave\]? Why is he become a spoil?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> The young lions roared against him, they
gave forth their voice, and they made his land desolate: his cities are
burned, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Even the children of Noph and Tahapanes
have fed on the crown of thy head.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Hast thou not procured this unto thyself,
in that thou hast forsaken Jehovah thy God, at the time he was leading
thee in the way?

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And now, what hast thou to do with the
way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Shihor? And what hast thou to do
with the way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the River?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Thine own wickedness chastiseth thee, and
thy backslidings reprove thee: know then and see that it is an evil
thing and bitter that thou hast forsaken Jehovah thy God, and that my
fear is not in thee, saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For of old thou hast broken thy yoke,
\[and\] burst thy bands; and thou saidst, I will not serve. For upon
every high hill, and under every green tree, thou bowest down, playing
the harlot.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And I, -- I had planted thee a noble
vine, wholly a right seed; how then art thou turned into the degenerate
shoots of a strange vine unto me?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> For though thou wash thee with nitre, and
take thee much potash, thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the
Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> How sayest thou, I am not defiled, I have
not gone after the Baals? See thy way in the valley, acknowledge what
thou hast done -- a swift dromedary traversing her ways!

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> -- a wild ass, used to the wilderness,
that snuffeth up the wind in her desire! In her ardour, who shall turn
her away? All they that seek her will not weary themselves; in her month
they shall find her.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and
thy throat from thirst. But thou saidst, There is no hope; no, for I
love strangers, and after them will I go.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> As a thief is ashamed when he is found,
so shall the house of Israel be ashamed -- they, their kings, their
princes, and their priests, and their prophets --

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> saying to a stock, Thou art my father;
and to a stone, Thou hast brought me forth; for they have turned the
back unto me, and not the face; and in the time of their trouble they
will say, Arise, and save us!

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Where then are thy gods that thou hast
made for thyself? let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of
thy trouble: for as the number of thy cities, are thy gods, O Judah.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Wherefore would ye contend with me? Ye
all have transgressed against me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> In vain have I smitten your children:
they received no correction. Your own sword hath devoured your prophets,
like a destroying lion.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> O generation, mark ye the word of
Jehovah. Have I been a wilderness unto Israel, or a land of thick
darkness? Wherefore say my people, We have dominion; we will come no
more unto thee?

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> Doth a virgin forget her ornaments, a
bride her attire? But my people have forgotten me days without number.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> How dost thou trim thy way to seek love!
Therefore hast thou also accustomed thy ways to wickedness.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Yea, in thy skirts is found the blood of
the souls of the innocent poor, whom thou didst not encounter breaking
in, but \[it is found\] upon all these.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> And thou sayest, Indeed I am innocent;
his anger will turn from me. Behold, I will enter into judgment with
thee because thou sayest, I have not sinned.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> Why dost thou gad about so much, and
change thy way? Thou shalt also be brought to shame by Egypt, as thou
wast brought to shame by Assyria.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Thou shalt indeed go forth from her with
thy hands upon thy head; for Jehovah hath rejected those thou confidest
in, and thou shalt not prosper by them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> They say, If a man put away his wife, and
she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return unto her
again? Would not that land be utterly polluted? But thou hast committed
fornication with many lovers; yet return to me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Lift up thine eyes unto the heights and
see, where hast thou not been lain with? In the ways hast thou sat for
them, as an Arab in the wilderness; and thou hast polluted the land with
thy fornications and with thy wickedness.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And the showers have been withholden, and
there hath been no latter rain; but thou hast a harlot's forehead, thou
refusest to be ashamed.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me,
My father, thou art the guide of my youth?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Will he keep \[his anger\] for ever? Will
he preserve it perpetually? Behold, thou hast spoken and hast done evil
things, and thou art \[so\] determined.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And Jehovah said unto me in the days of
Josiah the king, Hast thou seen what backsliding Israel hath done? She
hath gone up upon every high mountain and under every green tree, and
there hath committed fornication.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And I said, After she hath done all these
\[things\], she will return unto me; but she returned not. And her
sister Judah, the treacherous, saw \[it\].

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And I saw that when for all the causes
wherein backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away, and
given her a bill of divorce, yet the treacherous Judah, her sister,
feared not, but went and committed fornication also.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And it came to pass through the lightness
of her fornication that she polluted the land, and committed adultery
with stones and with stocks.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And even for all this her treacherous
sister Judah hath not returned unto me with her whole heart, but with
falsehood, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Backsliding
Israel hath shewn herself more just than treacherous Judah.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Go and proclaim these words toward the
north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith Jehovah: I will
not make my face dark upon you; for I am merciful, saith Jehovah; I will
not keep \[anger\] for ever.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that
thou hast transgressed against Jehovah thy God, and hast turned thy ways
hither and thither to the strangers under every green tree; and ye have
not hearkened to my voice, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Return, backsliding children, saith
Jehovah; for I am a husband unto you, and I will take you, one of a
city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And I will give you shepherds according
to my heart, and they shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And it shall come to pass, when ye are
multiplied in the land and become fruitful, in those days, saith
Jehovah, they shall say no more, Ark of the covenant of Jehovah! neither
shall it come to mind, nor shall they remember it, nor shall they visit
\[it\]; neither shall it be done any more.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> At that time they shall call Jerusalem
the throne of Jehovah; and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to
the name of Jehovah, to Jerusalem; and they shall no more walk after the
stubbornness of their evil heart.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> In those days the house of Judah shall
walk with the house of Israel; and they shall come together out of the
land of the north, to the land which I caused your fathers to inherit.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And as for me, I said, How shall I put
thee among the children, and give thee the pleasant land, the goodly
inheritance of the hosts of the nations? And I said, Thou shalt call me,
My father; and shalt not turn away from following me.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Surely \[as\] a woman treacherously
departeth from her companion, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O
house of Israel, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> A voice is heard upon the heights, the
weeping supplications of the children of Israel; for they have perverted
their way, they have forgotten Jehovah their God.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> -- Return, backsliding children; I will
heal your backslidings. ... Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art
Jehovah our God.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Truly in vain \[is salvation looked for\]
from the hills, \[and\] the multitude of mountains; truly in Jehovah our
God is the salvation of Israel.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> But shame hath devoured the labour of our
fathers from our youth; their flocks and their herds, their sons and
their daughters.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> We lie down in our shame, and our
confusion covereth us; for we have sinned against Jehovah our God, we
and our fathers, from our youth even unto this day, and have not
hearkened to the voice of Jehovah our God.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith
Jehovah, return unto me; and if thou wilt put away thine abominations
out of my sight, then shalt thou not be a wanderer;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> -- and thou shalt in truth, in justice, and
in righteousness swear, \[As\] Jehovah liveth! and the nations shall
bless themselves in him, and in him shall they glory.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For thus saith Jehovah to the men of Judah
and Jerusalem: Break up for you a fallow ground, and sow not among
thorns.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Circumcise yourselves for Jehovah, and take
away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem; lest my fury come forth like fire and burn, and there be none
to quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Declare ye in Judah, and cause it to be
heard in Jerusalem, and say, ... and blow the trumpet in the land, cry
aloud and say, Assemble yourselves, and let us enter into the fenced
cities.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Set up a banner toward Zion; take to
flight, stay not! For I am bringing evil from the north, and a great
destruction.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> The lion is come up from his thicket, the
destroyer of the nations is on his way; he is gone forth from his place,
to make thy land desolate; thy cities shall be laid waste, without
inhabitant.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For this, gird you with sackcloth, lament
and howl! for the fierce anger of Jehovah is not turned away from us.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
saith Jehovah, that the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of
the princes; and the priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall
be amazed.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And I said, Alas, Lord Jehovah! surely
thou hast greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall
have peace; whereas the sword reacheth unto the soul.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> At that time shall it be said to this
people and to Jerusalem, A hot wind \[cometh\] from the heights in the
wilderness, on the way of the daughter of my people, not for fanning,
nor for cleansing.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> A wind more vehement than that shall come
from me: now will I also pronounce judgments against them.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Behold, he cometh up as clouds, and his
chariots are as a whirlwind; his horses are swifter than eagles. Woe
unto us! for we are destroyed.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Wash thy heart, Jerusalem, from
wickedness, that thou mayest be saved. How long shall thy vain thoughts
lodge within thee?

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For a voice declareth from Dan, and
publisheth affliction from mount Ephraim.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Inform the nations; behold, make
Jerusalem to hear: Besiegers come from a far country, and raise their
voice against the cities of Judah.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> As keepers of a field are they against
her round about; for she hath been rebellious against me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Thy way and thy doings have procured
these \[things\] unto thee; this is thy wickedness, yea, it is bitter,
yea, it reacheth unto thy heart.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> My bowels! my bowels! I am in travail!
\[Oh,\] the walls of my heart! My heart maketh a noise in me; I cannot
hold my peace: for thou hearest, my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the
clamour of war.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Destruction upon destruction is
proclaimed; for the whole land is wasted: suddenly are my tents laid
waste, my curtains, in a moment.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> How long shall I see the standard,
\[and\] hear the sound of the trumpet?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For my people is foolish, they have not
known me; they are sottish children, and they have no intelligence; they
are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> I beheld the earth, and lo, it was waste
and empty; and the heavens, and they had no light.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> I beheld the mountains, and lo, they
trembled, and all the hills shook violently.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> I beheld, and lo, man was not, and all
the fowl of the heavens were fled.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> I beheld, and lo, the fruitful land was a
wilderness, and all the cities thereof were broken down, before Jehovah,
before his fierce anger.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For thus saith Jehovah: The whole land
shall be a desolation; but I will not make a full end.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> For this shall the earth mourn, and the
heavens above be black; because I have spoken it, I have purposed it,
and will not repent, neither will I turn back therefrom.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> At the noise of the horsemen and bowmen,
every city fleeth; they go into the thickets, and climb up upon the
rocks: every city is forsaken and no man dwelleth therein.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> -- And thou, wasted one, what wilt thou
do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee
with ornaments of gold, though thou rendest thine eyes with paint, in
vain dost thou make thyself fair: \[thy\] lovers despise thee, they seek
thy life.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> For I hear a voice, as of a woman in
travail, anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the
voice of the daughter of Zion: she moaneth, she spreadeth forth her
hands, \[saying\], Woe unto me! for my soul faileth because of
murderers.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Run ye to and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broadways thereof, if
ye can find a man, if there be \[any\] that doeth justice, that seeketh
fidelity; and I will pardon it.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And if they say, \[As\] Jehovah liveth!
surely they swear falsely.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Jehovah, are not thine eyes upon fidelity?
Thou hast smitten them, but they are not sore; thou hast consumed them,
they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces
harder than a rock; they have refused to return.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And I said, Surely these are the wretched
ones, they are foolish; for they know not the way of Jehovah, the
judgment of their God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I will go unto the great men, and will
speak unto them; for they know the way of Jehovah, the judgment of their
God; but these have altogether broken the yoke, have burst the bonds.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Therefore a lion out of the forest shall
slay them, a wolf of the evenings shall waste them; the leopard lurketh
against their cities, every one that goeth out thence is torn in pieces:
for their transgressions are multiplied, their backslidings are
increased.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Wherefore should I pardon thee? Thy
children have forsaken me, and swear by them that are not God. I have
satiated them, and they have committed adultery, and they troop to the
harlots' house.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> \[As\] well fed horses, they roam about,
every one neigheth after his neighbour's wife.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Shall I not visit for these things? saith
Jehovah, and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Go up upon her walls, and destroy; but
make not a full end; take away her battlements, for they are not
Jehovah's.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> For the house of Israel and the house of
Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> They have denied Jehovah, and say, He is
not; and evil shall not come upon us, nor shall we see sword nor famine;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and the prophets shall become wind, and
the word is not in them: thus shall it be done unto them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah, the God of
hosts: Because ye speak this word, behold, I will make my words in thy
mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Behold, I bring a nation upon you from
afar, house of Israel, saith Jehovah: it is a mighty nation, it is an
ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not, neither
understandest thou what they say.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Their quiver is as an open sepulchre;
they are all mighty men.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And they shall eat up thy harvest and thy
bread, they shall eat up thy sons and thy daughters, they shall eat up
thy flocks and thy herds, they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig-trees;
they shall destroy with the sword thy strong cities, wherein thou
trustedst.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Nevertheless in those days, saith
Jehovah, I will not make a full end with you.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And it shall come to pass, when ye shall
say, Wherefore hath Jehovah our God done all these things unto us? then
shalt thou say to them, As ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods
in your land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Declare this in the house of Jacob, and
publish it in Judah, saying,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Hear now this, O foolish and heartless
people, who have eyes and see not; who have ears, and hear not.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Will ye not fear me? saith Jehovah. Will
ye not tremble at my presence, who have set the sand a bound for the sea
by a perpetual decree, and it shall not pass it? and its waves toss
themselves, but they do not prevail; and they roar, yet can they not
pass over it?

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> But this people hath a stubborn and a
rebellious heart; they have turned aside and are gone.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And they say not in their heart, Let us
now fear Jehovah our God, that giveth rain, both the early and the
latter, in its season; who preserveth unto us the appointed weeks of
harvest.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Your iniquities have turned away these
things, and your sins have withholden from you what is good.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For among my people are found wicked
\[men\]: they lay wait, as fowlers stoop down; they set a trap, they
catch men.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> As a cage full of birds, so are their
houses full of deceit: therefore they are become great, and have
enriched themselves.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> They are become fat, they shine, yea,
they surpass in deeds of wickedness; they judge not the cause, the cause
of the fatherless, and they prosper; and the right of the needy do they
not adjudge.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Shall I not visit for these things? saith
Jehovah; shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> An appalling and horrible thing is
committed in the land:

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> the prophets prophesy falsehood, and the
priests rule by their means; and my people love \[to have it\] so. But
what will ye do in the end thereof?

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Flee for safety, ye children of Benjamin,
out of the midst of Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and set up
a signal in Beth-haccerem; for evil appeareth out of the north, and a
great destruction.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The comely and delicate one do I cut off,
the daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Shepherds with their flocks shall come unto
her; they shall pitch \[their\] tents against her round about; they
shall feed every one in his place.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Prepare war against her. Arise, and let us
go up at noon. Woe unto us! for the day hath declined, for the shadows
of the evening are lengthening.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Arise, and let us go up by night, and let
us destroy her palaces.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For thus hath Jehovah of hosts said: Hew ye
down trees, and cast a mound against Jerusalem. She is the city to be
visited; she is wholly oppression in the midst of her.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> As a well poureth forth her waters, so she
poureth forth her wickedness: violence and destruction are heard in her;
before me continually are grief and wounds.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Be thou instructed, Jerusalem, lest my soul
be alienated from thee; lest I make thee a desolation, a land not
inhabited.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: They shall
thoroughly glean like a vine the remnant of Israel: turn back thy hand,
as a grape-gatherer unto the baskets.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> To whom shall I speak and testify, that
they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot
hearken: behold, the word of Jehovah is unto them a reproach; they have
no delight in it.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And I am full of the fury of Jehovah, I
am weary with holding in. Pour it out upon the children in the street,
and upon the assembly of young men together: for even the husband with
the wife shall be taken; the aged with him \[that is\] full of days.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And their houses shall be turned unto
others, \[their\] fields and wives together; for I will stretch out my
hand upon the inhabitants of the land, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For from the least of them even unto the
greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness; and from the
prophet even unto the priest, every one dealeth falsely.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And they have healed the breach of the
daughter of my people lightly, saying, Peace, peace! when there is no
peace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Are they ashamed that they have committed
abomination? Nay, they are not at all ashamed, neither know they what it
is to blush. Therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time
that I visit them they shall stumble, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Stand in the ways and
see, and ask for the ancient paths, which is the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, We will
not walk \[therein\].

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Also I have set watchmen over you: --
Hearken ye to the sound of the trumpet. But they said, We will not
hearken.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O
assembly, what is among them.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil
upon this people, the fruit of their thoughts; for they have not
hearkened unto my words, and as to my law, they have rejected it.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> To what purpose should there come to me
incense from Sheba, and the sweet cane from a far country? Your
burnt-offerings are not acceptable, nor are your sacrifices pleasing
unto me.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I
will lay stumbling-blocks before this people, and the fathers and the
sons together shall fall over them; the neighbour and his friend shall
perish.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, a people
cometh from the north country, and a great nation is stirred up from the
uttermost parts of the earth.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> They lay hold on bow and spear; they are
cruel, and have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea; and they
ride upon horses, set in array as a man for the battle, against thee,
daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> We have heard the report thereof: our
hands are grown feeble; anguish hath taken hold of us, pain as of a
woman that travaileth.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Go not forth into the field, nor walk by
the way; for \[there is\] the sword of the enemy, terror is on every
side.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Daughter of my people, gird thee with
sackcloth, and roll thyself in ashes: make mourning, \[as\] for an only
son -- bitter lamentation; for the spoiler cometh suddenly upon us.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> I have set thee among my people as an
assayer, a fortress, that thou mayest know and try their way.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> They are all the most rebellious of
rebels, going about with slander: they are bronze and iron; they are all
corrupters.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> The bellows are burned, the lead is
consumed by the fire; they have melted, and melted in vain; and the bad
are not plucked away.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Reprobate silver shall they call them,
for Jehovah hath rejected them.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Stand in the gate of Jehovah's house, and
proclaim there this word, and say, Hear ye the word of Jehovah, all
Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel: Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell
in this place.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Confide ye not in words of falsehood,
saying, Jehovah's temple, Jehovah's temple, Jehovah's temple is this.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> But if ye thoroughly amend your ways and
your doings, if ye really do justice between a man and his neighbour,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> \[if\] ye oppress not the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow, and shed no innocent blood in this place,
neither walk after other gods to your hurt;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> then will I cause you to dwell in this
place, in the land that I gave to your fathers from of old even for
ever.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Behold, ye confide in words of falsehood
that cannot profit.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> What? steal, murder, and commit adultery,
and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods
whom ye know not ...

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> then ye come and stand before me, in this
house which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered, -- in order
to do all these abominations!

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Is this house, which is called by my
name, a den of robbers in your eyes? Even I, behold, I have seen it,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For go now unto my place which was in
Shiloh, where I caused my name to dwell at the first, and see what I did
to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And now, because ye have done all these
works, saith Jehovah, and I spoke unto you, rising up early and
speaking, and ye heard not, and I called you, and ye answered not;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> I will even do unto the house which is
called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to
you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> and I will cast you out of my sight, as I
have cast out all your brethren, all the seed of Ephraim.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And thou, pray not for this people,
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, and make not intercession to
me; for I will not hear thee.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Seest thou not what they do in the cities
of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> The children gather wood, and the fathers
kindle the fire, and the women knead dough, to make cakes to the queen
of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto other gods, that they
may provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Is it I whom they provoke to anger? saith
Jehovah; is it not themselves, to the shame of their own face?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold, mine anger and my fury shall be poured out upon this place; upon
man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit
of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel: Add your burnt-offerings to your sacrifices, and eat the flesh.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For I spoke not unto your fathers, nor
commanded them concerning burnt-offerings and sacrifices, in the day
that I brought them out of the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> but I commanded them this thing, saying,
Hearken unto my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my
people; and walk in all the way that I command you, that it may be well
with you.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> But they hearkened not, nor inclined
their ear, but walked in the counsels, in the stubbornness of their evil
heart, and went backward and not forward.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Since the day that your fathers came
forth out of the land of Egypt, unto this day, have I sent unto you all
my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them;

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> but they have not hearkened unto me, nor
inclined their ear; and they have hardened their neck: they have done
worse than their fathers.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And thou shalt speak all these words unto
them, but they will not hearken unto thee; and thou shalt call unto
them, but they will not answer thee.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And thou shalt say unto them, This is the
nation which hath not hearkened unto the voice of Jehovah their God, nor
received correction; fidelity is perished, and is cut off from their
mouth.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Cut off thy hair, and cast it away, and
take up a lamentation on the heights; for Jehovah hath rejected and
forsaken the generation of his wrath.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> For the children of Judah have done evil
in my sight, saith Jehovah; they have set their abominations in the
house which is called by my name, to defile it.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And they have built the high places of
Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons
and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded not, neither did it
come up into my mind.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> Therefore, behold, days are coming, saith
Jehovah, when it shall no more be said, Topheth, and Valley of the son
of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter; for they shall bury in Topheth,
till there be no place.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And the carcases of this people shall be
food for the fowl of the heavens, and for the beasts of the earth; and
none shall scare \[them\] away.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> And I will cause to cease from the cities
of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth and the
voice of joy, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride;
for the land shall become a waste.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> At that time, saith Jehovah, they shall
bring forth the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his
princes, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets,
and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and they shall spread them out to the sun
and to the moon and to all the host of the heavens, which they have
loved, and which they have served, and after which they have walked, and
which they have sought, and which they have worshipped: they shall not
be gathered, nor be buried; they shall be for dung upon the face of the
ground.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And death shall be chosen rather than life
by all the residue that remain of this evil family, in all the places
whither I have driven those that remain, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith
Jehovah: Do \[men\] fall, and not rise up? Doth one turn away, and not
return?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Why hath this people of Jerusalem slidden
back with a perpetual backsliding? They hold fast deceit, they refuse to
return.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> I hearkened and heard: they speak not what
is right; there is no man who repenteth him of his wickedness, saying,
What have I done? Every one turneth to his course, like a horse rushing
into the battle.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Even a stork in the heavens knoweth her
appointed times, and the turtle-dove and the swallow and the crane
observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> How do ye say, We are wise, and the law of
Jehovah is with us? Behold, certainly the lying pen of the scribes hath
made it falsehood.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed
and taken: behold, they have rejected Jehovah's word; and what wisdom is
in them?

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Therefore will I give their wives unto
others, their fields to those that shall possess \[them\]; for every
one, from the least even unto the greatest, is given to covetousness;
from the prophet even unto the priest, every one dealeth falsely.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And they have healed the breach of the
daughter of my people lightly, saying, Peace, peace! when there is no
peace.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Are they ashamed that they have committed
abomination? Nay, they are not at all ashamed, and they know not how to
blush. Therefore shall they fall among them that fall: in the time of
their visitation they shall stumble, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> I will utterly take them away, saith
Jehovah: there are no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig-tree; and
the leaf is faded: and I will give them up to those that shall pass over
them.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Why do we sit still? Assemble yourselves,
and let us enter into the fenced cities, and let us be silent there: for
Jehovah our God hath put us to silence, and given us water of gall to
drink, because we have sinned against Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Peace is looked for, and there is no
good; a time of healing, and behold, terror.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The snorting of his horses is heard from
Dan: the whole land trembleth at the sound of the neighing of his
steeds, and they come, and devour the land, and all it contains, the
city and those that dwell therein.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For behold, I send among you serpents,
vipers against which there is no charm, and they shall bite you, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> My comfort in my sadness! my heart is
faint in me!

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Behold the voice of the cry of the
daughter of my people, from a very far country: Is not Jehovah in Zion?
Is not her king in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with their
graven images, with foreign vanities?

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> The harvest is past, the summer is ended,
and we are not saved.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> -- For the breach of the daughter of my
people am I crushed; I go mourning; astonishment hath taken hold of me.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no
physician there? Why then is there no dressing applied for the healing
of the daughter of my people?

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Oh that my head were waters, and mine eye a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people!

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Oh that I had in the wilderness a
traveller's lodging-place, that I might leave my people, and go away
from them! For they are all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And they bend their tongue, their bow of
falsehood, and not for fidelity are they valiant in the land; for they
proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Take ye heed every one of his friend, and
confide not in any brother; for every brother only supplanteth, and
every friend goeth about with slander.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And they act deceitfully every one with his
neighbour, and speak not the truth: they teach their tongue to speak
falsehood, they weary themselves with perverse dealing.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Thy habitation is in the midst of deceit;
through deceit they refuse to know me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts:
Behold, I will melt them, and try them; for how else could I do for the
daughter of my people?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Their tongue is a murderous arrow; it
speaketh deceit. \[A man\] speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his
mouth, but in his heart he layeth his ambush.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Shall I not visit them for these
\[things\]? saith Jehovah; shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation
as this?

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> For the mountains will I take up weeping
and wailing, and for the pastures of the wilderness, a lamentation; for
they are burnt up, so that none passeth through them; and the voice of
the cattle is not heard. Both the fowl of the heavens and the beasts are
fled; they are gone.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And I will make Jerusalem heaps, a
dwelling-place of jackals; and I will make the cities of Judah a
desolation, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Who is a wise man, that he may understand
this? and he to whom the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken, that he may
declare it? Why is the land perished, burnt up like a wilderness, so
that none passeth through?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And Jehovah saith, Because they have
forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not hearkened unto my
voice, nor walked in it,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> but have walked after the stubbornness of
their own heart, and after the Baals, as their fathers taught them;

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel, Behold, I will feed this people with wormwood, and
give them water of gall to drink,

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> and will scatter them among the nations,
whom neither they nor their fathers have known; and I will send the
sword after them, till I have consumed them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Consider,
and call for the mourning women, that they may come, and send for the
skilful women, that they may come;

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and let them make haste, and take up a
wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids
pour forth waters.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For a voice of wailing is heard out of
Zion, How are we spoiled, sorely put to shame! For we have forsaken the
land, for they have cast down our dwellings.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Hear then the word of Jehovah, ye women,
and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, and teach your daughters
wailing, and each one her companion lamentation.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> For death is come up through our windows,
is entered into our palaces, to cut off the children from the street,
the young men from the broadways.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Speak, Thus saith Jehovah: Yea, the
carcases of men shall fall as dung upon the open field, and as the
handful after the reaper, and there shall be none to gather.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Let not the wise
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty glory in his might; let not
the rich glory in his riches:

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> but let him that glorieth glory in this,
that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I \[am\] Jehovah, who
exercise loving-kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth; for
in these things I delight, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Behold, days are coming, saith Jehovah,
when I will visit all \[them that are\] circumcised with the
uncircumcised;

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the
children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that have the corners \[of their
beard\] cut off, that dwell in the wilderness: for all the nations are
uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Hear the word that Jehovah speaketh unto
you, house of Israel.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Learn not the way of
the nations, and be not dismayed at the signs of the heavens; for the
nations are dismayed at them.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For the statutes of the peoples are
vanity; for \[it is\] a tree cut out of the forest, worked with a chisel
by the hands of the artizan;

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> they deck it with silver and with gold;
they fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it move not.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> They are as a palm-column of turned work,
and they speak not; they are carried, for they cannot go. Be not afraid
of them; for they cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to do good.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> There is none like unto thee, Jehovah;
thou art great, and thy name is great in might.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Who would not fear thee, O King of
nations? For to thee doth it appertain; for among all the wise men of
the nations, and in all their kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But they are one and all senseless and
foolish; the teaching of vanities is a stock.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Silver spread into plates is brought from
Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the artizan and of the hands
of the founder; blue and purple is their clothing: they are all the work
of skilful \[men\].

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> But Jehovah Elohim is truth; he is the
living God, and the King of eternity. At his wrath the earth trembleth,
and the nations cannot abide his indignation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Thus shall ye say unto them: The gods
that have not made the heavens and the earth, these shall perish from
the earth, and from under the heavens.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> He hath made the earth by his power, he
hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the
heavens by his understanding.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> When he uttereth his voice, there is a
tumult of waters in the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend
from the end of the earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain, and
bringeth forth the wind out of his treasuries.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Every man is become brutish, bereft of
knowledge; every founder is put to shame by the graven image, for his
molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> They are vanity, a work of delusion: in
the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The portion of Jacob is not like them;
for it is he that hath formed all \[things\], and Israel is the rod of
his inheritance: Jehovah of hosts is his name.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Gather up thy baggage out of the land,
O inhabitress of the fortress.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will
this time sling out the inhabitants of the land, and will distress them,
that they may be found.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Woe is me, for my wound! My stroke is
hard to heal, and I had said, Yea, this is \[my\] grief, and I will bear
it.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> My tent is despoiled, and all my cords
are broken; my children are gone forth from me, and they are not; there
is none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> For the shepherds are become brutish,
and have not sought Jehovah; therefore have they not acted wisely, and
all their flock is scattered.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The voice of a rumour! Behold, it
cometh, and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the
cities of Judah a desolation, a dwelling-place of jackals.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> I know, Jehovah, that the way of man is
not his own; it is not in a man that walketh to direct his steps.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Jehovah, correct me, but with judgment;
not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Pour out thy fury upon the nations that
know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name; for they
have eaten up Jacob, yea, they have eaten him up and consumed him, and
have laid waste his dwelling-place.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Hear ye the words of this covenant; and
speak ye unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith
Jehovah, the God of Israel: Cursed be the man that obeyeth not the words
of this covenant

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> which I commanded your fathers in the day
that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from the iron
furnace, saying, Hearken unto my voice and do them, according to all
that I command you; so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God:

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> that I may perform the oath that I have
sworn unto your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and
honey, as it is this day. And I answered and said, Amen, Jehovah!

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Proclaim all
these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem,
saying: Hear the words of this covenant, and do them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> For I earnestly protested unto your
fathers, in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt,
unto this day, rising early and protesting, saying, Hearken unto my
voice.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But they have not hearkened, nor inclined
their ear, but have walked every one in the stubbornness of their evil
heart; and I have brought upon them all the words of this covenant,
which I commanded \[them\] to do, and they have not done.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And Jehovah said unto me, A conspiracy is
found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They are turned back to the iniquities
of their forefathers, who refused to hear my words; and they have gone
after other gods to serve them. The house of Israel and the house of
Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I
will bring evil upon them, from which they shall not be able to escape;
and they will cry unto me, and I will not hearken unto them.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Then shall the cities of Judah and
inhabitants of Jerusalem go and cry unto the gods unto whom they have
burned incense; but they shall not save them at all in the time of their
trouble.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For \[as\] the number of thy cities,
are thy gods, O Judah; and \[as\] the number of the streets of
Jerusalem, have ye set up altars to the Shame, altars to burn incense
unto Baal.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And thou, pray not for this people,
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them; for I will not hear in the time
that they cry unto me for their trouble.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> What hath my beloved to do in my house,
seeing that the more part practise their evil devices, and the holy
flesh is passed from thee? When thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Jehovah had called thy name, A green
olive-tree, fair, of goodly fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he
hath kindled fire upon it, and its branches are broken.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> For Jehovah of hosts, that planted
thee, hath pronounced evil against thee, for the evil of the house of
Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have done for themselves,
to provoke me to anger in burning incense unto Baal.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And Jehovah hath given me knowledge,
and I know \[it\]; then thou shewedst me their doings.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And I was like a tame lamb \[that\] is
led to the slaughter; and I knew not that they devised devices against
me, \[saying,\] Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let
us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be no more
remembered.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But thou, Jehovah of hosts, who judgest
righteously, who triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy
vengeance on them: for unto thee have I revealed my cause.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning
the men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the
name of Jehovah, that thou die not by our hand,

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> -- therefore thus saith Jehovah of
hosts: Behold, I punish them: the young men shall die by the sword;
their sons and their daughters shall die by famine;

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> and there shall be no remnant of them;
for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, in the year of their
visitation.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Righteous art thou, Jehovah, when I plead
with thee; yet will I speak with thee of \[thy\] judgments. Wherefore
doth the way of the wicked prosper? \[wherefore\] are all they at ease
that deal very treacherously?

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Thou hast planted them, they also have
taken root: they advance, yea, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in
their mouth, but far from their reins.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But thou, Jehovah, knowest me; thou hast
seen me, and proved my heart toward thee. Drag them out like sheep for
the slaughter, and set them apart for the day of slaughter.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> How long shall the land mourn, and the
herbs of all the fields wither? Because of the wickedness of them that
dwell therein, the beasts and the birds perish; for they say, He will
not see our end.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> If thou hast run with footmen, and they
have wearied thee, how wilt thou then contend with horses? And if in a
land of peace thou thinkest thyself in security, how wilt thou then do
in the swelling of the Jordan?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For even thy brethren, and the house of
thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee, even they have
cried aloud after thee. Believe them not, though they speak good
\[words\] unto thee.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> I have forsaken my house, I have cast off
my heritage, I have given the beloved of my soul into the hand of her
enemies.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> My heritage is become unto me as a lion
in the forest; it hath raised its voice against me: therefore have I
hated it.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> My heritage is unto me \[as\] a speckled
bird of prey; the birds of prey round about are against her. Go,
assemble all the beasts of the field, bring them to devour.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Many shepherds have destroyed my
vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my
pleasant portion a desolate wilderness:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> they have made it a desolation;
desolate, it mourneth unto me: the whole land is made desolate, for no
man layeth it to heart.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Spoilers are come upon all heights in
the wilderness; for the sword of Jehovah devoureth from one end of the
land even to the \[other\] end of the land: no flesh hath peace.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> They have sown wheat, and they reap
thorns; they have put themselves to pain, \[and\] do not profit. Be ye
therefore ashamed of your revenues, because of the fierce anger of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Thus saith Jehovah against all mine
evil neighbours, that touch the inheritance which I have caused my
people Israel to inherit: Behold, I will pluck them up out of their
land, and pluck out the house of Judah from among them.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And it shall come to pass, after I have
plucked them up, I will return, and have compassion on them, and will
bring them back, each one to his inheritance, and each one to his land.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And it shall come to pass, if they will
diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, \[As\]
Jehovah liveth -- even as they taught my people to swear by Baal -- they
shall be built up in the midst of my people.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And if they will not obey, I will
utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Thus said Jehovah unto me: Go and buy
thee a linen girdle, and put it upon thy loins; but dip it not in water.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And I bought a girdle according to the
word of Jehovah, and put it upon my loins.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me the
second time, saying,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Take the girdle that thou hast bought,
which is upon thy loins, and arise, go to the Euphrates, and hide it
there in a hole of the rock.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> So I went and hid it by the Euphrates, as
Jehovah had commanded me.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And it came to pass at the end of many
days, that Jehovah said unto me, Arise, go to the Euphrates, and take
the girdle from thence which I commanded thee to hide there.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And I went to the Euphrates, and digged,
and took the girdle from the place where I had hid it; and behold, the
girdle was spoiled, it was good for nothing.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Thus saith Jehovah: After this manner
will I spoil the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> This evil people, who refuse to hear my
words, who walk in the stubbornness of their heart, and go after other
gods, to serve them and to worship them, shall even be as this girdle
which is good for nothing.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For as a girdle cleaveth to the loins
of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel
and the whole house of Judah, saith Jehovah; that they might be unto me
for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but
they would not hear.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And thou shalt speak unto them this
word: Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, Every skin shall be filled
with wine. And they will say unto thee, Do we not very well know that
every skin shall be filled with wine?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And thou shalt say unto them, Thus
saith Jehovah: Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, and
the kings that sit for David upon his throne, and the priests and the
prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And I will dash them one against
another, both the fathers and the sons together, saith Jehovah; I will
not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy so as not to destroy them.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Hear ye, and give ear, be not lifted
up; for Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Give glory to Jehovah your God, before
he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the mountains of
twilight; and ye shall look for light, but he will turn it into the
shadow of death, and make \[it\] gross darkness.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And if ye will not hear it, my soul
shall weep in secret places for \[your\] pride; and mine eye shall weep
sore, and run down with tears, because Jehovah's flock is gone into
captivity.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Say unto the king and to the queen:
Humble yourselves, sit down low; for from your heads shall come down the
crown of your magnificence.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> The cities of the south are shut up,
and there is none to open \[them\]; all Judah is carried away captive:
it is wholly carried away captive.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Lift up your eyes, and behold them that
come from the north. Where is the flock that was given thee, thy
beautiful flock?

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> What wilt thou say when he shall visit
thee, since thou thyself hast trained them to be princes in chief over
thee? Shall not sorrows take thee, as a woman in travail?

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And if thou say in thy heart, Wherefore
come these things upon me? For the greatness of thine iniquity are thy
skirts uncovered, \[and\] thy heels have suffered violence.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Can an Ethiopian change his skin, or a
leopard his spots? \[Then\] may ye also do good, who are accustomed to
do evil.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And I will scatter them as stubble that
passeth away by the wind of the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> This shall be thy lot, thy measured
portion from me, saith Jehovah; because thou hast forgotten me, and
confided in falsehood.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Therefore will I also turn thy skirts
over thy face, and thy shame shall be seen.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> Thine adulteries, and thy neighings,
the lewdness of thy fornication, on the hills, in the fields, -- thine
abominations, have I seen. Woe unto thee, Jerusalem! Wilt thou not be
made clean? after how long a time yet?

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> The word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah
concerning the drought.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof
languish, they are black unto the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem goeth
up.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And their nobles send their little ones
for water: they come to the pits, they find no water; they return with
their vessels empty; they are ashamed, they are confounded, and have
covered their heads.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Because the ground is chapt, for there
hath been no rain on the earth, the ploughmen are ashamed, they cover
their heads.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> For the hind also calveth in the field,
and forsaketh \[its young\], because there is no grass.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And the wild asses stand on the heights,
they snuff up the wind like jackals; their eyes fail, because there is
no herbage.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Jehovah, though our iniquities testify
against us, do thou act for thy name's sake; for our backslidings are
many -- we have sinned against thee.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Thou hope of Israel, its Saviour in the
time of trouble, why wilt thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a
traveller that turneth aside to stay a night?

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Why wilt thou be as a man astonished, as
a mighty man that cannot save? Yet thou, Jehovah, art in the midst of
us, and we are called by thy name: leave us not.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Thus saith Jehovah to this people: Even
so have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet; and
Jehovah hath no delight in them: now will he remember their iniquity,
and visit their sins.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Pray not for
this people for their good.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> When they fast, I will not hear their
cry; and when they offer up burnt-offering and oblation, I will not
accept them: for I will consume them by sword, and by famine, and by
pestilence.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And I said, Alas, Lord Jehovah! Behold,
the prophets say unto them, Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye
have famine; for I will give you assured peace in this place.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And Jehovah said unto me, The prophets
prophesy falsehood in my name; I have not sent them, neither have I
commanded them, nor spoken unto them: they prophesy unto you a false
vision, and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their
heart.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning
the prophets that prophesy in my name, and I sent them not, and who say,
Sword and famine shall not be in this land: By sword and by famine shall
those prophets be consumed;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> and the people to whom they prophesy
shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem, because of the famine and
the sword; and there shall be none to bury them, them, their wives, and
their sons, and their daughters; and I will pour their wickedness upon
them.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And thou shalt say this word unto them:
Let mine eyes run down with tears, night and day, and not cease; for the
virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very
grievous blow.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> If I go forth into the field, behold
the slain with the sword! and if I enter into the city, behold them that
pine away with famine! For both prophet and priest shall go about into a
land that they know not.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> -- Hast thou then utterly rejected
Judah? Doth thy soul loathe Zion? Why hast thou smitten us, and there is
no healing for us? Peace is looked for, and there is no good, -- and a
time of healing, and behold terror!

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Jehovah, we acknowledge our wickedness,
the iniquity of our fathers; for we have sinned against thee.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> For thy name's sake, do not spurn
\[us\], do not disgrace the throne of thy glory: remember, break not thy
covenant with us.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Are there any among the vanities of the
nations that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? Art not
thou HE, Jehovah, our God? And we wait upon thee; for thou hast made all
these things.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Though Moses
and Samuel stood before me, my soul \[would\] not \[turn\] toward this
people. Send \[them\] out of my sight, and let them go forth.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And it shall come to pass, if they say
unto thee, Whither shall we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, Thus
saith Jehovah: Such as are for death, to death; and such as are for the
sword, to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and
such as are for captivity, to captivity.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For I will visit them with four kinds
\[of punishments\], saith Jehovah: the sword to slay, and dogs to tear,
and the fowl of the heavens, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and
to destroy.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And I will give them over to be driven
hither and thither amongst all the kingdoms of the earth, because of
Manasseh the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, for that which he did in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For who shall have pity upon thee,
Jerusalem? and who shall bemoan thee? and who shall turn aside to ask
after thy welfare?

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thou hast cast me off, saith Jehovah,
thou art gone backward; and I have stretched out my hand against thee,
and will destroy thee: I am become weary of repenting.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And I will fan them with a fan in the
gates of the land; I will bereave of children \[and\] destroy my people:
they have not returned from their ways.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Their widows are increased to me more
than the sand of the seas; I have brought upon them, against the mother
of the young men, a spoiler at noonday; I have caused anguish and terror
to fall upon her suddenly.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> She that hath borne seven languisheth,
she hath given up the ghost; her sun is gone down while it is yet day;
she is put to shame and confounded. And the residue of them will I give
up to the sword before their enemies, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast
borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole land! I
have not lent on usury, nor have they lent to me on usury; \[yet\] every
one of them doth curse me.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Jehovah said, Verily I will set thee
free for \[thy\] good; verily I will cause the enemy to meet thee kindly
in the time of evil and in the time of affliction.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Will iron break? iron from the north?
and bronze?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Thy substance and thy treasures will I
give to the spoil without price, and that for all thy sins, and in all
thy borders;

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> and I will make \[them\] to pass with
thine enemies into a land that thou knowest not: for a fire is kindled
in mine anger; it shall burn upon you.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Jehovah, thou knowest: remember me, and
visit me, and avenge me of my persecutors; in thy long-suffering take me
not away: know that for thy sake I bear reproach.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Thy words were found, and I did eat
them, and thy words were unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart; for
I am called by thy name, O Jehovah, God of hosts.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I sat not in the assembly of the
mockers, nor exulted: I sat alone because of thy hand; for thou hast
filled me with indignation.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound
incurable? It refuseth to be healed. Wilt thou be altogether unto me as
a treacherous \[spring\], \[as\] waters that fail?

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah: If thou
return, then will I bring thee again, thou shalt stand before me; and if
thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth.
Let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And I will make thee unto this people a
strong brazen wall; and they shall fight against thee, but they shall
not prevail against thee: for I am with thee, to save thee and to
deliver thee, saith Jehovah;

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> yea, I will deliver thee out of the
hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the
terrible.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Thou shalt not take thee a wife, and thou
shalt not have sons nor daughters in this place.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> For thus saith Jehovah concerning the
sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and
concerning their mothers that bear them, and concerning their fathers
that beget them in this land:

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> They shall die of painful deaths; they
shall not be lamented, neither shall they be buried; they shall be as
dung upon the face of the ground, and they shall be consumed by the
sword, and by famine, and their carcases shall be food for the fowl of
the heavens and for the beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Enter not into
the house of wailing, neither go to lament or bemoan them; for I have
taken away my peace from this people, saith Jehovah, the loving-kindness
and the tender mercies.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Both great and small shall die in this
land: they shall not be buried; and none shall lament for them, or cut
themselves, nor make themselves bald for them.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Nor shall they break \[bread\] for them
in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall they give them
the cup of consolations to drink for their father or for their mother.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And thou shalt not go into the house of
feasting, to sit with them, to eat and to drink.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel: Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place, before your
eyes, and in your days, the voice of mirth and the voice of joy, the
voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And it shall come to pass, when thou
shalt declare unto this people all these words, and they shall say unto
thee, Wherefore hath Jehovah pronounced all this great evil against us?
and what is our iniquity? and what is our sin which we have committed
against Jehovah our God?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> then shalt thou say unto them, Because
your fathers have forsaken me, saith Jehovah, and have walked after
other gods, and have served them, and have worshipped them, and have
forsaken me, and have not kept my law;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> and you, ye have done still worse than
your fathers; and there ye are walking every one after the stubbornness
of his evil heart, not to hearken unto me:

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> and I will cast you forth out of this
land, into a land that ye know not, ye nor your fathers; and there shall
ye serve other gods day and night: because I will shew you no favour.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Therefore, behold, days are coming,
saith Jehovah, that it shall no more be said, \[As\] Jehovah liveth, who
brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> but, \[As\] Jehovah liveth, who brought
up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the
lands whither he had driven them. For I will bring them again into their
land, which I gave unto their fathers.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Behold, I will send for many fishers,
saith Jehovah, and they shall fish them; and afterwards will I send for
many hunters, and they shall hunt them, from every mountain, and from
every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> For mine eyes are upon all their ways;
they are not concealed from my face, neither is their iniquity hidden
from before mine eyes.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> But first I will recompense their
iniquity and their sin double, because they have profaned my land with
the carcases of their detestable things, and with their abominations
have they filled mine inheritance.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Jehovah, my strength and my fortress,
and my refuge in the day of distress, unto thee shall the nations come
from the ends of the earth, and they shall say, Surely our fathers have
inherited falsehood \[and\] vanity; and in these things there is no
profit.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Shall a man make gods unto himself, and
they are no-gods?

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Therefore, behold, I will this once
cause them to know, I will cause them to know my hand and my might; and
they shall know that my name is Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> The sin of Judah is written with a style
of iron, with the point of a diamond, engraven upon the tablet of their
heart, and upon the horns of your altars;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> whilst their children remember their
altars and their Asherahs, by the green trees, upon the high hills.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> My mountain in the field, thy substance,
all thy treasures will I give for a spoil, -- thy high places, because
of sin throughout thy borders.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And of thyself thou shalt let go thine
inheritance which I gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thine
enemies in a land that thou knowest not; for ye have kindled a fire in
mine anger, -- it shall burn for ever.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Cursed is the man
that confideth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart
departeth from Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And he shall be like the heath in the
desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but he shall inhabit the
parched places in the wilderness, a salt land and not inhabited.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Blessed is the man that confideth in
Jehovah, and whose confidence Jehovah is.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> For he shall be like a tree planted by
the waters, and that spreadeth out its roots by the stream, and he shall
not see when heat cometh, but his leaf shall be green; and in the year
of drought he shall not be careful, neither shall he cease to yield
fruit.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> The heart is deceitful above all things,
and incurable; who can know it?

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> I Jehovah search the heart, I try the
reins, even to give each one according to his ways, according to the
fruit of his doings.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> \[As\] the partridge sitteth on
\[eggs\] it hath not laid, \[so\] is he that getteth riches and not by
right: in the midst of his days shall he leave them, and at his end
shall be a fool.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> A throne of glory, \[set\] on high from
the beginning, is the place of our sanctuary.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Thou hope of Israel, Jehovah! all that
forsake thee shall be ashamed. They that depart from me shall be written
in the earth; because they have forsaken Jehovah, the fountain of living
waters.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> Heal me, Jehovah, and I shall be
healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Behold, these say unto me, Where is the
word of Jehovah? let it then come!

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> But as for me, I have not hastened from
being a shepherd in following thee, neither have I desired the fatal
day, thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was before thy face.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Be not a terror unto me: thou art my
refuge in the day of evil.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Let them be ashamed that persecute me,
but let not me be ashamed; let them be dismayed, but let not me be
dismayed; bring upon them the day of evil, and break them with a double
breaking.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Thus hath Jehovah said unto me: Go and
stand in the gate of the children of the people, by which the kings of
Judah come in, and by which they go out, and in all the gates of
Jerusalem;

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> and say unto them, Hear the word of
Jehovah, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates;

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> thus saith Jehovah: Take heed to your
souls, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, and bring nothing in
through the gates of Jerusalem;

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> and carry forth no burden out of your
houses on the sabbath day, neither do any work; but hallow ye the
sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers,

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> but they hearkened not, neither
inclined their ear, but hardened their neck, that they might not hear
nor receive instruction.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And it shall come to pass, if ye
diligently hearken unto me, saith Jehovah, to bring in no burden through
the gates of this city on the sabbath day, and to hallow the sabbath
day, to do no work therein;

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> then shall there enter in, through the
gates of this city, kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David,
riding in chariots and on horses, they and their princes, the men of
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shall be inhabited
for ever.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And they shall come from the cities of
Judah, and from the places around Jerusalem, and from the land of
Benjamin, and from the lowland, and from the hill-country, and from the
south, bringing burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, and oblations, and
incense, and bringing thanksgiving unto the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> But if ye will not hearken unto me, to
hallow the sabbath day and not to bear a burden and enter in through the
gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day, then will I kindle a fire in the
gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it
shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Arise and go down to the potter's house,
and there I will cause thee to hear my words.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And I went down to the potter's house;
and behold, he wrought a work on the wheels.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And the vessel that he made was marred,
as clay, in the hand of the potter; and he made it again another vessel,
as seemed good to the potter to make.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> House of Israel, cannot I do with you as
this potter? saith Jehovah. Behold, as the clay in the potter's hand, so
are ye in my hand, house of Israel.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> At the moment that I speak concerning a
nation and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to break down, and to
destroy,

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> if that nation, concerning which I have
spoken, turn from their evil, then I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do unto them.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And at the moment that I speak concerning
a nation and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant,

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> if it do evil in my sight, that it
hearken not unto my voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I
said I would benefit them.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And now, speak to the men of Judah and
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I
prepare evil against you, and devise a device against you: turn ye then
every one from his evil way, and amend your ways and your doings.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> But they say, There is no hope; for we
will walk after our own devices, and we will each one do \[according
to\] the stubbornness of his evil heart.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Ask ye
now among the nations, Who hath heard such things? The virgin of Israel
hath done a very horrible thing.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Shall the snow of Lebanon cease from
the rock of the field? Shall the cool flowing waters coming from afar be
dried up?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> For my people hath forgotten me: they
burn incense to vanity; and they have caused them to stumble in their
ways, the ancient paths, to walk in by-paths of a way not cast up;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> to make their land an astonishment, a
perpetual hissing: every one that passeth by shall be astonished, and
shake his head.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> As with an east wind will I scatter
them before the enemy; I will shew them the back, and not the face, in
the day of their calamity.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And they said, Come, and let us devise
devices against Jeremiah; for law shall not perish from the priest, nor
counsel from the wise, nor word from the prophet. Come and let us smite
him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Jehovah, give heed to me, and listen to
the voice of those that contend with me.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Shall evil be recompensed for good? For
they have digged a pit for my soul. Remember how I stood before thee to
speak good for them, to turn away thy wrath from them.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Therefore give up their children to the
famine, and deliver them over to the power of the sword; and let their
wives be bereaved of children and be widows; and let their men be swept
off by death, their young men be smitten by the sword in battle.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Let a cry be heard from their houses,
when thou shalt bring a troop suddenly upon them; for they have digged a
pit to take me, and have hidden snares for my feet.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And thou, Jehovah, knowest all their
counsel against me to slay me. Forgive not their iniquity, neither blot
out their sin from thy sight, but let them be overthrown before thee:
deal with them in the time of thine anger.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Go and buy a potter's
earthen flagon, and \[take\] of the elders of the people, and of the
elders of the priests;

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and go forth unto the valley of the son
of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the pottery-gate, and proclaim there
the words that I shall tell thee,

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> and say, Hear the word of Jehovah, O
kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem. Thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, the
which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle;

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> because they have forsaken me, and have
estranged this place \[from me\], and have burned incense in it unto
other gods, whom neither they nor their fathers have known, nor the
kings of Judah; and have filled this place with the blood of innocents;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> and they have built the high places of
Baal, to burn their sons in the fire as burnt-offerings unto Baal, which
I commanded not, nor spake it, neither came it up into my mind:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> therefore behold, days come, saith
Jehovah, that this place shall no more be called Topheth, nor Valley of
the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And I will make void the counsel of Judah
and Jerusalem in this place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword
before their enemies, and by the hand of them that seek their life, and
their carcases will I give as food to the fowl of the heavens and to the
beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And I will make this city an astonishment
and a hissing; every one that passeth by shall be astonished and hiss
because of all the plagues thereof.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And I will cause them to eat the flesh of
their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat everyone
the flesh of his friend, in the siege and in the straitness wherewith
their enemies, and they that seek their lives, shall straiten them.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And thou shalt break the flagon in the
sight of the men that go with thee,

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> and shalt say unto them, Thus saith
Jehovah of hosts: Even so will I break this people and this city, as one
breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again. And they
shall bury in Topheth, till there be no place to bury.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Thus will I do unto this place, saith
Jehovah, and to the inhabitants thereof, and make this city as Topheth.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And the houses of Jerusalem and the
houses of the kings of Judah shall be as the place of Topheth, defiled,
all the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense unto all the
host of the heavens, and have poured out drink-offerings unto other
gods.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Jeremiah came from Topheth, whither
Jehovah had sent him to prophesy; and he stood in the court of Jehovah's
house, and said to all the people,

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel: Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her cities all
the evil that I have spoken against it; for they have hardened their
necks, not to hear my words.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And Pashur the son of Immer, the priest
-- and he was chief officer in the house of Jehovah -- heard Jeremiah
prophesy these things.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet,
and put him in the stocks that were in the upper gate of Benjamin, which
was in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And it came to pass the next day, that
Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks; and Jeremiah said unto
him, Jehovah hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magor-missabib.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I make
thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends; and they shall fall by
the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall see \[it\]; and I will
give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry
them captive into Babylon, and shall smite them with the sword.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And, I will give all the wealth of this
city, and all its gains, and all its precious things, and all the
treasures of the kings of Judah, will I give into the hand of their
enemies; and they shall make them a prey, and take them, and carry them
to Babylon.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in
thy house shall go into captivity; and thou shalt come to Babylon, and
there thou shalt die, and there thou shalt be buried, thou and all thy
friends to whom thou hast prophesied falsehood.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Jehovah, thou hast enticed me, and I was
enticed; thou hast laid hold of me, and hast prevailed; I am become a
derision the whole day: every one mocketh me.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> For as oft as I speak, I cry out; I
proclaim violence and spoil; for the word of Jehovah is become unto me a
reproach and a derision all the day.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And I said, I will not make mention of
him, nor speak any more in his name: but it was in my heart as a burning
fire shut up in my bones; and I became wearied with holding in, and I
could not.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> For I have heard the defaming of many,
terror on every side: Report, and we will report it. All my familiars
are watching for my stumbling: Peradventure he will be enticed, and we
shall prevail against him; and we shall take our revenge on him.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> But Jehovah is with me as a mighty
terrible one; therefore my persecutors shall stumble and shall not
prevail; they shall be greatly ashamed, for they have not prospered: it
shall be an everlasting confusion that shall not be forgotten.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And thou, Jehovah of hosts, who triest
the righteous, who seest the reins and the heart, let me see thy
vengeance on them; for unto thee have I revealed my cause.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Sing ye unto Jehovah, praise Jehovah,
for he hath delivered the soul of the needy from the hand of evildoers.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Cursed be the day wherein I was born;
let not the day wherein my mother bore me be blessed!

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Cursed be the man who brought tidings
to my father, saying, A man child is born unto thee; making him very
glad!

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And let that man be as the cities which
Jehovah overthrew, and repented not; and let him hear a cry in the
morning, and a shouting at noonday,

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> because he slew me not from the womb.
Or would that my mother had been my grave, and her womb always great
\[with me\]!

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Wherefore came I forth from the womb to
see labour and sorrow, that my days should be consumed in shame?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The word that came unto Jeremiah from
Jehovah, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Malchijah,
and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, saying,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Inquire, I pray thee, of Jehovah for us;
for Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon maketh war against us; if so be
that Jehovah will deal with us according to all his marvellous works,
that he may go up from us.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And Jeremiah said unto them, Thus shall
ye say to Zedekiah:

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel:
Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, with
which ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans
who besiege you, outside the walls, and I will assemble them into the
midst of this city.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And I myself will fight against you with
a stretched-out hand, and with a strong arm, and in anger, and in fury,
and in great wrath.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And I will smite the inhabitants of this
city, both man and beast: they shall die of a great pestilence.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And afterwards, saith Jehovah, I will
give Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such
as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from
the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, and
into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek
their life, and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword: he shall
not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And unto this people thou shalt say, Thus
saith Jehovah: Behold, I set before you the way of life, and the way of
death.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> He that abideth in this city shall die by
the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; but he that goeth
out, and deserteth to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and
his life shall be unto him for a prey.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> For I have set my face against this
city for evil, and not for good, saith Jehovah: it shall be given into
the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And touching the house of the king of
Judah, hear ye the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> House of David, thus saith Jehovah:
Judge with justice in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out
of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go forth like fire and burn,
and there be none to quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Behold, I am against thee, inhabitress
of the valley, the rock of the plain, saith Jehovah; ye that say, Who
shall come down against us, or who shall enter into our dwellings?

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And I will visit you according to the
fruit of your doings, saith Jehovah; and I will kindle a fire in her
forest, and it shall devour all that is round about her.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Go down to the house
of the king of Judah, and speak there this word,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> and say, Hear the word of Jehovah, O king
of Judah, that sittest upon the throne of David, thou, and thy servants,
and thy people who enter in through these gates.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Execute judgment and
righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor;
and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, or the
widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> For if ye do this thing indeed, then
shall there enter in through the gates of this house kings sitting in
the place of David upon his throne, riding in chariots and on horses, --
he, and his servants, and his people.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> But if ye will not hear these words, I
have sworn by myself, saith Jehovah, that this house shall become a
waste.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> For thus saith Jehovah concerning the
house of the king of Judah: Thou art a Gilead unto me, the summit of
Lebanon: verily I will make thee a wilderness, cities not inhabited.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And I will prepare destroyers against
thee, every one with his weapons; and they shall cut down the choice of
thy cedars, and cast \[them\] into the fire.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And many nations shall pass by this city,
and they shall say every man to his neighbour, Wherefore hath Jehovah
done thus unto this great city?

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And they shall say, Because they have
forsaken the covenant of Jehovah their God, and worshipped other gods,
and served them.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Weep not for the dead, neither bemoan
him; \[but\] weep sore for him that goeth away, for he shall return no
more, nor see his native country.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> For thus saith Jehovah concerning
Shallum the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, who reigned instead of
Josiah his father, who went forth out of this place: He shall not return
thither any more;

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> for he shall die in the place whither
they have led him captive, and shall see this land no more.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Woe unto him that buildeth his house by
unrighteousness, and his upper chambers by injustice; that taketh his
neighbour's service without wages, and giveth him not his earning;

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> that saith, I will build me a wide
house, and spacious upper chambers; and he cutteth out for himself
windows; and it is wainscoted with cedar, and painted with vermilion.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Shalt thou reign, because thou viest
with the cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and
justice? Then it was well with him.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> He judged the cause of the poor and
needy; then it was well. Was not this to know me? saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> But thine eyes and thy heart are only
on thine extortion, and on the blood of the innocent, to shed it, and on
oppression and on violence, to do it.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, the king of Judah: They shall not lament
for him, Ah, my brother! or, Ah, sister! They shall not lament for him,
Ah, lord! or Ah, his glory!

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> He shall be buried with the burial of
an ass, dragged along and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and give
forth thy voice in Bashan, and cry from \[the heights of\] Abarim: for
all thy lovers are destroyed.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity;
\[but\] thou saidst, I will not hear. This hath been thy way from thy
youth, that thou hearkenedst not unto my voice.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> The wind shall feed on all thy
shepherds, and thy lovers shall go into captivity; surely, then shalt
thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> Thou inhabitress of Lebanon, that
makest thy nest in the cedars, how pitiful shalt thou be when pangs come
upon thee, pain as of a woman in travail!

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> \[As\] I live, saith Jehovah, though
Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, were a signet upon my
right hand, yet will I pluck thee thence;

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> and I will give thee into the hand of
them that seek thy life, and into the hand of them before whom thou art
afraid, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into
the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And I will cast thee out, and thy
mother that bare thee, into another country, where ye were not born; and
there shall ye die.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And into the land whereunto they lift
up their souls to return, thither shall they not return.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Is this man Coniah a despised broken
vase? a vessel wherein is no delight? Wherefore are they thrown out, he
and his seed, and are cast into a land which they know not?

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of
Jehovah!

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Write this man
childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days; for no man of his
seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any
more in Judah.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Woe unto the shepherds that destroy and
scatter the sheep of my pasture! saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah the God of
Israel concerning the shepherds that feed my people: Ye have scattered
my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them: behold, I
will visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And I will gather the remnant of my flock
out of all countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them
again to their pastures; and they shall be fruitful and shall multiply.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And I will raise up shepherds over them,
who shall feed them; and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed,
neither shall any be missing, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Behold, the days come, saith Jehovah,
when I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, who shall reign as
king, and act wisely, and shall execute judgment and righteousness in
the land.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell in safety; and this is his name whereby he shall be
called, Jehovah our Righteousness.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Therefore behold, days are coming, saith
Jehovah, that they shall no more say, \[As\] Jehovah liveth, who brought
up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> but, \[As\] Jehovah liveth, who brought
up and who led back the seed of the house of Israel out of the north
country, and from all countries whither I had driven them. And they
shall dwell in their own land.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Concerning the prophets: My heart within
me is broken; all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a
man whom wine hath overcome; because of Jehovah, and because of the
words of his holiness.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> For the land is full of adulterers; for
because of execration the land mourneth. The pastures of the wilderness
are dried up; for their course is evil, and their force is not right.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> For both prophet and priest are
profane: even in my house have I found their wickedness, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Therefore their way shall be unto them
as slippery places in the darkness; they shall be driven on, and fall
therein: for I will bring evil upon them in the year of their
visitation, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And I have seen folly in the prophets
of Samaria: they prophesied by Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And in the prophets of Jerusalem have I
seen a horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in falsehood, and
strengthen the hands of evildoers, so that none doth return from his
wickedness. They are all become unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants
thereof as Gomorrah.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts
concerning the prophets: Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and
make them drink water of gall; for from the prophets of Jerusalem is
profaneness gone forth into all the land.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Hearken
not unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto you: they lead you
to vanity; they speak a vision of their own heart, not out of the mouth
of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> They say constantly unto them that
despise me, Jehovah hath said, Ye shall have peace. And they say unto
every one that walketh in the stubbornness of his heart, No evil shall
come upon you.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> For who hath stood in the council of
Jehovah, so that he hath perceived and heard his word? who hath
hearkened to his word and listened?

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Behold, a tempest of Jehovah, fury is
gone forth, yea, a whirling storm: it shall whirl down upon the head of
the wicked.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> The anger of Jehovah shall not return,
until he have executed, and until he have performed the purposes of his
heart: at the end of the days ye shall understand it clearly.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> I did not send the prophets, yet they
ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if they had stood in my council,
and had caused my people to hear my words, then would they have turned
them from their evil way and from the wickedness of their doings.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Am I a God at hand, saith Jehovah, and
not a God afar off?

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Can any hide himself in secret places,
that I shall not see him? saith Jehovah. Do not I fill the heavens and
the earth? saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> I have heard what the prophets say, who
prophesy falsehood in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> How long shall \[this\] be in the heart
of the prophets who prophesy falsehood, and who are prophets of the
deceit of their own heart?

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> who think to cause my people to forget
my name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbour: as
their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> The prophet that hath a dream, let him
tell the dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word
faithfully. What is the chaff to the wheat? saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Is not my word like a fire, saith
Jehovah; and like a hammer \[that\] breaketh the rock in pieces?

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Therefore, behold, I am against the
prophets, saith Jehovah, that steal my words every one from his
neighbour.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Behold, I am against the prophets,
saith Jehovah, that use their tongues, and say, He hath said.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Behold, I am against them that prophesy
false dreams, saith Jehovah, and that tell them, and cause my people to
err by their lies and by their boasting; and I have not sent them, nor
commanded them; and they profit not this people at all, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> And when this people, or a prophet, or
a priest, ask thee, saying, What is the burden of Jehovah? thou shalt
then say unto them, What burden? I will even cast you off, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And as for the prophet, and the priest,
and the people, that shall say, The burden of Jehovah, I will even
punish that man and his house.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Thus shall ye say every one to his
neighbour, and every one to his brother: What hath Jehovah answered?
and, What hath Jehovah spoken?

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> And the burden of Jehovah shall ye
mention no more; for every man's own word shall be his burden: for ye
have perverted the words of the living God, of Jehovah of hosts, our
God.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> Thus shalt thou say to the prophet:
What hath Jehovah answered thee? and, What hath Jehovah spoken?

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> But since ye say, The burden of
Jehovah, therefore thus saith Jehovah: Because ye say this word, The
burden of Jehovah, and I have sent unto you, saying, Ye shall not say,
The burden of Jehovah;

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> therefore behold, I will utterly forget
you, and I will cast you off, far from my face, and the city that I gave
to you and to your fathers.

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> And I will bring everlasting reproach
upon you, and everlasting shame, that shall not be forgotten.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Jehovah shewed me, and behold, two
baskets of figs, set before the temple of Jehovah, after that
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive from Jerusalem,
Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, and the princes of
Judah, and the craftsmen and smiths, and had brought them to Babylon.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> One basket had very good figs, like the
figs first ripe; and the other basket had very bad figs, which could not
be eaten for badness.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And Jehovah said unto me, What seest
thou, Jeremiah? And I said, Figs: the good figs very good; and the bad
very bad, which cannot be eaten for badness.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel:
Like these good figs, so will I regard for good them that are carried
away captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land
of the Chaldeans;

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> and I will set mine eyes upon them for
good, and I will bring them again to this land; and I will build them
and not pull them down, and I will plant them and not pluck them up.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And I will give them a heart to know me,
that I am Jehovah; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God:
for they shall return unto me with their whole heart.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And as the bad figs, which cannot be
eaten for badness, surely, thus saith Jehovah: So will I make Zedekiah
the king of Judah, and his princes, and the remnant of Jerusalem, that
remain in this land, and them that dwell in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And I will give them over to be driven
hither and thither unto all the kingdoms of the earth for evil, to be a
reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I
shall drive them;

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> and I will send among them the sword,
the famine, and the pestilence, until they be consumed from off the land
that I gave unto them and to their fathers.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah concerning
all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah, the king of Judah (that is, the first year of Nebuchadrezzar
king of Babylon),

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> which Jeremiah the prophet spoke unto all
the people of Judah and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying:

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> From the thirteenth year of Josiah the
son of Amon, the king of Judah, even unto this day, these three and
twenty years, the word of Jehovah hath come unto me, and I have spoken
unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not hearkened.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And Jehovah hath sent unto you all his
servants the prophets, rising early and sending; but ye have not
hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear,

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> when they said, Turn again now every one
from his evil way, and from the wickedness of your doings, and dwell in
the land that Jehovah hath given unto you and to your fathers from of
old even for ever.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And go not after other gods, to serve
them and to worship them; and provoke me not to anger with the work of
your hands; and I will do you no hurt.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> But ye have not hearkened unto me, saith
Jehovah; that ye might provoke me to anger with the work of your hands,
to your own hurt.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts:
Because ye have not listened to my words,

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> behold, I will send and take all the
families of the north, saith Jehovah, and \[I will send\] to
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them
against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all
these nations round about; and I will utterly destroy them, and make
them an astonishment, and a hissing, and perpetual wastes.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And I will cause to perish from them
the voice of mirth and the voice of joy, the voice of the bridegroom and
the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones and the light of the
lamp.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And this whole land shall become a
waste, an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king of
Babylon seventy years.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And it shall come to pass, when seventy
years are accomplished, \[that\] I will visit on the king of Babylon and
on that nation, saith Jehovah, their iniquity, and on the land of the
Chaldeans, and I will make it perpetual desolations.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And I will bring upon that land all my
words which I have pronounced against it, all that is written in this
book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> For many nations and great kings shall
serve themselves of them also; and I will recompense them according to
their deeds, and according to the work of their hands.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> For thus hath Jehovah the God of Israel
said unto me: Take the cup of the wine of this fury at my hand, and
cause all the nations to whom I send thee to drink it.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> And they shall drink, and reel to and
fro, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send among them.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And I took the cup at Jehovah's hand,
and made all the nations to drink, to whom Jehovah had sent me:

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and
the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make them a waste, an
astonishment, a hissing, and a curse, as it is this day;

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his
servants, and his princes, and all his people;

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> and all the mingled people, and all the
kings of the land of Uz, and all the kings of the land of the
Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Gazah, and Ekron, and the remnant of
Ashdod;

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> Edom, and Moab, and the children of
Ammon;

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> and all the kings of Tyre, and all the
kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles that are beyond the sea;

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all that
have the corners \[of their beard\] cut off;

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> and all the kings of Arabia, and all
the kings of the mingled people that dwell in the desert;

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> and all the kings of Zimri, and all the
kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes;

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> and all the kings of the north, far and
near, one with another; and all the kingdoms of the world, which are
upon the face of the earth; and the king of Sheshach shall drink after
them.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> And thou shalt say unto them, Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Drink, and be drunken, and
vomit, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword that I will send
among you.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> And it shall be, if they refuse to take
the cup from thy hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto them, Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts: Ye shall certainly drink.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> For behold, I begin to bring evil on
the city that is called by my name, and should ye be altogether
unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished; for I call for a sword upon all
the inhabitants of the earth, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And thou, prophesy unto them all these
words, and say unto them, Jehovah will roar from on high, and utter his
voice from his holy habitation; he will mightily roar upon his
dwelling-place, he will give a shout, as they that tread \[the
vintage\], against all the inhabitants of the earth.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> The noise shall come to the end of the
earth: for Jehovah hath a controversy with the nations, he entereth into
judgment with all flesh; as for the wicked, he will give them up to the
sword, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Behold,
evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great storm shall be
raised up from the uttermost parts of the earth.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> And the slain of Jehovah shall \[be\]
at that day from \[one\] end of the earth even unto the \[other\] end of
the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried;
they shall be dung upon the face of the ground.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow
yourselves \[in the dust\], noble ones of the flock: for the days of
your slaughter are accomplished, and I will disperse you; and ye shall
fall like a precious vessel.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> And refuge shall perish from the
shepherds, and escape from the noble ones of the flock.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> There shall be a voice of the cry of
the shepherds, and a howling of the noble ones of the flock: for Jehovah
layeth waste their pasture;

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> and the peaceable enclosures shall be
desolated, because of the fierce anger of Jehovah.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> He hath forsaken his covert as a young
lion; for their land is a desolation because of the fierceness of the
oppressor, and because of his fierce anger.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, came this word from
Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Stand in the court of
Jehovah's house, and speak unto all the cities of Judah, which come to
worship in Jehovah's house, all the words that I command thee to speak
unto them: diminish not a word.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Peradventure they will hearken, and turn
every man from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil which I
purpose to do unto them because of the wickedness of their doings.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith
Jehovah: If ye will not hearken unto me, to walk in my law, which I have
set before you,

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> to hearken unto the words of my servants
the prophets, whom I have sent unto you, even rising early and sending
\[them\], but ye have not hearkened,

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> -- then will I make this house like
Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And the priests and the prophets and all
the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And it came to pass when Jeremiah had
ended speaking all that Jehovah had commanded \[him\] to speak unto all
the people, that the priests and the prophets and all the people seized
him, saying, Thou shalt certainly die.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Why hast thou prophesied in the name of
Jehovah, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be
desolate, without inhabitant? And all the people were gathered against
Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And the princes of Judah heard these
things; and they went up from the king's house unto the house of
Jehovah, and sat in the entry of the new gate of Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And the priests and the prophets spoke
unto the princes and to all the people, saying, This man is worthy to
die, for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with
your ears.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And Jeremiah spoke to all the princes
and to all the people, saying, Jehovah sent me to prophesy against this
house and against this city all the words that ye have heard.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And now, amend your ways and your
doings, and hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God; and Jehovah will
repent him of the evil that he hath pronounced against you.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> But as for me, behold, I am in your
hand; do unto me as seemeth good and right in your eyes:

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> only know for certain that if ye put me
to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon
this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof; for of a truth Jehovah hath
sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> And the princes and all the people said
unto the priests and to the prophets, This man is not worthy to die; for
he hath spoken to us in the name of Jehovah our God.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And there rose up certain of the elders
of the land and spoke to all the congregation of the people, saying,

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the
days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spoke to all the people of Judah,
saying, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Zion shall be ploughed \[as\] a
field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house
as the high places of a forest.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all
Judah put him at all to death? Did he not fear Jehovah, and supplicate
Jehovah, and Jehovah repented him of the evil that he had pronounced
against them? And we should be doing a great evil against our souls.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And there was also a man that
prophesied in the name of Jehovah, Urijah the son of Shemaiah of
Kirjath-jearim: and he prophesied against this city and against this
land according to all the words of Jeremiah;

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> and Jehoiakim the king, and all his
mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, and the king sought to
put him to death; but Urijah heard it, and he was afraid, and fled, and
went into Egypt.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And Jehoiakim the king sent men into
Egypt, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and men with him, into Egypt;

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> and they fetched forth Urijah out of
Egypt, and brought him to Jehoiakim the king; and he slew him with the
sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the children of the
people.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> -- Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the
son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the
hand of the people to put him to death.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, came this word to
Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Thus hath Jehovah said unto me: Make thee
bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck;

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and send them to the king of Edom, and to
the king of Moab, and to the king of the children of Ammon, and to the
king of Tyre, and to the king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers
that come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of Judah.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And give them a charge unto their
masters, saying, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Thus
shall ye say unto your masters:

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> I have made the earth, man and beast that
are upon the face of the earth, by my great power and by my outstretched
arm; and I give them unto whom it seemeth right in mine eyes.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And now have I given all these lands into
the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts
of the field also have I given him to serve him.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And all the nations shall serve him, and
his son, and his son's son, until the time of his land also come, when
many nations and great kings shall reduce him to servitude.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And it shall come to pass, that the
nation and kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of
Babylon, that nation will I visit, saith Jehovah, with the sword, and
with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by
his hand.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And ye, hearken not to your prophets, nor
to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your soothsayers, nor to
your sorcerers, who speak unto you saying: Ye shall not serve the king
of Babylon.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> For they prophesy falsehood unto you,
to remove you far from your land, and that I should drive you out, and
ye should perish.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> But the nation that bringeth its neck
under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serveth him, will I let remain
still in its own land, saith Jehovah; and they shall till it, and dwell
therein.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And I spoke to Zedekiah king of Judah
according to all these words, saying, bring your necks under the yoke of
the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Why will ye die, thou and thy people,
by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as Jehovah hath
spoken concerning the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And hearken not unto the words of the
prophets that speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of
Babylon; for they prophesy falsehood unto you.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> For I have not sent them, saith
Jehovah, yet they prophesy falsely in my name; in order that I should
drive you out, and that ye should perish, ye, and the prophets who
prophesy unto you.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And I spoke to the priests and to all
this people, saying, Thus saith Jehovah: Hearken not to the words of
your prophets that prophesy unto you, saying, Behold, the vessels of
Jehovah's house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon; for
they prophesy falsehood unto you.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Hearken not unto them; serve the king
of Babylon, and live: wherefore should this city become a waste?

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> But if they be prophets, and if the
word of Jehovah be with them, let them now make intercession to Jehovah
of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of Jehovah, and
in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> For thus saith Jehovah of hosts
concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the
bases, and concerning the rest of the vessels that are left in this
city,

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
took not, when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim,
the king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, along with all the nobles
of Judah and Jerusalem;

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> yea, thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the
God of Israel, concerning the vessels that are left in the house of
Jehovah, and in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> They shall be carried to Babylon, and
there shall they be until the day of my visiting them, saith Jehovah;
then I will bring them up, and restore them to this place.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And it came to pass the same year, in the
beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, in
the fifth month, \[that\] Hananiah the son of Azzur, the prophet, who
was of Gibeon, spoke to me in the house of Jehovah, in the presence of
the priests and of all the people, saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Thus speaketh Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Within two full years will I bring again
into this place all the vessels of Jehovah's house, that Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried to Babylon;

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> and I will bring again to this place
Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, with all the captives
of Judah that went to Babylon, saith Jehovah: for I will break the yoke
of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And the prophet Jeremiah spoke unto the
prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of
all the people that stood in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen, may
Jehovah do so! may Jehovah perform thy words which thou hast prophesied,
to bring again from Babylon, into this place, the vessels of Jehovah's
house, and all them of the captivity!

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Nevertheless, hear, I pray thee, this
word which I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people:

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The prophets that have been before me and
before thee of old, prophesied also concerning many countries and
concerning great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> The prophet that prophesieth of peace,
when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, shall be known as the
prophet whom Jehovah hath really sent.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> And the prophet Hananiah took the yoke
from off the prophet Jeremiah's neck, and broke it.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And Hananiah spoke in the presence of
all the people, saying, Thus saith Jehovah: So will I break the yoke of
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon within two full years from off the
neck of all the nations. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto
Jeremiah, after that the prophet Hananiah had broken the yoke from off
the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus
saith Jehovah: Thou hast broken the yokes of wood, and thou hast made in
their place yokes of iron.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the
God of Israel: I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these
nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they
shall serve him: and I have given him the beasts of the field also.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And the prophet Jeremiah said unto the
prophet Hananiah, Hear now, Hananiah: Jehovah hath not sent thee; and
thou makest this people to trust in falsehood.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I
will cast thee from off the face of the earth: this year thou shalt die,
for thou hast spoken revolt against Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And the prophet Hananiah died in the
same year in the seventh month.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And these are the words of the letter
that the prophet Jeremiah sent from Jerusalem to the residue of the
elders of the captivity, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to
all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from
Jerusalem to Babylon

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> (after that Jeconiah the king, and the
queen, and the eunuchs, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the
craftsmen, and the smiths, had departed from Jerusalem);

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> by the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan,
and Gemariah the son of Hilkijah (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent to
Babylon, unto Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon), saying,

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel, unto all the captivity, whom I have caused to be carried away
from Jerusalem unto Babylon:

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Build houses, and dwell in them, and
plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> Take wives, and beget sons and daughters;
and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that
they may bear sons and daughters; and multiply there, and be not
diminished.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And seek the peace of the city whither I
have caused you to be carried away captive, and pray unto Jehovah for
it: for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel: Let not your prophets that are in your midst, nor your
diviners deceive you, neither hearken to your dreams, which ye like to
dream.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> For they prophesy falsely unto you in my
name: I have not sent them, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> For thus saith Jehovah: When seventy
years shall be accomplished for Babylon I will visit you, and perform my
good word toward you, in bringing you back to this place.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> For I know the thoughts that I think
toward you, saith Jehovah, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give
you in your latter end a hope.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And ye shall call upon me, and ye shall
go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you;

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> and ye shall seek me and find me, for
ye shall search for me with all your heart,

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> and I will be found of you, saith
Jehovah. And I will turn your captivity, and I will gather you from all
the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you, saith
Jehovah; and I will bring you again into the place whence I have caused
you to be carried away captive.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> If ye say, Jehovah hath raised us up
prophets in Babylon;

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> yea, thus saith Jehovah concerning the
king that sitteth upon the throne of David, and concerning all the
people that dwell in this city, your brethren that are not gone forth
with you into captivity;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I
will send against them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and
will make them like the vile figs, that cannot be eaten for badness.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And I will pursue them with the sword,
with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will give them over to be
driven hither and thither into all the kingdoms of the earth, to be an
execration, and an astonishment, and a hissing, and a reproach, among
all the nations whither I will drive them:

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> because they have not hearkened to my
words, saith Jehovah, wherewith I sent unto them my servants the
prophets, rising early and sending; but ye have not hearkened, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> But ye, all ye of the captivity, whom I
have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon, hear the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah the
son of Maaseiah, who prophesy falsehood unto you in my name: Behold, I
will give them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he
shall smite them before your eyes.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And of them shall be taken up a curse
by all the captivity of Judah that are in Babylon, saying, Jehovah make
thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in
the fire;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> because they have committed infamy in
Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbours' wives, and
have spoken words of falsehood in my name, which I had not commanded
them: and I \[am\] he that knoweth, and \[am\] witness, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And thou shalt speak to Shemaiah the
Nehelamite, saying,

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> Thus speaketh Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, saying, Because thou hast sent letters in thy name unto all
the people that are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah
the priest, and to all the priests, saying,

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Jehovah hath made thee priest in the
stead of Jehoiada the priest, that there should be officers \[in\] the
house of Jehovah, over every madman and self-made prophet, that thou
shouldest put him in the stocks and in the shackles.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And now, why hast thou not reproved
Jeremiah of Anathoth, who maketh himself a prophet to you?

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> Forasmuch as he hath sent unto us in
Babylon, saying, It will be long; build houses, and dwell \[in them\],
and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> -- And Zephaniah the priest read this
letter in the ears of the prophet Jeremiah.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> Send to all them of the captivity,
saying, Thus saith Jehovah concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite: Because
that Shemaiah hath prophesied unto you, and I sent him not, and he hath
caused you to trust in falsehood;

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I
will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his seed: he shall not have a
man to dwell among this people; neither shall he see the good that I
will do for my people, saith Jehovah; because he hath spoken revolt
against Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Thus speaketh Jehovah the God of Israel,
saying, Write thee in a book all the words that I have spoken unto thee.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For behold, the days come, saith Jehovah,
when I will turn the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith
Jehovah; and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to
their fathers, and they shall possess it.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And these are the words that Jehovah hath
spoken concerning Israel and concerning Judah;

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> for thus saith Jehovah: We have heard a
voice of trembling, there is fear, and no peace.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Ask ye now, and see, whether a male doth
travail with child? Wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his
loins, as a woman in travail; and all faces are turned into paleness?

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Alas! for that day is great, so that none
is like it: it is even the time of Jacob's trouble; but he shall be
saved out of it.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
saith Jehovah of hosts, I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and
will burst thy bonds, and strangers shall no more reduce him to
servitude.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> But they shall serve Jehovah their God,
and David their king, whom I will raise up unto them.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And thou, my servant Jacob, fear not,
saith Jehovah; neither be dismayed, O Israel: for behold, I will save
thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob
shall return, and shall be in rest, and at ease, and none shall make
\[him\] afraid.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For I am with thee, saith Jehovah, to
save thee: for I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have
scattered thee; yet of thee will I not make a full end, but I will
correct thee with judgment, and will not hold thee altogether guiltless.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Thy bruise is
incurable, thy wound is grievous.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> There is none to plead thy cause, to
bind up \[thy wound\]; thou hast no healing medicines.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> All thy lovers have forgotten thee;
they seek thee not. For I have smitten thee with the stroke of an enemy,
with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the greatness of thine
iniquity: thy sins are manifold.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Why criest thou because of thy bruise?
thy sorrow is incurable; for the greatness of thine iniquity,
\[because\] thy sins are manifold, I have done these things unto thee.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> Therefore all that devour thee shall be
devoured, and all thine adversaries, every one of them, shall go into
captivity; and they that spoil thee shall be for a spoil; and all they
that prey upon thee will I give to be a prey.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> For I will apply a bandage unto thee,
and I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith Jehovah; for they have called
thee an outcast: This is Zion that no man seeketh after.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will turn
the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his habitations; and
the city shall be built upon her own heap; and the palace shall be
inhabited after the manner thereof.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> And out of them shall proceed
thanksgiving, and the voice of them that make merry: and I will multiply
them, and they shall not be diminished; and I will honour them, and they
shall not be small.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And their sons shall be as aforetime;
and their assembly shall be established before me; and I will punish all
that oppress them.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And their prince shall be of
themselves, and their ruler shall proceed from the midst of them; and I
will cause him to approach, and he shall draw near unto me. For who is
this that engageth his heart to draw near unto me? saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And ye shall be my people, and I will
be your God.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Behold, a tempest of Jehovah, fury is
gone forth, a sweeping storm: it shall whirl down upon the head of the
wicked.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> The fierce anger of Jehovah shall not
return, until he have executed, and until he have performed the purposes
of his heart. At the end of the days ye shall consider it.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> At that time, saith Jehovah, will I be
the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Thus saith Jehovah: The people \[that
were\] left of the sword have found grace in the wilderness, \[even\]
Israel, when I go to give him rest.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Jehovah hath appeared from afar unto me,
\[saying,\] Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love; therefore
with loving-kindness have I drawn thee.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> I will build thee again, and thou shalt
be built, O virgin of Israel! Thou shalt again be adorned with thy
tambours, and shalt go forth in the dances of them that make merry.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Thou shalt again plant vineyards upon the
mountains of Samaria; the planters shall plant, and shall eat the fruit.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> For there shall be a day, when the
watchmen upon mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise, and let us go up to Zion,
unto Jehovah our God.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Sing aloud
\[with\] gladness for Jacob, and shout at the head of the nations;
publish ye, praise ye, and say, Jehovah, save thy people, the remnant of
Israel.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Behold, I bring them from the north
country, and gather them from the uttermost parts of the earth; \[and\]
among them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that
travaileth with child together: a great assemblage shall they return
hither.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> They shall come with weeping, and with
supplications will I lead them; I will cause them to walk by
water-brooks, in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble; for I
will be a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Hear the word of Jehovah, ye nations,
and declare \[it\] to the isles afar off, and say, He that scattered
Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd his flock.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> For Jehovah hath ransomed Jacob, and
redeemed him from the hand of one stronger than he.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And they shall come and sing aloud upon
the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of Jehovah,
for corn, and for new wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock
and of the herd; and their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they
shall not languish any more at all.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Then shall the virgin rejoice in the
dance, and the young men and old together; for I will turn their
mourning into gladness, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice
after their sorrow.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And I will satiate the soul of the
priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Thus saith Jehovah: A voice hath been
heard in Ramah, the wail of very bitter weeping, -- Rachel weeping for
her children, refusing to be comforted for her children, because they
are not.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Refrain thy voice
from weeping, and thine eyes from tears; for there is a reward for thy
work, saith Jehovah; and they shall come again from the land of the
enemy.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> And there is hope for thy latter end,
saith Jehovah, and thy children shall come again to their own border.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> I have indeed heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself \[thus\]: Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised as a
bullock not trained: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art
Jehovah my God.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Surely after that I was turned, I
repented; and after I knew myself, I smote upon \[my\] thigh. I was
ashamed, yea, even confounded, for I bear the reproach of my youth.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> Is Ephraim a dear son unto me? is he a
child of delights? For whilst I have been speaking against him, I do
constantly remember him still. Therefore my bowels are troubled for him:
I will certainly have mercy upon him, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> Set up waymarks, make for thyself
signposts; set thy heart toward the highway, the way by which thou
wentest: turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> How long wilt thou wander about, thou
backsliding daughter? For Jehovah hath created a new thing on the earth,
a woman shall encompass a man.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel: They shall again use this speech, in the land of Judah and in
the cities thereof, when I shall turn their captivity: Jehovah bless
thee, O habitation of righteousness, mountain of holiness!

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And therein shall dwell Judah, and all
the cities thereof together, the husbandmen, and they that go about with
flocks.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> For I have satiated the weary soul, and
every languishing soul have I replenished.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> -- Upon this I awaked, and beheld; and
my sleep was sweet unto me.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> Behold, days come, saith Jehovah, that
I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah \[with\] the seed
of man and the seed of beast.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> And it shall come to pass, as I have
watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to overthrow, and
to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them to build, and to
plant, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> In those days they shall say no more,
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on
edge:

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> for every one shall die for his own
iniquity; every man that eateth the sour grapes, his teeth shall be set
on edge.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Behold, days come, saith Jehovah, that
I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house
of Judah:

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> not according to the covenant that I
made with their fathers, in the day of my taking them by the hand, to
lead them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they broke,
although I was a husband unto them, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> For this is the covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel, after those days, saith Jehovah: I will
put my law in their inward parts, and will write it in their heart; and
I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> And they shall teach no more every man
his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know Jehovah; for they
shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them,
saith Jehovah: for I will pardon their iniquity, and their sin will I
remember no more.

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> Thus saith Jehovah, who giveth the sun
for light by day, the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for light
by night, who stirreth up the sea so that the waves thereof roar, --
Jehovah of hosts is his name:

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> If those ordinances depart from before
me, saith Jehovah, the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a
nation before me for ever.

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> Thus saith Jehovah: If the heavens
above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out
beneath, I will also cast off the whole seed of Israel, for all that
they have done, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> Behold, the days come, saith Jehovah,
that the city shall be built to Jehovah, from the tower of Hananeel unto
the corner-gate.

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> And the measuring line shall yet go
forth before it unto the hill Gareb, and shall turn toward Goath.

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> And the whole valley of the dead
bodies, and of the ashes, and all the fields unto the torrent Kidron,
unto the corner of the horse-gate toward the east, shall be holy unto
Jehovah: it shall not be plucked up, nor overthrown any more for ever.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah: that year was the
eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And the king of Babylon's army was then
besieging Jerusalem; and the prophet Jeremiah was shut up in the court
of the guard, which was in the king of Judah's house.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him
up, saying, Why dost thou prophesy and say, Thus saith Jehovah: Behold,
I give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take
it;

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> and Zedekiah king of Judah shall not
escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans; for he shall certainly be given
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to
mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes;

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> and he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon,
and there shall he be until I visit him, saith Jehovah: though ye fight
with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper?

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And Jeremiah said, The word of Jehovah
came unto me, saying,

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Behold, Hanameel, the son of Shallum
thine uncle, shall come unto thee, saying, Buy for thyself my field
which is in Anathoth; for thine is the right of redemption, to buy
\[it\].

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> And Hanameel, mine uncle's son, came to
me in the court of the guard according to the word of Jehovah, and said
unto me, Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the
land of Benjamin; for the right of inheritance is thine, and the
redemption is thine: buy \[it\] for thyself. Then I knew that this was
the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And I bought of Hanameel, mine uncle's
son, the field which is in Anathoth, and weighed him the money,
seventeen shekels of silver.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> And I subscribed the writing, and
sealed it, and took witnesses, and weighed the money in the balances.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> And I took the writing of the purchase,
that which was sealed \[according to\] the law and the statutes, and
that which was open;

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> and I gave the writing of the purchase
unto Baruch the son of Nerijah, the son of Maaseiah, in the sight of
Hanameel mine uncle's \[son\], and in the presence of the witnesses that
had subscribed the writing of purchase, before all the Jews that were
sitting in the court of the guard.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> And I charged Baruch in their presence,
saying,

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel: Take these writings, this writing of the purchase, both that
which is sealed and this writing which is open; and put them in an
earthen vessel, that they may remain many days.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the
God of Israel: Houses and fields and vineyards shall again be purchased
in this land.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And after I had given the writing of
the purchase unto Baruch the son of Nerijah, I prayed unto Jehovah
saying,

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> Alas, Lord Jehovah! Behold, thou hast
made the heavens and the earth by thy great power and stretched-out arm;
there is nothing too hard for thee:

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> who shewest mercy unto thousands, and
recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their
children after them, thou, the great, the mighty ùGod, -- Jehovah of
hosts is his name;

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> great in counsel and mighty in work,
whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the children of men, to give
every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
doings:

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> who hast displayed signs and wonders
unto this day, in the land of Egypt and in Israel and among \[other\]
men; and hast made thee a name, as at this day.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> And thou broughtest forth thy people
Israel out of the land of Egypt by signs, and by wonders, and by a
powerful hand, and by a stretched-out arm, and by great terror;

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> and didst give them this land, which
thou hadst sworn unto their fathers to give them, a land flowing with
milk and honey.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> And they came in and possessed it: but
they hearkened not unto thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have
done nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do; so that thou hast
caused all this evil to come upon them.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> Behold the mounds, they are come unto
the city for taking it; and the city is given over into the hand of the
Chaldeans, that fight against it, by the sword, and the famine, and the
pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come to pass; and behold, thou
seest \[it\].

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And thou, Lord Jehovah, thou hast said
unto me, Buy for thyself the field for money, and take witnesses; -- and
the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> Behold, I am Jehovah, the God of all
flesh: is there anything too hard for me?

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I
give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> And the Chaldeans, that fight against
this city, shall come in and set fire to this city, and shall burn it,
and the houses upon whose roofs they have offered incense unto Baal, and
poured out drink-offerings unto other gods, to provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> For the children of Israel and the
children of Judah have been doing only evil in my sight from their
youth; for the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger with
the work of their hands, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> For this city hath been to me \[a
provocation\] of mine anger and of my fury from the day that they built
it even unto this day; that I should remove it from before my face,

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> because of all the evil of the children
of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke
me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their
prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And they have turned unto me the back,
and not the face; and though I taught them, rising early and teaching,
they hearkened not to receive instruction.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> And they have set their abominations in
the house which is called by my name, to defile it;

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> and they have built the high places of
Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause to pass
through \[the fire\] their sons and their daughters unto Molech: which I
commanded them not, neither came it into my mind, that they should do
this abomination, to cause Judah to sin.

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> And now therefore Jehovah, the God of
Israel, saith thus concerning this city, whereof ye say, It hath been
given over into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the
famine, and by the pestilence:

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> Behold, I will gather them out of all
the countries whither I have driven them, in mine anger, and in my fury,
and in great wrath; and I will bring them again unto this place, and I
will cause them to dwell safely.

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> And they shall be my people, and I will
be their God.

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> And I will give them one heart, and one
way, that they may fear me all \[their\] days, for the good of them, and
of their children after them.

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> And I will make an everlasting covenant
with them, that I will not draw back from them, to do them good; and I
will put my fear in their heart, that they may not turn aside from me.

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> And I will rejoice over them to do them
good, and I will assuredly plant them in this land with my whole heart
and with my whole soul.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Like as I have
brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon them
all the good that I have spoken concerning them.

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> And fields shall be bought in this
land, whereof ye say, It is desolate without man or beast; it is given
into the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> \[Men\] shall buy fields for money, and
subscribe the writings, and seal them, and take witnesses, in the land
of Benjamin, and in the environs of Jerusalem, and in the cities of
Judah, and in the cities of the hill-country, and in the cities of the
lowland, and in the cities of the south: for I will turn their
captivity, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah
the second time, while he was still shut up in the court of the prison,
saying,

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Thus saith Jehovah the doer of it,
Jehovah that formeth it to establish it, Jehovah is his name:

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and
I will shew thee great and hidden things, which thou knowest not.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> For thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel
concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the
kings of Judah, which are thrown down because of the mounds and because
of the sword:

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> They come to fight with the Chaldeans,
but to fill them with the dead bodies of the men whom I have slain in
mine anger and in my fury, and for all whose wickedness I have hid my
face from this city.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Behold, I will apply a healing dressing
to it and cure, and I will heal them, and will reveal unto them an
abundance of peace and truth.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And I will turn the captivity of Judah
and the captivity of Israel, and will build them, as at the beginning.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all
their iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me, and whereby they
have transgressed against me.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And it shall be to me a name of joy, a
praise and a glory before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear
of all the good that I do unto them; and they shall fear and tremble for
all the good and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Thus saith Jehovah: In this place of
which ye say, It is waste, without man and without beast! in the cities
of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem that are desolate, without man,
and without inhabitant, and without beast,

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> there shall again be heard the voice of
mirth and the voice of joy, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of
the bride, the voice of them that say, Give ye thanks unto Jehovah of
hosts; for Jehovah is good, for his loving-kindness \[endureth\] for
ever, -- of them that bring thanksgiving unto the house of Jehovah. For
I will turn the captivity of the land as in the beginning, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: In this
place which is waste, without man and without beast, and in all the
cities thereof, there shall again be a habitation of shepherds causing
\[their\] flocks to lie down.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> In the cities of the hill-country, in
the cities of the lowland, and in the cities of the south, and in the
land of Benjamin, and in the environs of Jerusalem, and in the cities of
Judah, shall the flocks pass again under the hands of him that counteth
\[them\], saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Behold, the days come, saith Jehovah,
that I will perform the good word which I have spoken unto the house of
Israel and unto the house of Judah.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> In those days, and at that time, will I
cause a Branch of righteousness to grow up unto David; and he shall
execute judgment and righteousness in the land.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> In those days shall Judah be saved, and
Jerusalem shall dwell in safety. And this is the name wherewith she
shall be called: Jehovah our Righteousness.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> For thus saith Jehovah: There shall
never fail to David a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel;

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> neither shall there fail to the priests
the Levites a man before me to offer up burnt-offerings, and to burn
oblations, and to do sacrifice continually.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Thus saith Jehovah: If ye can break my
covenant \[in respect\] of the day, and my covenant \[in respect\] of
the night, so that there should not be day and night in their season,

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> \[then\] shall also my covenant be
broken with David my servant, that he should not have a son to reign
upon his throne; and with the Levites, the priests, my ministers.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> As the host of the heavens cannot be
numbered, nor the sand of the sea measured, so will I multiply the seed
of David my servant, and the Levites that minister unto me.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Hast thou not seen what this people
have spoken, saying, The two families that Jehovah had chosen, he hath
even cast them off? And they despise my people, that they should be no
more a nation before them.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Thus saith Jehovah: If my covenant of
day and night \[stand\] not, if I have not appointed the ordinances of
the heavens and the earth,

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> \[then\] will I also cast away the seed
of Jacob, and of David my servant, so as not to take of his seed to be
rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for I will turn their
captivity, and will have mercy on them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his army, and all
the kingdoms of the earth under his dominion, and all the peoples,
fought against Jerusalem and against all the cities thereof, saying,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Go
and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him, Thus saith Jehovah:
Behold, I give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he
shall burn it with fire.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> And thou shalt not escape out of his
hand, but shalt certainly be taken, and given into his hand; and thine
eyes shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and his mouth shall
speak with thy mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Only, hear the word of Jehovah, O
Zedekiah king of Judah. Thus saith Jehovah as to thee: Thou shalt not
die by the sword;

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> thou shalt die in peace, and with the
burnings of thy fathers, the former kings that were before thee, so
shall they burn for thee; and they will lament for thee, Ah, lord! for I
have spoken the word, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And the prophet Jeremiah spoke all these
words unto Zedekiah king of Judah, in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And the king of Babylon's army fought
against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that were left,
against Lachish, and against Azekah; for these were amongst the cities
of Judah, the fenced cities that were left.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> The word that came unto Jeremiah from
Jehovah, after that king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the
people that were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto them:

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> that every man should let his bondman,
and every man his bondmaid, the Hebrew and the Hebrewess, go free, that
none should exact service of them, \[that is,\] of a Jew his brother.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And all the princes and all the people
that had entered into the covenant obeyed, every man letting his bondman
and every man his bondmaid go free, that none should exact service of
them any more: they obeyed, and let \[them\] go.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> But afterwards they turned, and caused
the bondmen and the bondmaids whom they had let go free, to return, and
brought them into subjection for bondmen and for bondmaids.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> And the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel: I
made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying,

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> At the end of seven years ye shall let
go every man his brother, a Hebrew, who hath sold himself unto thee;
when he hath served thee six years, thou shalt let him go free from
thee. But your fathers hearkened not unto me, neither inclined their
ear.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> And you, ye had this day turned, and
had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his
neighbour; and ye had made a covenant before me in the house which is
called by my name:

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> but ye have turned and profaned my
name, and caused every man his bondman, and every man his bondmaid, whom
ye had set at liberty at their pleasure, to return, and ye have brought
them into subjection, to be unto you for bondmen and for bondmaids.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Ye have
not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty, every man to his brother,
and every man to his neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you,
saith Jehovah, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I
will give you over to be driven hither and thither among all the
kingdoms of the earth.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> And I will give the men that have
transgressed my covenant, who have not performed the words of the
covenant which they had made before me, -- the calf which they cut in
twain, and passed between the parts thereof,

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> -- the princes of Judah and the princes
of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the people of the
land, that passed between the parts of the calf;

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> them will I give into the hand of their
enemies and into the hand of them that seek their life; and their
carcases shall be food for the fowl of the heavens and for the beasts of
the earth.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> And Zedekiah king of Judah and his
princes will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of
them that seek their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon's
army, which are gone up from you.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> Behold, I command, saith Jehovah, and I
will cause them to return to this city; and they shall fight against it,
and take it, and burn it with fire; and I will make the cities of Judah
a desolation, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, the king of Judah,
saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Go to the house of the Rechabites, and
speak with them, and bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of
the chambers, and give them wine to drink.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> And I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah,
the son of Habazziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and the
whole house of the Rechabites,

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> and I brought them into the house of
Jehovah, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah, the
man of God, which was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the
chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the threshold.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> And I set before the sons of the house of
the Rechabites bowls full of wine, and cups, and I said unto them, Drink
wine.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> And they said, We will drink no wine; for
Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall
drink no wine, ye nor your sons for ever;

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> neither shall ye build house, nor sow
seed, nor plant vineyard, nor shall ye have \[any\]; but all your days
ye shall dwell in tents, that ye may live many days in the land where ye
sojourn.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And we have hearkened unto the voice of
Jonadab the son of Rechab our father in all that he commanded us, to
drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, and our daughters,

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> and not to build houses for us to dwell
in; neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed;

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> but we have dwelt in tents, and have
obeyed and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> And it came to pass when Nebuchadrezzar
king of Babylon came up into the land, that we said, Come and let us go
into Jerusalem because of the army of the Chaldeans, and because of the
army of Syria; and we dwell at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel: Go and say to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Will ye not receive instruction to hearken unto my words?
saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab,
that he commanded his sons not to drink wine, are performed; and to this
day they have drunk none, for they have obeyed their father's
commandment. But I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking, and
ye have not hearkened unto me.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And I have sent unto you all my
servants the prophets, rising early and sending, saying, Return ye now
every man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after
other gods to serve them; and ye shall dwell in the land that I have
given to you and to your fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear nor
hearkened unto me.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> Yea, the sons of Jonadab the son of
Rechab have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded
them, but this people hath not hearkened unto me;

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> therefore thus saith Jehovah the God of
hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against
them, because I have spoken unto them, but they have not hearkened, and
I have called unto them, but they have not answered.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> And Jeremiah said unto the house of the
Rechabites, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Because ye
have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his
injunctions, and have done according unto all that he hath commanded
you;

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel, There shall not fail to Jonadab the son of Rechab a
man to stand before me, for ever.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And it came to pass in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, \[that\] this word came
to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Take thee a roll of a book, and write
therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and
against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spoke unto
thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto this day.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> It may be the house of Judah will hear
all the evil that I purpose to do unto them, that they may return every
man from his evil way, and that I may forgive their iniquity and their
sin.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And Jeremiah called Baruch the son of
Nerijah; and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of
Jehovah, which he had spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I
am shut up, I cannot go into the house of Jehovah; but go thou in,

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> and read in the roll, which thou hast
written from my mouth, the words of Jehovah in the ears of the people in
the house of Jehovah upon the fast day; and thou shalt also read them in
the ears of all Judah that come from their cities.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> It may be they will present their
supplication before Jehovah, and that they will return every one from
his evil way; for great is the anger and the fury that Jehovah hath
pronounced against this people.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And Baruch the son of Nerijah did
according to all that the prophet Jeremiah commanded him, reading in the
book the words of Jehovah in Jehovah's house.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> And it came to pass in the fifth year of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, in the ninth month,
\[that\] they proclaimed a fast before Jehovah, for all the people in
Jerusalem, and for all the people that came from the cities of Judah to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And Baruch read in the book the words
of Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gemariah the son
of Shaphan the scribe, in the upper court, at the entry of the new gate
of the house of Jehovah, in the ears of all the people.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And Micah the son of Gemariah the son
of Shaphan heard out of the book all the words of Jehovah;

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> and he went down to the king's house,
into the scribe's chamber, and behold, all the princes were sitting
there: Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and
Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and
Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the princes.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And Micah declared unto them all the
words that he had heard, when Baruch read in the book in the ears of the
people.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> And all the princes sent Jehudi the son
of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, unto Baruch,
saying, Take in thy hand the roll in which thou hast read in the ears of
the people, and come. And Baruch the son of Nerijah took the roll in his
hand, and came unto them.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> And they said unto him, Sit down now,
and read it in our ears. And Baruch read \[it\] in their ears.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> And it came to pass, when they heard
all the words, they turned in fear one toward another, and said unto
Baruch, We will certainly report to the king all these words.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us
now, How didst thou write all these words from his mouth?

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And Baruch said unto them, He
pronounced all these words unto me with his mouth, and I wrote \[them\]
with ink in the book.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> And the princes said unto Baruch, Go,
hide thee, thou and Jeremiah; that none may know where ye are.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And they went in unto the king into the
court, but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe;
and they told all the words in the ears of the king.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> And the king sent Jehudi to fetch the
roll, and he fetched it out of the chamber of Elishama the scribe. And
Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the
princes that stood beside the king.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Now the king was sitting in the
winter-house in the ninth month, and with the fire-pan burning before
him.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And it came to pass, that when Jehudi
had read three or four columns, he cut it with the scribe's knife, and
cast it into the fire that was in the pan until all the roll was
consumed in the fire that was in the pan.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> And they were not afraid, nor rent
their garments, \[neither\] the king nor any of his servants that heard
all these words.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> Moreover, Elnathan and Delaiah and
Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the
roll; but he would not hear them.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> And the king commanded Jerahmeel the
son of Hammelech, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son
of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet; but
Jehovah hid them.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> And after that the king had burned the
roll, and the words that Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, the word
of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> Take thee again another roll, and write
in it all the former words that were in the first roll which Jehoiakim
the king of Judah hath burned.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king of
Judah, Thus saith Jehovah: Thou hast burned this roll, saying, Why hast
thou written therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come
and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from it man and beast?

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning
Jehoiakim king of Judah: He shall have none to sit upon the throne of
David; and his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and
in the night to the frost.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And I will visit their iniquity upon
him, and upon his seed, and upon his servants; and I will bring upon
them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah,
all the evil that I have pronounced against them; and they have not
hearkened.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> And Jeremiah took another roll, and
gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Nerijah; and he wrote therein
from the mouth of Jeremiah, all the words of the book that Jehoiakim
king of Judah had burned in the fire; and there were added besides unto
them many like words.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah
reigned instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon having made him king in the land of Judah.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And neither he, nor his servants, nor the
people of the land, hearkened unto the words of Jehovah, which he had
spoken through the prophet Jeremiah.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the
son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to the
prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now unto Jehovah our God for us.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And Jeremiah came in and went out among
the people; for they had not put him into prison.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> And Pharaoh's army was come forth out of
Egypt; and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of
them, they went up from Jerusalem.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto
Jeremiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel:
Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, that sent you unto me to inquire
of me: Behold, Pharaoh's army, which is come forth to help you, shall
return to Egypt into their own land.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And the Chaldeans shall come again, and
fight against this city, and take it, and burn it with fire.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Deceive not
yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans are certainly gone away from us; for
they are not gone.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> For though ye had smitten the whole
army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained \[but\]
wounded men among them, \[yet\] should they rise up every man in his
tent, and burn this city with fire.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> And it came to pass when the army of
the Chaldeans was gone up from Jerusalem because of Pharaoh's army,

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> that Jeremiah went forth out of
Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to have his portion there
among the people.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And when he was in the gate of
Benjamin, a captain of the guard was there whose name was Irijah, the
son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he laid hold on the prophet
Jeremiah, saying, Thou art deserting to the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And Jeremiah said, It is false: I am
not deserting to the Chaldeans. But he hearkened not to him; and Irijah
laid hold on Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And the princes were wroth with
Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in the place of confinement in the
house of Jonathan the scribe: for they had made that the prison.

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> When Jeremiah was come into the dungeon
and into the vaults, and Jeremiah had remained there many days,

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> king Zedekiah sent and took him out.
And the king asked of him secretly in his house, and said, Is there any
word from Jehovah? And Jeremiah said, There is; and he said, Thou shalt
be given into the hand of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> And Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah,
What have I offended against thee, or against thy servants, or against
this people, that ye have put me in the prison?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> And where are your prophets that
prophesied unto you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come against
you, nor against this land?

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And now hear, I pray thee, my lord, O
king: let my supplication, I pray thee, come before thee; and cause me
not to return into the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> Then Zedekiah the king commanded, and
they committed Jeremiah into the court of the guard, and they gave him
daily a loaf of bread out of the bakers' street, until all the bread in
the city was spent. And Jeremiah abode in the court of the guard.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and
Gedaliah the son of Pashur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur
the son of Malchijah, heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken unto all
the people, saying,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Thus saith Jehovah: He that remaineth in
this city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence;
but he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live; and he shall have
his life for a prey, and shall live.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> Thus saith Jehovah: This city shall
certainly be given into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, and he
shall take it.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And the princes said unto the king, Let
this man, we pray thee, be put to death; for why should he weaken the
hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all
the people, in speaking to them according to these words? for this man
seeketh not the welfare of this people, but the hurt.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> And king Zedekiah said, Behold, he is in
your hand; for the king is not he that can do a thing against you.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Then they took Jeremiah, and cast him
into the dungeon of Malchijah the son of Hammelech, which was in the
court of the guard, and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the
dungeon there was no water, but mire; and Jeremiah sank in the mire.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, a eunuch
who was in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the
dungeon -- now the king was sitting in the gate of Benjamin,

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> -- and Ebed-melech went forth out of the
king's house, and spoke to the king, saying,

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> My lord, O king, these men have done evil
in all that they have done to the prophet Jeremiah, whom they have cast
into the dungeon; and he will die by reason of the famine in the place
where he is; for there is no more bread in the city.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> And the king commanded Ebed-melech the
Ethiopian, saying, Take from hence thirty men with thee, and take up
Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon, before he die.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And Ebed-melech took the men under his
order, and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and took
thence old shreds and worn-out clothes, and let them down by cords into
the dungeon to Jeremiah.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said to
Jeremiah, Put, I pray, \[these\] old shreds and rags under thine
armholes under the cords. And Jeremiah did so.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> And they drew up Jeremiah with cords,
and brought him up out of the dungeon; and Jeremiah remained in the
court of the guard.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> And king Zedekiah sent and took the
prophet Jeremiah unto him, into the third entry that is in the house of
Jehovah; and the king said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing: hide
nothing from me.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I
declare \[it\] unto thee, wilt thou not certainly put me to death? and
if I give thee counsel, thou wilt not hearken unto me.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> And king Zedekiah swore secretly unto
Jeremiah, saying, \[As\] Jehovah liveth, that made us this soul, I will
not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of these
men that seek thy life.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> And Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, Thus
saith Jehovah the God of hosts, the God of Israel: If thou wilt freely
go forth to the king of Babylon's princes, then thy soul shall live, and
this city shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thy
house.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> But if thou wilt not go forth to the
king of Babylon's princes, then shall this city be given into the hand
of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not
escape out of their hand.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> And king Zedekiah said unto Jeremiah, I
am afraid of the Jews that have deserted to the Chaldeans, lest they
give me over into their hand, and they mock me.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> And Jeremiah said, They shall not give
\[thee\] over. Hearken, I beseech thee, unto the voice of Jehovah, in
that which I speak unto thee; so shall it be well unto thee, and thy
soul shall live.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> But if thou refuse to go forth, this is
the word which Jehovah hath shewn me:

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Behold, all the women that are left in
the king of Judah's house shall be brought forth to the king of
Babylon's princes; and they shall say, Thy familiar friends have set
thee on, and have prevailed over thee; thy feet are sunk in the mire,
they are turned away back.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> And they shall bring out all thy wives
and thy children to the Chaldeans, and thou shalt not escape out of
their hand; for thou shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon,
and thou shalt cause this city to be burned with fire.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> And Zedekiah said unto Jeremiah, Let no
man know of these words, and thou shalt not die.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> And if the princes hear that I have
talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare
unto us now what thou hast said unto the king, hide it not from us, and
we will not put thee to death; and what hath the king said unto thee?

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> then thou shalt say unto them, I
presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to
return to Jonathan's house, to die there.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> -- And all the princes came to
Jeremiah, and asked him; and he told them according to all these words
that the king had commanded. And they withdrew quietly from him; for the
matter was not reported.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> And Jeremiah remained in the court of
the guard until the day that Jerusalem was taken.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And it came to pass when Jerusalem was
taken, in the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month,
came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem,
and they besieged it.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> In the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the
fourth month, on the ninth of the month, the city was broken into;

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> and all the princes of the king of
Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate: Nergal-sharezer,
Samgar-nebu, Sarsechim, chief chamberlain, Nergal-sharezer, chief
magian, and all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And it came to pass when Zedekiah the
king of Judah and all the men of war saw them, that they fled, and went
forth out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, by the
gate between the two walls; and he went out the way of the plain.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And the army of the Chaldeans pursued
after them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and they
took him, and brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, unto
Riblah in the land of Hamath; and he pronounced judgment upon him.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And the king of Babylon slaughtered the
sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes, and the king of Babylon
slaughtered all the nobles of Judah;

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> and he put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and
bound him with chains of brass, to carry him to Babylon.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> And the Chaldeans burned the king's house
and the houses of the people with fire, and broke down the walls of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> And Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard carried away captive into Babylon the rest of the people that
were left in the city, and the deserters that had deserted to him, with
the rest of the people that were left.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard left \[certain\] of the people, the poor who had nothing, in
the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> And Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had
given charge concerning Jeremiah by Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard, saying,

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Take him, and keep an eye upon him, and
do him no harm; but do unto him even as he shall say unto thee.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> So Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard sent, and Nebushazban, chief chamberlain, and
Nergal-sharezer, chief magian, and all the king of Babylon's princes,

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> even they sent, and took Jeremiah out
of the court of the guard and committed him to Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam the son of Shaphan, that he should conduct him away home. And he
dwelt among the people.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto
Jeremiah, while he was shut up in the court of the guard, saying,

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> Go and speak to Ebed-melech the
Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel:
Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for good,
and they shall come to pass before thy face in that day.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And I will deliver thee in that day,
saith Jehovah; and thou shalt not be given into the hand of the men of
whom thou art afraid;

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> for I will certainly save thee, and
thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thou shalt have thy life for a
prey; for thou hast put thy confidence in me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, after that Nebuzar-adan the captain of the body-guard had let
him go from Ramah, when he had taken him, being bound in chains, among
all the captivity of Jerusalem and Judah, that were carried away captive
to Babylon.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> And the captain of the body-guard took
Jeremiah, and said unto him, Jehovah thy God pronounced this evil upon
this place,

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> and Jehovah hath brought \[it about\] and
done according as he said; for ye have sinned against Jehovah, and have
not hearkened unto his voice, therefore this thing is come upon you.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And now, behold, I loose thee this day
from the chains that are upon thy hand. If it seem good in thy sight to
come with me to Babylon, come, and I will keep mine eye upon thee; but
if it seem ill unto thee to come with me to Babylon, forbear. See, all
the land is before thee: whither it seemeth good and right in thy sight
to go, thither go.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And while he had not yet given answer;
\[he said,\] Yea, go back to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath appointed over the cities of
Judah, and abide with him in the midst of the people; or go wheresoever
it seemeth right in thy sight to go. And the captain of the body-guard
gave him provisions and a present, and let him go.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And Jeremiah came unto Gedaliah the son
of Ahikam to Mizpah, and abode with him among the people that remained
in the land.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And all the captains of the forces that
were in the fields, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon
had appointed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam over the land, and had
committed unto him men, and women, and children, and of the poor of the
land, of them that had not been carried away captive to Babylon.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> And they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah; even
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of
Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the
Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan swore unto them and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the
Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it
shall be well with you.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> And as for me, behold, I dwell at
Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans, who will come unto us; and ye,
gather wine, and summer fruits, and oil, and put \[them\] in your
vessels, and dwell in your cities which ye have taken.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> Likewise all the Jews that were in
Moab, and among the children of Ammon and in Edom, and that were in all
the lands, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant in Judah,
and that he had appointed over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son
of Shaphan;

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> and all the Jews returned out of all
the places whither they had been driven, and came to the land of Judah
to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine and summer fruits in great
abundance.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> And Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the captains of the forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah
unto Mizpah,

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> and said unto him, Dost thou indeed
know that Baalis the king of the children of Ammon hath sent Ishmael the
son of Nethaniah to smite thee to death? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam
believed them not.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> And Johanan the son of Kareah spoke to
Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will
smite Ishmael the son of Nethaniah and no man shall know it: why should
he take thy life, and all they of Judah who are gathered unto thee be
scattered, and the remnant of Judah perish?

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said
unto Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shalt not do this thing; for thou
speakest falsely of Ishmael.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> And it came to pass in the seventh month,
that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the royal
seed, and \[one\] of the king's chief men, and ten men with him, came to
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam unto Mizpah, and there they ate bread
together, in Mizpah.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah arose,
and the ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam
the son of Shaphan with the sword, and killed him, whom the king of
Babylon had appointed over the land.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> And Ishmael smote all the Jews that were
with him, with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found
there, the men of war.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> And it came to pass the second day after
he had killed Gedaliah, and no man knew it,

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> that there came men from Shechem, from
Shiloh, and from Samaria, eighty men, having their beards shaven and
their clothes rent, and having cut themselves; with oblations and
incense in their hand, to bring them to the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went
forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went; and it
came to pass when he met them, he said unto them, Come to Gedaliah the
son of Ahikam.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And it was so, when they came into the
midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, he and the men
that were with him, slew them, \[and cast them\] into the midst of the
pit.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> But ten men were found among them that
said unto Ishmael, Do not kill us, for we have hidden stores in the
field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey. So he forbore,
and did not kill them among their brethren.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> And the pit into which Ishmael had cast
all the dead bodies of the men whom he had slain by the side of Gedaliah
was the one which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of
Israel: Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with the slain.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> And Ishmael carried away captive all
the remnant of the people that were in Mizpah, the king's daughters, and
all the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzar-adan the captain of
the body-guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam: Ishmael the
son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to
the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> And Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the captains of the forces that were with him, heard of all the evil
that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done;

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> and they took all the men, and went to
fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great
waters that are at Gibeon.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> And it came to pass when all the people
that were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the
captains of the forces that were with him, then they were glad.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> And all the people that Ishmael had
carried away captive from Mizpah turned about and came back, and went to
Johanan the son of Kareah.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah
escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> Then Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the captains of the forces that were with him, took all the remnant of
the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from
Mizpah, after he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the mighty men of
war, and the women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had
brought again from Gibeon;

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> and they departed, and dwelt at
Geruth-Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into Egypt,

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> because of the Chaldeans; for they
feared them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had smitten Gedaliah
the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the land.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> And all the captains of the forces, and
Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the
people from the least even to the greatest,

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> came near and said unto Jeremiah the
prophet, Let, we beseech thee, our supplication come before thee, and
pray for us unto Jehovah thy God, for all this remnant (for we are left
a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us);

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> that Jehovah thy God may shew us the way
wherein we should walk, and the thing that we should do.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> And Jeremiah the prophet said unto them,
I have heard; behold, I will pray unto Jehovah your God according to
your words; and it shall come to pass \[that\] whatsoever thing Jehovah
shall answer you, I will declare it unto you: I will keep nothing back
from you.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> And they said to Jeremiah, Jehovah be a
true and faithful witness amongst us, if we do not even according to all
the word for which Jehovah thy God shall send thee to us.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Whether it be good or whether it be evil,
we will hearken unto the voice of Jehovah our God, to whom we send thee;
that it may be well with us when we hearken unto the voice of Jehovah
our God.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And it came to pass at the end of ten
days, that the word of Jehovah came unto Jeremiah.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> And he called Johanan the son of Kareah,
and all the captains of the forces that were with him, and all the
people from the least even unto the greatest,

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> and said unto them, Thus saith Jehovah
the God of Israel, to whom ye sent me to present your supplication
before him:

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> If ye will still abide in this land,
then will I build you, and not overthrow \[you\], and I will plant you,
and not pluck \[you\] up; for I repent me of the evil that I have done
unto you.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Be not afraid of the king of Babylon,
of whom ye are afraid: be not afraid of him, saith Jehovah; for I will
be with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And I will grant mercies to you, that
he may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own land.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> But if ye say, We will not dwell in
this land; so as not to hearken unto the voice of Jehovah your God,

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> saying, No; but we will go into the
land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the
trumpet, nor have hunger for bread; and there will we dwell;

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> -- and now, therefore, hear the word of
Jehovah, ye remnant of Judah: thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel: If ye really set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to
sojourn there,

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> then it shall come to pass, that the
sword which ye fear shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and
the famine, whereof ye are afraid, shall follow hard after you there in
Egypt; and there ye shall die.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> And it shall be that all the men that
have set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there shall die by the
sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence; and none of them shall
remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the
God of Israel: As mine anger and my fury have been poured forth upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, so shall my fury be poured forth upon you,
when ye shall enter into Egypt; and ye shall be an execration, and an
astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach, and ye shall see this place
no more.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> Jehovah hath said concerning you, the
remnant of Judah, Go ye not into Egypt. Know certainly that I have
admonished you this day.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> For ye deceived yourselves in your own
souls, when ye sent me unto Jehovah your God, saying, Pray for us unto
Jehovah our God; and according to all that Jehovah our God shall say, so
declare unto us, and we will do it.

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> And I have this day declared \[it\] to
you; but ye have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah your God, nor anything
for which he hath sent me unto you.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> And now know certainly that ye shall
die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place
whither ye desire to go to sojourn.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> And it came to pass, when Jeremiah had
ended speaking unto all the people all the words of Jehovah their God,
with which Jehovah their God had sent him to them -- all these words,

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> -- then spoke Azariah the son of
Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying
to Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely: Jehovah our God hath not sent thee
to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there;

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> but Baruch the son of Nerijah is setting
thee on against us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that
they may put us to death, and carry us away captives into Babylon.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the
captains of the forces, and all the people, hearkened not unto the voice
of Jehovah to abide in the land of Judah;

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> but Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that were
returned from all nations whither they had been driven, to sojourn in
the land of Judah;

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> men, and women, and children, and the
king's daughters, and every person that Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan,
and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Nerijah;

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> and they came into the land of Egypt: for
they hearkened not unto the voice of Jehovah. And they came as far as
Tahpanhes.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah
in Tahpanhes, saying,

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Take great stones in thy hand, and hide
them in the clay in the brick-kiln, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's
house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the Jews,

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> and say unto them, Thus saith Jehovah
of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar
the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne upon these
stones which I have hidden, and he shall spread his royal pavilion over
them.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> And he shall come and smite the land of
Egypt: such as are for death to death, and such as are for captivity to
captivity; and such as are for the sword to the sword.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> And I will kindle a fire in the houses
of the gods of Egypt, and he shall burn them, and carry them away
captive; and he shall array himself with the land of Egypt, as a
shepherd putteth on his garment; and he shall go forth from thence in
peace.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> And he shall break the pillars of
Beth-shemesh, which is in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods
of Egypt shall he burn with fire.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah concerning
all the Jews who dwelt in the land of Egypt, who dwelt at Migdol, and at
Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying,

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel: Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem,
and upon all the cities of Judah; and behold they are, this day, a
waste, and no man dwelleth therein,

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> because of their wickedness which they
have committed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense
to serve other gods which they knew not, they, \[nor\] ye, nor your
fathers.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And I sent unto you all my servants the
prophets, rising early and sending, saying, Oh, do not this abominable
thing which I hate!

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> But they hearkened not, nor inclined
their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense unto other
gods.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> And my fury and mine anger was poured
forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of
Jerusalem; and they are become a waste, a desolation, as at this day.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> And now thus saith Jehovah the God of
hosts, the God of Israel: Wherefore commit ye great evil against your
souls, to cut off from you man and woman, infant and suckling, out of
the midst of Judah, to leave you no remnant;

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> provoking me to anger with the works of
your hands, burning incense unto other gods in the land of Egypt,
whither ye are come to sojourn, that ye should be cut off, and that ye
should be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your
fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of
their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives,
which they have committed in the land of Judah and in the streets of
Jerusalem?

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> They are not humbled unto this day,
neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes which
I set before you and before your fathers.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel: Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, and
to cut off all Judah.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> And I will take the remnant of Judah,
that have set their faces to enter into the land of Egypt to sojourn
there, and they shall all be consumed: in the land of Egypt shall they
fall; they shall be consumed by the sword \[and\] by the famine, from
the least even unto the greatest; they shall die by the sword and by the
famine, and they shall be an execration, an astonishment, and a curse,
and a reproach.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> And I will punish them that dwell in
the land of Egypt as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the
famine, and by the pestilence;

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> and none of the remnant of Judah, that
have come into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or
remain, so as to return into the land of Judah, whither they have a
desire to return to dwell there; for none shall return but such as shall
escape.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> Then all the men who knew that their
wives burned incense to other gods, and all the women who stood by, a
great assemblage, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt,
in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> \[As for\] the word that thou hast
spoken unto us in the name of Jehovah, we will not hearken unto thee,

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> but we will certainly do every word
that is gone forth out of our mouth, to burn incense to the queen of the
heavens, and to pour out drink-offerings to her, as we have done, we and
our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah and in
the streets of Jerusalem; and we had plenty of bread, and were well, and
saw no evil.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> But since we left off burning incense
to the queen of the heavens, and pouring out drink-offerings to her, we
have wanted everything, and have been consumed by the sword and by the
famine.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> And when we burned incense to the queen
of the heavens and poured out drink-offerings to her, did we make for
her cakes to portray her, and pour out drink-offerings to her, without
our husbands?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> And Jeremiah said unto all the people,
to the men, and to the women, and to all the people that had given him
that answer, saying,

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> Is it not the incense that ye burned in
the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye and your
fathers, your kings and your princes and the people of the land, that
Jehovah remembered, and that came into his mind?

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> And Jehovah could no longer bear,
because of the evil of your doings, \[and\] because of the abominations
that ye had committed; and your land is become a waste, and an
astonishment, and a curse, without inhabitant, as at this day.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> Because ye have burned incense, and
because ye have sinned against Jehovah, and have not hearkened unto the
voice of Jehovah, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his
testimonies; therefore this evil hath come upon you, as at this day.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> And Jeremiah said unto all the people,
and to all the women, Hear ye the word of Jehovah, all Judah that are in
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel, saying, Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and
fulfilled with your hands, saying, We will certainly perform our vows
which we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of the heavens, and to
pour out drink-offerings unto her. Ye will certainly establish your
vows, and entirely perform your vows.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> Therefore hear ye the word of Jehovah,
all Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt: Behold, I have sworn by my
great name, saith Jehovah, that my name shall no more be named in the
mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, \[As\] the
Lord Jehovah liveth.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> Behold, I will watch over them for
evil, and not for good; and all the men of Judah that are in the land of
Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there be
an end of them.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> And they that escape the sword shall
return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, a very small
company; and all the remnant of Judah, that have come into the land of
Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose word shall stand, mine or
theirs.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> And this shall be the sign unto you,
saith Jehovah, that I will punish you in this place, that ye may know
that my words shall certainly stand against you for evil:

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will give
Pharaoh-Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the
hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that sought
his life.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> The word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke
to Baruch the son of Nerijah, when he wrote these words in a book at the
mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah,
the king of Judah, saying,

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> Thus sayeth Jehovah, the God of Israel,
concerning thee, Baruch:

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> Thou didst say, Woe unto me! for Jehovah
hath added grief to my sorrow; I am weary with my sighing, and I find no
rest.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> Thus shalt thou say unto him, Thus saith
Jehovah: Behold, what I have built do I overthrow, and what I have
planted I pluck up, even this whole land.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> And seekest thou great things for
thyself? seek \[them\] not; for behold, I will bring evil upon all
flesh, saith Jehovah; but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in
all places whither thou shalt go.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> The word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah
the prophet concerning the nations.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> Of Egypt: concerning the army of
Pharaoh-Necho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates at
Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth
year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, the king of Judah.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> Make ready buckler and shield, and draw
near to battle!

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> Harness the horses, and mount ye
horsemen, and stand forth with helmets; polish the spears, put on the
coats of mail!

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> Why do I see them dismayed, turned away
back? And their mighty ones are beaten down, and take to flight, and
look not back? Terror \[is\] on every side, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> Let not the swift flee away, neither let
the mighty man escape! -- Toward the north, hard by the river Euphrates,
they have stumbled and fallen.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> Who is this \[that\] riseth up as the
Nile, whose waters toss themselves like the rivers?

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> It is Egypt that riseth up as the Nile,
and \[his\] waters toss themselves like the rivers; and he saith, I will
rise up, I will cover the earth; I will destroy the city and the
inhabitants thereof.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> Go up, ye horses, and drive furiously, ye
chariots; and let the mighty men go forth: Cush and Phut that handle the
shield, and the Ludim that handle the bow \[and\] bend it.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> For this is the day of the Lord Jehovah
of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may be avenged of his adversaries;
and the sword shall devour, and it shall be sated and made drunk with
their blood; for the Lord Jehovah of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north
country, by the river Euphrates.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> Go up to Gilead, and fetch balm, O
virgin-daughter of Egypt! In vain shalt thou multiply remedies: there is
no healing for thee.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> The nations have heard of thy shame,
and thy cry hath filled the earth; for the mighty man stumbleth against
the mighty, they are both fallen together.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> The word that Jehovah spoke to Jeremiah
the prophet, concerning the coming of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon to
smite the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> Declare in Egypt, and publish in
Migdol, and publish in Noph, and in Tahpanhes; say, Stand fast, and
prepare thee; for the sword devoureth round about thee.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> Why are thy valiants swept away? They
stood not, for Jehovah did thrust them down.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> He made many to stumble, yea, one fell
upon another; and they said, Arise, and let us return to our own people
and to the land of our nativity, from the oppressing sword.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> There did they cry, Pharaoh king of
Egypt is but a noise; he hath let the time appointed go by.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> \[As\] I live, saith the King, whose
name is Jehovah of hosts, surely as Tabor among the mountains, and as
Carmel by the sea, so shall he come.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> Thou, inhabitress, daughter of Egypt,
furnish for thyself a captive's baggage, for Noph shall be a desolation
and shall be ruined, so that none shall dwell therein.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> Egypt is a very fair heifer; the
gad-fly cometh, it cometh from the north.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> Also her hired men in the midst of her
are like fatted bullocks; for they also have turned back, they have fled
away together, they did not stand; for the day of their calamity is come
upon them, the time of their visitation.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> Her voice shall go like a serpent's;
for they shall march with an army, and come against her with axes, as
hewers of wood.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> They shall cut down her forest, saith
Jehovah, though it be impenetrable; for they are more than the locusts,
and are innumerable.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> The daughter of Egypt is put to shame;
she is delivered into the hand of the people of the north.

<span id="an_46:25">46:25</span> Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel,
saith, Behold, I will punish Amon of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, and her
gods, and her kings; yea, Pharaoh and them that confide in him.

<span id="an_46:26">46:26</span> And I will give them into the hand of
those that seek their life, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon, and into the hand of his servants; but afterwards it shall be
inhabited, as in the days of old, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_46:27">46:27</span> But thou, my servant Jacob, fear not,
neither be dismayed, Israel: for behold, I will save thee from afar, and
thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and
be in rest and at ease, and none shall make \[him\] afraid.

<span id="an_46:28">46:28</span> Fear thou not, my servant Jacob, saith
Jehovah: for I am with thee; for I will make a full end of all the
nations whither I have driven thee, but I will not make a full end of
thee; but I will correct thee with judgment, and I will not hold thee
altogether guiltless.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> The word of Jehovah that came to the
prophet Jeremiah concerning the Philistines, before Pharaoh smote Gazah.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, waters rise
up out of the north, and shall become an overflowing flood, and shall
overflow the land, and all that is therein; the city, and them that
dwell therein: and the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the
land shall howl,

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> at the noise of the stamping of the hoofs
of his steeds, at the rushing of his chariots, at the rumbling of his
wheels: fathers shall not look back for \[their\] children, from
feebleness of hands;

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> because of the day that cometh to lay
waste all the Philistines, to cut off from Tyre and Sidon every helper
that remaineth; for Jehovah will lay waste the Philistines, the remnant
of the island of Caphtor.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Baldness is come upon Gazah; Ashkelon is
cut off, the remnant of their valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself?

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> Alas! sword of Jehovah, how long wilt
thou not be quiet? Withdraw into thy scabbard, rest, and be still.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> How shouldest thou be quiet? -- For
Jehovah hath given it a charge: against Ashkelon, and against the sea
shore, there hath he appointed it.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Concerning Moab. Thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel: Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled; Kirjathaim
is put to shame, it is taken; Misgab is put to shame and dismayed.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> Moab's praise is no more; in Heshbon they
have devised evil against her: Come, and let us cut her off from
\[being\] a nation. Thou also, O Madmen, shalt be cut down; the sword
shall pursue thee.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> A voice of crying from Horonaim; wasting
and great destruction!

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> Moab is destroyed; her little ones have
caused a cry to be heard.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> For by the ascent of Luhith continual
weeping shall go up; for in the descent of Horonaim is heard the anguish
of the cry of destruction.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> Flee, save your lives, and be like a
shrub in the wilderness.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> For because thou hast confided in thy
works and in thy treasures, thou also shalt be taken, and Chemosh shall
go forth into captivity, his priests and his princes together.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> And the waster shall come upon every
city, that not a city shall escape; and the valley shall perish, and the
plateau shall be destroyed: as Jehovah hath said.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> Give wings unto Moab, that she may flee
and get away; and the cities thereof shall become a desolation, without
inhabitant.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Cursed be he that doeth the work of
Jehovah negligently, and cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from
blood!

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> Moab hath been at ease from his youth,
and hath settled on his lees; he hath not been emptied from vessel to
vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity: therefore his taste hath
remained in him, and his scent is not changed.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Therefore behold, days come, saith
Jehovah, that I will send unto him pourers that shall pour him off, and
shall empty his vessels, and break in pieces his flagons.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh,
as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel, their confidence.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> How do ye say, We are mighty, and men
of valour for the war?

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> Moab is laid waste, and his cities are
gone up \[in smoke\], and his chosen young men are gone down to the
slaughter, saith the King, whose name is Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> The calamity of Moab is near to come,
and his affliction hasteth fast.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> All ye that are about him, bemoan him;
and all ye that know his name, say, How is the strong staff broken, the
beautiful rod!

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> Come down from \[thy\] glory and sit in
the drought, O inhabitress, daughter of Dibon; the spoiler of Moab is
come up against thee, thy strongholds hath he destroyed.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> Stand by the way, and watch,
inhabitress of Aroer; ask him that fleeth, and her that escapeth; say,
What is done?

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> Moab is put to shame; for he is broken
down: howl and cry; tell it in Arnon, that Moab is laid waste.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And judgment is come upon the country
of the plateau; upon Holon, and upon Jahzah, and upon Mephaath;

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> and upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon
Beth-diblathaim;

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> and upon Kirjathaim, and upon
Beth-gamul, and upon Beth-meon;

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> and upon Kerijoth, and upon Bozrah, and
upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far and near.

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> The horn of Moab is cut off, and his
arm is broken, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> Make him drunken, for he magnified
himself against Jehovah; and Moab shall wallow in his vomit, and he also
shall be in derision.

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> For was not Israel a derision unto
thee? Was he found among thieves, that as oft as thou didst speak of
him, thou didst shake the head?

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> Leave the cities, and dwell in the
rocks, ye inhabitants of Moab, and be like the dove, that maketh her
nest in the sides of the cave's mouth.

<span id="an_48:29">48:29</span> We have heard of the arrogance of Moab,
-- \[he is\] very proud; -- his loftiness, and his arrogance, and his
pride, and the haughtiness of his heart.

<span id="an_48:30">48:30</span> I know his wrath, saith Jehovah; his
pratings are vain: they do not as \[they say\].

<span id="an_48:31">48:31</span> Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I
will cry out for all Moab: for the men of Kir-heres shall there be
moaning.

<span id="an_48:32">48:32</span> O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee
with more than the weeping of Jaazer: thy shoots passed over the sea,
they reached to the sea of Jaazer. The spoiler is fallen upon thy summer
fruits and upon thy vintage.

<span id="an_48:33">48:33</span> And joy and gladness is taken away from
the fruitful field and from the land of Moab; and I have caused wine to
fail from the winepresses: they shall no more tread with shouting; the
shouting shall be no shouting.

<span id="an_48:34">48:34</span> Because of the cry from Heshbon, unto
Elaleh, unto Jahaz have they uttered their voice, from Zoar unto
Horonaim, \[unto\] Eglath-shelishijah: for even the waters of Nimrim
shall become desolations.

<span id="an_48:35">48:35</span> And I will cause to cease in Moab,
saith Jehovah, him that offereth in the high place, and him that burneth
incense to his gods.

<span id="an_48:36">48:36</span> Therefore my heart shall sound for Moab
like pipes, and my heart shall sound like pipes for the men of
Kir-heres; because the abundance that he hath gotten is perished.

<span id="an_48:37">48:37</span> For every head is bald, and every beard
clipped; upon all the hands are cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.

<span id="an_48:38">48:38</span> It is wholly lamentation upon all the
housetops of Moab, and in the public places thereof; for I have broken
Moab, like a vessel wherein is no pleasure, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:39">48:39</span> They howl, How is it broken down! how
hath Moab turned the back with shame! And Moab shall be a derision and a
terror to all that are round about him.

<span id="an_48:40">48:40</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, he
shall fly as an eagle, and shall spread forth his wings over Moab.

<span id="an_48:41">48:41</span> Kerijoth is taken, and the strongholds
are seized, and at that day the heart of the mighty men of Moab shall be
as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

<span id="an_48:42">48:42</span> And Moab shall be destroyed from being
a people, because he hath magnified himself against Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:43">48:43</span> Fear, and the pit, and the snare shall
be upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:44">48:44</span> He that fleeth from the fear shall fall
into the pit; and he that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in
the snare: for I will bring upon her, upon Moab, the year of their
visitation, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_48:45">48:45</span> They that fled stood under the shadow
of Heshbon powerless; for a fire hath come forth from Heshbon, and a
flame from the midst of Sihon, and hath consumed the corner of Moab, and
the crown of the head of the sons of tumult.

<span id="an_48:46">48:46</span> Woe to thee, Moab! The people of
Chemosh is undone; for thy sons are taken away in captivity, and thy
daughters are captives.

<span id="an_48:47">48:47</span> But I will turn the captivity of Moab
at the end of the days, saith Jehovah. Thus far is the judgement of
Moab.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> Concerning the children of Ammon. Thus
saith Jehovah: Hath Israel no sons? hath he no heir? Why is Malcam heir
of Gad, and his people dwell in the cities thereof?

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> Therefore behold, days come, saith
Jehovah, that I will cause the clamour of war to be heard in Rabbah of
the children of Ammon; and it shall be a desolate heap; and her towns
shall be burned with fire; and Israel shall possess them that possessed
him, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> Howl, Heshbon! for Ai is laid waste; cry,
daughters of Rabbah, gird you with sackcloth, lament and run to and fro
within the enclosures: for Malcam shall go into captivity, his priests
and his princes together.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> Wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys?
Thy valley shall flow down, O backsliding daughter, that trusteth in her
treasures, \[saying,\] Who shall come against me?

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee,
saith the Lord Jehovah of hosts, from all that are about thee; and ye
shall be driven out every man right forth; and none shall assemble the
fugitives.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> And afterwards I will turn the captivity
of the children of Ammon, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Concerning Edom. Thus saith Jehovah of
hosts: Is there no more wisdom in Teman? is counsel perished from the
prudent? is their wisdom spent?

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> Flee, turn back, dwell deep down, ye
inhabitants of Dedan! For I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him,
the time that I visit him.

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> If grape-gatherers had come to thee,
would they not have left a gleaning? If thieves by night, they would
destroy only till they had enough.

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> But I have made Esau bare, I have
uncovered his secret places, that he is unable to hide himself: his seed
is wasted, and his brethren, and his neighbours, and he is not.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> Leave thine orphans, I will preserve
them alive; and let thy widows trust in me.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, they
whose judgment was not to drink of the cup shall assuredly drink; and
thou indeed, shouldest thou be altogether unpunished? Thou shalt not go
unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> For I have sworn by myself, saith
Jehovah, that Bozrah shall become an astonishment, a reproach, a waste,
and a curse; and all the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> I have heard a rumour from Jehovah, and
an ambassador is sent among the nations: -- Gather yourselves together,
and come against her and rise up for the battle.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> For behold, I have made thee small
among the nations, despised among men.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> Thy terribleness, the pride of thy
heart, hath deceived thee, thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock,
that holdest the height of the hill. Though thou shouldest make thy nest
high as the eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> And Edom shall be an astonishment:
every one that goeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss, because
of all the plagues thereof.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> As in the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and their neighbour cities, saith Jehovah, no one shall dwell
there, neither shall a son of man sojourn therein.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> Behold, he shall come up like a lion
from the swelling of the Jordan against the strong habitation; for I
will make them suddenly run away from it; and who is a chosen \[man\]
whom I shall appoint over her? For who is like me? and who will assign
me a time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> Therefore hear the counsel of Jehovah,
which he hath taken against Edom, and his purposes which he hath
purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: The little ones of the flock
shall certainly draw them away; he shall certainly make their habitation
desolate for them.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> The earth quaketh at the sound of their
fall; there is a cry, the sound whereof is heard in the Red sea.

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Behold, he shall come up, and fly as an
eagle, and spread forth his wings against Bozrah; and at that day the
heart of the mighty men of Edom shall be as the heart of a woman in her
pangs.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> Concerning Damascus. Hamath is put to
shame, and Arpad; for they have heard evil tidings, they are melted
away: there is distress on the sea; it cannot be quiet.

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> Damascus is grown feeble: she turneth
herself to flee, and terror hath seized on her; trouble and sorrows have
taken hold of her as of a woman in travail.

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> How is not the town of praise forsaken,
the city of my joy!

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> Therefore shall her young men fall in
her streets, and all the men of war be cut off in that day, saith
Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_49:27">49:27</span> And I will kindle a fire in the wall of
Damascus, and it shall consume the palaces of Ben-Hadad.

<span id="an_49:28">49:28</span> Concerning Kedar, and concerning the
kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote. Thus
saith Jehovah: Arise, go up to Kedar, and spoil the men of the east.

<span id="an_49:29">49:29</span> Their tents and their flocks shall they
take; their curtains and all their vessels, and their camels, shall they
carry away for themselves; and they shall cry unto them, Terror on every
side!

<span id="an_49:30">49:30</span> Flee, wander very far, dwell deep down,
ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith Jehovah; for Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon hath taken counsel against you, and hath conceived a purpose
against you.

<span id="an_49:31">49:31</span> Arise, get you up against the nation at
ease, that dwelleth securely, saith Jehovah, which hath neither gates
nor bars: they dwell alone.

<span id="an_49:32">49:32</span> And their camels shall be a booty, and
the multitude of their cattle a spoil; and I will scatter to every wind
them that have the corners \[of their beard\] cut off, and I will bring
their calamity from all sides thereof, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:33">49:33</span> And Hazor shall be a dwelling-place of
jackals, a desolation for ever. No one shall dwell there, neither shall
a son of man sojourn therein.

<span id="an_49:34">49:34</span> The word of Jehovah that came to
Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam, in the beginning of the reign of
Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,

<span id="an_49:35">49:35</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I
will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might.

<span id="an_49:36">49:36</span> And upon Elam will I bring the four
winds, from the four ends of the heavens, and I will scatter them toward
all those winds; and there shall be no nation whither the outcasts of
Elam shall not come.

<span id="an_49:37">49:37</span> And I will cause Elam to be dismayed
before their enemies, and before them that seek their life; and I will
bring evil upon them, my fierce anger, saith Jehovah; and I will send
the sword after them, till I have consumed them.

<span id="an_49:38">49:38</span> And I will set my throne in Elam, and
will destroy from thence king and princes, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_49:39">49:39</span> But it shall come to pass at the end of
the days, I will turn the captivity of Elam, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> The word that Jehovah spoke concerning
Babylon, concerning the land of the Chaldeans, through Jeremiah the
prophet.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> Declare ye among the nations, and
publish, and lift up a banner; publish, conceal not! Say, Babylon is
taken, Bel is put to shame, Merodach is dismayed: her images are put to
shame, her idols are dismayed.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> For out of the north there cometh up a
nation against her, which shall make her land desolate, and none shall
dwell therein: both man and beast are fled; they are gone.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> In those days, and at that time, saith
Jehovah, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of
Judah together, going and weeping as they go, and shall seek Jehovah
their God.

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> They shall inquire concerning Zion, with
their faces thitherward, \[saying,\] Come, and let us join ourselves to
Jehovah, in an everlasting covenant that shall not be forgotten.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> My people are lost sheep; their shepherds
have caused them to go astray, they turned them away on the mountains:
they went from mountain to hill, they forgot their resting-place.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> All that found them devoured them, and
their adversaries said, We are not guilty, because they have sinned
against Jehovah, the habitation of righteousness, even Jehovah, the hope
of their fathers.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and go
forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the he-goats before
the flock.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> For behold, I will raise and cause to
come up against Babylon, an assemblage of great nations from the north
country; and they shall set themselves in array against her: from thence
shall she be taken. Their arrows shall be as those of a mighty expert
man: none shall return empty.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all the
spoilers thereof shall be satiated, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> For ye rejoiced, for ye triumphed, ye
plunderers of my heritage; for ye have been wanton as the heifer at
grass, and neighed as steeds.

<span id="an_50:12">50:12</span> Your mother hath been sorely put to
shame; she that bore you hath been covered with reproach: behold, \[she
is become\] hindmost of the nations, a wilderness, a dry land, and a
desert.

<span id="an_50:13">50:13</span> Because of the wrath of Jehovah, it
shall not be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate; every one that
goeth by Babylon shall be astonished, and shall hiss, because of all her
plagues.

<span id="an_50:14">50:14</span> Put yourselves in array against Babylon
round about, all ye that bend the bow; shoot at her, spare no arrows:
for she hath sinned against Jehovah.

<span id="an_50:15">50:15</span> Shout against her round about: she hath
given her hand; her ramparts are fallen, her walls are thrown down: for
this is the vengeance of Jehovah. Take vengeance upon her; as she hath
done, do unto her.

<span id="an_50:16">50:16</span> Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him
that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest. For fear of the
oppressing sword let them turn every one to his people, and let them
flee every one to his own land.

<span id="an_50:17">50:17</span> Israel is a hunted sheep; the lions
have driven him away: first the king of Assyria devoured him, and last
this Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath broken his bones.

<span id="an_50:18">50:18</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel: Behold, I will visit the king of Babylon and his
land, like as I have visited the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_50:19">50:19</span> And I will bring Israel again to his
pasture, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be
satisfied upon mount Ephraim and in Gilead.

<span id="an_50:20">50:20</span> In those days, and at that time, saith
Jehovah, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will
pardon those whom I leave remaining.

<span id="an_50:21">50:21</span> Go up against the land of double
rebellion, against it, and against the inhabitants of visitation; waste
and utterly destroy after them, saith Jehovah, and do according to all
that I have commanded thee.

<span id="an_50:22">50:22</span> A sound of battle is in the land, and
great destruction.

<span id="an_50:23">50:23</span> How is the hammer of the whole earth
cut asunder and broken! How is Babylon become an astonishment among the
nations!

<span id="an_50:24">50:24</span> I have laid a snare for thee, and thou,
Babylon, art also taken, and thou wast not aware; thou art found, and
also caught, for thou hast contended with Jehovah.

<span id="an_50:25">50:25</span> Jehovah hath opened his armoury, and
hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation; for this is a work
for the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, in the land of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_50:26">50:26</span> Come ye against her from every quarter,
open her storehouses; pile her up like sheaves, and destroy her utterly:
let nothing of her be left.

<span id="an_50:27">50:27</span> Slay all her bullocks; let them go down
to the slaughter: woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of
their visitation.

<span id="an_50:28">50:28</span> The voice of them that flee and escape
out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of Jehovah
our God, the vengeance of his temple.

<span id="an_50:29">50:29</span> Call together the archers against
Babylon, all those that bend the bow: encamp against her round about;
let there be no escaping: recompense her according to her work;
according to all that she hath done, do unto her: for she hath acted
proudly against Jehovah, against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_50:30">50:30</span> Therefore shall her young men fall in
her streets; and all her men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="an_50:31">50:31</span> Behold, I am against thee, proud one,
saith the Lord Jehovah of hosts; for thy day is come, the time that I
visit thee:

<span id="an_50:32">50:32</span> and the proud one shall stumble and
fall, and none shall raise him up; yea, I will kindle a fire in his
cities, and it shall devour all that are round about him.

<span id="an_50:33">50:33</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: The
children of Israel and the children of Judah were together oppressed;
and all that took them captives held them fast: they refused to let them
go.

<span id="an_50:34">50:34</span> Their Redeemer is strong; Jehovah of
hosts is his name: he will thoroughly plead their cause, that he may
give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="an_50:35">50:35</span> The sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith
Jehovah, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and
upon her wise men;

<span id="an_50:36">50:36</span> the sword is upon the liars, and they
shall become fools; the sword is upon her mighty men, and they shall be
dismayed;

<span id="an_50:37">50:37</span> the sword is upon their horses, and
upon their chariots, and upon all the mingled people that are in the
midst of her, and they shall become as women; the sword is upon her
treasures, and they shall be robbed:

<span id="an_50:38">50:38</span> a drought is upon her waters, and they
shall be dried up; for it is a land of graven images, and they are mad
after frightful idols.

<span id="an_50:39">50:39</span> Therefore wild beasts of the desert
with jackals shall dwell there, and ostriches shall dwell therein; and
it shall be no more inhabited for ever, neither shall it be dwelt in
from generation to generation.

<span id="an_50:40">50:40</span> As when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, and their neighbour cities, saith Jehovah, no one shall dwell
there, neither shall a son of man sojourn therein.

<span id="an_50:41">50:41</span> Behold, a people cometh from the north,
and a great nation. And many kings shall arise from the uttermost parts
of the earth.

<span id="an_50:42">50:42</span> They lay hold of bow and spear; they
are cruel, and will not shew mercy; their voice roareth like the sea,
and they ride upon horses -- set in array like a man for the battle,
against thee, O daughter of Babylon.

<span id="an_50:43">50:43</span> The king of Babylon hath heard the
report of them, and his hands wax feeble; trouble hath taken hold of
him, pangs as of a woman in travail.

<span id="an_50:44">50:44</span> Behold, he shall come up like a lion
from the swelling of the Jordan against the strong habitation; for I
will make him suddenly run away from it; and who is a chosen \[man\]
whom I may appoint over her? For who is like me? and who will assign me
a time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?

<span id="an_50:45">50:45</span> Therefore hear the counsel of Jehovah,
which he hath taken against Babylon, and his purposes which he hath
purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: The little ones of the flock
shall certainly draw them away; he shall certainly make their habitation
desolate for them.

<span id="an_50:46">50:46</span> At the sound of the taking of Babylon
the earth hath quaked, and the cry is heard among the nations.

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will raise
up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in the heart of those
that rise against me, a destroying wind;

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> and I will send unto Babylon strangers,
who shall fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble
they shall be against her round about.

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> Against him that bendeth let the archer
bend his bow, and against him that lifteth himself up in his coat of
mail; and spare not her young men: destroy utterly all her host.

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> And the slain shall fall in the land of
the Chaldeans, and they that are thrust through in her streets.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> For Israel is not forsaken, nor Judah of
his God, of Jehovah of hosts; for their land is full of guilt against
the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and
save every man his life; be ye not cut off in her iniquity: for this is
the time of Jehovah's vengeance: he shall render unto her a recompence.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> Babylon hath been a golden cup in
Jehovah's hand, that made all the earth drunken: the nations have drunk
of her wine; therefore have the nations become mad.

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> Babylon is suddenly fallen and ruined.
Howl over her; take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed.

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> We have treated Babylon, but she is not
healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country; for
her judgment reacheth unto the heavens, and is lifted up to the skies.

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> Jehovah hath brought forth our
righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of Jehovah our
God.

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> Sharpen the arrows; take the shields.
Jehovah hath stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes; for his
purpose is against Babylon, to destroy it; for this is the vengeance of
Jehovah, the vengeance of his temple.

<span id="an_51:12">51:12</span> Lift up a banner towards the walls of
Babylon, make the watch strong, set the watchmen, prepare the ambushes;
for Jehovah hath both devised and done that which he spoke against the
inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="an_51:13">51:13</span> Thou that dwellest upon many waters,
abundant in treasures, thine end is come, the measure of thy rapacity.

<span id="an_51:14">51:14</span> Jehovah of hosts hath sworn by himself,
I will assuredly fill thee with men, as with caterpillars; and they
shall raise a shout against thee.

<span id="an_51:15">51:15</span> He hath made the earth by his power, he
hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the
heavens by his understanding.

<span id="an_51:16">51:16</span> When he uttereth his voice, there is a
tumult of waters in the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend
from the end of the earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain, and
bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.

<span id="an_51:17">51:17</span> Every man is become brutish, so as to
have no knowledge; every founder is put to shame by the graven image,
for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.

<span id="an_51:18">51:18</span> They are vanity, a work of delusion: in
the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="an_51:19">51:19</span> The portion of Jacob is not like them;
for it is he that hath formed all things: and \[Israel\] is the rod of
his inheritance: Jehovah of hosts is his name.

<span id="an_51:20">51:20</span> Thou art my maul, \[my\] weapons of
war: and with thee I will break in pieces the nations, and I will with
thee destroy kingdoms;

<span id="an_51:21">51:21</span> and with thee I will break in pieces
the horse and his rider; and with thee I will break in pieces the
chariot and its driver;

<span id="an_51:22">51:22</span> and with thee will I break in pieces
man and woman; and with thee will I break in pieces old and young; and
with thee will I break in pieces the young man and the maid;

<span id="an_51:23">51:23</span> and with thee will I break in pieces
the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in pieces the
husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces
governors and rulers.

<span id="an_51:24">51:24</span> And I will render unto Babylon and to
all the inhabitants of Chaldea, in your sight, all their evil which they
have done in Zion, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:25">51:25</span> Behold, I am against thee, mount of
destruction, saith Jehovah, which destroyest all the earth; and I will
stretch out my hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and
will make thee a burning mountain.

<span id="an_51:26">51:26</span> And they shall not take of thee a stone
for a corner, nor a stone for foundations; for thou shalt be desolate
for ever, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:27">51:27</span> Lift up a banner in the land, blow the
trumpet among the nations, prepare nations against her; call together
against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz; appoint a
captain against her; cause the horses to come up as the bristly
caterpillars.

<span id="an_51:28">51:28</span> Prepare nations against her, the kings
of the Medes, their governors and all their rulers, yea, all the land of
their dominion.

<span id="an_51:29">51:29</span> And the land trembleth and is in pain;
for the purposes of Jehovah against Babylon do stand, to make the land
of Babylon a desolation, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_51:30">51:30</span> The mighty men of Babylon have ceased
to fight, they are sitting in the fortresses; their might hath failed,
they are become as women: they have set her dwelling places on fire; her
bars are broken.

<span id="an_51:31">51:31</span> Courier runneth to meet courier, and
messenger to meet messenger, to announce to the king of Babylon that his
city is taken from end to end;

<span id="an_51:32">51:32</span> and the passages are seized, and the
reedy places are burnt with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

<span id="an_51:33">51:33</span> For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the
God of Israel: The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing-floor, at the
time of its being trodden; yet a little while, and the time of harvest
shall come for her.

<span id="an_51:34">51:34</span> Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath
devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel; he
hath swallowed me up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my
delicates, he hath cast me out.

<span id="an_51:35">51:35</span> The violence done to me and to my flesh
be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitress of Zion say; and, My blood be
upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.

<span id="an_51:36">51:36</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I
will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her
sea, and make her spring dry.

<span id="an_51:37">51:37</span> And Babylon shall become heaps, a
dwelling-place of jackals, an astonishment, and a hissing, without
inhabitant.

<span id="an_51:38">51:38</span> They shall roar together like young
lions, growl as lions' whelps.

<span id="an_51:39">51:39</span> When they are heated, I will prepare
their drink, and I will make them drunken, that they may exult, and
sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:40">51:40</span> I will bring them down like lambs to
the slaughter, like rams with he-goats.

<span id="an_51:41">51:41</span> How is Sheshach taken! and how is the
praise of the whole earth seized! How is Babylon become an astonishment
among the nations!

<span id="an_51:42">51:42</span> The sea is come up upon Babylon: she is
covered with the multitude of its waves.

<span id="an_51:43">51:43</span> Her cities are become a desolation, a
dry land, and a desert, a land wherein no one dwelleth, neither doth a
son of man pass thereby.

<span id="an_51:44">51:44</span> And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I
will bring forth out of his mouth what he hath swallowed up; and the
nations shall not flow together any more unto him: yea, the wall of
Babylon is fallen.

<span id="an_51:45">51:45</span> Go ye out of the midst of her, my
people, and deliver every man his soul from the fierce anger of Jehovah!

<span id="an_51:46">51:46</span> lest your heart faint, and ye fear for
the rumour that shall be heard in the land; for a rumour shall come
\[one\] year, and after that a rumour in \[another\] year, and violence
in the earth, ruler against ruler.

<span id="an_51:47">51:47</span> Therefore behold, days are coming when
I will punish the graven images of Babylon; and her whole land shall be
put to shame, and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.

<span id="an_51:48">51:48</span> And the heavens and the earth, and all
that is therein, shall shout aloud over Babylon; for out of the north
the spoilers shall come against her, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:49">51:49</span> As Babylon caused the slain of Israel
to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.

<span id="an_51:50">51:50</span> Ye that have escaped the sword, go,
stand not still: remember Jehovah from afar, and let Jerusalem come into
your mind.

<span id="an_51:51">51:51</span> -- We are put to shame, for we have
heard reproach; confusion hath covered our face: for strangers are come
into the sanctuaries of Jehovah's house.

<span id="an_51:52">51:52</span> -- Therefore behold, days come, saith
Jehovah, that I will punish her graven images; and throughout her land
the wounded shall groan.

<span id="an_51:53">51:53</span> Though Babylon should mount up to the
heavens, and though she should fortify the height of her strength, yet
from me shall spoilers come unto her, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_51:54">51:54</span> The sound of a cry \[cometh\] from
Babylon, and great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans;

<span id="an_51:55">51:55</span> for Jehovah spoileth Babylon, and he
will destroy out of her the great voice; and their waves roar like great
waters, the noise of their voice resoundeth.

<span id="an_51:56">51:56</span> For the spoiler is come against her,
against Babylon, and her mighty men are taken; their bows are broken in
pieces; for Jehovah, the ùGod of recompences, will certainly requite.

<span id="an_51:57">51:57</span> And I will make drunk her princes, and
her wise men, her governors, and her rulers, and her mighty men; and
they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose
name is Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_51:58">51:58</span> Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: The broad
walls of Babylon shall be utterly laid bare, and her high gates shall be
burned with fire; so that the peoples will have laboured in vain, and
the nations for the fire: and they shall be weary.

<span id="an_51:59">51:59</span> The word that Jeremiah the prophet
commanded Seraiah the son of Nerijah, the son of Mahseiah, when he went
with Zedekiah the king of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his
reign. Now Seraiah was chief chamberlain.

<span id="an_51:60">51:60</span> And Jeremiah wrote in a book all the
evil that should come upon Babylon, all these words that are written
against Babylon.

<span id="an_51:61">51:61</span> And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou
comest to Babylon, see that thou read all these words;

<span id="an_51:62">51:62</span> and say, Jehovah, thou hast spoken
concerning this place, that thou wilt cut it off, so that none shall
dwell in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate for
ever.

<span id="an_51:63">51:63</span> And it shall be, when thou hast ended
reading this book, \[that\] thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it
into the midst of the Euphrates;

<span id="an_51:64">51:64</span> and shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink,
and shall not rise, because of the evil that I will bring upon it: and
they shall be weary. Thus far the words of Jeremiah.

<span id="an_52:1">52:1</span> Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Hamutal, daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

<span id="an_52:2">52:2</span> And he did evil in the sight of Jehovah,
according to all that Jehoiakim had done.

<span id="an_52:3">52:3</span> For, because the anger of Jehovah was
against Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his
presence, Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_52:4">52:4</span> And it came to pass in the ninth year of
his reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth of the month, \[that\]
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against
Jerusalem; and they encamped against it, and built turrets against it
round about.

<span id="an_52:5">52:5</span> And the city was besieged until the
eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

<span id="an_52:6">52:6</span> In the fourth month, on the ninth of the
month, the famine prevailed in the city, and there was no bread for the
people of the land.

<span id="an_52:7">52:7</span> And the city was broken into: and all the
men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night, by the way of
the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden (now the
Chaldeans were near the city round about); and they went the way toward
the plain.

<span id="an_52:8">52:8</span> And the army of the Chaldeans pursued
after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all
his army was scattered from him.

<span id="an_52:9">52:9</span> And they took the king, and brought him
up to the king of Babylon, unto Riblah in the land of Hamath, and he
pronounced judgment upon him.

<span id="an_52:10">52:10</span> And the king of Babylon slaughtered the
sons of Zedekiah before his eyes; and he slaughtered also all the
princes of Judah in Riblah.

<span id="an_52:11">52:11</span> And he put out the eyes of Zedekiah,
and bound him with chains of brass; and the king of Babylon carried him
to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death.

<span id="an_52:12">52:12</span> And in the fifth month, on the tenth of
the month, which was in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon, Nebuzar-adan, captain of the body-guard, who stood before the
king of Babylon, came unto Jerusalem;

<span id="an_52:13">52:13</span> and he burned the house of Jehovah, and
the king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; and every great
\[man's\] house he burned with fire.

<span id="an_52:14">52:14</span> And all the army of the Chaldeans, that
were with the captain of the body-guard, broke down all the walls of
Jerusalem round about.

<span id="an_52:15">52:15</span> And Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard carried away captive of the poorest sort of the people, and
the rest of the people that were left in the city, and the deserters
that had deserted to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude.

<span id="an_52:16">52:16</span> But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard left of the poor of the land for vinedressers and for
husbandmen.

<span id="an_52:17">52:17</span> And the brazen pillars that were in the
house of Jehovah, and the bases, and the brazen sea that was in the
house of Jehovah, the Chaldeans broke up, and carried all the brass
thereof to Babylon.

<span id="an_52:18">52:18</span> The pots also, and the shovels, and the
knives, and the bowls, and the cups, and all the vessels of brass
wherewith they ministered, they took away.

<span id="an_52:19">52:19</span> And the basons and the censers, and the
bowls, and the pots, and the candlesticks, and the cups, and the
goblets, that which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver in
silver, the captain of the body-guard took away.

<span id="an_52:20">52:20</span> The two pillars, the one sea, and the
twelve brazen oxen that formed the bases, which king Solomon had made
for the house of Jehovah: for the brass of all these vessels there was
no weight.

<span id="an_52:21">52:21</span> And as to the pillars: the height of
one pillar was eighteen cubits, and a line of twelve cubits encompassed
it; and the thickness thereof was four fingers: it was hollow.

<span id="an_52:22">52:22</span> And the capital upon it was brass, and
the height of the one capital \[was\] five cubits; and the network and
the pomegranates, upon the capital round about, all of brass; and
similarly for the second pillar, and the pomegranates.

<span id="an_52:23">52:23</span> And there were ninety-six pomegranates
on the \[four\] sides; all the pomegranates upon the network were a
hundred round about.

<span id="an_52:24">52:24</span> And the captain of the body-guard took
Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three
doorkeepers.

<span id="an_52:25">52:25</span> And out of the city he took a eunuch
that was set over the men of war, and seven men of them that were in the
king's presence, who were found in the city, and the scribe of the
captain of the host, who enrolled the people of the land. And sixty men
of the people of the land that were found in the midst of the city.

<span id="an_52:26">52:26</span> And Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah;

<span id="an_52:27">52:27</span> and the king of Babylon smote them, and
put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was
carried away captive out of his land.

<span id="an_52:28">52:28</span> This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar
carried away captive: in the seventh year three thousand and
twenty-three Jews;

<span id="an_52:29">52:29</span> in the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadrezzar \[he carried away captive\] from Jerusalem eight hundred
and thirty-two persons;

<span id="an_52:30">52:30</span> in the twenty-third year of
Nebuchadrezzar, Nebuzar-adan the captain of the body-guard carried away
captive of the Jews seven hundred and forty-five persons: all the
persons were four thousand six hundred.

<span id="an_52:31">52:31</span> And it came to pass in the
thirty-seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the
twelfth month, on the twenty-fifth of the month, \[that\] Evil-Merodach
king of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign, lifted up the head
of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison;

<span id="an_52:32">52:32</span> and he spoke kindly unto him, and set
his seat above the seat of the kings that were with him in Babylon.

<span id="an_52:33">52:33</span> And he changed his prison garments; and
he ate bread before him continually all the days of his life;

<span id="an_52:34">52:34</span> and his allowance was a continual
allowance given him by the king of Babylon, every day a portion until
the day of his death, all the days of his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations](lam)
