[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](est)  [Next](psa) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Job

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> There was a man in the land of Uz whose
name was Job; and this man was perfect and upright, and one that feared
God and abstained from evil.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And there were born to him seven sons and
three daughters.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And his substance was seven thousand sheep,
and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five
hundred she-asses, and very many servants; and this man was greater than
all the children of the east.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And his sons went and made a feast in the
house of each one on his day; and they sent and invited their three
sisters to eat and to drink with them.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And it was so, when the days of the
feasting were gone about, that Job sent and hallowed them; and he rose
up early in the morning, and offered up burnt-offerings \[according to\]
the number of them all; for Job said, It may be that my children have
sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Thus did Job continually.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And there was a day when the sons of God
came to present themselves before Jehovah; and Satan came also among
them.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And Jehovah said to Satan, Whence comest
thou? And Satan answered Jehovah and said, From going to and fro in the
earth, and from walking up and down in it.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Jehovah said to Satan, Hast thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him on the earth, a
perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God and abstaineth from
evil?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And Satan answered Jehovah and said, Doth
Job fear God for nought?

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Hast not thou made a hedge about him, and
about his house, and about all that he hath on every side? Thou hast
blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is spread abroad in the
land.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> But put forth thy hand now and touch all
that he hath, \[and see\] if he will not curse thee to thy face!

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Jehovah said to Satan, Behold, all
that he hath is in thy hand; only upon himself put not forth thy hand.
So Satan went forth from the presence of Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And there was a day when his sons and his
daughters were eating and drinking wine in the house of their brother,
the firstborn.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And there came a messenger to Job and
said, The oxen were ploughing, and the asses feeding beside them;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and \[they of\] Sheba fell \[upon them\]
and took them, and the servants have they smitten with the edge of the
sword; and I only am escaped, alone, to tell thee.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> While he was yet speaking, there came
another and said, The fire of God fell from heaven and burned up the
sheep and the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped, alone,
to tell thee.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> While he was yet speaking, there came
another and said, The Chaldeans made three bands, and fell upon the
camels and took them, and the servants have they smitten with the edge
of the sword; and I only am escaped, alone, to tell thee.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> While he was yet speaking, there came
another and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking
wine in the house of their brother, the firstborn;

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> and behold, there came a great wind from
over the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it
fell upon the young men, and they died; and I only am escaped, alone, to
tell thee.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And Job rose up, and rent his mantle, and
shaved his head, and fell down on the ground, and worshipped;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> and he said, Naked came I out of my
mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: Jehovah gave, and
Jehovah hath taken away; blessed be the name of Jehovah!

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> In all this Job sinned not, nor ascribed
anything unseemly to God.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And there was a day when the sons of God
came to present themselves before Jehovah, and Satan also came among
them to present himself before Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Jehovah said to Satan, From whence
comest thou? And Satan answered Jehovah and said, From going to and fro
in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And Jehovah said to Satan, Hast thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him on the earth, a
perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God and abstaineth from
evil? and still he remaineth firm in his integrity, though thou movedst
me against him, to swallow him up without cause.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And Satan answered Jehovah and said, Skin
for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> but put forth thy hand now, and touch his
bone and his flesh, \[and see\] if he will not curse thee to thy face!

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And Jehovah said to Satan, Behold, he is in
thy hand; only spare his life.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And Satan went forth from the presence of
Jehovah; and he smote Job with a grievous botch from the sole of his
foot unto his crown.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And he took a potsherd to scrape himself
with; and he sat among the ashes.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And his wife said to him, Dost thou still
remain firm in thine integrity? curse God and die.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But he said to her, Thou speakest as one
of the foolish women speaketh. We have also received good from God, and
should we not receive evil? In all this Job did not sin with his lips.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And three friends of Job heard of all
this evil that was come upon him. And they came each one from his place:
Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite;
and they made an appointment together to come to condole with him and to
comfort him.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And when they lifted up their eyes afar
off, and knew him not, they lifted up their voice and wept. And they
rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward
the heavens.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And they sat down with him on the ground
seven days and seven nights; and none spoke a word to him; for they saw
that \[his\] anguish was very great.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> After this, Job opened his mouth and cursed
his day.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let the day perish in which I was born, and
the night that said, There is a man child conceived.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> That day -- let it be darkness, let not
+God care for it from above, neither let light shine upon it:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Let darkness and the shadow of death claim
it; let clouds dwell upon it; let darkeners of the day terrify it.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> That night -- let gloom seize upon it; let
it not rejoice among the days of the year; let it not come into the
number of the months.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Behold, let that night be barren; let no
joyful sound come therein;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Let them curse it that curse the day, who
are ready to rouse Leviathan;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Let the stars of its twilight be dark; let
it wait for light, and have none, neither let it see the eyelids of the
dawn:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Because it shut not up the doors of the
womb that bore me, and hid not trouble from mine eyes.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Wherefore did I not die from the womb, --
come forth from the belly and expire?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Why did the knees meet me? and wherefore
the breasts, that I should suck?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For now should I have lain down and been
quiet; I should have slept: then had I been at rest,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> With kings and counsellors of the earth,
who build desolate places for themselves,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Or with princes who had gold, who filled
their houses with silver;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Or as a hidden untimely birth I had not
been; as infants that have not seen the light.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> There the wicked cease from troubling;
and there the wearied are at rest.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> The prisoners together are at ease; they
hear not the voice of the taskmaster.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The small and great are there, and the
bondman freed from his master.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Wherefore is light given to him that is
in trouble, and life to those bitter of soul,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who long for death, and it \[cometh\]
not, and dig for it more than for hidden treasures;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Who rejoice even exultingly and are glad
when they find the grave? --

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> To the man whose way is hidden, and whom
+God hath hedged in?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> For my sighing cometh before my bread,
and my groanings are poured out like the waters.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For I feared a fear, and it hath come
upon me, and that which I dreaded hath come to me.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> I was not in safety, neither had I
quietness, neither was I at rest, and trouble came.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> If a word were essayed to thee, wouldest
thou be grieved? But who can refrain from speaking?

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou
hast strengthened the weak hands;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Thy words have upholden him that was
stumbling, and thou hast braced up the bending knees:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But now it is come upon thee, and thou
grievest; it toucheth thee, and thou art troubled.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Hath not thy piety been thy confidence, and
the perfection of thy ways thy hope?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Remember, I pray thee, who that was
innocent has perished? and where were the upright cut off?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Even as I have seen, they that plough
iniquity and sow mischief, reap the same.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> By the breath of +God they perish, and by
the blast of his nostrils are they consumed.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The roar of the lion, and the voice of
the fierce lion, and the teeth of the young lions, are broken;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The old lion perisheth for lack of prey,
and the whelps of the lioness are scattered.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Now to me a word was secretly brought,
and mine ear received a whisper thereof.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> In thoughts from visions of the night,
when deep sleep falleth on men: --

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Fear came on me, and trembling, and made
all my bones to shake;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And a spirit passed before my face -- the
hair of my flesh stood up --

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> It stood still; I could not discern the
appearance thereof: a form was before mine eyes; I heard a slight murmur
and a voice:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Shall \[mortal\] man be more just than
+God? Shall a man be purer than his Maker?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Lo, he trusteth not his servants, and his
angels he chargeth with folly:

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> How much more them that dwell in houses
of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed as the moth!

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> From morning to evening are they smitten:
without any heeding it, they perish for ever.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Is not their tent-cord torn away in them?
they die, and without wisdom.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Call, I pray thee! Is there any that
answereth thee? and to which of the holy ones wilt thou turn?

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For vexation killeth the foolish man, and
envy slayeth the simple.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I myself saw the foolish taking root, but
suddenly I cursed his habitation.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> His children are far from safety, and they
are crushed in the gate, and there is no deliverer:

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and
taketh even out of the thorns; and the snare gapeth for his substance.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For evil cometh not forth from the dust,
neither doth trouble spring out of the ground;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For man is born to trouble, as the sparks
fly upwards.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But as for me I will seek unto ùGod, and
unto God commit my cause;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Who doeth great things and unsearchable,
marvellous things without number;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Who giveth rain on the face of the earth,
and sendeth waters on the face of the fields;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Setting up on high those that are low;
and mourners are exalted to prosperity.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> He disappointeth the devices of the
crafty, and their hands carry not out the enterprise.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> He taketh the wise in their own
craftiness; and the counsel of the wily is carried headlong:

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> They meet with darkness in a the daytime,
and grope at midday as in the night.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And he saveth the needy from the sword,
from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> So the poor hath what he hopeth for, and
unrighteousness stoppeth her mouth.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Behold, happy is the man whom +God
correcteth; therefore despise not the chastening of the Almighty.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For he maketh sore, and bindeth up; he
woundeth, and his hands make whole.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> He will deliver thee in six troubles, and
in seven there shall no evil touch thee.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> In famine he will redeem thee from death,
and in war from the power of the sword.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Thou shalt be hidden from the scourge of
the tongue; and thou shalt not be afraid of destruction when it cometh.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> At destruction and famine thou shalt
laugh, and of the beasts of the earth thou shalt not be afraid.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For thou shalt be in league with the
stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with
thee.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And thou shalt know that thy tent is in
peace; and thou wilt survey thy fold, and miss nothing.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And thou shalt know that thy seed is
numerous, and thine offspring as the herb of the earth.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Thou shalt come to the grave in a ripe
age, as a shock of corn is brought in in its season.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Behold this, we have searched it out, so
it is; hear it, and know thou it for thyself.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Oh that my grief were thoroughly weighed,
and all my calamity laid in the balances!

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> For now it would be heavier than the sand
of the seas; therefore my words are vehement.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For the arrows of the Almighty are within
me, their poison drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of +God are arrayed
against me.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Doth the wild ass bray by the grass? loweth
an ox over his fodder?

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Shall that which is insipid be eaten
without salt? Is there any taste in the white of an egg?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> What my soul refuseth to touch, that is as
my loathsome food.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Oh that I might have my request, and that
+God would grant my desire!

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And that it would please +God to crush me,
that he would let loose his hand and cut me off!

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Then should I yet have comfort; and in
the pain which spareth not I would rejoice that I have not denied the
words of the Holy One.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> What is my strength, that I should hope?
and what is mine end, that I should have patience?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Is my strength the strength of stones? is
my flesh of brass?

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Is it not that there is no help in me,
and soundness is driven away from me?

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For him that is fainting kindness \[is
meet\] from his friend; or he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a
stream, as the channel of streams which pass away,

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Which are turbid by reason of the ice, in
which the snow hideth itself:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> At the time they diminish, they are dried
up; when heat affecteth them, they vanish from their place:

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> They wind about in the paths of their
course, they go off into the waste and perish.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> The caravans of Tema looked, the
companies of Sheba counted on them:

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> They are ashamed at their hope; they come
thither, and are confounded.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> So now ye are nothing; ye see a terrible
object and are afraid.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Did I say, Bring unto me, and make me a
present from your substance?

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Or, rescue me from the hand of the
oppressor, and redeem me from the hand of the violent?

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Teach me, and I will hold my tongue; and
cause me to understand wherein I have erred.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> How forcible are right words! but what
doth your upbraiding reprove?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Do ye imagine to reprove words? The
speeches of one that is desperate are indeed for the wind.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and dig
\[a pit\] for your friend.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Now therefore if ye will, look upon me;
and it shall be to your face if I lie.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Return, I pray you, let there be no
wrong; yea, return again, my righteousness shall be in it.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Is there wrong in my tongue? cannot my
taste discern mischievous things?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Hath not man a life of labour upon earth?
and are not his days like the days of a hireling?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> As a bondman earnestly desireth the shadow,
and a hireling expecteth his wages,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So am I made to possess months of vanity,
and wearisome nights are appointed to me.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> If I lie down, I say, When shall I rise up,
and the darkness be gone? and I am full of tossings until the dawn.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of
dust; my skin is broken, and suppurates.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> My days are swifter than a weaver's
shuttle, and are spent without hope.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Remember thou that my life is wind; mine
eye shall no more see good.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> The eye of him that hath seen me shall
behold me no \[more\]: thine eyes are upon me, and I am not.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> The cloud consumeth and vanisheth away; so
he that goeth down to Sheol shall not come up.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> He shall return no more to his house,
neither shall his place know him again.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Therefore I will not restrain my mouth: I
will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the
bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Am I a sea, or a sea-monster, that thou
settest a watch over me?

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my
couch shall ease my complaint;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Then thou scarest me with dreams, and
terrifiest me through visions;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> So that my soul chooseth strangling,
death, rather than my bones.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I loathe it; I shall not live always: let
me alone, for my days are a breath.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> What is man, that thou makest much of
him? and that thou settest thy heart upon him?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And that thou visitest him every morning,
triest him every moment?

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> How long wilt thou not look away from me,
nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Have I sinned, what do I unto thee, thou
Observer of men? Why hast thou set me as an object of assault for thee,
so that I am become a burden to myself?

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And why dost not thou forgive my
transgression and take away mine iniquity? for now shall I lie down in
the dust, and thou shalt seek me early, and I shall not be.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Bildad the Shuhite answered and said,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> How long wilt thou speak these things? and
the words of thy mouth be a strong wind?

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Doth ùGod pervert judgment, and the
Almighty pervert justice?

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> If thy children have sinned against him, he
hath also given them over into the hand of their transgression.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> If thou seek earnestly unto ùGod, and make
thy supplication to the Almighty,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> If thou be pure and upright, surely now he
will awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness
prosperous;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And though thy beginning was small, yet
thine end shall be very great.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> For inquire, I pray thee, of the former
generation, and attend to the researches of their fathers;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For we are \[but\] of yesterday, and know
nothing, for our days upon earth are a shadow.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Shall not they teach thee, \[and\] tell
thee, and utter words out of their heart?

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Doth the papyrus shoot up without mire?
doth the reed-grass grow without water?

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Whilst it is yet in its greenness \[and\]
not cut down, it withereth before any \[other\] grass.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> So are the paths of all that forget ùGod;
and the profane man's hope shall perish,

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Whose confidence shall be cut off, and
his reliance is a spider's web.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> He shall lean upon his house, and it
shall not stand; he shall lay hold on it, but it shall not endure.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> He is full of sap before the sun, and his
sprout shooteth forth over his garden;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> His roots are entwined about the
stoneheap; he seeth the place of stones.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> If he destroy him from his place, then it
shall deny him: I have not seen thee!

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Behold, this is the joy of his way, and
out of the dust shall others grow.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Behold, ùGod will not cast off a perfect
man, neither will he take evil-doers by the hand.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Whilst he would fill thy mouth with
laughing and thy lips with shouting,

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> They that hate thee shall be clothed with
shame, and the tent of the wicked be no more.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Of a truth I know it is so; but how can man
be just with ùGod?

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> If he shall choose to strive with him, he
cannot answer him one thing of a thousand.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> He is wise in heart and mighty in strength:
who hath hardened himself against him, and had peace?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Who removeth mountains, and they know it
not, when he overturneth them in his anger;

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Who shaketh the earth out of its place, and
the pillars thereof tremble;

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Who commandeth the sun, and it riseth not,
and he sealeth up the stars;

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Who alone spreadeth out the heavens, and
treadeth upon the high waves of the sea;

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Who maketh the Bear, Orion, and the
Pleiades, and the chambers of the south;

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Who doeth great things past finding out,
and wonders without number.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Lo, he goeth by me, and I see \[him\]
not; and he passeth along, and I perceive him not.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Behold, he taketh away: who will hinder
him? Who will say unto him, What doest thou?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> +God withdraweth not his anger; the proud
helpers stoop under him:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> How much less shall I answer him, choose
out my words \[to strive\] with him?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Whom, though I were righteous, \[yet\]
would I not answer; I would make supplication to my judge.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> If I had called, and he had answered me,
I would not believe that he hearkened to my voice, --

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> He, who crusheth me with a tempest, and
multiplieth my wounds without cause.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> He suffereth me not to take my breath,
for he filleth me with bitternesses.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Be it a question of strength, lo, \[he
is\] strong; and be it of judgment, who will set me a time?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> If I justified myself, mine own mouth
would condemn me; were I perfect, he would prove me perverse.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Were I perfect, \[yet\] would I not know
my soul: I would despise my life.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> It is all one; therefore I said, he
destroyeth the perfect and the wicked.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> If the scourge kill suddenly, he mocketh
at the trial of the innocent.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> The earth is given over into the hand of
the wicked \[man\]; he covereth the faces of its judges. If not, who
then is it?

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And my days are swifter than a runner:
they flee away, they see no good.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> They pass by like skiffs of reed; as an
eagle that swoops upon the prey.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> If I say, I will forget my complaint, I
will leave off my \[sad\] countenance, and brighten up,

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> I am afraid of all my sorrows; I know
that thou wilt not hold me innocent.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Be it that I am wicked, why then do I
labour in vain?

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> If I washed myself with snow-water, and
cleansed my hands in purity,

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> Then wouldest thou plunge me in the
ditch, and mine own clothes would abhor me.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> For he is not a man, as I am, that I
should answer him; that we should come together in judgment.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> There is not an umpire between us, who
should lay his hand upon us both.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> Let him take his rod away from me, and
let not his terror make me afraid,

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> \[Then\] I will speak, and not fear him;
but it is not so with me.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> My soul is weary of my life: I will give
free course to my complaint; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> I will say unto +God, Do not condemn me;
shew me wherefore thou strivest with me.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Doth it please thee to oppress, that thou
shouldest despise the work of thy hands, and shine upon the counsel of
the wicked?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as
man seeth?

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Are thy days as the days of a mortal? are
thy years as a man's days,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> That thou searchest after mine iniquity,
and inquirest into my sin;

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Since thou knowest that I am not wicked,
and that there is none that delivereth out of thy hand?

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Thy hands have bound me together and made
me as one, round about; yet dost thou swallow me up!

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast
made me as clay, and wilt bring me into dust again.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Hast thou not poured me out as milk,
and curdled me like cheese?

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Thou hast clothed me with skin and
flesh, and knit me together with bones and sinews;

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Thou hast granted me life and favour,
and thy care hath preserved my spirit;

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And these things didst thou hide in thy
heart; I know that this was with thee.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> If I sinned, thou wouldest mark me, and
thou wouldest not acquit me of mine iniquity.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> If I were wicked, woe unto me! and
righteous, I will not lift up my head, being \[so\] full of shame, and
beholding mine affliction; --

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And it increaseth: thou huntest me as a
fierce lion; and ever again thou shewest thy marvellous power upon me.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Thou renewest thy witnesses before me
and increasest thy displeasure against me; successions \[of evil\] and a
time of toil are with me.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And wherefore didst thou bring me forth
out of the womb? I had expired, and no eye had seen me.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> I should be as though I had not been; I
should have been carried from the womb to the grave.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Are not my days few? cease then and let
me alone, that I may revive a little,

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Before I go, and never to return, -- to
the land of darkness and the shadow of death;

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> A land of gloom, as darkness itself; of
the shadow of death, without any order, where the light is as thick
darkness.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And Zophar the Naamathite answered and
said,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Should not the multitude of words be
answered? and should a man of much talk be justified?

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Should thy fictions make men hold their
peace? and shouldest thou mock, and no one make \[thee\] ashamed?

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For thou sayest, My doctrine is pure, and
I am clean in thine eyes.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> But oh that +God would speak, and open
his lips against thee;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And that he would shew thee the secrets
of wisdom, how that they are the double of what is realised; and know
that +God passeth by \[much\] of thine iniquity!

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Canst thou by searching find out +God?
canst thou find out the Almighty to perfection?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> \[It is as\] the heights of heaven; what
wilt thou do? deeper than Sheol; what canst thou know?

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> The measure thereof is longer than the
earth, and broader than the sea.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> If he pass by, and shut up, and call to
judgment, who can hinder him?

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> For he knoweth vain men, and seeth
wickedness when \[man\] doth not consider it;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Yet a senseless man will make bold,
though man be born \[like\] the foal of a wild ass.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> If thou prepare thy heart and stretch
out thy hands toward him,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> If thou put far away the iniquity which
is in thy hand, and let not wrong dwell in thy tents;

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Surely then shalt thou lift up thy face
without spot, and thou shalt be stedfast and shalt not fear:

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For thou shalt forget misery; as waters
that are passed away shalt thou remember it;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And life shall arise brighter than
noonday; though thou be enshrouded in darkness, thou shalt be as the
morning,

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And thou shalt have confidence, because
there shall be hope; and having searched about \[thee\], thou shalt take
rest in safety.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Yea, thou shalt lie down, and none
shall make thee afraid; and many shall seek thy favour.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But the eyes of the wicked shall fail,
and \[all\] refuge shall vanish from them, and their hope \[shall be\]
the breathing out of life.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Truly ye are the people, and wisdom shall
die with you!

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> I also have understanding as well as you;
I am not inferior to you; and who knoweth not such things as these?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> I am to be one that is a derision to his
friend, I who call upon +God, and whom he will answer: a derision is the
just upright \[man\].

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> He that is ready to stumble with the foot
is a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The tents of desolators are in peace, and
they that provoke ùGod are secure; into whose hand +God bringeth.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But ask now the beasts, and they shall
teach thee; and the fowl of the heavens, and they shall tell thee;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach
thee; and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Who knoweth not in all these, that the
hand of Jehovah hath wrought this?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> In whose hand is the soul of every
living thing, and the spirit of all flesh of man.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Doth not the ear try words, as the
palate tasteth food?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> With the aged is wisdom, and in length
of days understanding.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> With him is wisdom and might; he hath
counsel and understanding.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Behold, he breaketh down, and it is not
built again; he shutteth up a man, and there is no opening.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and
they dry up; and he sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> With him is strength and effectual
knowledge; the deceived and the deceiver are his.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> He leadeth counsellors away spoiled,
and judges maketh he fools;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> He weakeneth the government of kings,
and bindeth their loins with a fetter;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> He leadeth priests away spoiled, and
overthroweth the mighty;

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> He depriveth of speech the trusty, and
taketh away the judgment of the elders;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> He poureth contempt upon nobles, and
slackeneth the girdle of the mighty;

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> He discovereth deep things out of
darkness, and bringeth out into light the shadow of death;

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> He increaseth the nations, and
destroyeth them; he spreadeth out the nations, and bringeth them in;

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> He taketh away the understanding of the
chiefs of the people of the earth, and causeth them to wander in a
pathless waste.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> They grope in the dark without light,
and he maketh them to stagger like a drunkard.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Lo, mine eye hath seen all \[this\], mine
ear hath heard and understood it.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> What ye know, I know also: I am not
inferior to you.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> But I will speak to the Almighty, and
will find pleasure in reasoning with ùGod;

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> For ye indeed are forgers of lies, ye are
all physicians of no value.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Oh that ye would be altogether silent!
and it would be your wisdom.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Hear now my defence, and hearken to the
pleadings of my lips.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Will ye speak unrighteously for ùGod? and
for him speak deceit?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Will ye accept his person? will ye
contend for ùGod?

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Will it be well if he should search you
out? or as one mocketh at a man, will ye mock at him?

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> He will certainly reprove you, if ye do
secretly accept persons.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Shall not his excellency terrify you?
and his dread fall upon you?

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Your memorable sayings are proverbs of
ashes, your bulwarks are bulwarks of mire.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Hold your peace from me, and I will
speak, and let come on me what \[will\]!

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Wherefore should I take my flesh in my
teeth, and put my life in my hand?

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Behold, if he slay me, yet would I
trust in him; but I will defend mine own ways before him.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> This also shall be my salvation, that a
profane man shall not come before his face.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Hear attentively my speech and my
declaration with your ears.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Behold now, I have ordered the cause; I
know that I shall be justified.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Who is he that contendeth with me? For
if I were silent now, I should expire.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Only do not two things unto me; then
will I not hide myself from thee.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Withdraw thy hand far from me; and let
not thy terror make me afraid:

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Then call, and I will answer; or I will
speak, and answer thou me.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> How many are mine iniquities and sins?
Make me to know my transgression and my sin.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Wherefore dost thou hide thy face, and
countest me for thine enemy?

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> Wilt thou terrify a driven leaf? and
wilt thou pursue dry stubble?

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> For thou writest bitter things against
me, and makest me to possess the iniquities of my youth;

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And thou puttest my feet in the stocks,
and markest all my paths; thou settest a bound about the soles of my
feet; --

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> One who, as a rotten thing consumeth,
as a garment that the moth eateth.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Man, born of woman, is of few days, and
full of trouble.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut
down; and he fleeth as a shadow, and continueth not.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Yet dost thou open thine eyes upon such a
one, and bringest me into judgment with thee?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who can bring a clean \[man\] out of the
unclean? Not one!

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> If his days are determined, if the number
of his months is with thee, \[and\] thou hast appointed his bounds which
he must not pass,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Look away from him; and let him rest,
till he accomplish, as a hireling, his day.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For there is hope for a tree: if it be
cut down, it will sprout again, and its tender branch will not cease;

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Though its root grow old in the earth,
and its stock die in the ground,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Yet through the scent of water it will
bud, and put forth boughs like a young plant.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But a man dieth, and is prostrate; yea,
man expireth, and where is he?

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> The waters recede from the lake, and
the river wasteth and drieth up:

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So man lieth down, and riseth not
again; till the heavens be no more, they do not awake, nor are raised
out of their sleep.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Oh that thou wouldest hide me in Sheol,
that thou wouldest keep me secret until thine anger be past, that thou
wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me, --

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> (If a man die, shall he live
\[again\]?) all the days of my time of toil would I wait, till my change
should come:

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Thou wouldest call, and I would answer
thee; thou wouldest have a desire after the work of thy hands.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> For now thou numberest my steps: dost
thou not watch over my sin?

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> My transgression is sealed up in a bag,
and thou heapest up mine iniquity.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And indeed a mountain falling cometh to
nought, and the rock is removed out of its place;

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The waters wear the stones, the floods
thereof wash away the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of
man.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Thou prevailest for ever against him,
and he passeth away; thou changest his countenance, and dismissest him.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> His sons come to honour, and he knoweth
it not; and they are brought low, and he perceiveth it not.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> But his flesh hath pain for himself
alone, and his soul mourneth for himself.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And Eliphaz the Temanite answered and
said,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Should a wise man answer with windy
knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind,

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Reasoning with unprofitable talk, and
with speeches which do no good?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Yea, thou makest piety of none effect,
and restrainest meditation before ùGod.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For thy mouth uttereth thine iniquity,
and thou hast chosen the tongue of the crafty.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not
I; and thy lips testify against thee.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Art thou the first man that was born? and
wast thou brought forth before the hills?

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Hast thou listened in the secret council
of +God? And hast thou absorbed wisdom for thyself?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> What knowest thou that we know not?
\[what\] understandest thou which is not in us?

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Both the greyheaded and the aged are
with us, older than thy father.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Are the consolations of ùGod too small
for thee? and the word gently spoken to thee?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Why doth thy heart carry thee away? and
why do thine eyes wink?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> That thou turnest thy spirit against
ùGod, and lettest words go out of thy mouth?

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> What is man, that he should be pure?
and he that is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Behold, he putteth no trust in his holy
ones, and the heavens are not pure in his sight:

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> How much less the abominable and
corrupt, -- man, that drinketh unrighteousness like water!

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I will shew thee, listen to me; and
what I have seen I will declare;

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Which wise men have told from their
fathers, and have not hidden;

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Unto whom alone the earth was given,
and no stranger passed among them.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> All his days the wicked man is
tormented, and numbered years are allotted to the violent.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> The sound of terrors is in his ears: in
prosperity the destroyer cometh upon him.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> He believeth not that he shall return
out of darkness, and he is singled out for the sword.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> He wandereth abroad for bread, -- where
may it be? He knoweth that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Distress and anguish make him afraid;
they prevail against him, as a king ready for the battle.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> For he hath stretched out his hand
against ùGod, and strengthened himself against the Almighty:

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> He runneth against him, with
\[outstretched\] neck, with the thick bosses of his bucklers;

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> For he hath covered his face with his
fatness, and gathered fat upon \[his\] flanks.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And he dwelleth in desolate cities, in
houses that no man inhabiteth, which are destined to become heaps.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> He shall not become rich, neither shall
his substance continue, and their possessions shall not extend upon the
earth.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> He shall not depart out of darkness;
the flame shall dry up his branches; and by the breath of his mouth
shall he go away.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Let him not trust in vanity: he is
deceived, for vanity shall be his recompense;

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> It shall be complete before his day,
and his branch shall not be green.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> He shall shake off his unripe grapes as
a vine, and shall cast his flower as an olive.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> For the family of the ungodly shall be
barren, and fire shall consume the tents of bribery.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> They conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity, and their belly prepareth deceit.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> I have heard many such things: grievous
comforters are ye all.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Shall words of wind have an end? or what
provoketh thee that thou answerest?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> I also could speak as ye: if your soul
were in my soul's stead, I could join together words against you, and
shake my head at you;

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> \[But\] I would encourage you with my
mouth, and the solace of my lips should assuage \[your pain\].

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> If I speak, my pain is not assuaged; and
if I forbear, what am I eased?

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But now he hath made me weary; ... thou
hast made desolate all my family;

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Thou hast shrivelled me up! it is become
a witness; and my leanness riseth up against me, it beareth witness to
my face.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> His anger teareth and pursueth me; he
gnasheth with his teeth against me; \[as\] mine adversary he sharpeneth
his eyes at me.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> They gape upon me with their mouth;
they smite my cheeks reproachfully; they range themselves together
against me.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> ùGod hath delivered me over to the
iniquitous man, and hurled me into the hands of the wicked.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> I was at rest, but he hath shattered
me; he hath taken me by the neck and shaken me to pieces, and set me up
for his mark.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> His arrows encompass me round about, he
cleaveth my reins asunder and doth not spare; he poureth out my gall
upon the ground.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> He breaketh me with breach upon breach;
he runneth upon me like a mighty man.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin,
and rolled my horn in the dust.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> My face is red with weeping, and on my
eyelids is the shadow of death;

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Although there is no violence in my
hands, and my prayer is pure.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> O earth, cover not my blood, and let
there be no place for my cry!

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Even now, behold, my Witness is in the
heavens, and he that voucheth for me is in the heights.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> My friends are my mockers; mine eye
poureth out tears unto +God.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Oh that there were arbitration for a
man with +God, as a son of man for his friend!

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> For years \[few\] in number shall pass,
-- and I shall go the way \[whence\] I shall not return.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> My breath is corrupt, my days are
extinct, the graves are mine.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Are there not mockers around me? and doth
\[not\] mine eye abide in their provocation?

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Lay down now \[a pledge\], be thou surety
for me with thyself: who is he that striketh hands with me?

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> For thou hast hidden their heart from
understanding; therefore thou wilt not exalt \[them\].

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He that betrayeth friends for a prey --
even the eyes of his children shall fail.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And he hath made me a proverb of the
peoples; and I am become one to be spit on in the face.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And mine eye is dim by reason of grief,
and all my members are as a shadow.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Upright men \[shall be\] astonished at
this, and the innocent shall be stirred up against the ungodly;

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> But the righteous shall hold on his way,
and he that hath clean hands shall increase in strength.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> But as for you all, pray come on again;
and I shall not find one wise man among you.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> My days are past, my purposes are
broken off, the cherished thoughts of my heart.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> They change the night into day; the
light \[they imagine\] near in presence of the darkness.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> If I wait, Sheol is my house; I spread
my bed in the darkness:

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> I cry to the grave, Thou art my father!
to the worm, My mother, and my sister!

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And where is then my hope? yea, my
hope, who shall see it?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> It shall go down to the bars of Sheol,
when \[our\] rest shall be together in the dust.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And Bildad the Shuhite answered and said,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> How long will ye hunt for words? Be
intelligent, and then we will speak.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and
reputed stupid in your sight?

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Thou that tearest thyself in thine anger,
shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be removed out
of its place?

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put
out, and the flame of his fire shall not shine.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> The light shall become dark in his tent,
and his lamp over him shall be put out.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The steps of his strength shall be
straitened, and his own counsel shall cast him down.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> For he is sent into the net by his own
feet, and he walketh on the meshes;

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> The gin taketh \[him\] by the heel, the
snare layeth hold on him;

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> A cord is hidden for him in the ground,
and his trap in the way.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Terrors make him afraid on every side,
and chase him at his footsteps.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> His strength is hunger-bitten, and
calamity is ready at his side.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> The firstborn of death devoureth the
members of his body; it will devour his members.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> His confidence shall be rooted out of
his tent, and it shall lead him away to the king of terrors:

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> They who are none of his shall dwell in
his tent; brimstone shall be showered upon his habitation:

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> His roots shall be dried up beneath,
and above shall his branch be cut off;

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> His remembrance shall perish from the
earth, and he shall have no name on the pasture-grounds.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> He is driven from light into darkness,
and chased out of the world.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> He hath neither son nor grandson among
his people, nor any remaining in the places of his sojourn.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> They that come after shall be
astonished at his day, as they that went before \[them\] were
affrighted.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Surely, such are the dwellings of the
unrighteous man, and such the place of him that knoweth not ùGod.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> How long will ye vex my soul, and crush
me with words?

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> These ten times have ye reproached me; ye
are not ashamed to stupefy me.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And be it \[that\] I have erred, mine
error remaineth with myself.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> If indeed ye will magnify yourselves
against me, and prove against me my reproach,

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Know now that +God hath overthrown me,
and hath surrounded me with his net.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Behold, I cry out of wrong, and I am not
heard; I cry aloud, but there is no judgment.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He hath hedged up my way that I cannot
pass, and he hath set darkness in my paths.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> He hath stripped me of my glory, and
taken the crown from my head.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> He breaketh me down on every side, and
I am gone; and my hope hath he torn up as a tree.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And he hath kindled his anger against
me, and hath counted me unto him as one of his enemies.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> His troops have come together and cast
up their way against me, and have encamped round about my tent.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> He hath put my brethren far from me,
and mine acquaintance are quite estranged from me.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> My kinsfolk have failed, and my known
friends have forgotten me.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> The sojourners in my house and my maids
count me as a stranger; I am an alien in their sight.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> I called my servant, and he answered
not; I entreated him with my mouth.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> My breath is strange to my wife, and my
entreaties to the children of my \[mother's\] womb.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Even young children despise me; I rise
up, and they speak against me.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> All my intimate friends abhor me, and
they whom I loved are turned against me.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> My bones cleave to my skin and to my
flesh, and I am escaped with the skin of my teeth.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Have pity upon me, have pity upon me,
ye my friends; for the hand of +God hath touched me.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Why do ye persecute me as ùGod, and are
not satisfied with my flesh?

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Oh would that my words were written! oh
that they were inscribed in a book!

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> That with an iron style and lead they
were graven in the rock for ever!

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And \[as for\] me, I know that my
Redeemer liveth, and the Last, he shall stand upon the earth;

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And \[if\] after my skin this shall be
destroyed, yet from out of my flesh shall I see +God;

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Whom I shall see for myself, and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another: -- my reins are consumed within me.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> If ye say, How shall we persecute him?
when the root of the matter is found in me,

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Be ye yourselves afraid of the sword!
for the sword is fury against misdeeds, that ye may know there is a
judgment.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And Zophar the Naamathite answered and
said,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Therefore do my thoughts give me an
answer, and for this is my haste within me.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> I hear a reproof putting me to shame; and
\[my\] spirit answereth me by mine understanding.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Knowest thou \[not\] this, that of old,
since man was placed upon earth,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> The exultation of the wicked is short,
and the joy of the ungodly man but for a moment?

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Though his height mount up to the
heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds,

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Like his own dung doth he perish for
ever; they which have seen him shall say, Where is he?

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> He flieth away as a dream, and is not
found; and is chased away as a vision of the night.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> The eye which saw him shall \[see him\]
not again; and his place beholdeth him no more.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> His children shall seek the favour of
the poor, and his hands restore his wealth.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> His bones were full of his youthful
strength; but it shall lie down with him in the dust.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth
\[and\] he hide it under his tongue,

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> \[Though\] he spare it, and forsake it
not, but keep it within his mouth,

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> His food is turned in his bowels; it is
the gall of asps within him.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> He hath swallowed down riches, but he
shall vomit them up again: ùGod shall cast them out of his belly.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> He shall suck the poison of asps; the
viper's tongue shall kill him.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> He shall not see streams, rivers,
brooks of honey and butter.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> That which he laboured for shall he
restore, and not swallow down; its restitution shall be according to the
value, and he shall not rejoice \[therein\].

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> For he hath oppressed, hath forsaken
the poor; he hath violently taken away a house that he did not build.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Because he knew no rest in his craving,
he shall save nought of what he most desired.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Nothing escaped his greediness;
therefore his prosperity shall not endure.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> In the fulness of his sufficiency he
shall be in straits; every hand of the wretched shall come upon him.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> It shall be that, to fill his belly, he
will cast his fierce anger upon him, and will rain it upon him into his
flesh.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> If he have fled from the iron weapon,
the bow of brass shall strike him through.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> He draweth it forth; it cometh out of
his body, and the glittering point out of his gall: terrors are upon
him.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> All darkness is laid up for his
treasures: a fire not blown shall devour him; it shall feed upon what is
left in his tent.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The heavens shall reveal his iniquity,
and the earth shall rise up against him.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> The increase of his house shall depart,
flowing away in the day of his anger.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> This is the portion of the wicked man
from God, and the heritage appointed to him by ùGod.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Hear attentively my speech, and let this
replace your consolations.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Suffer me and I will speak; and after I
have spoken, mock on!

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> As for me, is my complaint to a man? or
wherefore should not my spirit be impatient?

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Mark me, and be astonished, and lay the
hand upon the mouth.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Even when I think \[thereon\], I am
affrighted, and trembling taketh hold of my flesh.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Wherefore do the wicked live, grow old,
yea, become mighty in power?

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Their seed is established with them in
their sight, and their offspring before their eyes.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Their houses are safe from fear, neither
is the rod of +God upon them.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Their bull gendereth, and faileth not;
their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> They send forth their little ones like
a flock, and their children dance.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> They shout to the tambour and harp, and
rejoice at the sound of the pipe.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> They spend their days in prosperity,
and in a moment go down to Sheol.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And they say unto ùGod, Depart from us,
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways!

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> What is the Almighty that we should
serve him? and what are we profited if we pray unto him?

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Behold, their prosperity is not in
their hand. The counsel of the wicked be far from me!

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> How often is the lamp of the wicked put
out, and cometh their calamity upon them? Doth he distribute sorrows
\[to them\] in his anger?

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Do they become as stubble before the
wind, and as chaff that the storm carrieth away?

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> +God layeth up \[the punishment of\]
his iniquity for his children; he rewardeth him, and he shall know
\[it\]:

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> His eyes shall see his destruction, and
he shall drink of the fury of the Almighty.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For what pleasure should he have in his
house after him, when the number of his months is cut off?

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Can any teach ùGod knowledge? And he it
is that judgeth those that are high.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> One dieth in his full strength, being
wholly at ease and quiet;

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> His sides are full of fat, and the
marrow of his bones is moistened;

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And another dieth in bitterness of
soul, and hath not tasted good:

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Together they lie down in the dust, and
the worms cover them.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> Lo, I know your thoughts, and the
devices ye wrongfully imagine against me.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> For ye say, Where is the house of the
noble? and where the tent of the dwellings of the wicked?

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Have ye not asked the wayfarers? and do
ye not regard their tokens:

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> That the wicked is reserved for the day
of calamity? They are led forth to the day of wrath.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Who shall declare his way to his face?
and who shall repay him what he hath done?

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Yet is he carried to the graves, and
watch is kept over the tomb.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> The clods of the valley are sweet unto
him; and every man followeth suit after him, as there were innumerable
before him.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> How then comfort ye me in vain? Your
answers remain perfidious.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And Eliphaz the Temanite answered and
said,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Can a man be profitable to ùGod? surely
it is unto himself that the wise man is profitable.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Is it any pleasure to the Almighty if
thou art righteous? And is it gain \[to him\] that thou makest thy ways
perfect?

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Will he reason with thee for fear of
thee? Will he enter with thee into judgment?

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Is not thy wickedness great? and thine
iniquities without end?

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> For thou hast taken a pledge of thy
brother for nought, and stripped off the clothing of the naked.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Thou hast not given water to the fainting
to drink, and thou hast withholden bread from the hungry.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> But the powerful man, he had the land;
and the man of high rank dwelt in it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Widows hast thou sent empty away, and the
arms of the fatherless have been broken.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Therefore snares are round about thee,
and sudden fear troubleth thee;

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Or darkness, that thou canst not see,
and floods of waters cover thee.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Is not +God in the height of the
heavens? And behold the summit of the stars: how exalted are they!

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And thou sayest, What doth ùGod know?
will he judge through the dark cloud?

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Thick clouds are a covering to him,
that he seeth not; and he walketh on the vault of the heavens.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Dost thou mark the ancient path which
wicked men have trodden?

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Who were carried off before the time,
whose foundation was overflowed with a flood;

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Who said unto ùGod, Depart from us! and
what could the Almighty do to them?

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Yet he filled their houses with good.
But the counsel of the wicked is far from me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> The righteous see it, and are glad; and
the innocent laugh them to scorn:

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Is not he who rose against us
destroyed, and doth not the fire consume his residue?

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Reconcile thyself now with him, and be
at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Receive, I pray thee, instruction from
his mouth, and lay up his words in thy heart.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If thou return to the Almighty, thou
shalt be built up. If thou remove unrighteousness far from thy tents,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And put the precious ore with the dust,
and \[the gold of\] Ophir among the stones of the torrents,

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Then the Almighty will be thy precious
ore, and silver heaped up unto thee;

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Yea, then shalt thou delight thyself in
the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face unto +God:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him,
and he will hear thee, and thou shalt pay thy vows;

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And thou shalt decree a thing, and it
shall be established unto thee; and light shall shine upon thy ways.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> When they are made low, then thou shalt
say, Rise up! and he shall save him that is of downcast eyes.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> \[Even\] him that is not innocent shall
he deliver; yea, he shall be delivered by the pureness of thy hands.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Even to-day is my complaint bitter: my
stroke is heavier than my groaning.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Oh that I knew where I might find him,
that I might come to his seat!

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> I would order the cause before him, and
fill my mouth with arguments;

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> I would know the words he would answer
me, and understand what he would say unto me.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Would he plead against me with \[his\]
great power? Nay; but he would give heed unto me.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> There would an upright man reason with
him; and I should be delivered for ever from my judge.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Lo, I go forward, but he is not there;
and backward, but I do not perceive him;

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> On the left hand, where he doth work, but
I behold \[him\] not; he hideth himself on the right hand, and I see
\[him\] not.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> But he knoweth the way that I take; he
trieth me, I shall come forth as gold.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> My foot hath held to his steps; his way
have I kept, and not turned aside.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Neither have I gone back from the
commandment of his lips; I have laid up the words of his mouth more than
the purpose of my own heart.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> But he is in one \[mind\], and who can
turn him? And what his soul desireth, that will he do.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> For he will perform \[what\] is
appointed for me; and many such things are with him.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Therefore am I troubled at his
presence; I consider, and I am afraid of him.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> For ùGod hath made my heart soft, and
the Almighty troubleth me;

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Because I was not cut off before the
darkness, neither hath he hidden the gloom from me.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Why are not times treasured up with the
Almighty? why do not they that know him see his days?

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> They remove the landmarks; they violently
take away the flocks and pasture them;

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> They drive away the ass of the
fatherless, they take the widow's ox for a pledge;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> They turn the needy out of the way: the
afflicted of the land all hide themselves.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Lo, \[as\] wild asses in the desert, they
go forth to their work, seeking early for the prey: the wilderness
\[yieldeth\] them food for \[their\] children.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> They reap in the field the fodder
thereof, and they gather the vintage of the wicked;

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> They pass the night naked without
clothing, and have no covering in the cold;

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> They are wet with the showers of the
mountains, and for want of a shelter embrace the rock ...

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> They pluck the fatherless from the
breast, and take a pledge of the poor:

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> These go naked without clothing, and,
hungry, they bear the sheaf;

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> They press out oil within their walls,
they tread their winepresses, and suffer thirst.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Men groan from out of the city, and the
soul of the wounded crieth out; and +God imputeth not the impiety.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> There are those that rebel against the
light; they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> The murderer riseth with the light,
killeth the afflicted and needy, and in the night is as a thief.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And the eye of the adulterer waiteth
for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me; and he putteth a covering
on \[his\] face.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> In the dark they dig through houses; by
day they shut themselves in; they know not the light:

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> For the morning is to them all \[as\]
the shadow of death; for they are familiar with the terrors of the
shadow of death.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> He is swift on the face of the waters;
their portion is cursed on the earth: he turneth not unto the way of the
vineyards.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Drought and heat consume snow waters;
so doth Sheol those that have sinned.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> The womb forgetteth him; the worm
feedeth sweetly on him: he shall be no more remembered; and
unrighteousness is broken as a tree, --

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> He that despoileth the barren that
beareth not, and doeth not good to the widow:

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> He draweth also the mighty with his
power; he riseth up, and no \[man\] is sure of life.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> \[God\] setteth him in safety, and he
resteth thereon; but his eyes are upon their ways.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> They are exalted for a little, and are
no more; they are laid low; like all \[other\] are they gathered, and
are cut off as the tops of the ears of corn.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> If it be not so now, who will make me a
liar, and make my speech nothing worth?

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And Bildad the Shuhite answered and said,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Dominion and fear are with him; he maketh
peace in his high places.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Is there any number of his troops? and
upon whom doth not his light arise?

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And how should man be just with ùGod? Or
how should he be clean that is born of a woman?

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Lo, even the moon is not bright; and the
stars are not pure in his sight:

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> How much less man, a worm, and the son of
man, a worm!

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> How hast thou helped the powerless; how
saved the arm that is without strength!

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> How hast thou counselled him that hath no
wisdom, and abundantly declared the thing as it is!

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> For whom hast thou uttered words? and
whose spirit came from thee?

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> The shades tremble beneath the waters and
the inhabitants thereof;

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Sheol is naked before him, and
destruction hath no covering.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> He stretcheth out the north over empty
space, he hangeth the earth upon nothing;

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> He bindeth up the waters in his thick
clouds, and the cloud is not rent under them.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> He covereth the face of his throne, he
spreadeth his cloud upon it.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> He hath traced a fixed circle over the
waters, unto the confines of light and darkness.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> The pillars of the heavens tremble and
are astonished at his rebuke.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> He stirreth up the sea by his power,
and by his understanding he smiteth through Rahab.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> By his Spirit the heavens are adorned;
his hand hath formed the fleeing serpent.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Lo, these are the borders of his ways;
but what a whisper of a word do we hear of him! And the thunder of his
power, who can understand?

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And Job continued his parable and said,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> \[As\] ùGod liveth, who hath taken away
my right, and the Almighty, who hath embittered my soul,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> All the while my breath is in me, and the
spirit of +God is in my nostrils,

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> My lips shall not speak unrighteousness,
nor my tongue utter deceit!

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Be it far from me that I should justify
you; till I die I will not remove my blamelessness from me.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> My righteousness I hold fast, and will
not let it go: my heart reproacheth \[me\] not one of my days.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he
that riseth up against me as the unrighteous.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> For what is the hope of the ungodly, when
\[God\] cutteth him off, when +God taketh away his soul?

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Will ùGod hear his cry when distress
cometh upon him?

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Doth he delight himself in the
Almighty? will he at all times call upon +God?

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> I will teach you concerning the hand of
ùGod; what is with the Almighty will I not conceal.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Behold, ye yourselves have all seen
\[it\]; and why are ye thus altogether vain?

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> This is the portion of the wicked man
with ùGod, and the heritage of the violent, which they receive from the
Almighty: --

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> If his children be multiplied, it is
for the sword, and his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread;

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Those that remain of him shall be
buried by death, and his widows shall not weep.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Though he heap up silver as the dust,
and prepare clothing as the clay;

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> He may prepare it, but the just shall
put it on; and the innocent shall divide the silver.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> He buildeth his house as the moth, and
as a booth that a keeper maketh.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> He lieth down rich, but will do so no
more; he openeth his eyes, and he is not.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Terrors overtake him like waters; a
whirlwind stealeth him away in the night.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> The east wind carrieth him away and he
is gone; and as a storm it hurleth him out of his place.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And \[God\] shall cast upon him and not
spare: he would fain flee out of his hand.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> \[Men\] shall clap their hands at him,
and shall hiss him out of his place.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Surely there is a vein for the silver,
and a place for gold which they refine;

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Iron is taken out of the dust, and copper
is molten out of the stone.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> \[Man\] putteth an end to the darkness,
and exploreth to the utmost limit, the stones of darkness and of the
shadow of death.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> He openeth a shaft far from the
inhabitants \[of the earth\]: forgotten of the foot, they hang
suspended; away below men they hover.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> As for the earth, out of it cometh bread,
and underneath it is turned up as by fire;

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> The stones of it are the place of
sapphires, and it hath dust of gold.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> It is a path no bird of prey knoweth, and
the vulture's eye hath not seen it;

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The proud beasts have not trodden it, nor
the fierce lion passed over it.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> \[Man\] putteth forth his hand upon the
flinty rock, he overturneth the mountains by the root.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> He cutteth out channels in the rocks,
and his eye seeth every precious thing.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> He bindeth the streams that they drip
not, and what is hidden he bringeth forth to light.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> But wisdom, where shall it be found?
and where is the place of understanding?

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Man knoweth not the value thereof; and
it is not found in the land of the living.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> The deep saith, It is not in me; and
the sea saith, It is not with me.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Choice gold cannot be given for it, nor
silver be weighed for its price.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> It is not set in the balance with gold
of Ophir, with the precious onyx, and the sapphire.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Gold and glass cannot be compared to
it, nor vessels of fine gold be its exchange.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Corals and crystal are no more
remembered; yea, the acquisition of wisdom is above rubies.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> The topaz of Ethiopia shall not be
compared to it, neither shall it be set in the balance with pure gold.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is
the place of understanding?

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> For it is hidden from the eyes of all
living, and concealed from the fowl of the heavens.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Destruction and death say, We have
heard its report with our ears.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> God understandeth the way thereof, and
he knoweth its place:

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> For he looketh to the ends of the
earth, he seeth under the whole heaven.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> In making a weight for the wind, and
meting out the waters by measure,

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> In appointing a statute for the rain,
and a way for the thunder's flash:

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Then did he see it, and declare it; he
established it, yea, and searched it out;

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> And unto man he said, Lo, the fear of
the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And Job continued his parable and said,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Oh that I were as in months past, as in
the days when +God preserved me;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> When his lamp shone over my head, \[and\]
by his light I walked through darkness;

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> As I was in the days of my youth, when
the secret counsel of +God was over my tent,

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> When the Almighty was yet with me, my
young men round about me;

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> When my steps were bathed in milk, and
the rock poured out beside me rivers of oil! ...

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When I went out to the gate by the city,
when I prepared my seat on the broadway,

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> The young men saw me, and hid themselves;
and the aged arose \[and\] stood up;

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Princes refrained from talking, and laid
the hand on their mouth;

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> The voice of the nobles was hushed, and
their tongue cleaved to their palate.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> When the ear heard \[me\], then it
blessed me, and when the eye saw \[me\], it gave witness to me;

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> For I delivered the afflicted that
cried, and the fatherless who had no helper.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The blessing of him that was perishing
came upon me, and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> I put on righteousness, and it clothed
me; my justice was as a mantle and a turban.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I
to the lame;

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> I was a father to the needy, and the
cause which I knew not I searched out;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And I broke the jaws of the
unrighteous, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And I said, I shall die in my nest, and
multiply my days as the sand;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> My root shall be spread out to the
waters, and the dew will lie all night on my branch;

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> My glory shall be fresh in me, and my
bow be renewed in my hand.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Unto me they listened, and waited, and
kept silence for my counsel:

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> After my words they spoke not again,
and my speech dropped upon them;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And they waited for me as for the rain,
and they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> \[If\] I laughed on them, they believed
\[it\] not; and they troubled not the serenity of my countenance.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> I chose their way, and sat as chief,
and dwelt as a king in the army, as one that comforteth mourners.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> But now they that are younger than I have
me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to set with the
dogs of my flock.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Yea, whereto \[should\] the strength of
their hands \[profit\] me, \[men\] in whom vigour hath perished?

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> Withered up through want and hunger, they
flee into waste places long since desolate and desert:

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> They gather the salt-wort among the
bushes, and the roots of the broom for their food.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> They are driven forth from among \[men\]
-- they cry after them as after a thief --

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> To dwell in gloomy gorges, in caves of
the earth and the rocks:

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> They bray among the bushes; under the
brambles they are gathered together:

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Sons of fools, and sons of nameless
sires, they are driven out of the land.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And now I am their song, yea, I am their
byword.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> They abhor me, they stand aloof from
me, yea, they spare not to spit in my face.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For he hath loosed my cord and
afflicted me; so they cast off the bridle before me.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> At \[my\] right hand rise the young
brood; they push away my feet, and raise up against me their pernicious
ways;

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> They mar my path, they set forward my
calamity, without any to help them;

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> They come in as through a wide breach:
amid the confusion they roll themselves onward.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Terrors are turned against me; they
pursue mine honour as the wind; and my welfare is passed away like a
cloud.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And now my soul is poured out in me;
days of affliction have taken hold upon me.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The night pierceth through my bones
\[and detacheth them\] from me, and my gnawing pains take no rest:

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> By their great force they have become
my raiment; they bind me about as the collar of my coat.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> He hath cast me into the mire, and I
have become like dust and ashes.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> I cry unto thee, and thou answerest me
not; I stand up, and thou lookest at me.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Thou art changed to a cruel one to me;
with the strength of thy hand thou pursuest me.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou
causest me to be borne away, and dissolvest my substance.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> For I know that thou wilt bring me to
death, and into the house of assemblage for all living.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> Indeed, no prayer \[availeth\] when he
stretcheth out \[his\] hand: though they cry when he destroyeth.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> Did not I weep for him whose days were
hard? was not my soul grieved for the needy?

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> For I expected good, and there came
evil; and I waited for light, but there came darkness.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> My bowels well up, and rest not; days
of affliction have confronted me.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> I go about blackened, but not by the
sun; I stand up, I cry in the congregation.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> I am become a brother to jackals, and a
companion of ostriches.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> My skin is become black \[and falleth\]
off me, and my bones are parched with heat.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> My harp also is \[turned\] to mourning,
and my pipe into the voice of weepers.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> I made a covenant with mine eyes; and how
should I fix my regard upon a maid?

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> For what would have been \[my\] portion
of +God from above, and what the heritage of the Almighty from on high?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Is not calamity for the unrighteous? and
misfortune for the workers of iniquity?

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Doth not he see my ways, and number all
my steps?

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> If I have walked with falsehood, and my
foot hath hasted to deceit,

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> (Let me be weighed in an even balance,
and +God will take knowledge of my blamelessness;)

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> If my step have turned out of the way,
and my heart followed mine eyes, and if any blot cleaveth to my hands;

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Let me sow, and another eat; and let mine
offspring be rooted out.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> If my heart have been enticed unto a
woman, so that I laid wait at my neighbour's door,

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Let my wife grind for another, and let
others bow down upon her.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> For this is an infamy; yea, it is an
iniquity \[to be judged by\] the judges:

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> For it is a fire that consumeth to
destruction, and would root out all mine increase.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> If I have despised the cause of my
bondman or of my bondmaid, when they contended with me,

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> What then should I do when ùGod riseth
up? and if he visited, what should I answer him?

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Did not he that made me in the womb
make him? and did not One fashion us in the womb?

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> If I have withheld the poor from
\[their\] desire, or caused the eyes of the widow to fail;

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Or have eaten my morsel alone, so that
the fatherless ate not thereof,

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> (For from my youth he grew up with me
as with a father, and I have guided the \[widow\] from my mother's
womb;)

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> If I have seen any perishing for want
of clothing, or any needy without covering;

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> If his loins have not blessed me, and
if he were not warmed with the fleece of my lambs;

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> If I have lifted up my hand against an
orphan, because I saw my help in the gate:

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> \[Then\] let my shoulder fall from the
shoulder-blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone!

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> For calamity from ùGod was a terror to
me, and by reason of his excellency I was powerless.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> If I have made gold my hope, or said to
the fine gold, My confidence!

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> If I rejoiced because my wealth was
great, and because my hand had gotten much;

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> If I beheld the sun when it shone, or
the moon walking in brightness,

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> And my heart have been secretly
enticed, so that my mouth kissed my hand:

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> This also would be an iniquity for the
judge, for I should have denied the ùGod who is above.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> If I rejoiced at the destruction of him
that hated me, and exulted when evil befell him;

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> (Neither have I suffered my mouth to
sin by asking his life with a curse;)

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> If the men of my tent said not, Who
shall find one that hath not been satisfied with his meat? --

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> The stranger did not lodge without; I
opened my doors to the pathway.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> If I covered my transgressions as Adam,
by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom,

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> Because I feared the great multitude,
and the contempt of families terrified me, so that I kept silence, and
went not out of the door, ...

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> Oh that I had one to hear me! Behold my
signature: let the Almighty answer me! And let mine opponent write an
accusation!

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> Would I not take it upon my shoulder? I
would bind it on to me \[as\] a crown;

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> I would declare unto him the number of
my steps; as a prince would I come near to him.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> If my land cry out against me, and its
furrows weep together;

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> If I have eaten the fruits thereof
without money, and have tormented to death the souls of its owners:

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and
tares instead of barley. The words of Job are ended.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And these three men ceased to answer Job,
because he was righteous in his own eyes.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Then was kindled the anger of Elihu the
son of Barachel, the Buzite, of the family of Ram: against Job was his
anger kindled, because he justified himself rather than God;

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> and against his three friends was his
anger kindled, because they found no answer, and \[yet\] condemned Job.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> But Elihu had waited till Job had
finished speaking, because they were older than he.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And Elihu saw that there was no answer in
the mouth of the three men, and his anger was kindled.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite
answered and said, I am young, and ye are aged; wherefore I was timid,
and feared to shew you what I know.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> I said, Let days speak, and multitude of
years teach wisdom.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> But there is a spirit which is in man;
and the breath of the Almighty giveth them understanding.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> It is not the great that are wise;
neither do the aged understand judgment.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Therefore I say, Hearken to me; I also
will shew what I know.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Lo, I waited for your words; I gave ear
to your reasonings, until ye searched out what to say.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Yea, I gave you mine attention, and
behold, there was none of you that confuted Job, that answered his
words;

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> That ye may not say, We have found out
wisdom; ùGod will make him yield, not man.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Now he hath not directed \[his\] words
against me; and I will not answer him with your speeches. ...

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> They were amazed, they answered no
more; words failed them.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And I waited, for they spoke not, but
stood still, and answered no more; --

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> I will answer, I also in my turn, I
also will shew what I know:

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> For I am full of matter, the spirit
within me constraineth me.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Behold, my belly is as wine which hath
no vent; like new flasks, it is ready to burst.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> I will speak, that I may find relief; I
will open my lips and answer.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> Let me not, I pray you, accept any
man's person; neither will I give flattery to man.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For I know not how to flatter; my Maker
would soon take me away.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Howbeit, Job, I pray thee, hear mine
utterances, and hearken to all my words.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Behold now, I have opened my mouth, my
tongue speaketh in my palate,

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> My words shall be of the uprightness of
my heart, and my lips shall utter knowledge purely.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> The Spirit of ùGod hath made me, and the
breath of the Almighty hath given me life.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> If thou canst, answer me; array \[thy
words\] before me: take thy stand.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Behold, before ùGod I am as thou; I also
am formed out of the clay.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Behold, my terror shall not make thee
afraid, nor my burden be heavy upon thee.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> Surely thou hast spoken in my hearing,
and I have heard the voice of \[thy\] words: --

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> I am clean without transgression; I am
pure, and there is no iniquity in me;

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Lo, he findeth occasions of hostility
against me, he counteth me for his enemy;

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> He putteth my feet in the stocks, he
marketh all my paths.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Behold, I will answer thee in this,
thou art not right; for +God is greater than man.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Why dost thou strive against him? for
he giveth not account of any of his matters.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> For ùGod speaketh once, and twice, --
\[and man\] perceiveth it not --

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> In a dream, in a vision of the night,
when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed;

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> Then he openeth men's ears, and sealeth
their instruction,

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> That he may withdraw man \[from his\]
work, and hide pride from man.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> He keepeth back his soul from the pit,
and his life from passing away by the sword.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> He is chastened also with pain upon his
bed, and with constant strife in his bones;

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And his life abhorreth bread, and his
soul dainty food;

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> His flesh is consumed away from view,
and his bones that were not seen stick out;

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And his soul draweth near to the pit,
and his life to the destroyers.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> If there be a messenger with him, an
interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew unto man his duty;

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Then he will be gracious unto him, and
say, Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> His flesh shall be fresher than in
childhood; he shall return to the days of his youth.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> He shall pray unto +God, and he will
receive him with favour; and he shall see his face with shoutings, and
he will render unto man his righteousness.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> He will sing before men, and say, I
have sinned, and perverted what was right, and it hath not been requited
to me;

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> He hath delivered my soul from going
into the pit, and my life shall see the light.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Lo, all these \[things\] worketh ùGod
twice, thrice, with man,

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> To bring back his soul from the pit,
that he may be enlightened with the light of the living.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> Mark well, Job, hearken unto me; be
silent, and I will speak.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> If thou hast anything to say, answer
me; speak, for I desire to justify thee.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> If not, hearken thou unto me; be
silent, and I will teach thee wisdom.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Moreover Elihu answered and said,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Hear my words, ye wise \[men\]; and give
ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> For the ear trieth words, as the palate
tasteth food.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Let us choose for ourselves what is
right; let us know among ourselves what is good!

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> For Job hath said, I am righteous, and
ùGod hath taken away my judgment:

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> Should I lie against my right? My wound
is incurable without transgression.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> What man is like Job? he drinketh up
scorning like water,

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And goeth in company with workers of
iniquity, and walketh with wicked men.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> For he hath said, It profiteth not a man
if he delight himself in God.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of
understanding: Far be wickedness from ùGod, and wrong from the Almighty!

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For a man's work will he render to him,
and cause every one to find according to \[his\] way.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Yea, surely, ùGod acteth not wickedly,
and the Almighty perverteth not judgment.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Who hath entrusted to him the earth?
and who hath disposed the whole world?

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> If he only thought of himself, \[and\]
gathered unto him his spirit and his breath,

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> All flesh would expire together, and
man would return to the dust.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> If now \[thou hast\] understanding,
hear this: give ear to the voice of my words!

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Should he that hateth right indeed
govern? and wilt thou condemn the All-just?

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Shall one say to a king, Belial? to
nobles, Wicked?

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> \[How then to him\] that accepteth not
the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich man more than the poor?
for they are all the work of his hands.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> In a moment they die, even at midnight
the people are convulsed and pass away; and the strong are taken away
without hand.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> For his eyes are upon the ways of man,
and he seeth all his steps.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> There is no darkness, nor shadow of
death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> For he doth not long consider a man, to
bring him before ùGod in judgment.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> He breaketh in pieces mighty men
without inquiry, and setteth others in their stead;

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Since he knoweth their actions; and he
overthroweth \[them\] in the night, and they are crushed.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> He striketh them as wicked men in the
open sight of others,

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> Because they have turned back from him,
and would consider none of his ways;

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> So that they cause the cry of the poor
to come unto him, and he heareth the cry of the afflicted.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> When he giveth quietness, who then will
disturb? and when he hideth \[his\] face, who shall behold him? and this
towards a nation, or towards a man alike;

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> That the ungodly man reign not, that
the people be not ensnared.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> For hath he said unto ùGod, I bear
\[chastisement\], I will not offend;

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> What I see not, teach thou me; if I
have done wrong, I will do so no more?

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> Shall he recompense according to thy
mind? for thou hast refused \[his judgment\]; for thou so choosest, and
not I; speak then what thou knowest.

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> Men of understanding will say to me,
and a wise man who heareth me:

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> Job hath spoken without knowledge, and
his words were not with intelligence.

<span id="an_34:36">34:36</span> Would that Job may be tried unto the
end, because of \[his\] answers after the manner of evil men!

<span id="an_34:37">34:37</span> For he addeth rebellion unto his sin,
he clappeth \[his hands\] among us, and multiplieth his words against
ùGod.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Moreover Elihu answered and said,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Thinkest thou this to be right, that thou
saidst, My righteousness is more than ùGod's?

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> For thou hast asked of what profit it is
unto thee: what do I gain more than if I had sinned?

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> I will reply to thee in words, and to thy
companions with thee.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Look unto the heavens and see; and survey
the skies: they are higher than thou.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> If thou sinnest, what doest thou against
him? If thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> If thou be righteous, what givest thou to
him? or what doth he receive of thy hand?

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> Thy wickedness \[may affect\] a man as
thou \[art\], and thy righteousness a son of man.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> By reason of the multitude of oppressions
they cry; they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty:

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> But none saith, Where is +God my Maker,
who giveth songs in the night,

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> Who teacheth us more than the beasts of
the earth, and maketh us wiser than the fowl of the heavens?

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> There they cry, and he answereth not,
because of the pride of evil men.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> Surely ùGod will not hear vanity,
neither will the Almighty regard it.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Although thou sayest thou dost not see
him, judgment is before him, therefore wait for him.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> But now, because he hath not visited in
his anger, doth not \[Job\] know \[his\] great arrogancy?

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> For Job hath opened his mouth in
vanity, and made words abundant without knowledge.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And Elihu proceeded and said,

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Suffer me a little, and I will shew thee
that I have yet words for +God.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and
will ascribe righteousness to my Creator.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> For truly my words shall be no falsehood:
one perfect in knowledge is with thee.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Lo, ùGod is mighty, but despiseth not
\[any\]; mighty in strength of understanding:

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> He saveth not the wicked alive; but he
doeth justice to the afflicted.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> He withdraweth not his eyes from the
righteous, but with kings on the throne doth he even set them for ever;
and they are exalted.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And if, bound in fetters, they be held in
cords of affliction,

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> Then he sheweth them their work, and
their transgressions, because they have increased.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And he openeth their ear to discipline,
and commandeth that they return from iniquity.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> If they hearken and serve \[him\], they
shall accomplish their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> But if they hearken not, they shall
pass away by the sword, and expire without knowledge.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> But the godless in heart heap up anger;
they cry not when he bindeth them:

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Their soul dieth in youth, and their
life is among the unclean.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> But he delivereth the afflicted in his
affliction, and openeth their ear in \[their\] oppression.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Even so would he have allured thee out
of the jaws of distress into a broad place, where there is no
straitness; and the supply of thy table \[would be\] full of fatness.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> But thou art full of the judgments of
the wicked: judgment and justice take hold \[on thee\].

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Because there is wrath, \[beware\] lest
it take thee away through chastisement: then a great ransom could not
avail thee.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Will he esteem thy riches? Not gold,
nor all the resources of strength!

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> Desire not the night, when peoples are
cut off from their place.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> Take heed, turn not to iniquity; for
this hast thou chosen rather than affliction.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Lo, ùGod is exalted in his power: who
teacheth as he?

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> Who hath appointed him his way? or who
hath said, Thou hast wrought unrighteousness?

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> Remember that thou magnify his work,
which men celebrate.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> All men look at it; man beholdeth
\[it\] afar off.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> Lo, ùGod is great, and we comprehend
\[him\] not, neither can the number of his years be searched out.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> For he draweth up the drops of water:
they distil in rain from the vapour which he formeth,

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> Which the skies pour down \[and\] drop
upon man abundantly.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> But can any understand the spreadings
of the clouds, \[or\] the crashing of his pavilion?

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> Lo, he spreadeth his light around him,
and covereth the bottom of the sea.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> For with them he judgeth the peoples;
he giveth food in abundance.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> \[His\] hands he covereth with
lightning, and commandeth it where it is to strike.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> His thundering declareth concerning
him; the cattle even, concerning its coming.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> Aye, my heart trembleth at this also, and
leapeth up out of its place:

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> Hear attentively the roar of his voice,
and the murmur going forth from his mouth.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> He sendeth it forth under the whole
heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> After it a voice roareth: he thundereth
with the voice of his excellency, and holdeth not back the flashes when
his voice is heard.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> ùGod thundereth marvellously with his
voice, doing great things which we do not comprehend.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> For he saith to the snow, Fall on the
earth! and to the pouring rain, even the pouring rains of his might.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> He sealeth up the hand of every man; that
all men may know his work.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And the wild beast goeth into its lair,
and they remain in their dens.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> From the chamber \[of the south\] cometh
the whirlwind; and cold from the winds of the north.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> By the breath of ùGod ice is given; and
the breadth of the waters is straitened.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Also with plentiful moisture he loadeth
the thick clouds, his light dispels the cloud;

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And they are turned every way by his
guidance, that they may do whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face
of the circuit of the earth,

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> Whether he cause it to come as a rod,
or for his land, or in mercy.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Hearken unto this, Job; stand still and
discern the wondrous works of ùGod.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> Dost thou know how +God hath disposed
them, and how he causeth the lightning of his cloud to flash?

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> Dost thou know about the balancings of
the clouds, the wondrous works of him that is perfect in knowledge?

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> How thy garments become warm when he
quieteth the earth by the south wind?

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Hast thou with him spread out the sky,
firm, like a molten mirror?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Teach us what we shall say unto him! We
cannot order \[our words\] by reason of darkness.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Shall it be told him if I would speak?
if a man \[so\] say, surely he shall be swallowed up.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And now \[men\] see not the light as it
gleameth, it is \[hidden\] in the skies. But the wind passeth by and
cleareth them.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> From the north cometh gold; with +God
is terrible majesty.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> The Almighty, we cannot find him out:
excellent in power, and in judgment, and in abundance of justice, he
doth not afflict.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> Men do therefore fear him: he
respecteth not any that are wise of heart.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And Jehovah answered Job out of the
whirlwind and said,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Who is this that darkeneth counsel by
words without knowledge?

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> Gird up now thy loins like a man; and I
will demand of thee, and inform thou me.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> Where wast thou when I founded the earth?
Declare, if thou hast understanding.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Who set the measures thereof -- if thou
knowest? or who stretched a line upon it?

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Whereupon were the foundations thereof
sunken? or who laid its corner-stone,

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> When the morning stars sang together, and
all the sons of God shouted for joy?

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> And who shut up the sea with doors, when
it burst forth, issuing out of the womb?

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> When I made the cloud its garment, and
thick darkness a swaddling band for it;

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> When I cut out for it my boundary, and
set bars and doors,

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And said, Hitherto shalt thou come and
no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed?

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> Hast thou since thy days commanded the
morning? hast thou caused the dawn to know its place,

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> That it might take hold of the ends of
the earth, and the wicked might be shaken out of it?

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> It is changed like the signet-clay; and
\[all things\] stand forth as in a garment:

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And from the wicked their light is
withholden, and the uplifted arm is broken.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> Hast thou entered as far as the springs
of the sea? and hast thou walked in the recesses of the deep?

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Have the gates of death been revealed
unto thee? and hast thou seen the gates of the shadow of death?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> Hath thine understanding compassed the
breadths of the earth? Declare if thou knowest it all.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> Where is the way to where light
dwelleth? and the darkness, where is its place,

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> That thou shouldest take it to its
bound, and that thou shouldest know the paths to its house?

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> Thou knowest, for thou wast then born,
and the number of thy days is great!

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Hast thou entered into the storehouses
of the snow, and hast thou seen the treasuries of the hail,

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> Which I have reserved for the time of
distress, for the day of battle and war?

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> By what way is the light parted,
\[and\] the east wind scattered upon the earth?

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> Who hath divided a channel for the
rain-flood, and a way for the thunder's flash;

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> To cause it to rain on the earth, where
no one is; on the wilderness wherein there is not a man;

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> To satisfy the desolate and waste
\[ground\], and to cause the sprout of the grass to spring forth?

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> Hath the rain a father? or who
begetteth the drops of dew?

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> Out of whose womb cometh the ice? and
the hoary frost of heaven, who bringeth it forth?

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> When the waters lie hidden as in stone,
and the face of the deep holdeth fast together.

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> Canst thou fasten the bands of the
Pleiades, or loosen the cords of Orion?

<span id="an_38:32">38:32</span> Dost thou bring forth the
constellations each in its season? or dost thou guide the Bear with her
sons?

<span id="an_38:33">38:33</span> Knowest thou the ordinances of the
heavens? dost thou determine their rule over the earth?

<span id="an_38:34">38:34</span> Dost thou lift up thy voice to the
clouds, that floods of waters may cover thee?

<span id="an_38:35">38:35</span> Dost thou send forth lightnings that
they may go, and say unto thee, Here we are?

<span id="an_38:36">38:36</span> Who hath put wisdom in the inward
parts? or who hath given understanding to the mind?

<span id="an_38:37">38:37</span> Who numbereth the clouds with wisdom?
or who poureth out the bottles of the heavens,

<span id="an_38:38">38:38</span> When the dust runneth as into a molten
mass, and the clods cleave fast together?

<span id="an_38:39">38:39</span> Dost thou hunt the prey for the
lioness, and dost thou satisfy the appetite of the young lions,

<span id="an_38:40">38:40</span> When they crouch in \[their\] dens,
\[and\] abide in the thicket to lie in wait?

<span id="an_38:41">38:41</span> Who provideth for the raven his food,
when his young ones cry unto ùGod, \[and\] they wander for lack of meat?

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> Knowest thou the time when the wild goats
of the rock bring forth? dost thou mark the calving of the hinds?

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> Dost thou number the months that they
fulfil? and knowest thou the time when they bring forth?

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> They bow themselves, they give birth to
their young ones, they cast out their pains;

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> Their young ones become strong, they grow
up in the open field, they go forth, and return not unto them.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Who hath sent out the wild ass free? and
who hath loosed the bands of the onager,

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Whose house I made the wilderness, and
the salt plain his dwellings?

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> He laugheth at the tumult of the city,
and heareth not the shouts of the driver;

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> The range of the mountains is his
pasture, and he searcheth after every green thing.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Will the buffalo be willing to serve
thee, or will he lodge by thy crib?

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> Canst thou bind the buffalo with his
cord in the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after thee?

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> Wilt thou put confidence in him,
because his strength is great? and wilt thou leave thy labour to him?

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Wilt thou trust him to bring home thy
seed, and gather it into thy threshing-floor?

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> The wing of the ostrich beats joyously
-- But is it the stork's pinion and plumage?

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> For she leaveth her eggs to the earth,
and warmeth them in the dust,

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And forgetteth that the foot may crush
them, or that the beast of the field may trample them.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> She is hardened against her young ones,
as though they were not hers; her labour is in vain, without her
concern.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> For +God hath deprived her of wisdom,
and hath not furnished her with understanding.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> What time she lasheth herself on high,
she scorneth the horse and his rider.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> Hast thou given strength to the horse?
hast thou clothed his neck with the quivering mane?

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> Dost thou make him to leap as a locust?
His majestic snorting is terrible.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth
in \[his\] strength; he goeth forth to meet the armed host.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> He laugheth at fear, and is not
affrighted; neither turneth he back from before the sword.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> The quiver rattleth upon him, the
glittering spear and the javelin.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> He swalloweth the ground with
fierceness and rage, and cannot contain himself at the sound of the
trumpet:

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> At the noise of the trumpets he saith,
Aha! and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains,
and the shouting.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> Doth the hawk fly by thine
intelligence, \[and\] stretch his wings toward the south?

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> Doth the eagle mount up at thy command,
and make his nest on high?

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> He inhabiteth the rock and maketh his
dwelling on the point of the cliff, and the fastness:

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> From thence he spieth out the prey, his
eyes look into the distance;

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> And his young ones suck up blood; and
where the slain are, there is he.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> And Jehovah answered Job and said,

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Shall he that will contend with the
Almighty instruct \[him\]? he that reproveth +God, let him answer it.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And Job answered Jehovah and said,

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> Behold, I am nought: what shall I answer
thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> Once have I spoken, and I will not
answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no further.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And Jehovah answered Job out of the
whirlwind and said,

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> Gird up now thy loins like a man: I will
demand of thee, and inform thou me.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> Wilt thou also annul my judgment? wilt
thou condemn me that thou mayest be righteous?

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Hast thou an arm like ùGod? or canst thou
thunder with a voice like him?

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> Deck thyself now with glory and
excellency, and clothe thyself with majesty and splendour.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> Cast abroad the ragings of thine anger,
and look on every one that is proud, and abase him:

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Look on every one that is proud, bring
him low, and tread down the wicked in their place:

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Hide them in the dust together; bind
their faces in secret.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> Then will I also praise thee, because
thy right hand saveth thee.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> See now the behemoth, which I made with
thee: he eateth grass as an ox.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> Behold now, his strength is in his
loins, and his force is in the muscles of his belly.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> He bendeth his tail like a cedar; the
sinews of his thighs are woven together.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> His bones are tubes of bronze, his
members are like bars of iron.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> He is the chief of ùGod's ways: he that
made him gave him his sword.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> For the mountains bring him forth food,
where all the beasts of the field play.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> He lieth under lotus-bushes, in the
covert of the reed and fen:

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> Lotus-bushes cover him with their
shade; the willows of the brook surround him.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> Lo, the river overfloweth -- he
startleth not: he is confident though a Jordan break forth against his
mouth.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> Shall he be taken in front? will they
pierce through \[his\] nose in the trap?

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Wilt thou draw out the leviathan with the
hook, and press down his tongue with a cord?

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Wilt thou put a rush-rope into his nose,
and pierce his jaw with a spike?

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Will he make many supplications unto
thee? or will he speak softly unto thee?

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt
thou take him as a bondman for ever?

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Wilt thou play with him as with a bird,
and wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> Shall partners make traffic of him, will
they divide him among merchants?

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> Wilt thou fill his skin with darts, and
his head with fish-spears?

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> Lay thy hand upon him; remember the
battle, -- do no more!

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Lo, hope as to him is belied: is not one
cast down even at the sight of him?

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> None is so bold as to stir him up; and
who is he that will stand before me?

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Who hath first given to me, that I
should repay \[him\]? \[Whatsoever is\] under the whole heaven is mine.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> I will not be silent as to his parts,
the story of his power, and the beauty of his structure.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> Who can uncover the surface of his
garment? who can come within his double jaws?

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Who can open the doors of his face?
Round about his teeth is terror.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> The rows of his shields are a pride,
shut up together \[as with\] a close seal.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> One is so near to another that no air
can come between them;

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> They are joined each to its fellow;
they stick together, and cannot be sundered.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> His sneezings flash light, and his eyes
are like the eyelids of the morning.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> Out of his mouth go forth flames;
sparks of fire leap out:

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as out
of a boiling pot and cauldron.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> His breath kindleth coals, and a flame
goeth out of his mouth.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> In his neck lodgeth strength, and
terror danceth before him.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> The flakes of his flesh are joined
together: they are fused upon him, they cannot be moved.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> His heart is firm as a stone, yea, firm
as the nether \[millstone\].

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> When he raiseth himself up, the mighty
are afraid: they are beside themselves with consternation.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> If any reach him with a sword, it
cannot hold; neither spear, nor dart, nor harpoon.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> He esteemeth iron as straw, bronze as
rotten wood.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> The arrow will not make him flee;
slingstones are turned with him into stubble.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> Clubs are counted as stubble; he
laugheth at the shaking of a javelin.

<span id="an_41:30">41:30</span> His under parts are sharp potsherds: he
spreadeth a threshing-sledge upon the mire.

<span id="an_41:31">41:31</span> He maketh the deep to boil like a pot;
he maketh the sea like a pot of ointment;

<span id="an_41:32">41:32</span> He maketh the path to shine after him:
one would think the deep to be hoary.

<span id="an_41:33">41:33</span> Upon earth there is not his like, who
is made without fear.

<span id="an_41:34">41:34</span> He beholdeth all high things; he is
king over all the proud beasts.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> And Job answered Jehovah and said,

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> I know that thou canst do everything, and
that thou canst be hindered in no thought of thine.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Who is he that obscureth counsel without
knowledge? therefore have I uttered what I did not understand; things
too wonderful for me, which I knew not.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I
will demand of thee, and inform me.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> I had heard of thee by the hearing of the
ear, but now mine eye seeth thee:

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Wherefore I abhor \[myself\], and repent
in dust and ashes.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And it came to pass after Jehovah had
spoken these words to Job, that Jehovah said to Eliphaz the Temanite,
Mine anger is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends; for ye
have not spoken rightly of me, like my servant Job.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> And now, take for yourselves seven
bullocks and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for
yourselves a burnt-offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you, for
him will I accept: lest I deal with you \[after your\] folly, for ye
have not spoken of me rightly, like my servant Job.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> Then Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the
Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, went and did according as Jehovah
had said unto them; and Jehovah accepted Job.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> And Jehovah turned the captivity of
Job, when he had prayed for his friends; and Jehovah gave Job twice as
much as he had before.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> And all his brethren, and all his
sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, came to
him, and they ate bread with him in his house, and they condoled with
him, and comforted him concerning all the evil that Jehovah had brought
upon him; and every one gave him a piece of money, and every one a
golden ring.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And Jehovah blessed the latter end of
Job more than his beginning; and he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six
thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she-asses.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> And he had seven sons and three
daughters.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> And he called the name of the first,
Jemimah; and the name of the second, Keziah; and the name of the third,
Keren-happuch.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> And in all the land were no women found
\[so\] fair as the daughters of Job; and their father gave them
inheritance among their brethren.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> And Job lived after this a hundred and
forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, four generations.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> And Job died, old and full of days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms](psa)
