[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](zac)  [Next](mat) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Malachi

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden of the word of Jehovah to Israel
by Malachi.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> I have loved you, saith Jehovah; but ye
say, Wherein hast thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother? saith
Jehovah, and I loved Jacob,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> and I hated Esau; and made his mountains a
desolation, and \[gave\] his inheritance to the jackals of the
wilderness.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> If Edom say, We are broken down, but we
will build again the ruined places, -- thus saith Jehovah of hosts: They
shall build, but I will throw down; and \[men\] shall call them the
territory of wickedness, and the people against whom Jehovah hath
indignation for ever.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And your eyes shall see \[it\], and ye
shall say, Jehovah is magnified beyond the border of Israel.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> A son honoureth \[his\] father, and a
servant his master: if then I be a father, where is mine honour? and if
I be a master, where is my fear? saith Jehovah of hosts unto you,
priests, that despise my name. But ye say, Wherein have we despised thy
name?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar;
and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of
Jehovah is contemptible.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is
it not evil? And if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? Present
it now unto thy governor: will he be pleased with thee? or will he
accept thy person? saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And now, I pray you, beseech ùGod that he
will be gracious unto us. This hath been of your hand: will he accept
any of your persons? saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Who is there among you that would even
shut the doors? and ye would not kindle \[fire\] on mine altar for
nothing. I have no delight in you, saith Jehovah of hosts, neither will
I accept an oblation at your hand.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For from the rising of the sun even unto
its setting my name shall be great among the nations; and in every place
incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure oblation: for my name
shall be great among the nations, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But ye profane it, in that ye say, The
table of the Lord is polluted; and the fruit thereof, his food, is
contemptible.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And ye say, Behold, what a weariness! And
ye have puffed at it, saith Jehovah of hosts, and ye bring \[that which
was\] torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye bring the oblation:
should I accept this of your hand? saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Yea, cursed be the deceiver, who hath in
his flock a male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt
thing; for I am a great King, saith Jehovah of hosts, and my name is
terrible among the nations.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And now, ye priests, this commandment is
for you.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> If ye do not hear, and if ye do not lay
\[it\] to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith Jehovah of hosts, I
will even send the curse among you, and I will curse your blessings:
yea, I have already cursed them, because ye do not lay \[it\] to heart.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Behold, I will rebuke your seed, and spread
dung upon your faces, the dung of your feasts; and they shall take you
away with it.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And ye shall know that I have sent this
commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with Levi, saith Jehovah
of hosts.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> My covenant with him was of life and peace,
and I gave them to him that he might fear; and he feared me, and
trembled before my name.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The law of truth was in his mouth, and
unrighteousness was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace
and uprightness, and he turned many from iniquity.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the priest's lips should keep
knowledge, and at his mouth they seek the law; for he is the messenger
of Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But ye are departed out of the way; ye have
caused many to stumble at the law; ye have corrupted the covenant of
Levi, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And I also have made you contemptible and
base before all the people, because ye have not kept my ways, but have
respect of persons in \[administering\] the law.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Have we not all one father? Hath not one
ùGod created us? Why do we deal unfaithfully every man against his
brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers?

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Judah hath dealt unfaithfully, and an
abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath
profaned the sanctuary of Jehovah which he loved, and hath married the
daughter of a strange ùgod.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Jehovah will cut off from the tents of
Jacob the man that doeth this, him that calleth and him that answereth;
and him that offereth an oblation unto Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And further ye do this: ye cover the
altar of Jehovah with tears, with weeping, and with sighing, insomuch
that he regardeth not the oblation any more, nor receiveth \[it\] with
satisfaction at your hand.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because Jehovah
hath been a witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom
thou hast dealt unfaithfully: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of
thy covenant.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And did not one make \[them\]? and the
remnant of the Spirit was his. And wherefore the one? He sought a seed
of God. Take heed then to your spirit, and let none deal unfaithfully
against the wife of his youth,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> (for I hate putting away, saith Jehovah
the God of Israel;) and he covereth with violence his garment, saith
Jehovah of hosts: take heed then to your spirit, that ye deal not
unfaithfully.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Ye have wearied Jehovah with your words,
and ye say, Wherein have we wearied \[him\]? In that ye say, Every one
that doeth evil is good in the sight of Jehovah, and he delighteth in
them; or, Where is the God of judgment?

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Behold, I send my messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek will suddenly come
to his temple, and the Angel of the covenant, whom ye delight in:
behold, he cometh, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> But who shall endure the day of his coming?
and who shall stand when he appeareth? For he will be like a refiner's
fire, and like fullers' lye.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he shall sit \[as\] a refiner and
purifier of silver; and he will purify the children of Levi, and purge
them as gold and silver; and they shall offer unto Jehovah an oblation
in righteousness.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then shall the oblation of Judah and
Jerusalem be pleasant unto Jehovah, as in the days of old, and as in
former years.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And I will come near to you to judgment;
and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulterers, and against the false swearers, and against those that
oppress the hired servant in \[his\] wages, the widow and the
fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger \[from his right\], and
fear not me, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For I Jehovah change not, and ye, sons of
Jacob, are not consumed.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Since the days of your fathers have ye
departed from my statutes, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I
will return unto you, saith Jehovah of hosts. But ye say, Wherein shall
we return?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Will a man rob God? But ye rob me. And ye
say, Wherein do we rob thee? \[In\] tithes and heave-offerings.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Ye are cursed with a curse; and me ye rob,
\[even\] this whole nation.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Bring the whole tithe into the
treasure-house, that there may be food in my house, and prove me now
herewith, saith Jehovah of hosts, if I open not to you the windows of
the heavens, and pour you out a blessing, till there be no place for it.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And I will rebuke the devourer for your
sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall
your vine cast its fruit before the time in the field, saith Jehovah of
hosts.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And all nations shall call you blessed;
for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Your words have been stout against me,
saith Jehovah; but ye say, What have we been speaking against thee?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Ye say, It is vain to serve God; and what
profit is it that we keep his charge, and that we walk mournfully before
Jehovah of hosts?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And now we hold the proud for happy; yea,
they that work wickedness are built up; yea, they tempt God, and they
escape.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then they that feared Jehovah spoke often
one to another; and Jehovah observed \[it\], and heard, and a book of
remembrance was written before him for them that feared Jehovah, and
that thought upon his name.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And they shall be unto me a peculiar
treasure, saith Jehovah of hosts, in the day that I prepare; and I will
spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And ye shall return and discern between
the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that
serveth him not.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> For behold, the day cometh, burning as a
furnace; and all the proud and all that work wickedness shall be
stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith Jehovah of
hosts, so that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And unto you that fear my name shall the
Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go
forth and leap like fatted calves.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And ye shall tread down the wicked; for
they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I
prepare, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Remember the law of Moses my servant, which
I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, the statutes and
ordinances.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet,
before the coming of the great and terrible day of Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And he shall turn the heart of the fathers
to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I
come and smite the earth with a curse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew](mat)
