[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jon)  [Next](nah) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Micah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of Jehovah that came to Micah the
Morasthite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, \[and\] Hezekiah, kings of
Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear, ye peoples, all of you; hearken, O
earth, and all that is therein: and let the Lord Jehovah be witness
against you, the Lord from his holy temple!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> For behold, Jehovah cometh forth out of his
place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the mountains shall be melted under
him, and the valleys shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, as waters
poured down a steep place.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For the transgression of Jacob is all this,
and for the sins of the house of Israel. Whence is the transgression of
Jacob? is it not \[from\] Samaria? And whence are the high places of
Judah? are they not \[from\] Jerusalem?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Therefore will I make Samaria as a heap of
the field, as plantings of a vineyard; and I will pour down the stones
thereof into the valley, and I will lay bare the foundations thereof.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And all her graven images shall be beaten
to pieces, and all her harlot-gifts shall be burned with fire, and all
her idols will I make a desolation; for of the hire of a harlot hath she
gathered \[them\], and to a harlot's hire shall they return.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For this will I lament, and I will howl; I
will go stripped and naked: I will make a wailing like the jackals, and
mourning like the ostriches.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For her wounds are incurable; for it is
come even unto Judah, it reacheth unto the gate of my people, even to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Tell it not in Gath, weep not at all; at
Beth-le-aphrah roll thyself in the dust.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Pass away, inhabitress of Shaphir, in
nakedness \[and\] shame. The inhabitress of Zaanan is not come forth for
the lamentation of Beth-ezel: he will take from you its shelter.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For the inhabitress of Maroth waited
anxiously for good; but evil hath come down from Jehovah unto the gate
of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Bind the chariot to the swift steed, O
inhabitress of Lachish: she was the beginning of sin to the daughter of
Zion; for in thee were found the transgressions of Israel.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Therefore shalt thou give parting-gifts
to Moresheth-Gath: the houses of Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of
Israel.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> I will yet bring unto thee an heir, O
inhabitress of Mareshah; the glory of Israel shall come even unto
Adullam.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Make thee bald, and poll thee for the
children of thy delights; enlarge thy baldness as the eagle, for they
are gone into captivity from thee.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Woe to them that devise iniquity and work
evil upon their beds! When the morning is light they practise it,
because it is in the power of their hand.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And they covet fields, and take them by
violence; and houses, and take them away; and they oppress a man and his
house, even a man and his heritage.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold,
against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove
your necks; neither shall ye walk haughtily: for it is an evil time.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> In that day shall they take up a proverb
concerning you, and lament with a doleful lamentation, \[and\] say, We
are utterly spoiled: he hath changed the portion of my people: how hath
he removed it from me! He hath distributed our fields to the rebellious.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Therefore thou shalt have none that shall
cast the measuring line upon a lot, in the congregation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Prophesy ye not, they prophesy. If they do
not prophesy to these, the ignominy will not depart.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> O thou \[that art\] named the house of
Jacob, Is Jehovah impatient? are these his doings? Do not my words do
good to him that walketh uprightly?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But of late my people is risen up as an
enemy: ye strip off the mantle with the garment from them that pass by
securely, that are averse from war.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The women of my people do ye cast out from
their pleasant houses; from their young children do ye take away my
magnificence for ever.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Arise ye, and depart; for this is not the
resting-place, because of defilement that bringeth destruction, even a
grievous destruction.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> If a man walking in wind and falsehood do
lie, \[saying,\] I will prophesy unto thee of wine and of strong drink,
he shall be the prophet of this people.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I will surely assemble, O Jacob, the
whole of thee; I will surely gather the remnant of Israel; I will put
them together as sheep of Bozrah, as a flock in the midst of their
pasture: they shall make great noise by reason of \[the multitude of\]
men.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> One that breaketh through is gone up
before them: they have broken forth, and have passed on to the gate, and
are gone out by it; and their king passeth on before them, and Jehovah
at the head of them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And I said, Hear, I pray you, ye heads of
Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel: Is it not for you to know
judgment?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Ye who hate the good, and love evil; who
pluck off their skin from them, and their flesh from off their bones;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and who eat the flesh of my people, and
flay their skin from off them, and break their bones, and chop them in
pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the cauldron.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then shall they cry unto Jehovah, but he
will not answer them; and he will hide his face from them at that time,
according as they have wrought evil in their doings.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Thus saith Jehovah concerning the prophets
that cause my people to err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace!
but whoso putteth not into their mouths they prepare war against him:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> therefore ye shall have night without a
vision; and it shall be dark unto you, without divination; and the sun
shall go down upon the prophets, and the day shall be black over them.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And the seers shall be ashamed, and the
diviners confounded; and they shall all cover their lips, for there will
be no answer of God.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But truly I am filled with power by the
Spirit of Jehovah, and with judgment and with might, to declare unto
Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the
house of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment,
and pervert all equity,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> that build up Zion with blood, and
Jerusalem with unrighteousness.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> The heads thereof judge for reward, and
the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for
money; yet do they lean upon Jehovah, and say, Is not Jehovah in the
midst of us? no evil shall come upon us.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Therefore shall Zion for your sake be
ploughed \[as\] a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the
mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But it shall come to pass in the end of
days \[that\] the mountain of Jehovah's house shall be established on
the top of the mountains, and shall be lifted up above the hills; and
the peoples shall flow unto it.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And many nations shall go and say, Come,
and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, and to the house of the God
of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and Jehovah's word from
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he shall judge among many peoples, and
reprove strong nations, even afar off; and they shall forge their swords
into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-knives: nation shall
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And they shall sit every one under his
vine, and under his fig-tree; and there shall be none to make \[them\]
afraid: for the mouth of Jehovah of hosts hath spoken \[it\].

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For all the peoples will walk every one in
the name of his god; but we will walk in the name of Jehovah, our God
for ever and ever.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> In that day, saith Jehovah, will I assemble
her that halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and her that
I have afflicted;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> and I will make her that halted a remnant,
and her that was cast far off a strong nation; and Jehovah shall reign
over them in mount Zion, from henceforth even for ever.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And thou, O tower of the flock, hill of the
daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, yea, the first dominion shall
come, -- the kingdom to the daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Now why dost thou cry out aloud? Is there
no king in thee? is thy counsellor perished, that pangs have seized thee
as a woman in travail?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, O
daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail; for now shalt thou go forth
out of the city, and thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go
even to Babylon: there shalt thou be delivered; there Jehovah will
redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And now many nations are assembled
against thee, that say, Let her be profaned, and let our eye look upon
Zion.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> But they know not the thoughts of
Jehovah, neither understand they his counsel; for he hath gathered them
together as the sheaves into the threshing-floor.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Arise and thresh, daughter of Zion, for I
will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass; and thou shalt
beat in pieces many peoples; and I will devote their gain to Jehovah,
and their substance to the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now gather thyself in troops, O daughter of
troops; he hath laid siege against us: they shall smite the judge of
Israel with a rod upon the cheek.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> (And thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, little to be
among the thousands of Judah, out of thee shall he come forth unto me
\[who is\] to be Ruler in Israel: whose goings forth are from of old,
from the days of eternity.)

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Therefore will he give them up, until the
time when she which travaileth shall have brought forth: and the residue
of his brethren shall return unto the children of Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And he shall stand and feed \[his flock\]
in the strength of Jehovah, in the majesty of the name of Jehovah his
God. And they shall abide; for now shall he be great even unto the ends
of the earth.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And this \[man\] shall be Peace. When the
Assyrian shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in our
palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight
princes of men.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And they shall waste the land of Asshur
with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof; and he
shall deliver \[us\] from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land,
and when he treadeth within our borders.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the
midst of many peoples as dew from Jehovah, as showers upon the grass,
that tarrieth not for man, neither waiteth for the sons of men.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the
nations, in the midst of many peoples, as a lion among the beasts of the
forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go
through, treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and there is none to
deliver.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine
adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
saith Jehovah, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee,
and I will destroy thy chariots.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And I will cut off the cities of thy
land, and overthrow all thy strongholds.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And I will cut off sorceries out of thy
hand; and thou shalt have no soothsayers.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Thy graven images also will I cut off,
and thy statues out of the midst of thee; and thou shalt no more bow
down to the work of thy hands.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And I will pluck up thine Asherahs out of
the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy cities.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And I will execute vengeance in anger and
in fury upon the nations, such as they have not heard of.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Hear ye now what Jehovah saith: Arise,
contend before the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Hear, ye mountains, Jehovah's controversy,
and ye, unchanging foundations of the earth; for Jehovah hath a
controversy with his people, and he will plead with Israel.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> O my people, what have I done unto thee?
and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For I brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of bondage; and I sent before
thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> My people, remember now what Balak king of
Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him, from
Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness of Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Wherewith shall I come before Jehovah, bow
myself before the high God? Shall I come before him with
burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Will Jehovah take pleasure in thousands of
rams, in ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for
my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> He hath shewn thee, O man, what is good:
and what doth Jehovah require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
goodness, and to walk humbly with thy God?

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Jehovah's voice crieth unto the city, and
wisdom looketh on thy name. Hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Are there yet treasures of wickedness in
the house of the wicked, and the scant measure \[which is\] abominable?

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Shall I be pure with the unjust balances,
and with the bag of deceitful weights?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For her rich men are full of violence,
and her inhabitants speak lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their
mouth.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Therefore also will I make \[thee\] sick
in smiting thee; I will make \[thee\] desolate because of thy sins.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Thou shalt eat, and not be satisfied, and
thine emptiness \[shall remain\] in the midst of thee; and thou shalt
take away, and not save; and what thou savest will I give up to the
sword.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap;
thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil;
and new wine, but shalt not drink wine.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> For the statutes of Omri are kept, and
all the works of the house of Ahab; and ye walk in their counsels: that
I should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof a hissing;
and ye shall bear the reproach of my people.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Woe is me! for I am as when they have
gathered the summer-fruits, as the grape-gleanings of the vintage. There
is no cluster to eat; there is no early fruit \[which\] my soul desired.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> The godly \[man\] hath perished out of the
land, and there is none upright among men: they all lie in wait for
blood, they hunt every man his brother with a net.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Both hands are for evil, to do it well. The
prince asketh, and the judge \[is there\] for a reward; and the great
\[man\] uttereth his soul's greed: and \[together\] they combine it.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The best of them is as a briar; the most
upright, \[worse\] than a thorn-fence. The day of thy watchmen, thy
visitation is come; now shall be their perplexity.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Believe ye not in a companion, put not
confidence in a familiar friend: keep the doors of thy mouth from her
that lieth in thy bosom.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For the son dishonoureth the father, the
daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law: a man's enemies are the men of his own household.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> But as for me, I will look unto Jehovah; I
will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy:
though I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, Jehovah shall be a
light unto me.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I will bear the indignation of Jehovah --
for I have sinned against him -- until he plead my cause, and execute
judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light; I shall behold his
righteousness.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And mine enemy shall see \[it\], and
shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is Jehovah thy God? Mine
eyes shall behold her; now shall she be trodden down, as the mire of the
streets.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> In the day when thy walls shall be built,
on that day shall the established limit recede.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> In that day they shall come to thee from
Assyria and the cities of Egypt, and from Egypt to the river, and from
sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> But the land shall be desolate because of
them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock
of thine inheritance, dwelling alone in the forest, in the midst of
Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> -- As in the days of thy coming forth out
of the land of Egypt, will I shew them marvellous things.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> -- The nations shall see, and be ashamed
for all their might: they shall lay \[their\] hand upon \[their\] mouth,
their ears shall be deaf.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> They shall lick dust like the serpent;
like crawling things of the earth, they shall come trembling forth from
their close places. They shall turn with fear to Jehovah our God, and
shall be afraid because of thee.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Who is a ùGod like unto thee, that
forgiveth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage? He retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth
in loving-kindness.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> He will yet again have compassion on us,
he will tread under foot our iniquities: and thou wilt cast all their
sins into the depths of the sea.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Thou wilt perform truth to Jacob,
loving-kindness to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers, from
the days of old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum](nah)
