[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jam)  [Next](pe2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 1 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Peter, apostle of Jesus Christ, to \[the\]
sojourners of \[the\] dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
and Bithynia,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> elect according to \[the\] foreknowledge of
God \[the\] Father, by sanctification of \[the\] Spirit, unto \[the\]
obedience and sprinkling of \[the\] blood of Jesus Christ: Grace to you
and peace be multiplied.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed \[be\] the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to his great mercy, has begotten us
again to a living hope through \[the\] resurrection of Jesus Christ from
among \[the\] dead,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> to an incorruptible and undefiled and
unfading inheritance, reserved in \[the\] heavens for you,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> who are kept guarded by \[the\] power of
God through faith for salvation ready to be revealed in \[the\] last
time.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Wherein ye exult, for a little while at
present, if needed, put to grief by various trials,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> that the proving of your faith, much more
precious than of gold which perishes, though it be proved by fire, be
found to praise and glory and honour in \[the\] revelation of Jesus
Christ:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> whom, having not seen, ye love; on whom
\[though\] not now looking, but believing, ye exult with joy unspeakable
and filled with \[the\] glory,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> receiving the end of your faith, \[the\]
salvation of \[your\] souls.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Concerning which salvation prophets, who
have prophesied of the grace towards you, sought out and searched out;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> searching what, or what manner of time,
the Spirit of Christ which \[was\] in them pointed out, testifying
before of the sufferings which \[belonged\] to Christ, and the glories
after these.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> To whom it was revealed, that not to
themselves but to you they ministered those things, which have now been
announced to you by those who have declared to you the glad tidings by
\[the\] Holy Spirit, sent from heaven, which angels desire to look into.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Wherefore, having girded up the loins of
your mind, \[be\] sober \[and\] hope with perfect stedfastness in the
grace \[which will be\] brought to you at \[the\] revelation of Jesus
Christ;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> as children of obedience, not conformed
to \[your\] former lusts in your ignorance;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> but as he who has called you is holy, be
ye also holy in all \[your\] conversation;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> because it is written, Be ye holy, for
\*I\* am holy.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And if ye invoke as Father him who,
without regard of persons, judges according to the work of each, pass
your time of sojourn in fear,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> knowing that ye have been redeemed, not
by corruptible \[things, as\] silver or gold, from your vain
conversation handed down from \[your\] fathers,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> but by precious blood, as of a lamb
without blemish and without spot, \[the blood\] of Christ,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> foreknown indeed before \[the\]
foundation of \[the\] world, but who has been manifested at the end of
times for your sakes,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> who by him do believe on God, who has
raised him from among \[the\] dead and given him glory, that your faith
and hope should be in God.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Having purified your souls by obedience
to the truth to unfeigned brotherly love, love one another out of a pure
heart fervently;

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> being born again, not of corruptible
seed, but of incorruptible, by \[the\] living and abiding word of God.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Because all flesh \[is\] as grass, and
all its glory as \[the\] flower of grass. The grass has withered and
\[its\] flower has fallen;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> but the word of \[the\] Lord abides for
eternity. But this is the word which in the glad tidings \[is\] preached
to you.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Laying aside therefore all malice and all
guile and hypocrisies and envyings and all evil speakings,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> as newborn babes desire earnestly the pure
mental milk of the word, that by it ye may grow up to salvation,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord
\[is\] good.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> To whom coming, a living stone, cast away
indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> yourselves also, as living stones, are
being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Because it is contained in the scripture:
Behold, I lay in Zion a corner stone, elect, precious: and he that
believes on him shall not be put to shame.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> To you therefore who believe \[is\] the
preciousness; but to the disobedient, the stone which the builders cast
away as worthless, this is become head of \[the\] corner,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and a stone of stumbling and rock of
offence; \[who\] stumble at the word, being disobedient to which also
they have been appointed.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But \*ye\* \[are\] a chosen race, a kingly
priesthood, a holy nation, a people for a possession, that ye might set
forth the excellencies of him who has called you out of darkness to his
wonderful light;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> who once \[were\] not a people, but now
God's people; who were not enjoying mercy, but now have found mercy.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Beloved, I exhort \[you\], as strangers
and sojourners, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the
soul;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> having your conversation honest among the
Gentiles, that \[as to that\] in which they speak against you as
evildoers, they may through \[your\] good works, \[themselves\]
witnessing \[them\], glorify God in \[the\] day of visitation.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Be in subjection \[therefore\] to every
human institution for the Lord's sake; whether to \[the\] king as
supreme,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> or to rulers as sent by him, for
vengeance on evildoers, and praise to them that do well.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Because so is the will of God, that by
well-doing ye put to silence the ignorance of senseless men;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> as free, and not as having liberty as a
cloak of malice, but as God's bondmen.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Shew honour to all, love the brotherhood,
fear God, honour the king.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Servants, \[be\] subject with all fear to
your masters, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
ill-tempered.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For this \[is\] acceptable, if one, for
conscience sake towards God, endure griefs, suffering unjustly.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For what glory \[is it\], if sinning and
being buffeted ye shall bear \[it\]? but if, doing good and suffering,
ye shall bear \[it\], this is acceptable with God.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For to this have ye been called; for
Christ also has suffered for you, leaving you a model that ye should
follow in his steps:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> who did no sin, neither was guile found
in his mouth;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> who, \[when\] reviled, reviled not again;
\[when\] suffering, threatened not; but gave \[himself\] over into the
hands of him who judges righteously;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> who himself bore our sins in his body on
the tree, in order that, being dead to sins, we may live to
righteousness: by whose stripes ye have been healed.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For ye were going astray as sheep, but
have now returned to the shepherd and overseer of your souls.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Likewise, wives, \[be\] subject to your own
husbands, that, even if any are disobedient to the word, they may be
gained without \[the\] word by the conversation of the wives,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> having witnessed your pure conversation
\[carried out\] in fear;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> whose adorning let it not be that outward
one of tressing of hair, and wearing gold, or putting on apparel;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> but the hidden man of the heart, in the
incorruptible \[ornament\] of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the
sight of God is of great price.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For thus also the holy women who have hoped
in God heretofore adorned themselves, being subject to their own
husbands;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord;
whose children ye have become, doing good, and not fearing with any kind
of consternation.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> \[Ye\] husbands likewise, dwell with
\[them\] according to knowledge, as with a weaker, \[even\] the female,
vessel, giving \[them\] honour, as also fellow-heirs of \[the\] grace of
life, that your prayers be not hindered.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Finally, \[be\] all of one mind,
sympathising, full of brotherly love, tender hearted, humble minded;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing; but on the contrary, blessing \[others\], because ye have been
called to this, that ye should inherit blessing.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For he that will love life and see good
days, let him cause his tongue to cease from evil and his lips that they
speak no guile.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And let him avoid evil, and do good; let
him seek peace and pursue it;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> because \[the\] eyes of \[the\] Lord
\[are\] on \[the\] righteous, and his ears towards their supplications;
but \[the\] face of \[the\] Lord \[is\] against them that do evil.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And who shall injure you if ye have
become imitators of that which \[is\] good?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But if also ye should suffer for
righteousness' sake, blessed \[are ye\]; but be not afraid of their
fear, neither be troubled;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> but sanctify \[the\] Lord the Christ in
your hearts, and \[be\] always prepared to \[give\] an answer \[to\]
every one that asks you to give an account of the hope that \[is\] in
you, but with meekness and fear;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> having a good conscience, that \[as to
that\] in which they speak against you as evildoers, they may be ashamed
who calumniate your good conversation in Christ.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For \[it is\] better, if the will of God
should will it, to suffer \[as\] well-doers than \[as\] evildoers;

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> for Christ indeed has once suffered for
sins, \[the\] just for \[the\] unjust, that he might bring us to God;
being put to death in flesh, but made alive in \[the\] Spirit,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> in which also going he preached to the
spirits \[which are\] in prison,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> heretofore disobedient, when the
longsuffering of God waited in \[the\] days of Noah while the ark was
preparing, into which few, that is, eight souls, were saved through
water:

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> which figure also now saves you, \[even\]
baptism, not a putting away of \[the\] filth of flesh, but \[the\]
demand as before God of a good conscience, by \[the\] resurrection of
Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> who is at \[the\] right hand of God, gone
into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Christ, then, having suffered for us in
\[the\] flesh, do \*ye\* also arm yourselves with the same mind; for he
that has suffered in \[the\] flesh has done with sin,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> no longer to live the rest of \[his\] time
in \[the\] flesh to men's lusts, but to God's will.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For the time past \[is\] sufficient \[for
us\] to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, walking in
lasciviousness, lusts, wine-drinking, revels, drinkings, and unhallowed
idolatries.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Wherein they think it strange that ye run
not with \[them\] to the same sink of corruption, speaking injuriously
\[of you\];

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> who shall render account to him who is
ready to judge \[the\] living and \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For to this \[end\] were the glad tidings
preached to \[the\] dead also, that they might be judged, as regards
men, after \[the\] flesh, but live, as regards God, after \[the\]
Spirit.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But the end of all things is drawn nigh: be
sober therefore, and be watchful unto prayers;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> but before all things having fervent love
among yourselves, because love covers a multitude of sins;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> hospitable one to another, without
murmuring;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> each according as he has received a gift,
ministering it to one another, as good stewards of \[the\] various grace
of God.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> If any one speak -- as oracles of God; if
any one minister -- as of strength which God supplies; that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory and
the might for the ages of ages. Amen.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Beloved, take not \[as\] strange the fire
\[of persecution\] which has taken place amongst you for \[your\] trial,
as if a strange thing was happening to you;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> but as ye have share in the sufferings of
Christ, rejoice, that in the revelation of his glory also ye may rejoice
with exultation.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> If ye are reproached in \[the\] name of
Christ, blessed \[are ye\]; for the \[Spirit\] of glory and the Spirit
of God rests upon you: \[on their part he is blasphemed, but on your
part he is glorified.\]

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Let none of you suffer indeed as
murderer, or thief, or evildoer, or as overseer of other people's
matters;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> but if as a christian, let him not be
ashamed, but glorify God in this name.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For the time of having the judgment begin
from the house of God \[is come\]; but if first from us, what \[shall
be\] the end of those who obey not the glad tidings of God?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And if the righteous is difficultly
saved, where shall the impious and \[the\] sinner appear?

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Wherefore also let them who suffer
according to the will of God commit their souls in well-doing to a
faithful Creator.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> The elders which \[are\] among you I
exhort, who \[am their\] fellow-elder and witness of the sufferings of
the Christ, who also \[am\] partaker of the glory about to be revealed:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> shepherd the flock of God which \[is\]
among you, exercising oversight, not by necessity, but willingly; not
for base gain, but readily;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> not as lording it over your possessions,
but being models for the flock.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And when the chief shepherd is manifested
ye shall receive the unfading crown of glory.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Likewise \[ye\] younger, be subject to
\[the\] elder, and all of you bind on humility towards one another; for
God sets himself against \[the\] proud, but to \[the\] humble gives
grace.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Humble yourselves therefore under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in \[the due\] time;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> having cast all your care upon him, for he
cares about you.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Be vigilant, watch. Your adversary \[the\]
devil as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom he may devour.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Whom resist, stedfast in faith, knowing
that the selfsame sufferings are accomplished in your brotherhood which
\[is\] in \[the\] world.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> But the God of all grace who has called
you to his eternal glory in Christ Jesus, when ye have suffered for a
little while, himself shall make perfect, stablish, strengthen, ground:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> to him \[be\] the glory and the might for
the ages of the ages. Amen.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> By Silvanus, the faithful brother, as I
suppose, I have written to you briefly; exhorting and testifying that
this is \[the\] true grace of God in which ye stand.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> She that is elected with \[you\] in
Babylon salutes you, and Marcus my son.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Salute one another with a kiss of love.
Peace be with you all who \[are\] in Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter](pe2)
