[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](act)  [Next](co1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Romans

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, bondman of Jesus Christ, \[a\] called
apostle, separated to God's glad tidings,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> (which he had before promised by his
prophets in holy writings,)

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> concerning his Son (come of David's seed
according to flesh,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> marked out Son of God in power, according
to \[the\] Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of \[the\] dead) Jesus
Christ our Lord;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> by whom we have received grace and
apostleship in behalf of his name, for obedience of faith among all the
nations,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> among whom are \*ye\* also \[the\] called
of Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> to all that are in Rome, beloved of God,
called saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and \[our\]
Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ
for you all, that your faith is proclaimed in the whole world.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For God is my witness, whom I serve in my
spirit in the glad tidings of his Son, how unceasingly I make mention of
you,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> always beseeching at my prayers, if any
way now at least I may be prospered by the will of God to come to you.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For I greatly desire to see you, that I
may impart to you some spiritual gift to establish you;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> that is, to have mutual comfort among
you, each by the faith \[which is\] in the other, both yours and mine.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> But I do not wish you to be ignorant,
brethren, that I often proposed to come to you, (and have been hindered
until the present time,) that I might have some fruit among you too,
even as among the other nations also.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I am a debtor both to Greeks and
barbarians, both to wise and unintelligent:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> so, as far as depends on me, am I ready
to announce the glad tidings to you also who \[are\] in Rome.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For I am not ashamed of the glad tidings;
for it is God's power to salvation, to every one that believes, both to
Jew first and to Greek:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> for righteousness of God is revealed
therein, on the principle of faith, to faith: according as it is
written, But the just shall live by faith.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For there is revealed wrath of God from
heaven upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in
unrighteousness.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Because what is known of God is manifest
among them, for God has manifested \[it\] to them,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> -- for from \[the\] world's creation the
invisible things of him are perceived, being apprehended by the mind
through the things that are made, both his eternal power and divinity,
-- so as to render them inexcusable.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Because, knowing God, they glorified
\[him\] not as God, neither were thankful; but fell into folly in their
thoughts, and their heart without understanding was darkened:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into \[the\] likeness of an image of corruptible man
and of birds and quadrupeds and reptiles.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Wherefore God gave them up \[also\] in
the lusts of their hearts to uncleanness, to dishonour their bodies
between themselves:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> who changed the truth of God into
falsehood, and honoured and served the creature more than him who had
created \[it\], who is blessed for ever. Amen.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> For this reason God gave them up to vile
lusts; for both their females changed the natural use into that contrary
to nature;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> and in like manner the males also,
leaving the natural use of the female, were inflamed in their lust
towards one another; males with males working shame, and receiving in
themselves the recompense of their error which was fit.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And according as they did not think good
to have God in \[their\] knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind
to practise unseemly things;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> being filled with all unrighteousness,
wickedness, covetousness, malice; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit,
evil dispositions; whisperers,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> back-biters, hateful to God, insolent,
proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> void of understanding, faithless, without
natural affection, unmerciful;

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> who knowing the righteous judgment of
God, that they who do such things are worthy of death, not only practise
them, but have fellow delight in those who do \[them\].

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man,
every one who judgest, for in that in which thou judgest another, thou
condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> But we know that the judgment of God is
according to truth upon those who do such things.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And thinkest thou this, O man, who judgest
those that do such things, and practisest them \[thyself\], that
\*thou\* shalt escape the judgment of God?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> but, according to thy hardness and
impenitent heart, treasurest up to thyself wrath, in \[the\] day of
wrath and revelation of \[the\] righteous judgment of God,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who shall render to each according to his
works:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> to them who, in patient continuance of good
works, seek for glory and honour and incorruptibility, life eternal.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But to those that are contentious, and are
disobedient to the truth, but obey unrighteousness, \[there shall be\]
wrath and indignation,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> tribulation and distress, on every soul of
man that works evil, both of Jew first, and of Greek;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> but glory and honour and peace to every
one that works good, both to Jew first and to Greek:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> for there is no acceptance of persons
with God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For as many as have sinned without law
shall perish also without law; and as many as have sinned under law
shall be judged by law,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> (for not the hearers of the law \[are\]
just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For when \[those of the\] nations, which
have no law, practise by nature the things of the law, these, having no
law, are a law to themselves;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> who shew the work of the law written in
their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts
accusing or else excusing themselves between themselves;)

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> in \[the\] day when God shall judge the
secrets of men, according to my glad tidings, by Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But if \*thou\* art named a Jew, and
restest in the law, and makest thy boast in God,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and knowest the will, and discerningly
approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of
the law;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and hast confidence that thou thyself art
a leader of the blind, a light of those who \[are\] in darkness,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> an instructor of the foolish, a teacher
of babes, having the form of knowledge and of truth in the law:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> thou then that teachest another, dost
thou not teach thyself? thou that preachest not to steal, dost thou
steal?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> thou that sayest \[man should\] not
commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols,
dost thou commit sacrilege?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> thou who boastest in law, dost thou by
transgression of the law dishonour God?

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> For the name of God is blasphemed on your
account among the nations, according as it is written.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For circumcision indeed profits if thou
keep \[the\] law; but if thou be a law-transgressor, thy circumcision is
become uncircumcision.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> If therefore the uncircumcision keep the
requirements of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be reckoned for
circumcision,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> and uncircumcision by nature, fulfilling
the law, judge thee, who, with letter and circumcision, \[art\] a
law-transgressor?

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> For he is not a Jew who \[is\] one
outwardly, neither that circumcision which is outward in flesh;

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> but he \[is\] a Jew \[who is so\]
inwardly; and circumcision, of the heart, in spirit, not in letter;
whose praise \[is\] not of men, but of God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> What then \[is\] the superiority of the
Jew? or what the profit of circumcision?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Much every way: and first, indeed, that to
them were entrusted the oracles of God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For what? if some have not believed, shall
their unbelief make the faith of God of none effect?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Far be the thought: but let God be true,
and every man false; according as it is written, So that thou shouldest
be justified in thy words, and shouldest overcome when thou art in
judgment.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But if our unrighteousness commend God's
righteousness, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who inflicts wrath?
I speak according to man.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Far be the thought: since how shall God
judge the world?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For if the truth of God, in my lie, has
more abounded to his glory, why yet am \*I\* also judged as a sinner?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and not, according as we are injuriously
charged, and according as some affirm that we say, Let us practise evil
things, that good ones may come? whose judgment is just.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What then? are we better? No, in no wise:
for we have before charged both Jews and Greeks with being all under
sin:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> according as it is written, There is not
a righteous \[man\], not even one;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> there is not the \[man\] that
understands, there is not one that seeks after God.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> All have gone out of the way, they have
together become unprofitable; there is not one that practises goodness,
there is not so much as one:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> their throat is an open sepulchre; with
their tongues they have used deceit; asps' poison \[is\] under their
lips:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> swift their feet to shed blood;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> ruin and misery \[are\] in their ways,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and way of peace they have not known:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> there is no fear of God before their
eyes.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Now we know that whatever the things the
law says, it speaks to those under the law, that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world be under judgment to God.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Wherefore by works of law no flesh shall
be justified before him; for by law \[is\] knowledge of sin.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But now without law righteousness of God
is manifested, borne witness to by the law and the prophets;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> righteousness of God by faith of Jesus
Christ towards all, and upon all those who believe: for there is no
difference;

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> for all have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God;

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> being justified freely by his grace
through the redemption which \[is\] in Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> whom God has set forth a mercy-seat,
through faith in his blood, for \[the\] shewing forth of his
righteousness, in respect of the passing by the sins that had taken
place before, through the forbearance of God;

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> for \[the\] shewing forth of his
righteousness in the present time, so that he should be just, and
justify him that is of \[the\] faith of Jesus.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Where then \[is\] boasting? It has been
excluded. By what law? of works? Nay, but by law of faith;

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> for we reckon that a man is justified by
faith, without works of law.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Is \[God\] the God of Jews only? is he
not of \[the\] nations also? Yea, of nations also:

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> since indeed \[it is\] one God who shall
justify \[the\] circumcision on the principle of faith, and
uncircumcision by faith.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Do we then make void law by faith? Far be
the thought: \[no,\] but we establish law.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> What shall we say then that Abraham our
father according to flesh has found?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For if Abraham has been justified on the
principle of works, he has whereof to boast: but not before God;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> for what does the scripture say? And
Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Now to him that works the reward is not
reckoned as of grace, but of debt:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> but to him who does not work, but believes
on him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is reckoned as
righteousness.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Even as David also declares the blessedness
of the man to whom God reckons righteousness without works:

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Blessed \[they\] whose lawlessnesses have
been forgiven, and whose sins have been covered:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> blessed \[the\] man to whom \[the\] Lord
shall not at all reckon sin.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> \[Does\] this blessedness then \[rest\] on
the circumcision, or also on the uncircumcision? For we say that faith
has been reckoned to Abraham as righteousness.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How then has it been reckoned? when he
was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he received \[the\] sign of
circumcision \[as\] seal of the righteousness of faith which \[he had\]
being in uncircumcision, that he might be \[the\] father of all them
that believe being in uncircumcision, that righteousness might be
reckoned to them also;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and father of circumcision, not only to
those who are of \[the\] circumcision, but to those also who walk in the
steps of the faith, during uncircumcision, of our father Abraham.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For \[it was\] not by law that the
promise was to Abraham, or to his seed, that he should be heir of
\[the\] world, but by righteousness of faith.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if they which \[are\] of law be
heirs, faith is made vain, and the promise made of no effect.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For law works wrath; but where no law is
neither \[is there\] transgression.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Therefore \[it is\] on the principle of
faith, that \[it might be\] according to grace, in order to the promise
being sure to all the seed, not to that only which \[is\] of the law,
but to that also which \[is\] of Abraham's faith, who is father of us
all,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> (according as it is written, I have made
thee father of many nations,) before the God whom he believed, who
quickens the dead, and calls the things which be not as being;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> who against hope believed in hope to his
becoming father of many nations, according to that which was spoken, So
shall thy seed be:

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and not being weak in faith, he
considered not his own body already become dead, being about a hundred
years old, and the deadening of Sarah's womb,

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and hesitated not at the promise of God
through unbelief; but found strength in faith, giving glory to God;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and being fully persuaded that what he
has promised he is able also to do;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> wherefore also it was reckoned to him as
righteousness.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Now it was not written on his account
alone that it was reckoned to him,

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> but on ours also, to whom, believing on
him who has raised from among \[the\] dead Jesus our Lord,

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> who has been delivered for our offences
and has been raised for our justification, it will be reckoned.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Therefore having been justified on the
principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus
Christ;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> by whom we have also access by faith into
this favour in which we stand, and we boast in hope of the glory of God.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And not only \[that\], but we also boast in
tribulations, knowing that tribulation works endurance;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and endurance, experience; and experience,
hope;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> and hope does not make ashamed, because the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by \[the\] Holy Spirit which
has been given to us:

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> for we being still without strength, in
\[the\] due time Christ has died for \[the\] ungodly.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For scarcely for \[the\] just \[man\] will
one die, for perhaps for \[the\] good \[man\] some one might also dare
to die;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> but God commends \*his\* love to us, in
that, we being still sinners, Christ has died for us.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Much rather therefore, having been now
justified in \[the power of\] his blood, we shall be saved by him from
wrath.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For if, being enemies, we have been
reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much rather, having been
reconciled, we shall be saved in \[the power of\] his life.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And not only \[that\], but \[we are\]
making our boast in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now
we have received the reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For this \[cause\], even as by one man
sin entered into the world, and by sin death; and thus death passed upon
all men, for that all have sinned:

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> (for until law sin was in \[the\] world;
but sin is not put to account when there is no law;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> but death reigned from Adam until Moses,
even upon those who had not sinned in the likeness of Adam's
transgression, who is \[the\] figure of him to come.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But \[shall\] not the act of favour
\[be\] as the offence? For if by the offence of one the many have died,
much rather has the grace of God, and the free gift in grace, which
\[is\] by the one man Jesus Christ, abounded unto the many.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And \[shall\] not as by one that has
sinned \[be\] the gift? For the judgment \[was\] of one to condemnation,
but the act of favour, of many offences unto justification.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For if by the offence of the one death
reigned by the one, much rather shall those who receive the abundance of
grace, and of the free gift of righteousness, reign in life by the one
Jesus Christ:)

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> so then as \[it was\] by one offence
towards all men to condemnation, so by one righteousness towards all men
for justification of life.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> For as indeed by the disobedience of the
one man the many have been constituted sinners, so also by the obedience
of the one the many will be constituted righteous.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> But law came in, in order that the
offence might abound; but where sin abounded grace has overabounded,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> in order that, even as sin has reigned in
\[the power of\] death, so also grace might reign through righteousness
to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> What then shall we say? Should we continue
in sin that grace may abound?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Far be the thought. We who have died to
sin, how shall we still live in it?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Are you ignorant that we, as many as have
been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> We have been buried therefore with him by
baptism unto death, in order that, even as Christ has been raised up
from among \[the\] dead by the glory of the Father, so \*we\* also
should walk in newness of life.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For if we are become identified with
\[him\] in the likeness of his death, so also we shall be of \[his\]
resurrection;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> knowing this, that our old man has been
crucified with \[him\], that the body of sin might be annulled, that we
should no longer serve sin.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For he that has died is justified from sin.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Now if we have died with Christ, we believe
that we shall also live with him,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> knowing that Christ having been raised up
from among \[the\] dead dies no more: death has dominion over him no
more.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For in that he has died, he has died to
sin once for all; but in that he lives, he lives to God.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> So also \*ye\*, reckon yourselves dead to
sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Let not sin therefore reign in your
mortal body to obey its lusts.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Neither yield your members instruments of
unrighteousness to sin, but yield yourselves to God as alive from among
\[the\] dead, and your members instruments of righteousness to God.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For sin shall not have dominion over
\*you\*, for ye are not under law but under grace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> What then? should we sin because we are
not under law but under grace? Far be the thought.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Know ye not that to whom ye yield
yourselves bondmen for obedience, ye are bondmen to him whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But thanks \[be\] to God, that ye were
bondmen of sin, but have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into
which ye were instructed.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Now, having got your freedom from sin, ye
have become bondmen to righteousness.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> I speak humanly on account of the
weakness of your flesh. For even as ye have yielded your members in
bondage to uncleanness and to lawlessness unto lawlessness, so now yield
your members in bondage to righteousness unto holiness.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For when ye were bondmen of sin ye were
free from righteousness.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> What fruit therefore had ye \*then\* in
the things of which ye are \*now\* ashamed? for the end of \*them\*
\[is\] death.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> But \*now\*, having got your freedom from
sin, and having become bondmen to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness,
and the end eternal life.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the wages of sin \[is\] death; but
the act of favour of God, eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Are ye ignorant, brethren, (for I speak to
those knowing law,) that law rules over a man as long as he lives?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For the married woman is bound by law to
her husband so long as he is alive; but if the husband should die, she
is clear from the law of the husband:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> so then, the husband being alive, she shall
be called an adulteress if she be to another man; but if the husband
should die, she is free from the law, so as not to be an adulteress,
though she be to another man.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> So that, my brethren, \*ye\* also have been
made dead to the law by the body of the Christ, to be to another, who
has been raised up from among \[the\] dead, in order that we might bear
fruit to God.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For when we were in the flesh the passions
of sins, which \[were\] by the law, wrought in our members to bring
forth fruit to death;

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> but now we are clear from the law, having
died in that in which we were held, so that we should serve in newness
of spirit, and not in oldness of letter.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> What shall we say then? \[is\] the law sin?
Far be the thought. But I had not known sin, unless by law: for I had
not had conscience also of lust unless the law had said, Thou shalt not
lust;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> but sin, getting a point of attack by the
commandment, wrought in me every lust; for without law sin \[was\] dead.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> But \*I\* was alive without law once; but
the commandment having come, sin revived, but \*I\* died.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the commandment, which \[was\] for
life, was found, \[as\] to me, itself \[to be\] unto death:

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> for sin, getting a point of attack by the
commandment, deceived me, and by it slew \[me\].

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> So that the law indeed \[is\] holy, and
the commandment holy, and just, and good.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Did then that which is good become death
to me? Far be the thought. But sin, that it might appear sin, working
death to me by that which is good; in order that sin by the commandment
might become exceeding sinful.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For we know that the law is spiritual:
but \*I\* am fleshly, sold under sin.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> For that which I do, I do not own: for
not what I will, this I do; but what I hate, this I practise.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> But if what I do not will, this I
practise, I consent to the law that \[it is\] right.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Now then \[it is\] no longer \*I\*
\[that\] do it, but the sin that dwells in me.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> For I know that in me, that is, in my
flesh, good does not dwell: for to will is there with me, but to do
right \[I find\] not.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For I do not practise the good that I
will; but the evil I do not will, that I do.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> But if what \*I\* do not will, this I
practise, \[it is\] no longer \*I\* \[that\] do it, but the sin that
dwells in me.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I find then the law upon \*me\* who will
to practise what is right, that with \*me\* evil is there.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For I delight in the law of God according
to the inward man:

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> but I see another law in my members,
warring in opposition to the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin which exists in my members.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> O wretched man that I \[am\]! who shall
deliver me out of this body of death?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> I thank God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. So then \*I\* \*myself\* with the mind serve God's law; but with
the flesh sin's law.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> \[There is\] then now no condemnation to
those in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For what the law could not do, in that it
was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of
flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> in order that the righteous requirement of
the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh
but according to Spirit.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For they that are according to flesh mind
the things of the flesh; and they that are according to Spirit, the
things of the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For the mind of the flesh \[is\] death; but
the mind of the Spirit life and peace.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Because the mind of the flesh is enmity
against God: for it is not subject to the law of God; for neither indeed
can it be:

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> and they that are in flesh cannot please
God.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But \*ye\* are not in flesh but in Spirit,
if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you; but if any one has not \[the\]
Spirit of Christ \*he\* is not of him:

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> but if Christ be in you, the body is dead
on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> But if the Spirit of him that has raised
up Jesus from among \[the\] dead dwell in you, he that has raised up
Christ from among \[the\] dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on
account of his Spirit which dwells in you.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> So then, brethren, we are debtors, not to
the flesh, to live according to flesh;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> for if ye live according to flesh, ye are
about to die; but if, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the
body, ye shall live:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> for as many as are led by \[the\] Spirit
of God, \*these\* are sons of God.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> For ye have not received a spirit of
bondage again for fear, but ye have received a spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The Spirit itself bears witness with our
spirit, that we are children of God.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And if children, heirs also: heirs of
God, and Christ's joint heirs; if indeed we suffer with \[him\], that we
may also be glorified with \[him\].

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For I reckon that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy \[to be compared\] with the coming glory to
be revealed to us.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> For the anxious looking out of the
creature expects the revelation of the sons of God:

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> for the creature has been made subject to
vanity, not of its will, but by reason of him who has subjected \[the
same\], in hope

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> that the creature itself also shall be
set free from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of
the children of God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> For we know that the whole creation
groans together and travails in pain together until now.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And not only \[that\], but even \*we\*
ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, we also ourselves
groan in ourselves, awaiting adoption, \[that is\] the redemption of our
body.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> For we have been saved in hope; but hope
seen is not hope; for what any one sees, why does he also hope?

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> But if what we see not we hope, we expect
in patience.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And in like manner the Spirit joins also
its help to our weakness; for we do not know what we should pray for as
is fitting, but the Spirit itself makes intercession with groanings
which cannot be uttered.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But he who searches the hearts knows what
\[is\] the mind of the Spirit, because he intercedes for saints
according to God.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> But we \*do\* know that all things work
together for good to those who love God, to those who are called
according to purpose.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> Because whom he has foreknown, he has
also predestinated \[to be\] conformed to the image of his Son, so that
he should be \[the\] firstborn among many brethren.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> But whom he has predestinated, these also
he has called; and whom he has called, these also he has justified; but
whom he has justified, these also he has glorified.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> What shall we then say to these things?
If God \[be\] for us, who against us?

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> He who, yea, has not spared his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him grant us
all things?

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Who shall bring an accusation against
God's elect? \[It is\] God who justifies:

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> who is he that condemns? \[It is\] Christ
who has died, but rather has been \[also\] raised up; who is also at the
right hand of God; who also intercedes for us.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or danger, or sword?

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> According as it is written, For thy sake
we are put to death all the day long; we have been reckoned as sheep for
slaughter.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> But in all these things we more than
conquer through him that has loved us.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> For I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor powers,

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which
\[is\] in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> I say \[the\] truth in Christ, I lie not,
my conscience bearing witness with me in \[the\] Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> that I have great grief and uninterrupted
pain in my heart,

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> for I have wished, I myself, to be a curse
from the Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen, according to flesh;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> who are Israelites; whose \[is\] the
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the law-giving, and the
service, and the promises;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> whose \[are\] the fathers; and of whom, as
according to flesh, \[is\] the Christ, who is over all, God blessed for
ever. Amen.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Not however as though the word of God had
failed; for not all \[are\] Israel which \[are\] of Israel;

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> nor because they are seed of Abraham
\[are\] all children: but, In Isaac shall a seed be called to thee.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> That is, \[they that are\] the children of
the flesh, these \[are\] not the children of God; but the children of
the promise are reckoned as seed.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For this word \[is\] of promise, According
to this time I will come, and there shall be a son to Sarah.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And not only \[that\], but Rebecca having
conceived by one, Isaac our father,

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> \[the children\] indeed being not yet
born, or having done anything good or worthless (that the purpose of God
according to election might abide, not of works, but of him that calls),

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> it was said to her, The greater shall
serve the less:

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> according as it is written, I have loved
Jacob, and I have hated Esau.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> What shall we say then? \[Is there\]
unrighteousness with God? Far be the thought.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> For he says to Moses, I will shew mercy
to whom I will shew mercy, and I will feel compassion for whom I will
feel compassion.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> So then \[it is\] not of him that wills,
nor of him that runs, but of God that shews mercy.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For the scripture says to Pharaoh, For
this very thing I have raised thee up from amongst \[men\], that I might
thus shew in thee my power, and so that my name should be declared in
all the earth.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> So then, to whom he will he shews mercy,
and whom he will he hardens.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Thou wilt say to me then, Why does he yet
find fault? for who resists his purpose?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Aye, but thou, O man, who art \*thou\*
that answerest again to God? Shall the thing formed say to him that has
formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Or has not the potter authority over the
clay, out of the same lump to make one vessel to honour, and another to
dishonour?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And if God, minded to shew his wrath and
to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering vessels of
wrath fitted for destruction;

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> and that he might make known the riches
of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for
glory,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> us, whom he has also called, not only
from amongst \[the\] Jews, but also from amongst \[the\] nations?

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> As he says also in Hosea, I will call
not-my-people My people; and the-not-beloved Beloved.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And it shall be, in the place where it
was said to them, \*Ye\* \[are\] not my people, there shall they be
called Sons of \[the\] living God.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Esaias cries concerning Israel,
Should the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea,
the remnant shall be saved:

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> for \[he\] is bringing the matter to an
end, and \[cutting \[it\] short in righteousness; because\] a cutting
short of the matter will \[the\] Lord accomplish upon the earth.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And according as Esaias said before,
Unless \[the\] Lord of hosts had left us a seed, we had been as Sodom,
and made like even as Gomorrha.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> What then shall we say? That \[they of
the\] nations, who did not follow after righteousness, have attained
righteousness, but \[the\] righteousness that is on the principle of
faith.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> But Israel, pursuing after a law of
righteousness, has not attained to \[that\] law.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Wherefore? Because \[it was\] not on the
principle of faith, but as of works. They have stumbled at the
stumblingstone,

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> according as it is written, Behold, I
place in Zion a stone of stumbling and rock of offence: and he that
believes on him shall not be ashamed.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Brethren, the delight of my own heart and
my supplication which \[I address\] to God for them is for salvation.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For I bear them witness that they have
zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For they, being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and seeking to establish their own \[righteousness\],
have not submitted to the righteousness of God.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For Christ is \[the\] end of law for
righteousness to every one that believes.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> For Moses lays down in writing the
righteousness which is of the law, The man who has practised those
things shall live by them.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But the righteousness of faith speaks
thus: Do not say in thine heart, Who shall ascend to the heavens? that
is, to bring Christ down;

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> or, Who shall descend into the abyss?
that is, to bring up Christ from among \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But what says it? The word is near thee,
in thy mouth and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we
preach:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth
Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him
from among \[the\] dead, thou shalt be saved.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> For with \[the\] heart is believed to
righteousness; and with \[the\] mouth confession made to salvation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> For the scripture says, No one
believing on him shall be ashamed.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For there is no difference of Jew and
Greek; for the same Lord of all \[is\] rich towards all that call upon
him.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For every one whosoever, who shall call
on the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> How then shall they call upon him in
whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe on him of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without one who preaches?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> and how shall they preach unless they
have been sent? according as it is written, How beautiful the feet of
them that announce glad tidings of peace, of them that announce glad
tidings of good things!

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> But they have not all obeyed the glad
tidings. For Esaias says, Lord, who has believed our report?

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> So faith then \[is\] by a report, but
the report by God's word.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> But I say, Have they not heard? Yea,
surely, Their voice has gone out into all the earth, and their words to
the extremities of the habitable world.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But I say, Has not Israel known? First,
Moses says, \*I\* will provoke you to jealousy through \[them that are\]
not a nation: through a nation without understanding I will anger you.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But Esaias is very bold, and says, I
have been found by those not seeking me; I have become manifest to those
not inquiring after me.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> But unto Israel he says, All the day
long I have stretched out my hands unto a people disobeying and
opposing.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> I say then, Has God cast away his people?
Far be the thought. For \*I\* also am an Israelite, of \[the\] seed of
Abraham, of \[the\] tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> God has not cast away his people whom he
foreknew. Know ye not what the scripture says in \[the history of\]
Elias, how he pleads with God against Israel?

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Lord, they have killed thy prophets, they
have dug down thine altars; and \*I\* have been left alone, and they
seek my life.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But what says the divine answer to him? I
have left to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed knee to Baal.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Thus, then, in the present time also
there has been a remnant according to election of grace.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But if by grace, no longer of works:
since \[otherwise\] grace is no more grace.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> What \[is it\] then? What Israel seeks
for, that he has not obtained; but the election has obtained, and the
rest have been blinded,

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> according as it is written, God has given
to them a spirit of slumber, eyes not to see, and ears not to hear, unto
this day.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And David says, Let their table be for a
snare, and for a gin, and for a fall-trap, and for a recompense to them:

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> let their eyes be darkened not to see,
and bow down their back alway.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> I say then, Have they stumbled in order
that they might fall? Far be the thought: but by their fall \[there is\]
salvation to the nations to provoke them to jealousy.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> But if their fall \[be the\] world's
wealth, and their loss \[the\] wealth of \[the\] nations, how much
rather their fulness?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For I speak to you, the nations,
inasmuch as \*I\* am apostle of nations, I glorify my ministry;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> if by any means I shall provoke to
jealousy \[them which are\] my flesh, and shall save some from among
them.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For if their casting away \[be the\]
world's reconciliation, what \[their\] reception but life from among
\[the\] dead?

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Now if the first-fruit \[be\] holy, the
lump also; and if the root \[be\] holy, the branches also.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Now if some of the branches have been
broken out, and \*thou\*, being a wild olive tree, hast been grafted in
amongst them, and hast become a fellow-partaker of the root and of the
fatness of the olive tree,

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> boast not against the branches; but if
thou boast, \[it is\] not \*thou\* bearest the root, but the root thee.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Thou wilt say then, The branches have
been broken out in order that \*I\* might be grafted in.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Right: they have been broken out
through unbelief, and \*thou\* standest through faith. Be not
high-minded, but fear:

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> if God indeed has not spared the
natural branches; lest it might be he spare not thee either.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Behold then \[the\] goodness and
severity of God: upon them who have fallen, severity; upon thee goodness
of God, if thou shalt abide in goodness, since \[otherwise\] \*thou\*
also wilt be cut away.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And \*they\* too, if they abide not in
unbelief, shall be grafted in; for God is able again to graft them in.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For if \*thou\* hast been cut out of
the olive tree wild by nature, and, contrary to nature, hast been
grafted into the good olive tree, how much rather shall they, who are
according to nature be grafted into their own olive tree?

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> For I do not wish you to be ignorant,
brethren, of this mystery, that ye may not be wise in your own conceits,
that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the
nations be come in;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and so all Israel shall be saved.
According as it is written, The deliverer shall come out of Zion; he
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And this is the covenant from me to
them, when I shall have taken away their sins.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> As regards the glad tidings, \[they
are\] enemies on your account; but as regards election, beloved on
account of the fathers.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> For the gifts and the calling of God
\[are\] not subject to repentance.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For as indeed \*ye\* \[also\] once have
not believed in God, but now have been objects of mercy through the
unbelief of \*these\*;

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> so these also have now not believed in
your mercy, in order that \*they\* also may be objects of mercy.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> For God hath shut up together all in
unbelief, in order that he might shew mercy to all.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> O depth of riches both of \[the\]
wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable his judgments, and
untraceable his ways!

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> For who has known \[the\] mind of
\[the\] Lord, or who has been his counsellor?

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> or who has first given to him, and it
shall be rendered to him?

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> For of him, and through him, and for
him \[are\] all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, \[which is\] your intelligent service.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And be not conformed to this world, but
be transformed by the renewing of \[your\] mind, that ye may prove what
\[is\] the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For I say, through the grace which has
been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have high
thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as
God has dealt to each a measure of faith.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> For, as in one body we have many members,
but all the members have not the same office;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> thus we, \[being\] many, are one body in
Christ, and each one members one of the other.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> But having different gifts, according to
the grace which has been given to us, whether \[it be\] prophecy, \[let
us prophesy\] according to the proportion of faith;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> or service, \[let us occupy ourselves\]
in service; or he that teaches, in teaching;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> or he that exhorts, in exhortation; he
that gives, in simplicity; he that leads, with diligence; he that shews
mercy, with cheerfulness.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Let love be unfeigned; abhorring evil;
cleaving to good:

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> as to brotherly love, kindly
affectioned towards one another: as to honour, each taking the lead in
paying it to the other:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> as to diligent zealousness, not
slothful; in spirit fervent; serving the Lord.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> As regards hope, rejoicing: as regards
tribulation, enduring: as regards prayer, persevering:

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> distributing to the necessities of the
saints; given to hospitality.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Bless them that persecute you; bless,
and curse not.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Rejoice with those that rejoice, weep
with those that weep.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Have the same respect one for another,
not minding high things, but going along with the lowly: be not wise in
your own eyes:

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> recompensing to no one evil for evil:
providing things honest before all men:

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> if possible, as far as depends on you,
living in peace with all men;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> not avenging yourselves, beloved, but
give place to wrath; for it is written, Vengeance \[belongs\] to me,
\*I\* will recompense, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> If therefore thine enemy should hunger,
feed him; if he should thirst, give him drink; for, so doing, thou shalt
heap coals of fire upon his head.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Be not overcome by evil, but overcome
evil with good.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Let every soul be subject to the
authorities that are above \[him\]. For there is no authority except
from God; and those that exist are set up by God.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> So that he that sets himself in
opposition to the authority resists the ordinance of God; and they who
\[thus\] resist shall bring sentence of guilt on themselves.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> For rulers are not a terror to a good
work, but to an evil \[one\]. Dost thou desire then not to be afraid of
the authority? practise \[what is\] good, and thou shalt have praise
from it;

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> for it is God's minister to thee for
good. But if thou practisest evil, fear; for it bears not the sword in
vain; for it is God's minister, an avenger for wrath to him that does
evil.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Wherefore it is necessary to be subject,
not only on account of wrath, but also on account of conscience.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For on this account ye pay tribute also;
for they are God's officers, attending continually on this very thing.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Render to all their dues: to whom tribute
\[is due\], tribute; to whom custom, custom; to whom fear, fear; to whom
honour, honour.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Owe no one anything, unless to love one
another: for he that loves another has fulfilled the law.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou
shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not lust; and if there
be any other commandment, it is summed up in this word, namely, Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Love works no ill to its neighbour;
love therefore \[is the\] whole law.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> This also, knowing the time, that it is
already time that \*we\* should be aroused out of sleep; for now \[is\]
our salvation nearer than when we believed.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The night is far spent, and the day is
near; let us cast away therefore the works of darkness, and let us put
on the armour of light.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> As in the day, let us walk becomingly;
not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and lasciviousness,
not in strife and emulation.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
do not take forethought for the flesh to \[fulfil its\] lusts.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now him that is weak in the faith
receive, not to \[the\] determining of questions of reasoning.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> One man is assured that he may eat all
things; but the weak eats herbs.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Let not him that eats make little of him
that eats not; and let not him that eats not judge him that eats: for
God has received him.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who art \*thou\* that judgest the servant
of another? to his own master he stands or falls. And he shall be made
to stand; for the Lord is able to make him stand.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> One man esteems day more than day;
another esteems every day \[alike\]. Let each be fully persuaded in his
own mind.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He that regards the day, regards it to
\[the\] Lord. And he that eats, eats to \[the\] Lord, for he gives God
thanks; and he that does not eat, \[it is\] to \[the\] Lord he does not
eat, and gives God thanks.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For none of us lives to himself, and none
dies to himself.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> For both if we should live, \[it is\] to
the Lord we live; and if we should die, \[it is\] to the Lord we die:
both if we should live then, and if we should die, we are the Lord's.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> For to this \[end\] Christ has died and
lived \[again\], that he might rule over both dead and living.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But thou, why judgest thou thy brother?
or again, thou, why dost thou make little of thy brother? for we shall
all be placed before the judgment-seat of God.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> For it is written, \*I\* live, saith
\[the\] Lord, that to me shall bow every knee, and every tongue shall
confess to God.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So then each of us shall give an
account concerning himself to God.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Let us no longer therefore judge one
another; but judge ye this rather, not to put a stumbling-block or a
fall-trap before his brother.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I know, and am persuaded in the Lord
Jesus, that nothing is unclean of itself; except to him who reckons
anything to be unclean, to that man \[it is\] unclean.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> For if on account of meat thy brother
is grieved, thou walkest no longer according to love. Destroy not him
with thy meat for whom Christ has died.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Let not then your good be evil spoken
of;

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> for the kingdom of God is not eating
and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in \[the\] Holy
Spirit.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> For he that in this serves the Christ
\[is\] acceptable to God and approved of men.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> So then let us pursue the things which
tend to peace, and things whereby one shall build up another.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> For the sake of meat do not destroy the
work of God. All things indeed \[are\] pure; but \[it is\] evil to that
man who eats while stumbling \[in doing so\].

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> \[It is\] right not to eat meat, nor
drink wine, nor \[do anything\] in which thy brother stumbles, or is
offended, or is weak.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Hast \*thou\* faith? have \[it\] to
thyself before God. Blessed \[is\] he who does not judge himself in what
he allows.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> But he that doubts, if he eat, is
condemned; because \[it is\] not of faith; but whatever \[is\] not of
faith is sin.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> But \*we\* ought, we that are strong, to
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Let each one of us please his neighbour
with a view to what is good, to edification.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For the Christ also did not please
himself; but according as it is written, The reproaches of them that
reproach thee have fallen upon me.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For as many things as have been written
before have been written for our instruction, that through endurance and
through encouragement of the scriptures we might have hope.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Now the God of endurance and of
encouragement give to you to be like-minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> that ye may with one accord, with one
mouth, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Wherefore receive ye one another,
according as the Christ also has received you to \[the\] glory of God.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> For I say that Jesus Christ became a
minister of \[the\] circumcision for \[the\] truth of God, to confirm
the promises of the fathers;

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and that the nations should glorify God
for mercy; according as it is written, For this cause I will confess to
thee among \[the\] nations, and will sing to thy name.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And again he says, Rejoice, nations,
with his people.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And again, Praise the Lord, all \[ye\]
nations, and let all the peoples laud him.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And again, Esaias says, There shall be
the root of Jesse, and one that arises, to rule over \[the\] nations: in
him shall \[the\] nations hope.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Now the God of hope fill you with all
joy and peace in believing, so that ye should abound in hope by \[the\]
power of \[the\] Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> But I am persuaded, my brethren, I
myself also, concerning you, that yourselves also are full of goodness,
filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> But I have written to you the more
boldly, \[brethren,\] in part, as putting you in mind, because of the
grace given to me by God,

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> for me to be minister of Christ Jesus
to the nations, carrying on as a sacrificial service the \[message of\]
glad tidings of God, in order that the offering up of the nations might
be acceptable, sanctified by \[the\] Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I have therefore \[whereof to\] boast
in Christ Jesus in the things which pertain to God.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> For I will not dare to speak anything
of the things which Christ has not wrought by me, for \[the\] obedience
of \[the\] nations, by word and deed,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> in \[the\] power of signs and wonders,
in \[the\] power of \[the\] Spirit of God; so that I, from Jerusalem,
and in a circuit round to Illyricum, have fully preached the glad
tidings of the Christ;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> and so aiming to announce the glad
tidings, not where Christ has been named, that I might not build upon
another's foundation;

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> but according as it is written, To whom
there was nothing told concerning him, they shall see; and they that
have not heard shall understand.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Wherefore also I have been often
hindered from coming to you.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But now, having no longer place in
these regions, and having great desire to come to you these many years,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> whenever I should go to Spain; (for I
hope to see you as I go through, and by you to be set forward thither,
if first I shall have been in part filled with your company;)

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> but now I go to Jerusalem, ministering
to the saints;

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> for Macedonia and Achaia have been well
pleased to make a certain contribution for the poor of the saints who
\[are\] in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> They have been well pleased indeed, and
they are their debtors; for if the nations have participated in their
spiritual things, they ought also in fleshly to minister to them.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> Having finished this therefore, and
having sealed to them this fruit, I will set off by you into Spain.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> But I know that, coming to you, I shall
come in \[the\] fulness of \[the\] blessing of Christ.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> But I beseech you, brethren, by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, that ye strive
together with me in prayers for me to God;

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> that I may be saved from those that do
not believe in Judaea; and that my ministry which \[I have\] for
Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints;

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> in order that I may come to you in joy
by God's will, and that I may be refreshed with you.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And the God of peace be with you all.
Amen.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> But I commend to you Phoebe, our sister,
who is minister of the assembly which is in Cenchrea;

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> that ye may receive her in \[the\] Lord
worthily of saints, and that ye may assist her in whatever matter she
has need of you; for \*she\* also has been a helper of many, and of
myself.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Salute Prisca and Aquila, my
fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> (who for my life staked their own neck;
to whom not \*I\* only am thankful, but also all the assemblies of the
nations,)

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> and the assembly at their house. Salute
Epaenetus, my beloved, who is \[the\] first-fruits of Asia for Christ.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Salute Maria, who laboured much for you.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen
and fellow-captives, who are of note among the apostles; who were also
in Christ before me.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Salute Amplias, my beloved in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Salute Urbanus, our fellow-workman in
Christ, and Stachys, my beloved.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Salute Apelles, approved in Christ.
Salute those who belong to Aristobulus.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Salute Herodion, my kinsman. Salute
those who belong to Narcissus, who are in \[the\] Lord.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Salute Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who
labour in \[the\] Lord. Salute Persis, the beloved, who has laboured
much in \[the\] Lord.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Salute Rufus, chosen in \[the\] Lord;
and his mother and mine.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes,
Patrobas, Hermas, and the brethren with them.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus,
and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints with them.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Salute one another with a holy kiss.
All the assemblies of Christ salute you.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> But I beseech you, brethren, to
consider those who create divisions and occasions of falling, contrary
to the doctrine which \*ye\* have learnt, and turn away from them.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> For such serve not our Lord Christ, but
their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts
of the unsuspecting.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> For your obedience has reached to all.
I rejoice therefore as it regards you; but I wish you to be wise \[as\]
to that which is good, and simple \[as\] to evil.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> But the God of peace shall bruise Satan
under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[be\] with
you.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Timotheus, my fellow-workman, and
Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> I Tertius, who have written this
epistle, salute you in \[the\] Lord.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> Gaius, my host and of the whole
assembly, salutes you. Erastus, the steward of the city, salutes you,
and the brother Quartus.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
\[be\] with you all. Amen.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Now to him that is able to establish
you, according to my glad tidings and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to \[the\] revelation of \[the\] mystery, as to which silence
has been kept in \[the\] times of the ages,

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> but \[which\] has now been made
manifest, and by prophetic scriptures, according to commandment of the
eternal God, made known for obedience of faith to all the nations --

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> \[the\] only wise God, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians](co1)
