[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](col)  [Next](th2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 1 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus to the
assembly of Thessalonians in God \[the\] Father and \[the\] Lord Jesus
Christ. Grace to you and peace.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> We give thanks to God always for you all,
making mention of you at our prayers,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> remembering unceasingly your work of faith,
and labour of love, and enduring constancy of hope, of our Lord Jesus
Christ, before our God and Father;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> knowing, brethren beloved by God, your
election.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For our glad tidings were not with you in
word only, but also in power, and in \[the\] Holy Spirit, and in much
assurance; even as ye know what we were among you for your sakes:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> and \*ye\* became our imitators, and of the
Lord, having accepted the word in much tribulation with joy of \[the\]
Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> so that ye became models to all that
believe in Macedonia and in Achaia:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> for the word of the Lord sounded out from
you, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place your faith
which \[is\] towards God has gone abroad, so that we have no need to say
anything;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> for they themselves relate concerning us
what entering in we had to you, and how ye turned to God from idols to
serve a living and true God,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and to await his Son from the heavens,
whom he raised from among the dead, Jesus, our deliverer from the coming
wrath.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For ye know yourselves, brethren, our
entering in which \[we had\] to you, that it has not been in vain;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> but, having suffered before and been
insulted, even as ye know, in Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak
unto you the glad tidings of God with much earnest striving.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For our exhortation \[was\] not of deceit,
nor of uncleanness, nor in guile;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> but even as we have been approved of God to
have the glad tidings entrusted to us, so we speak; not as pleasing men,
but God, who proves our hearts.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For we have not at any time been \[among
you\] with flattering discourse, even as ye know, nor with a pretext for
covetousness, God \[is\] witness;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> nor seeking glory from men, neither from
you nor from others, when we might have been a charge as Christ's
apostles;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> but have been gentle in the midst of you,
as a nurse would cherish her own children.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Thus, yearning over you, we had found our
delight in having imparted to you not only the glad tidings of God, but
our own lives also, because ye had become beloved of us.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For ye remember, brethren, our labour and
toil: working night and day, not to be chargeable to any one of you, we
have preached to you the glad tidings of God.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> \*Ye\* \[are\] witnesses, and God, how
piously and righteously and blamelessly we have conducted ourselves with
you that believe:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> as ye know how, as a father his own
children, we used to exhort each one of you, and comfort and testify,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> that ye should walk worthy of God, who
calls you to his own kingdom and glory.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And for this cause we also give thanks to
God unceasingly that, having received \[the\] word of \[the\] report of
God by us, ye accepted, not men's word, but, even as it is truly, God's
word, which also works in you who believe.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For \*ye\*, brethren, have become
imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus;
for \*ye\* also have suffered the same things of your own countrymen as
also \*they\* of the Jews,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> who have both slain the Lord Jesus and
the prophets, and have driven us out by persecution, and do not please
God, and \[are\] against all men,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> forbidding us to speak to the nations
that they may be saved, that they may fill up their sins always: but
wrath has come upon them to the uttermost.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But we, brethren, having been bereaved of
you and separated for a little moment in person, not in heart, have used
more abundant diligence to see your face with much desire;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> wherefore we have desired to come to you,
even I Paul, both once and twice, and Satan has hindered us.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For what \[is\] our hope, or joy, or
crown of boasting? \[are\] not \*ye\* also before our Lord Jesus at his
coming?

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> for ye are our glory and joy.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Wherefore, being no longer able to refrain
ourselves, we thought good to be left alone in Athens,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and sent Timotheus, our brother and
fellow-workman under God in the glad tidings of Christ, to confirm you
and encourage \[you\] concerning your faith,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> that no one might be moved by these
afflictions. (For yourselves know that we are set for this;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> for also, when we were with you, we told
you beforehand we are about to be in tribulation, even as also it came
to pass, and ye know.)

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this reason \*I\* also, no longer able
to refrain myself, sent to know your faith, lest perhaps the tempter had
tempted you and our labour should be come to nothing.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But Timotheus having just come to us from
you, and brought to us the glad tidings of your faith and love, and that
ye have always good remembrance of us, desiring much to see us, even as
we also you;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> for this reason we have been comforted in
you, brethren, in all our distress and tribulation, through your faith,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> because now we live if \*ye\* stand firm in
\[the\] Lord.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For what thanksgiving can we render to God
for you, for all the joy wherewith we rejoice on account of you before
our God,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> night and day beseeching exceedingly to
the end that we may see your face, and perfect what is lacking in your
faith?

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> But our God and Father himself, and our
Lord Jesus, direct our way to you.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> But you, may the Lord make to exceed and
abound in love toward one another, and toward all, even as we also
towards you,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> in order to the confirming of your hearts
unblamable in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our
Lord Jesus with all his saints.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> For the rest, then, brethren, we beg you
and exhort you in \[the\] Lord Jesus, even as ye have received from us
how ye ought to walk and please God, even as ye also do walk, that ye
would abound still more.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For ye know what charges we gave you
through the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For this is \[the\] will of God, \[even\]
your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> that each of you know how to possess his
own vessel in sanctification and honour,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> (not in passionate desire, even as the
nations who know not God,)

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> not overstepping the rights of and wronging
his brother in the matter, because the Lord \[is\] the avenger of all
these things, even as we also told you before, and have fully testified.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For God has not called us to uncleanness,
but in sanctification.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He therefore that \[in this\] disregards
\[his brother\], disregards, not man, but God, who has given also his
Holy Spirit to you.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Now concerning brotherly love ye have no
need that we should write to you, for ye yourselves are taught of God to
love one another.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For also ye do this towards all the
brethren in the whole of Macedonia; but we exhort you, brethren, to
abound still more,

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and to seek earnestly to be quiet and
mind your own affairs, and work with your \[own\] hands, even as we
charged you,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> that ye may walk reputably towards those
without, and may have need of no one.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But we do not wish you to be ignorant,
brethren, concerning them that are fallen asleep, to the end that ye be
not grieved even as also the rest who have no hope.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if we believe that Jesus has died and
has risen again, so also God will bring with him those who have fallen
asleep through Jesus.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> (For this we say to you in \[the\] word
of \[the\] Lord, that \*we\*, the living, who remain to the coming of
the Lord, are in no way to anticipate those who have fallen asleep;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> for the Lord himself, with an assembling
shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from
heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> then \*we\*, the living who remain, shall
be caught up together with them in \[the\] clouds, to meet the Lord in
\[the\] air; and thus we shall be always with \[the\] Lord.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> So encourage one another with these
words.)

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But concerning the times and the seasons,
brethren, ye have no need that ye should be written to,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> for ye know perfectly well yourselves, that
the day of \[the\] Lord so comes as a thief by night.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> When they may say, Peace and safety, then
sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon her that is with
child; and they shall in no wise escape.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But \*ye\*, brethren, are not in darkness,
that the day should overtake you as a thief:

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> for all \*ye\* are sons of light and sons
of day; we are not of night nor of darkness.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> So then do not let us sleep as the rest do,
but let us watch and be sober;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> for they that sleep sleep by night, and
they that drink drink by night;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> but \*we\* being of \[the\] day, let us be
sober, putting on \[the\] breastplate of faith and love, and as helmet
\[the\] hope of salvation;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> because God has not set us for wrath, but
for obtaining salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> who has died for us, that whether we may
be watching or sleep, we may live together with him.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Wherefore encourage one another, and
build up each one the other, even as also ye do.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But we beg you, brethren, to know those
who labour among you, and take the lead among you in \[the\] Lord, and
admonish you,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and to regard them exceedingly in love on
account of their work. Be in peace among yourselves.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> But we exhort you, brethren, admonish the
disorderly, comfort the faint-hearted, sustain the weak, be patient
towards all.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> See that no one render to any evil for
evil, but pursue always what is good towards one another and towards
all;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> rejoice always;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> pray unceasingly;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> in everything give thanks, for this is
\[the\] will of God in Christ Jesus towards you;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> quench not the Spirit;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> do not lightly esteem prophecies;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> but prove all things, hold fast the
right;

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> hold aloof from every form of wickedness.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Now the God of peace himself sanctify you
wholly: and your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> He \[is\] faithful who calls you, who
will also perform \[it\].

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Brethren, pray for us.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Greet all the brethren with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> I adjure you by the Lord that the letter
be read to all the \[holy\] brethren.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[be\]
with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians](th2)
