[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th2)  [Next](ti2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 1 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ, according to
\[the\] command of God our Saviour, and of Christ Jesus our hope,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to Timotheus, \[my\] true child in faith:
grace, mercy, peace, from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Even as I begged thee to remain in Ephesus,
\[when I was\] going to Macedonia, that thou mightest enjoin some not to
teach other doctrines,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> nor to turn their minds to fables and
interminable genealogies, which bring questionings rather than
\[further\] God's dispensation, which \[is\] in faith.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> But the end of what is enjoined is love out
of a pure heart and a good conscience and unfeigned faith;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> which \[things\] some having missed, have
turned aside to vain discourse,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> desiring to be law-teachers, not
understanding either what they say or concerning what they \[so\]
strenuously affirm.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now we know that the law \[is\] good if any
one uses it lawfully,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> knowing this, that law has not its
application to a righteous person, but to \[the\] lawless and
insubordinate, to \[the\] impious and sinful, to \[the\] unholy and
profane, to smiters of fathers and smiters of mothers; to murderers,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> fornicators, sodomites, kidnappers,
liars, perjurers; and if any other thing is opposed to sound teaching,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> according to the glad tidings of the
glory of the blessed God, with which \*I\* have been entrusted.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> \[And\] I thank Christ Jesus our Lord,
who has given me power, that he has counted me faithful, appointing to
ministry him

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> who before was a blasphemer and
persecutor, and an insolent overbearing \[man\]: but mercy was shewn me
because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> But the grace of our Lord surpassingly
over-abounded with faith and love, which \[is\] in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Faithful \[is\] the word, and worthy of
all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners,
of whom \*I\* am \[the\] first.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> But for this reason mercy was shewn me,
that in me, \[the\] first, Jesus Christ might display the whole
long-suffering, for a delineation of those about to believe on him to
life eternal.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Now to the King of the ages, \[the\]
incorruptible, invisible, only God, honour and glory to the ages of
ages. Amen.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> This charge, \[my\] child Timotheus, I
commit to thee, according to the prophecies as to thee preceding, in
order that thou mightest war by them the good warfare,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> maintaining faith and a good conscience;
which \[last\] some, having put away, have made shipwreck as to faith;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom
I have delivered to Satan, that they may be taught by discipline not to
blaspheme.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I exhort therefore, first of all, that
supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all
men;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> for kings and all that are in dignity, that
we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all piety and gravity;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> for this is good and acceptable before our
Saviour God,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> who desires that all men should be saved
and come to \[the\] knowledge of \[the\] truth.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For God is one, and \[the\] mediator of God
and men one, \[the\] man Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who gave himself a ransom for all, the
testimony \[to be rendered\] in its own times;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> to which \*I\* have been appointed a herald
and apostle, (I speak \[the\] truth, I do not lie,) a teacher of \[the\]
nations in faith and truth.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I will therefore that the men pray in every
place, lifting up pious hands, without wrath or reasoning.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> In like manner also that the women in
decent deportment and dress adorn themselves with modesty and
discretion, not with plaited \[hair\] and gold, or pearls, or costly
clothing,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> but, what becomes women making profession
of the fear of God, by good works.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Let a woman learn in quietness in all
subjection;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> but I do not suffer a woman to teach nor
to exercise authority over man, but to be in quietness;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> for Adam was formed first, then Eve:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and Adam was not deceived; but the woman,
having been deceived, was in transgression.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> But she shall be preserved in
childbearing, if they continue in faith and love and holiness with
discretion.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> The word \[is\] faithful: if any one
aspires to exercise oversight, he desires a good work.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The overseer then must be irreproachable,
husband of one wife, sober, discreet, decorous, hospitable, apt to
teach;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> not given to excesses from wine, not a
striker, but mild, not addicted to contention, not fond of money,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> conducting his own house well, having
\[his\] children in subjection with all gravity;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> (but if one does not know how to conduct
his own house, how shall he take care of the assembly of God?)

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> not a novice, that he may not, being
inflated, fall into \[the\] fault of the devil.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But it is necessary that he should have
also a good testimony from those without, that he may fall not into
reproach and \[the\] snare of the devil.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Ministers, in like manner, grave, not
double-tongued, not given to much wine, not seeking gain by base means,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And let these be first proved, then let
them minister, being without charge \[against them\].

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> \[The\] women in like manner grave, not
slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Let \[the\] ministers be husbands of one
wife, conducting \[their\] children and their own houses well:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> for those who shall have ministered well
obtain for themselves a good degree, and much boldness in faith which
\[is\] in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> These things I write to thee, hoping to
come to thee more quickly;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> but if I delay, in order that thou mayest
know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is \[the\]
assembly of \[the\] living God, \[the\] pillar and base of the truth.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And confessedly the mystery of piety is
great. God has been manifested in flesh, has been justified in \[the\]
Spirit, has appeared to angels, has been preached among \[the\] nations,
has been believed on in \[the\] world, has been received up in glory.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But the Spirit speaks expressly, that in
latter times some shall apostatise from the faith, giving their mind to
deceiving spirits and teachings of demons

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> speaking lies in hypocrisy, cauterised as
to their own conscience,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> forbidding to marry, \[bidding\] to abstain
from meats, which God has created for receiving with thanksgiving for
them who are faithful and know the truth.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For every creature of God \[is\] good, and
nothing \[is\] to be rejected, being received with thanksgiving;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> for it is sanctified by God's word and
freely addressing \[him\].

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Laying these things before the brethren,
thou wilt be a good minister of Christ Jesus, nourished with the words
of the faith and of the good teaching which thou hast fully followed up.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But profane and old wives' fables avoid,
but exercise thyself unto piety;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> for bodily exercise is profitable for a
little, but piety is profitable for everything, having promise of life,
of the present one, and of that to come.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The word \[is\] faithful and worthy of all
acceptation;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> for, for this we labour and suffer
reproach, because we hope in a living God, who is preserver of all men,
specially of those that believe.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Enjoin and teach these things.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Let no one despise thy youth, but be a
model of the believers, in word, in conduct, in love, in faith, in
purity.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Till I come, give thyself to reading, to
exhortation, to teaching.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Be not negligent of the gift \[that is\]
in thee, which has been given to thee through prophecy, with imposition
of the hands of the elderhood.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Occupy thyself with these things; be
wholly in them, that thy progress may be manifest to all.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Give heed to thyself and to the teaching;
continue in them; for, doing this, thou shalt save both thyself and
those that hear thee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Rebuke not an elder sharply, but exhort
\[him\] as a father, younger \[men\] as brethren,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> elder women as mothers, younger women as
sisters, with all purity.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Honour widows who are really widows;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> but if any widow have children or
descendants, let them learn first to be pious as regards their own
house, and to render a return on their side to \[their\] parents; for
this is acceptable in the sight of God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now she who \[is\] a widow indeed, and is
left alone, has put \[her\] hope in God, and continues in supplications
and prayers night and day.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> But she that lives in habits of
self-indulgence is dead \[while\] living.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And these things enjoin, that they may be
irreproachable.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But if any one does not provide for his
own, and specially for those of \[his\] house, he has denied the faith,
and is worse than the unbeliever.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Let a widow be put upon the list, being of
not less than sixty years, \[having been\] wife of one man,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> borne witness to in good works, if she
have brought up children, if she have exercised hospitality, if she have
washed saints' feet, if she have imparted relief to the distressed, if
she have diligently followed every good work.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But younger widows decline; for when they
grow wanton against Christ, they desire to marry,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> being guilty, because they have cast off
their first faith.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And, at the same time, they learn also
\[to be\] idle, going about to people's houses; and not only idle, but
also gossipers and meddlers, speaking things not becoming.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I will therefore that the younger marry,
bear children, rule the house, give no occasion to the adversary in
respect of reproach.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> For already some have turned aside after
Satan.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any believing man or woman have
widows, let them impart relief to them, and let not the assembly be
charged, that it may impart relief to those \[that are\] widows indeed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let the elders who take the lead \[among
the saints\] well be esteemed worthy of double honour, specially those
labouring in word and teaching;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> for the scripture says, Thou shalt not
muzzle an ox that treadeth out corn, and, The workman \[is\] worthy of
his hire.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Against an elder receive not an
accusation unless where there are two or three witnesses.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Those that sin convict before all, that
the rest also may have fear.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> I testify before God and Christ Jesus and
the elect angels, that thou keep these things without prejudice, doing
nothing by favour.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Lay hands quickly on no man, nor partake
in others' sins. Keep thyself pure.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Drink no longer only water, but use a
little wine on account of thy stomach and thy frequent illnesses.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Of some men the sins are manifest
beforehand, going before to judgment, and some also they follow after.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> In like manner good works also are
manifest beforehand, and those that are otherwise cannot be hid.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Let as many bondmen as are under yoke count
their own masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and the
teaching be not blasphemed.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And they that have believing masters, let
them not despise \[them\] because they are brethren; but let them the
rather serve them with subjection, because they are faithful and
beloved, who profit by the good and ready service \[rendered\]. These
things teach and exhort.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If any one teach differently, and do not
accede to sound words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the teaching
which \[is\] according to piety,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> he is puffed up, knowing nothing, but sick
about questions and disputes of words, out of which arise envy, strife,
injurious words, evil suspicions,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> constant quarrellings of men corrupted in
mind and destitute of the truth, holding gain to be \[the end of\]
piety.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But piety with contentment \*is\* great
gain.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For we have brought nothing into the world:
\[it is\] \[manifest\] that neither can we carry anything out.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But having sustenance and covering, we will
be content with these.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But those who desire to be rich fall into
temptation and a snare, and many unwise and hurtful lusts, which plunge
men into destruction and ruin.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For the love of money is \[the\] root of
every evil; which some having aspired after, have wandered from the
faith, and pierced themselves with many sorrows.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> But \*thou\*, O man of God, flee these
things, and pursue righteousness, piety, faith, love, endurance,
meekness of spirit.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Strive earnestly \[in\] the good conflict
of faith. Lay hold of eternal life, to which thou hast been called, and
hast confessed the good confession before many witnesses.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I enjoin thee before God who preserves
all things in life, and Christ Jesus who witnessed before Pontius Pilate
the good confession,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> that thou keep the commandment spotless,
irreproachable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> which in its own time the blessed and
only Ruler shall shew, the King of those that reign, and Lord of those
that exercise lordship;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> who only has immortality, dwelling in
unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see; to whom
\[be\] honour and eternal might. Amen.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Enjoin on those rich in the present age
not to be high-minded, nor to trust on the uncertainty of riches; but in
the God who affords us all things richly for \[our\] enjoyment;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> to do good, to be rich in good works, to
be liberal in distributing, disposed to communicate \[of their
substance\],

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> laying by for themselves a good
foundation for the future, that they may lay hold of \[what is\] really
life.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> O Timotheus, keep the entrusted deposit,
avoiding profane, vain babblings, and oppositions of false-named
knowledge,

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> of which some having made profession,
have missed the faith. Grace \[be\] with thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy](ti2)
