<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf64)  [Next](sunf66) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f63"></span>

Chapter LXIII. They Escape from the Chapmen by the Carline's Wizardry

The next night after, they were come to but a little way from the end of
the mountains, and could see the tilled and peopled lands lying down
before them, and this had been no very long day's journey. The three
merchant masters had ridden much apart from each other all day, and
there was little feasting between them at even, and all men laid them
down early to sleep. The Carline had spoken a word to the Maiden as they
were a-riding, so that none might hear: "Sweetling," she said, "the
thing thou hast to do tonight is to give heed to my least word or
beckoning, and obey it, and then will all be well." So they two lay down
somewhat away from the carle-folk. Amidst of the night then, awoke the
Maiden, and the moon was high and very bright, and looking to her left
side she saw the Carline was not there where she ought to have been; but
nought scared was she thereat, since she wotted well that something
would betide. But moving as little as she might, she let her eyes go
round the campment, and even therewith saw the said Carline coming out
of the tent of the masters, who slept all together there, whereas their
serving-men lay as they might, under cloaks and such-like, beneath the
naked heavens, the weather being fine and dry as at that time. Stole the
Carline then and went up to each one of the said men and made unked
signs over him, and when all that was done stood up by herself amidst
them all and laughed aloud. Then she called out: "O sweetling that I am
preserving as a pearl of all price for the greatest warrior of the
world, wakest thou or sleepest? Speak out and fear not, for these now
will lie here like logs long after the moon is gone out and the sun is
shining. These carles thou seest, and two of the masters lie therein in
their tent; but the third, the old one, I lured away far into the
thicket and laid him asleep there; so that his being away, and the
others hunting for him, might breed delay and quarrels amongst these
runagates."

The Maiden lightly arose and spake in a clear voice: "My mother, I am
verily awake and ready for the road." So she came down to the Carline,
and they went together to the horses and dight their own, which were the
best of the company's, and without more delay gat to saddle and rode
quietly down along the pass.

So rode they till it was the afternoon, and they were come out of the
mountains into the first of the meadows. Then they drew rein into the
first of the meadows. Then they drew rein in a fair little ingle amidst
goodly trees, and gat off their horses and tethered them amongst the
sweet grass. Then spake the Carline: "I must now look along the ways of
sleep and see what is betiding." Therewith she drew from her hardes a
goat-skin bag, which she did over her head, and then laid herself face
downwards on the grass; but the Maiden sat by her and watched.

Thus she lay for an hour, and tumbled and routed in her slumber, and
thereafter she awoke and sat up, and was much besweated and worn; and
she spake in a weak voice: "I have seen what lieth behind and what lieth
before; now therefore I can do, and all will be well. For the chapmen
have awakened and have striven, the two young ones together, and then
the two young with the old because of his bitter mocks. But now they be
got to the road again, and though we be most like to prevent them at a
place of refuge, yet wise will it be to leave as little as may be to
chancehap. As to what lieth before, I have seen our way that it turneth
somewhat east tomorrow, and will bring us to a goodly Abbey that hath a
noble guest-house, and there, by the help of the Prior's safe-conduct
and the gifts I shall give to the saints and the stewards, we shall be
put well upon our way. But now will I do; and when thou seest me fall
down and lie like to one dead, be not afeard, but when I come to myself
again then sprinkle my face with water and put a cup of wine to my lips,
and thereafter shall I be whole, and we shall eat and drink and go on
our way."

The the Carline went about the way and gathered handfuls of the dust and
small stones and laid them in the bag, and then lay down on the way and
put the bag under her bosom and brooded it, as a hen broodeth her eggs,
moaning and muttering the while, and thus she was a long hour. Then she
arose and let her hair loose, and it was long and white and not scanty.
In this guise she walked to and fro athwart the road, keeping her face
turned toward the mountains, and kept taking handfuls of that dust and
casting it up toward that quarter; and ever and anon she cried out: "Be
mist and mirk, and bewilderment and fear, before those faces of our
foemen! Be a wall behind us that they may not pierce through! Mirk
behind us, light before us!" So she went on till she had emptied the
said bag, and then she fell aback and lay on the road as one dead. And
the Maiden did as she had bidden and meddled not with her. But at last,
and it was another hour, she began to come to herself, and the Maiden
sprinkled her with water and gave her wine to drink, and the old woman
arose and was herself again and of good cheer; and she stowed away her
bag, and they drew forth victual and ate and drank kindly and merrily
together.

So they gat to the road again when when it yet lacked three hours of
sunset, but rode not after night had fallen lest they should miss their
way. And no shelter they had that night but the grass and the trees and
the well-bedecked heavens, and all that was sweet enough for them.

On the morrow they gat to the road early enough, and soon began to come
amongst the cots and the homesteads, and saw the folk labouring afield,
and none were otherwise than friendly to them; and a company of
husbandmen, carles and queans, hailed them from the ingle of an acre
where they were eating their dinner and bade light down and share, and
they did so with a good will; and the upland folk looked with wonder on
the Maiden and her beauty, and gave her much worship. But the Carline
talked with them, and asked them much of their land and how it sped with
them; and they said it was well with them, for that they dwelt in good
peace, whereas they were under the dominion of the great Abbey, which
dealt mildly with them, and would not suffer them to be harried; and
they pointed out to the newcomers a fair white castle lying on a spur of
the hills which went up to the waste mountains, and did them to with
that that was the bit and the bridle of any wild men who might get it
into their heads to break out on to the wealth of the Holy Fathers. And
there be many such, said they, about our land, and especially a good way
east and south hence where the land marcheth on the Great Forest, which
is haunted by the worst of men, who will not be refrained but by great
might and great heed. "And now," said they, "we here tell of that mighty
and good lord, the Knight of Longshaw, that he hath of late prevailed
against his foes, who be tyrants and oppressors; and if that be sooth,
he shall do as much or more on the east side of the Forest as my Lord
Abbot hath done in the west, and peace and good days shall abide with
us." Much those twain heeded this talk, and they prayed for that good
lord, him and his.

So they thanked that good folk and went their ways, and in an hour's
time they found the path which would do their eastering for them toward
the Abbey; and shortly to say it, they came to the guest-house thereof
two hours before it began to dusk, and were well-served by the brethren
whose office it was.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIV. The Carline Endeth Her Tale](sunf66)

</div>
