<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf15)  [Next](sunf17) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f14"></span>

Chapter XIV. The Gifts of Steelhead

Now by then it was high noon, and the sun very hot, and as they lay on
the grass after this converse the lad looked on the water, and he was
besweated, and longed for the bright pools of the stream after the
manner of boys; and he said at last: "I were fain to take to the water
this hot noon, if it please thee."

"It is well thought of, lad," said Steelhead, "and that the more, as I
must needs see thee naked if I am to strengthen thee as I am minded to
do." So they did off their raiment, both of them, and went into the
biggest of the pools hard by; and if Steelhead were a noble-looking man
clad, far nobler was he to look on naked, for he was both big and well
shapen, so that better might not be. As for Osberne, there looked but
little of him when he was unclad, as is the fashion of lads to be lank,
yet for his age he was full well shapen. So Steelhead came out of the
water presently, and clad himself, while Osberne yet played a while.
Then Steelhead called the lad to him all naked as he was, and said:
"Stand thou before me, youngling, and I will give thee a gift which
shall go well with Boardcleaver." And the lad stood still before him,
and Steelhead laid his hands on the head of him first, and let them
abide there a while; then he passed his hands over the shoulders and
arms of the boy, and his legs and thighs and breast, and all over his
body; and therewith he said: "In our days and the olden time it was the
wont of fathers to bless their children in this wise; but for thee, thy
father is dead, and thy nighest kinsman is little-hearted and somewhat
of a churl. Thus then have I done to thee to take the place of a father
to thee, I who am of the warriors of while agone. And I think it will
avail thee; and it is borne in upon me that before very long thou wilt
need this avail, if thou art to live and do the deeds I would have thee.
Now it is done, so cover thee in thy raiment and rest a while; and then
I will depart and leave thee to the might which I have given thee, and
the valiance which hath grown up in thine heart."

So they lay down on the greensward and rested; and Osberne had fetched
along with him cakes and cheese and a keg of good drink, and they took
their bever there in all content. But for that time Steelhead spake no
more of his folk and the old days, but about the fowl and fish and other
wild things that haunted that clough, and of shooting in the bow and so
forth. Then they arose and went to their horses, and Steelhead said to
Osberne: "How is it with the might of thy body, lad? Canst thou do
better in wielding of Boardcleaver?" So the youngling stretched himself
and took the sword by the hilts and shook it and waved it about, and
tossed it in the air and caught it again, and said: "Seest thou, master?
Meseems my might is so much eked, that I deem I could swim the stream of
the Sundering Flood and overcome it." Quoth the hillman, laughing: "Yea,
and we know that that would please the well; but let it be, my son, I
bid thee; for no race of folk who have ever dwelt in the Dale from the
beginning of the world have ever won across the Sundering Flood. So now
we depart for this present; but as for this way-beast I ride, thy
grandsire shall lose nothing and gain much by him; for I took him but to
pleasure thee, and I shall send him back to Wethermel ere many days are
past. Farewell, my son!"

So he kissed the youngling, and rode away south across the stream and
over the other side of the clough. Osberne stood beside his horse,
looking after him and the way he had taken, and then mounted and rode
his way homeward, somewhat downcast at first for the missing of this new
father. But after a while, what for his new gift and his freshly-gained
might, and the pride and pleasure of life, he became all joyous again,
as though the earth were new made for him.

Ye may well think that the very next time (which indeed was on the
morrow) that Osberne went to the Bight of the Cloven Knoll, he went girt
with Boardcleaver, and showed it to his friend; and she looked somewhat
sober at the sight of it, and said: "I pray thee, Osberne, draw it not
forth from the sheath." "In nowise may I draw it," said he, "for I am
told never to draw it till I have my foe before me; for ever it will
have a life betwixt the coming forth from the sheath and its going back
again." "I fear me," she said, "that thou wilt have to draw it often, so
that many a tale will be told of it, and perhaps at last the death of
thee." And therewith she put her hands up to her face and wept. But he
comforted her with kind words, till the tears were gone.

Then she looked at him long and lovingly, and said at last: "I know not
how it is, but thou seemest to me changed and grown less like a child,
as though some new might had come to thee. Now I may not ask thee who
has done this to thee, and given thee the sword, for if thou mightest
thou wouldst have told me. But tell me this, hast thou all this from a
friend or a foe?" He said: "Dost thou indeed see that I may not tell
thee who is the giver; but I may tell thee that it is a friend. But art
thou not glad of my gain?" She smiled and said: "I should be glad, and
would be if I might; but somehow meseemeth that thou growest older
quicker than I do, and that it is ill for me, for it will sunder us more
than even now we be sundered."

And again he had to comfort her with sweet words; and he shot across to
her an ouch which Stephen had given him that morning, so soon she was
herself again, and sat and told him a tale of old times; and they parted
happily, and Osberne gat him home to Wethermel. But he had scarce been
at home a minute or two when there came one riding to the door, a young
man scarlet-clad and gay, and his horse was dight with the goodliest of
saddles and bridles, and the bit of silver, but for all that, both
Osberne and Stephen, who was standing in the door, knew the horse for
their own nag, on whom Waywearer had ridden off the yestermorn.

Now the lad cries out: "Is this the stead of Wethermel?" "Yea," said
Osberne; "what wouldst thou?" "I would see the goodman," says the swain.
"He is yet afield," said Osberne, "but if thou wilt come in and have the
bite and the sup thou mayst abide him, for he will not be long."

"I may not," said the swain, "for time fails me; so I will say to thee
what I was to say to him, which is no long spell, to wit that Waywearer
sendeth home the horse the goodman lent him, and bids him keep the gear
on him in his memory." Therewith is he off the horse in a twinkling and
out through the garth gate, and away so swiftly that they lost sight of
him in a moment. Stephen laughed and said to Osberne: "Waywearer is
nowise debt-tough; now will our goodman be glad tonight. But see thou!
Look to the nag's shoes! If ever I saw silver to know it, they be shod
therewith." And so it was as he said, and the silver nigh an inch thick.

Soon cometh home the goodman, and they tell him the tidings, and he
grows wondrous glad, and says that luck has come to Wethermel at last.
But thereafter they found that horse much bettered, so that he was the
best nag in all the Wethermel pastures.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Surly John Brings a Guest to Wethermel](sunf17)

</div>
