<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sunf22)  [Next](sunf24.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f21"></span>

Chapter XXI. Warriors from Eastcheaping Ride into the Dale

So the summer wears with nought to tell of, and autumn and winter in
like manner, and spring was come again, and it was hard on two years
since those twain had first met, and Osberne was fifteen years old and
Elfhild but a month and a half less, and still they met happily as
aforetime. Wethermel throve in all wise this while, and there was deep
peace on the Eastern Dale, and never had the edges of Boardcleaver
looked on the light of day since the fall of Hardcastle.

But in early May of this year came riders into the Dale, friends, though
they rode all-armed, to wit the men-at-arms of Eastcheaping, even such
as Osberne had seen riding down from the Castle the last time of his
going thither; and the errand they came on was this, that war and strife
were at hand for the good town, for the Baron of Deepdale had sent the
Porte his challenge for some matter of truage, wherein the town deemed
it had a clear right, and seeing that it was nought feeble, it had a
settled mind to fight it out. Wherefore it had sent a knight of its
service and a company of men-at-arms to see what help its friends of the
Dale would give it at the pinch: for it was well known that the dalesmen
were stalwarth carles if need were, both a-foot and on horseback, though
they were no stirrers up of strife.

With this errand on hand came the men into the Dale, and the very first
stead they came to was Wethermel, for it lay first on their road. And
now was Wethermel a well-manned stead, for besides Stephen the Eater,
there were twelve carles defensible dwelling there, whereof five were
sons of men of estate.

So when the said men-at-arms rode into the garth of a bright May
evening, and they all glittering like so many heaps of sunlit ice, all
folk came out a-doors, and Osberne stood before them all, clad in
scarlet raiment, for Nicholas the goodman hung back somewhat, as was his
wont when he deemed he saw peril at hand. Then Osberne hailed the
newcomers, and asked no questions of them, and made no words save to
welcome them and bid them in; and they got off their horses and entered
the house, one score and five all told. And there they unarmed them, and
all service was done them, and then meat and drink were set on the board
and all folk fared to supper, and it was soon seen that both sides were
friendly and sweet together. And Osberne set the Knight who was their
captain at his right hand, and they talked merrily together. But when
supper was done the Knight spake unto Osberne and Nicholas and said:
"Sirs, is it free for me to tell out our errand into the Dale?" Osberne
answered: "We should not have asked it, fair sir, if ye had not offered
to tell it, but would rather have prayed ye to drink a cup or two; but
so it is that we be eager to hear your tale, whereas we see that ye are
of our friends of Eastcheaping." Then the Knight began, and told them of
their quarrel from point to point, and the right they deemed they had
therein. And from time to time Osberne put in a question when he would
have the matter made clearer to him, and the Knight deemed his questions
handy and wise. And at last he said: "Now so it is, neighbours, that we
ask help of you; and the help we need is not so much of money or beasts
or weapons as of the bodies and souls of stark & stout-hearted men. What
say ye, who be here, have ye will to ward your cheaping and the place
where we have done good to each other, or will ye let all go down the
wind as for you?"

"Fair sir," said Osberne, "we will first ask you one question: Ye bid us
to ride to battle with you in your quarrel; but do ye bid and command us
this service as of right, or do ye crave our help as neighbours, and
because there is love and dealings betwixt us? And this I ask because we
dalesmen deem that we be free men, owing no service to any lord, or
earl, or king."

Said the Knight: "We claim no service of you of right or by custom, but
crave your help as bold and free neighbours who for love's sake may be
fain of helping friends in need."

Spake Osberne: "Then there is no more to be said but this, that there is
one who will ride with you, and that is my own self. And though I be but
a lad I have a stroke of work in me, as some hereby can witness; and if
thou wilt, I will ride down the Dale with you and give you my
furtherance with the goodmen there. But as for these good fellows--which
of you will ride with this Knight against the good town's foemen and
ours?" They all cried aye to this and rose up and shouted. But Osberne
said: "Well, lads, but someone must be left behind to look to the
goodman and the women, and husband field and fold. I will take with me
but six and Stephen the Eater, my man." And he named them one after the
other.

Who were joyous now save the Knight and his men-at-arms, and they all
drank a cup to the young master; but sooth to say, some of them wondered
how so young a lad would bear him in the fight. But others said,
Let-a-be, no man so well beloved as this shall be a dastard.

So merry were they in the hall and drank a bout, but not for long,
whereas the captain would not have his men so drunk that they might not
ride fast and far upon the morrow. So the voidee cup was drunk, and
Osberne led the Knight to his bed and gave him good-night. But ere he
was asleep came Stephen to his bedside and asked was he fain of a tale;
and the Knight yeasaid it; so Stephen told much about the Dale and its
folk, and about the Dwarfs and the Land-wights. And at last he fell to
talk about his master, the young one, and told much of him and his
valiancy and kindness and prowess; and he told at length all the tale
how Hardcastle had sped at his hands. And the captain marvelled and
said: "I am in luck to see this lad and be his fellow then; for such
marvels come not to hand more than once or twice in a ten score years,
and this is one of them."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. Osberne Takes Leave of Elfhild](sunf24.md)

</div>
