<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sunf66)  [Next](sunf68.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f65"></span>

Chapter LXV. Osberne and Elfhild Make Themselves Known to Their People

Therewith the Carline sat down, and there was great cheer and rumour in
the hall, and folk wondered what was to come next; but it is not to be
said but that they had an inkling of what had befallen. Then Elfhild
arose and cast off her grey clothes, and was clad thereunder in the
finest of fine gear of gold and of green, and surely, said everybody,
that never was such beauty seen in hall. And for a while people held
their breaths, as they that see a wonder which they fear may pass away.
And then a great shout rent the hall, and there it was done. A tall man
rose in his place, a grey cloak fell from him, and he was clad all in
glittering armour, and there was none that did not know him for Osberne
Wulfgrimsson, who has been called the Red Lad. And he said in a bold and
free voice: "See, my masters and dear friends, if I have not kept tryst
with you; for it is of a sooth five years well told since I departed
from Wethermel with little hope in my heart. And now forsooth is no hope
in my heart, for all the hope has budded and blossomed and fruited, and
I am yours and ye are mine while the days last. And this is the woman
that I have won; and O I would that it had been earlier, though God wot
I laboured at it. And now I think ye will be good to her as ye will be
good to me, and what tale shall there be except of peace and quiet in
these far-away upland vales?"

So passed the hours into deep might at Wethermel, and folk went to sleep
scarce trowing in the wonders that they had heard and seen. And there
were few among them that did not long for the dawn and the daylight,
that they might once again cast eyes upon Osberne and his beloved. And
hard it were to say which of those twain was the loveliest. But surely
about both of them there was then and always a sweet wisdom that never
went beyond what was due and meet for the land they lived in or the
people with whom they dwelt. So that all round them the folk grew better
and not the worser.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVI. The Lip of the Sundering Flood](sunf68.md)

</div>
