<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf08)  [Next](sunf10) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f07"></span>

Chapter VII. Of a Newcomer, and His Gift to Osberne

Now when spring came again, needs must Osberne drive the sheep up to the
bents, though he had liefer haunted the riverside, for sore he desired
to cross the Flood and find out tidings there. And though he were a
child, yet he would by his own choice have fared to seek out the pretty
maiden whose hand he had held on the edge of the river that even, but
livelihood drave him to look to the sheep now that the spring grass was
growing.

So on a certain day when March was wearing towards April he drave his
sheep up over the crown of the bent; and there he went with them a way
where, the land still rising, the ground was hard and rocky but clean,
and the grass sweet for as scanty as it was, growing in little hollows
and shelters round about the rocks. Wherefore the sheep were nimble in
their feeding, and led him on long, till they and he were come into a
little grassy dale with a stream running through it. There they were
neither to hold nor to bind, but strayed all up and down the dale and
over the crest of the bent thereof, and would not come to his call; and
his dog was young and not very wise, and could do little to help him. So
he began to think he had best gather what of the sheep he could, and
drive them home and fold them, and then come back and hunt for the rest,
perhaps with the help of his grandsire; but as the ones he could get at
were all close anigh, and he was hot and weary with running hither and
thither and holloaing to sheep and dog, he would go down to the stream
and drink and rest awhile first. And even so he did, and lay down by the
water and drank a long draught; but while he was about it he thought he
heard footsteps coming down the hill-side over the greensward.

Howsoever, he had his drink out, and then rose to his knees and looked
up, and therewith sprang hastily to his feet, for a tall man was coming
on toward him not ten yards from the stream. He was not to say afeard by
the sight, yet somewhat startled, for the man was not his grandsire, nor
forsooth did he seem to be one of the Dale-dwellers. For he was so clad
that he had a grey hawberk on him of fine ringmail, and a scarlet coat
thereunder embroidered goodly; a big gold ring was on his left arm, a
bright basnet on his head; he was girt with a sword, and bare a bow in
his hand, and a quiver hung at his back. He was a goodly man, young by
seeming, bright-faced and grey-eyed; his hair was yellow and as fine as
silk, and it hung down over his shoulders.

Now Osberne put as good a face on the meeting as he might, and gave the
newcomer the sele of the day, and he hailed him again in a clear loud
voice, and they stood looking on each other across the stream a while.
Then the newcomer laughed pleasantly and said: "Hast thou any name that
I may call thee by?"

"I am Osberne of Wethermel," said the youngling. "Aha," said the man,
"art thou he that slew the leash of great grey wolves last autumn, who
had put two armed men to flight the day before?" Said Osberne,
reddening: "Well, what was I to do? There fell a leash of hill-dogs on
our sheep, and I made them forbear. Was it a scathe to thee, lord?" The
newcomer laughed again: "Nay, my lad," said he, "I love them no more
than ye do; they were no dogs of mine. But what doest thou here?"

"Thou seest," said the youngling, "that I am shepherding our sheep; and
a many have run from me, and I cannot bring them back to me. So I was
going home with those that be left."

"Well," says the man, "we can soon mend that. Rest thou here and abide
my coming back again, and I will fetch them for thee."

"With a good will," says Osberne, "and I shall can thee many thanks
therefor."

So the man strode on and through the stream, and went his ways up the
further bent, and Osberne sat down on a stone and abode him in no little
wonder. The man was gone somewhat more than an hour, and then Osberne
sees the sheep topping the crest of the bent, and pouring down into the
dale, and the newcomer came next driving them down; and when they came
to the stream they stood there and moved no more than if they were
penned.

Then the newcomer came through them up to Osberne, and said in a kind
voice, though it was loud: "What, art thou here yet? I deemed that thou
wouldst have run home."

"Why should I have run?" said the lad. "For fear of me," said the other.
Said Osberne: "I was somewhat afeard when I first saw thee, and thou
with the grey byrny and the gleaming helm; but then I saw that thou wert
no ill man, and I feared thee no longer. Withal I was fain to see thee
again; for thou art goodly and fair to behold, and I am fain to remember
thee."

Said the man: "Even so have others said ere now." "Were they women?"
said Osberne. "Thou art brisk and keen, youngling," said the man. "Yes,
they were women: but it was long ago." "Yet thou lookest no old man,"
said Osberne. "I have seen old men: they be nought like to thee."

"Heed thou not that," said the helmed man; "but tell me, how old a man
art thou?" Said Osberne: "When this April is three days old I shall be
thirteen years old."

Said the man of the waste: "Well, thou art stalwarth for thy years, and
that liketh me well, and meseems that we shall be friends hereafter: and
when thou art a grown man I shall seem no older to thee; nay we shall be
as brothers. Belike I shall see thee again before long; meanwhile, I
give the this rede: when thou mayest, seek thou to the side of the
Sundering Flood, for meseemeth that there lieth thy weird. Now there is
this last word to be said, that I came hither today to see thee, and in
token thereof I have brought thee a gift. Canst thou shoot in the bow
aught?" Said Osberne: "There is one at home, and my grandsire hath bent
it for me at whiles, and taught me how to shoot somewhat; but I am
little deft therein."

Then the man betook him the bow which he had in his hand and said: "Here
is one that shall make thee deft; for whoso hath this as a gift from me
shall hit what he shooteth at if he use my shafts withal, and here be
three which I will give thee; and if thou take heed, thou shalt not find
them easy to lose, since ever they shall go home. But if ever thou lose
two of them, then take the third and go into some waste place where
there is neither meadow nor acre, and turn to the north-east and shoot
upward toward the heavens, and say this rhyme:

  A shaft to the north,  
  Come ye three, come ye forth;  
  A shaft to the east,  
  Come three at the least;  
  A shaft to the sky,  
  Come swift, come anigh!  
  Come one, one and one,  
  And the tale is all done.

And then shalt thou find the arrows lying at thy feet. Now take the bow
and arrows, and drive me thy sheep betwixt us to the top of the bent
that looks down on Wethermel."

Then Osberne took the bow and shafts, and he all quivering with joy and
delight, and then the two of them together went back across the waste
with the sheep before them, and as they went side by side the man said
many things, and this at last: "Now that I know thy name, it is like
that those wouldst know mine and who I am; but my very name I may not
tell thee, for thy tongue has no word for it, but now and when we meet
again thou mayst call me Steelhead: and thou shalt know that when we
next meet I shall be arrayed all otherwise than now. In that array I
deem thou wilt know me, but look to it that thou show no sign thereof
before other men; and as to the bow, thou wilt not be eager belike to
say of whom thou hadst it. Lo now! we have opened up Wethermel; fare
thou well, bold bairn, and forget not my redes."

And therewith he turned about and gat him gone into the waste again,
striding hugely; and the lad was sorry to lack him, for he deemed him
the goodliest and best man that he had ever met.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Goodman Gets a New Hired Man](sunf10)

</div>
