<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sunf20)  [Next](sunf22.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f19"></span>

Chapter XIX. The Winter Passes and Elfhild Tells of the Death of Her
Kinswoman

Now Osberne and Stephen both give rede to the goodman, and bid him live
somewhat less niggardly, since not only had they good store of victual
and clothes and the like, which had been hoarded a long time, but also
the gifts of Waywearer had stood them in good stead, and furthermore,
the goodman was much bettered by the spoil of Hardcastle. For he had
left much wealth behind him, and chiefly in silver and gold; and all
that he had left, save his weapons, had Osberne given to his grandsire.
So the goodman heeded their words and let himself be talked over, and
while winter was yet young and before there was any snow to hinder, he
rode with Osberne down the Dale, and looked into many of the steads, and
amongst others, were dwelt the damsel who had been paired with Osberne
on the day of the mid-winter Cloven Mote. And he thought her fair and
sweet, and she received him joyfully and kissed him; but he was scarce
so ready for that as he was aforetime, for he deemed she kissed him as a
child and not a man.

So by hook or by crook the goodman got him six hired folk; three men,
two of whom were young, and three women, all young and one comely, one
ill-favoured, and the other betwixt and between. It must be said by the
way, that if he had abided the spring for getting these new folk he
would scarce have hired them, for the repute of Wethermel for scant
housekeeping had gone wide about; but when folk heard that Master
Nicholas was hiring folk from mid-winter onwards, they were willing
enough to go, whereas they deemed he would be changing his mind and
becoming open-handed. So Nicholas rides back with his catch (for he had
brought nags to horse them), and henceforth is good house kept at
Wethermel, as good as anywhere in the Dale.

Again fared Osberne to the mid-winter Cloven Mote, and again was he
mated to the above-said damsel, who hight Gertrude; and forsooth this
time he deemed that she kissed him and caressed him not so wholly as a
mere boy, though of such things ye may well deem he knew little. For she
seemed to find it hard when they kissed, as paired folk are bound to do,
to let her lips leave his, and when their hands parted at the end of the
Mote she gave a great sigh, and put her cheek toward him for a parting
kiss, which forsooth he gave her somewhat unheedfully; for he was
looking hard toward the other shore to see if he could make out the
shape of Elfhild amongst the women there; as he had done whenever he gat
a chance of it all day long, but had failed wholly therein.

Three days afterward he kept tryst with Elfhild, and asked her if she
had been at the Mote, and she told him No; that her aunts went every
time but always left her behind. Then she said smiling: "And this time
they have come back full of thy praises, for the tale of thee, and the
slaying of the robber, has come over to our side; and one of them, the
youngest, had thee shown to her by one of the folk, and she saith that
thou art the fairest lad that ever was seen: and therein she is not far
wrong."

He laughed and reddened, and told for tidings how he had fared at the
Mote, and Elfhild belike was not best pleased to hear of the fair damsel
who was so fond of kissing; but in all honesty she rejoiced when Osberne
told how hard he had looked for her on the other side of the water. So
they made the most of their short day, as indeed they had need to do,
for through the winter, when the snow was on the earth and the grass
grew not, the sheep were all shut up in the folds and the cotes, and
there was no shepherding toward; so that Elfhild was hard put to it for
some pretence for getting away from the house, and their trysts had to
be further between them than they had been; and not seldom, moreover,
Elfhild failed at the trysting-place, and Osberne had to go sorrowfully
away, though well he wotted it was by no fault of his playmate.

So wore the winter tidingless, and spring came again, and again the two
met oftener; and great feast they made the first day, when Elfhild came
to the ness with her head and her loins wreathed with the winter
wolfsbane. It was a warm and very clear day of February, and Elfhild of
her own will piped to her sheep and danced amongst them; and Osberne
looked on her eagerly, and he deemed that she had grown bigger and
sleeker and fairer; and her feet and legs (for still she went barefoot)
since they had not the summer tan on them, looked so dainty-white to him
that sore he longed to stroke them and kiss them. And this, belike was
the beginning to him of the longing of a young mad, which afterwards was
so sore on him, to be with his friend and embrace her and caress her.

So they met often that springtide, and oftener as the weather waxed
warmer. And nought worth telling befel to Osberne that while save these
meetings. But at last, when May was yet young, Osberne kept tryst thrice
and Elfhild came not, and the fourth time she came and had tidings, to
wit that one of her kinswomen had died of sickness. Said she: "And it
was the one who was least kind to me, and made most occasion for
chastising me. Well, she is gone; and often she was kind to me, and
before I saw thee I loved her somewhat. But now things will go better,
because the other aunt, who was kinder than the dead one, hath taken
into the house that old woman whereof I told thee, who hath taught me
lore and many ancient tales; and though she be old and wrinkled, she is
kind and loves me: and she is on our side, and I have told her about
thee; and she in turn told me strange things and unked, which I will not
and dare not tell again to thee. Wherefore now let us be glad together."

Said Osberne: "Yea, we will try to be glad; but see thou, I want more
than this now, I want to come across to thee, and tell thee things which
I cannot shout across this accursed Flood; and I want to take thee by
the hand and put my arms about thee and kiss thee. Dost thou not wish
the like by me?"

"O yea," said the maiden reddening, "most soothly do I. But hearken,
Osberne; the carline sayeth that all this thou shalt do to me, and that
we shall meet body to body one day. Dost thou trow in this?"

"Nay, how can I tell," said he somewhat surlily, "when thou hast told me
so little of the tale?"

"Well," she said, "but I may not tell more; so now, I pray, let us be
glad with what we have got of meeting oftener, and a life better and
merrier for me. Bethink thou, my dear, that if I live easier and have
not to toil so much, and catch fewer stripes, and have better meat and
more, I shall grow sleeker and daintier, yea and bigger, so that I shall
look older and more womanlike sooner." And she wept a little therewith;
so he repented his surliness and set to comfort her, till she laughed
and he also, and they were merrier together.

So now time after time was their converse sweet and happy, and true it
was that Elfhild grew fairer and sleeker week by week; and she was
better clad now, and well shod, and wore her ouches and necklaces
openly, though she said she had not shown all to the carline, "not all
of thine I mean. But the Dwarf necklace, the glorious one, I have shown
her, and she saith that it is such a wonder that it forebodeth my
becoming a Queen; and that will be well, as thou shalt be a great man."
Thuswise they prattled.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Osberne Fares to Eastcheaping and Brings Gifts for
Elfhild](sunf22.md)

</div>
