<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sunf10)  [Next](sunf12.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f09"></span>

Chapter IX. The Bight of the Cloven Knoll

And now it was mid-April, and the goodman dight him to ride to a mote of
the neighbours at a stead hight Bullmeads, where the Dalesmen were wont
to gather in the spring, that they might ride thence all together to the
town of Eastcheaping and sell the autumn clip of wool and do other
chaffer. So the carle goes his ways alone, and will be one night at
Bullmeads and two at Eastcheaping, and then another at Bullmeads, and be
back on the fifth day. And when he was gone comes Stephen to Osberne,
and says: "Young master, I am going presently to the hill with the
sheep, and thou needest neither to go with me nor fare a-hunting today,
since the house is full of meat; so thou art free, and were I in thy
shoes I would go straight from this door down to the water-side, and see
if thou mayst not happen on something fair or seldom seen. But hearken
to my rede, if thou comest on aught such, thou hast no need to tell of
it to any one, not even to me. \[And it were not amiss to do on they
coat of scarlet.\]"

Osberne thanks him, and takes his bow of arrows and goes his way and
comes to the riverside and turns his face south, and goes slowly along
the very edge of the water; and the water itself drew his eyes down to
gaze on the dark green deeps and fierce downlong swirl of the stream,
with its sharp clean lines as if they were carven in steel, and the
curling and upheaval and sudden changing of the talking eddies: so that
he scarce might see the familiar greensward of the further shore.

At last, when he had gone thus more than two miles from where he first
hit the water, a long straight reach lay before him, and as he looked
down it, it seemed as if the river came presently to an end; but in
sooth there was a sharp turn to the east by which the water ran, but
narrowing much; and this narrowing was made by the thrusting forth of
the western bank into a sharp ness, which, from where Osberne now stood,
showed a wide flank facing, as it seemed, the whole hurrying stream of
the Flood. But the stream turned ere it smote the cliff, and striving
for the narrow outgate made a prodigious eddy or whirlpool ere it might
clear itself of the under-water foot of the ness and make eastward so as
to rush on toward the sea. But in the face of the wall, in the bight
where the whirlpool turned from it, was a cave the height of a tall man,
and some four feet athwart, and below it a ledge thrust out from the
sheer rock and hanging over the terrible water, and it was but a yard
wide or so. It was but ten feet above the water, and from it to the
grass above must have been a matter of forty foot. But the ness as it
thrust forth into the river rose also, so that its crest was a score of
feet higher where it went down into the water than its base amidst the
green grass. Then came the strait passage of the water, some thirty feet
across, and then the bank of the eastern side, which, though it thrust
out not, but rather was as it were driven back by the stream, yet it
rose toward the water, though not so much as the ness over against it.
It was as if some one had cast down a knoll across the Sundering Flood,
and the stream had washed away the sloped side thereof, and then had
sheared its way through by the east side where the ground was the
softest. Forsooth so it seemed to the Dalesmen, for on either side they
called it the Bight of the Cloven Knoll.

Osberne stood amazed right over against the cave in the cliff-side, and
stared at the boiling waters beneath him, that seemed mighty enough to
have made a hole in the ship of the world and sunk it in the deep. And
he wondered at the cave, whether it was there by chance hap, or that
some hands had wrought it for an habitation.

And as he stood gazing there, on a sudden there came out of the cave a
shape as of man, and stood upon the ledge above the water, and the lad
saw at once that it was a little maiden of about his own age, with ruddy
golden hair streaming down from her head, and she was clad in a short
coat of dark blue stuff and no more raiment, as far as he could see. Now
as aforesaid Osberne was in his holiday raiment of red-scarlet by the
bidding of Stephen. Now the maiden looks up and sees the lad standing on
the eastern shore, and starts back astonished. Then she came forward
again and looked under the sharp of her hand, for the sun shone from the
south and was cast back dazzling from the water. There was but some
thirty feet of water between them, but all gurgling and rushing and
talking, so the child raised a shrill and clear voice as she clapped her
hands together and cried: "O thou beauteous creature, what art thou?"
Osberne laughed, and said in a loud voice: "I am a man but young of
years, so that they call me a boy, and a bairn, and a lad. But what art
thou?"

"Nay, nay," she said, "I must be nigher to thee; it is over-wide here
amidst the waters' speech. Fare up to the top on thy side, and so will
I." And therewith she turned about and fell to climbing up the side of
the cliff by the broken black staves and the shaly slips. And though
Osberne were a boy, yea and a tough one in some ways, he trembled and
his heart beat quick to see the little creature wending that perilous
upright road, and he might not take his eyes off her till she had landed
safely on the greensward; then he turned and went swiftly up the eastern
knoll, and reached the edge of the sheer rock just as the maiden came
running up the ness on her side.

He spake not, for he was eyeing her closely, and she might not speak for
a while for lack of breath. At last she said: "Now are we as near to
each other as we may be today; yea for many days, or it may be for all
our lives long: so now let us talk." She set her two feet together and
held her hands in front of her, and so stood as if she looked for him to
begin. But the words came not speedily to his mouth, and at last she
said: "I wonder why thou wilt not speak again; for thy laugh was as the
voice of a dear bird; and thy voice is beauteous, so loud and clear."

He laughed, and said: "Well then, I will speak. Tell me what thou art.
Art thou of the Faery? for thou art too well shapen to be of the
Dwarfkin." She clapped her hands together and laughed; then she said: "I
laughed not as mocking thy question, but for joy to hear thy voice
again. Nay, nay, I am no faery, but of the children of men. But thou,
art thou not of the sons of the Land-wights?"

"No more than thou art," said he. "I am also a goodman's son, but my
father is dead, and my mother also, and I live at home at Wethermel up
the water, with my grandsire and grandam."

Said she: "Are they kind to thee?" The lad drew himself up: "I am kind
to them," said he. "How goodly thou art!" she said; "that was why I
dreamed thou must be of the Land-wights, because I have seen divers men,
some old, some young like to thee, but none half so goodly." He smiled,
and said: "Well, I thought thou wert of the Faery because thou art
goodly and little. I have seen a pretty maid not long since, but she was
older than thou, I deem, and far taller. But tell me, how old art thou?"
She said: "When May is half worn I shall be of thirteen winters."

"Lo now," said he, "we be nigh of an age; I was thirteen in early April.
But thou hast not told me where thou dwellest, and how." She said: "I
dwell at Hartshaw Knolls hard by. I am the daughter of a goodman, as
thou art, and my father and mother are dead, so that my father I never
saw, and now I dwell with my two aunts and they be both older than was
my mother."

"Are they kind to thee?" said the lad, laughing that he must cast back
her question. "Whiles," said she, laughing also, "and whiles not: maybe
that is because I am not always kind to them, as thou art to thy folk."
He answered nought, and she was silent a while; then he said: "What is
in thy mind, maiden?" "This," she said, "that I am thinking how fair a
chance it was that I should have seen thee, for thou hast made me so
glad." Said he: "We can see each other again belike and make it less of
a chance." "O yea," she said, and was silent a while. Said he: "I wot
not why it was that thou wert in the cave: and tell me, is it not
exceeding perilous, the climbing up and down? Why wilt thou do that?
Also, I must tell thee, that this was another cause why I thought thou
wert of the Faery, that thou camest out of the cave."

Said she: "I will tell thee all about the cave; but first as to the
peril of going thither and coming hence: wouldst thou be very sorry if I
were lost on the way?" "Yea," said he, "exceeding sorry." "Well," said
she, "then fear it not, for it is so much a wont of mine that to me
there is no peril therein: yet I am glad that thou wert afraid for me."
"I was sore afraid," said Osberne.

"Now as to the cave," said the maiden. "I found it out two years ago,
when I was very little, and the women had been less than kind to me. And
thither may I go whenas I would that they should seek me not; because
folk say that it is a dwelling of the Dwarfs, and they fear to enter it.
Besides, when I think of my kinswomen coming down the rock to find me
therein, and they be tall, and one stiff, as if she were cut out of
timber, and the other exceeding fat, that makes me merry!"

And therewith she sat down on the very edge of the cliff with her little
legs hanging over the water, and laughed, rocking to and fro in her
laughter, and Osberne laughed also. But he said: "But art thou not
afraid of the Dwarfs?" She said: "Dear bairn or boy, I had been there
many times before I heard tell of the Dwarfs, and I gat no harm, and
after I had heard the tale I went still, and still gat no harm; nay I
will tell thee somewhat: I gat gifts, or such they seemed unto me. First
I had to herd the sheep and take them to the best grass, and whiles they
strayed and were wearisome to me, and I came home with divers missing,
and then would I be wyted or even whipped for what was no fault of mine.
And one such time I betook me to the cave and sat therein and wept, and
complained to myself of my harm, and when I went out of the cave I saw
on the ledge close to my foot a thing lying, and I took it up, and saw
that it was a pipe with seven holes therein, and when I blew into it, it
made sweet and merry little music. So I thought it great prize, and went
away home with it, with all my sorrows well healed. But the next day I
drave my sheep to grass, as my business was, and as oft happened, they
strayed, and I followed them and gat nothing done; so I was weary, and
afraid of what would betide at home in the stead. So I sat down on a
stone, and when I had wept a little I thought I would comfort myself
with the music of the pipe. But lo a wonder, for no sooner had a note or
two sounded than all the sheep came running up to me, bleating and
mowing, and would rub against my sides as I sat piping, and home I
brought every head in all glee. And even so has it befallen ever since;
and that was hard on a year agone. Fair boy, what dost thou think I am
doing now?" Osberne laughed. "Disporting thee in speech with a friend,"
said he. "Nay," said she, "but I am shepherding sheep."

And she drew forth the pipe from her bosom and fell to playing it, and a
ravishing sweet melody came thence, and so merry that the lad himself
began to shift his feet as one moving to measure, and straightway he
heard a sound of bleating, and sheep came running toward the maiden from
all about. Then she arose and ran to them, lest they should shove each
other into the water; and she danced before them, lifting up her scanty
blue skirts and twinkling her bare feet and legs, while her hair danced
about her, and the sheep, they too capered and danced about as if she
had bidden them. And the boy looked on and laughed without stint, and he
deemed it the best of games to behold. But when she was weary she came
back to the head of the ness and sat down again as before, and let the
sheep go where they would.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Osberne and Elfhild Hold Converse Together](sunf12.md)

</div>
