<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sunf48)  [Next](sunf50.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f47"></span>

Chapter XLVII. The Battle in the Square

On the morrow's morn, the leaders of the town met Osberne and his
captains in council, and their rede was that they should do warily and
not throw the helve after the hatchet. This they deemed best, that they
should now, while they might, make strong with mound and wall their
quarter of the town, since, until Sir Godrick was come to them, they
might even now look to it to have much might against them. This reded
the Red Lad nowise gainsaid, knowing well how valiant and stout these
men would be behind walls; but he said: "Yet, my masters, the more
leisure you have for this spade and mattock work, the better it shall be
for you and the work. Wherefore my rede is that some of your chosen men
go with the best of mine, and that we issue out of our quarter and fall
upon the others, and make a good space clear of foes of the streets and
carfaxes that march unto your quarter, which forsooth shall serve you as
an outwork to your castle until Sir Godrick comes with a great host and
fills up all that and more. And, sooth to say, now at once is the best
time to do this, while the foe is all astonied at what befel last
night."

That seemed good to one and all; so when they had eaten and were duly
arrayed they issued forth into the streets, and at first indeed wended
those that were truly of their quarter, only on the day before they
deemed them not big enough to hold all that; but now it was their mind
to bring it within their defences. So the Red Lad and his rode on
warily, taking heed that they should not be cut off by any at their
backs. So at last they came unto a great carfax with a wide square round
about it. There they drew up their folk in a long line with a wide face
to the foe, well furnished of bows and other shot-weapons; for the
townsmen were archers exceeding good.

There was nought in the square or on the carfax at first but themselves;
but after a little there entered by the east way and the west a rout of
archers, and fell to shooting at Osberne's, and they back again. The
archers of the Porte did not dare to show much face to the Red Lad, but
were gathered together in plumps at each incoming into the square. Said
the Red Lad to himself: Let us make an end of this folly. And he bade
his men leave shooting, and then gave the word, and they rode at the
carles right and left with spear and sword. Straightway the archers ran
all they might, yet not so fast but that the Red Lad and his captains
got amidst them ere they could take to the narrow byways, so that a many
were slain. And this was a matter of but ten minutes. But when the
horsemen had been along with the bowmen a little while, they heard great
horns blowing from the south, and therewith great noise of horse, and
presently a great rout of men-at-arms in the best of armour began to
come in by the southern road, and the Red Lad's men were all agog to
fall on them straightway, but he made them forbear till they had filled
the square over-full. They were not long about it, but meanwhile the
townsmen shot all they might; and so nigh they were that, despite their
armour, not a few fell, both of men and horses; yet did they fall not on
till the square was full of them, so that it looked far bigger than
might have been deemed. Then they thrust on, but so close that they
might scarce handle their arms, and the Red Lad and his cried their cry,
The Red Lad for Longshaw! and rushed forward, smiting and thrusting,
till the front of the foemen began to try to turn about if they might;
but scarce they could, though if they might not flee they might not
fall. And they behind strove to get forward to smite, for they said they
were many more than the others; but they could get but little done, for
their forward men who had been overthrown were hindering them. Now also
the carles of the town laid aside their bows and entered among them with
short swords and axes, and hewed and slew and took none to mercy, and it
seemed hard to know how that would end, save by all those men-at-arms
falling in the place.

Now, as ye may deem, Osberne was more thrust forward than any other, and
somewhat of a space he had cleared before him, and his yellow hair came
down from under his basnet, and his long red surcoat streamed all rent
and tattered in the wind, and Boardcleaver was bare and bloody in his
fist, and his face was stern but not exceeding fierce; for he would the
slaughter of the day were over. Now he hove up Boardcleaver, and before
him was a tall man in gilded armour and a gay yellow surcoat of silk,
and his armour was little rent and his sword unscathed in his hand; a
stark man he was of aspect, but terror was come into his soul because of
the slaughter of the press and that there was no escape therefrom. So
when he saw Boardcleaver arising he cried out, "O Red Lad, Red Lad, O
thou seeker, let me live, that I may tell thee what thou wouldst give
many lives to know!"

Then Osberne restrained Boardcleaver and let him fall to his wrist, and
stretched out his hand to the gilded man. But even therewith his hand
was thrust aside, for many a man there was mad and drunk with the
slaying: and a short, dark, long-armed man of the weavers' craft, armed
with nought else save a heavy short-sword cutting on the inner edge,
drew him on to the gilded man's horse, and brought his sword back-handed
across his face and neck, and fell with him as he fell, and mangled him
that he was more than dead, and then got up again amidst the horses and
fell to work again. Then Osberne, when he saw the tale was done, groaned
aloud; but none heeded him, for it was to them but as a cry of the
wounded. Then he uphove Boardcleaver again and cried out shrilly: "The
Red Lad, the Red Lad for Longshaw and the Crafts! On, on at them!" And
that all heard, both his and theirs. And now they of the foemen began to
cease pressing forward, and many fled without a stroke stricken, till
there was somewhat more room for the rest to flee, but little leave, for
even so was more room for the pursuers, and soon was the square clear of
all but dead and sore hurt; and the chase endured all up and along the
carfax, and mad-fierce it was, and that mostly at the hands of the
townsmen, who deemed that they had much to pay back to the men of the
King and the Porte.

Now after this Osberne and his drew not back from the carfax, but by the
rede of him the townsmen made trenches and walls to strengthen them
right up to the said carfax. And for three days the King's men durst not
fall upon them there, save that they tried a little arrow-shot from
afar, but did not much hurt thereby.

But the next day thereafter comes Sir Godrick with his host to the help
of the townsmen, and rides into the North Gate amidst the joy of all
men. And the next day they push on to their outworks and fall on. Three
days of battle they have thereafter, wherein Sir Godrick will not suffer
the Red Lad to deal: "For," saith he, "it is thou that hath won, and now
we have little to do, but as it were the woodwright's and the
carpenter's work. Wherefore now I bid thee to rest." Laughed Osberne,
and tarried in the North quarter, while Sir Godrick and his with all
deliberation set to work on clearing the quarters on that side of the
river; and they were four days about the business albeit the men of the
Porte and the King were scarce so stubborn and enduring as they looked
to find them.

But Osberne did all he might to keep good order and good heart amongst
his men, and they made their strongholds strong to the letter, and
looked to it that all their forward places should be ready for battle at
a moment's notice.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII. Sir Godrick Is Chosen Burgreve of the
City](sunf50.md)

</div>
