[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork06)  [Next](gork08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

### CHAPTER IV

### VISIT TO THE PANDIT VIDYÂSÂGARA <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21)

<span class="smallcaps">Srî Râmakrishna</span> desired to meet Pandit
Iswara Chandra Vidyâsâgara. One afternoon he was seen coming in a
carriage with some of his disciples all the way from Dakshineswara, a
distance of about six miles, to pay a visit to the Pandit at Bâdurbagan
in Calcutta. As the carriage passed before Râjâ Râmmohun Roy's <span
id="fr_22"></span>[†](#fn_22)

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

house, the Bhagavân suddenly grew silent. His mind wais absorbed in
meditation on the Divine Mother. One of his disciples, not perceiving
the sudden change that had come over him, said: "This is Râmmohun Roy's
house." The Bhagavân replied: "Ah! Now my mind is not on such things";
and immediately he entered into the ecstatic state (Bhâva).

<span class="margnote">Râmakrishna's childlike nature.</span>The
carriage, a short while after, drew up in front of the Pandit's house.
Srî Râmakrishna alighted, supported by one of His disciples. Before
reaching the staircase which led to the Pandit's study, which was also
the drawing-room, the Bhagavân, putting his hand on His shirt, asked a
disciple with some concern: "My shirt is unbuttoned; is it necessary to
button it?" The disciple answered: "Do not trouble Thyself, Lord; none
will find fault with Thee on that

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

account." The Bhagavân, like a child, seemed to be satisfied and did not
think about it again. The party was then led upstairs into a room where
the Pandit was seated in a chair facing the south. A table after the
European fashion, with books and papers lying about on it, was before
him, and he was talking with some of his friends. As the Bhagavân Srî
Râmakrishna entered the room, the Pandit rose to receive Him. The Lord
stood with His face to the west and with one hand resting upon the
table. He looked upon the Pandit intently as if he was an old
acquaintance, and with a smile on His sweet, childlike radiant face,
lost all sense-consciousness, and went into the ecstatic Samâdhi.

After a while, taking his seat on a bench, the Bhagavân in his
semiconscious state uttered, "I wish some water to drink." Thereupon
Vidyâsâgara inquired of a disciple whether the Bhagavân would also like
some delicious sweetmeats which he had just received from Burdwân. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23) Finding no objection, the Pandit went
into his inner apartments and returned with water and the sweetmeats. He
placed them

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

before the Lord. The disciples partook of the sweetmeats, but when they
were offered to one young man, Vidyâsâgara said: "Oh, he is a child of
the house; do not trouble about him."

The Bhagavân then said, referring to a young man who was sitting before
him: "Yes, this young man is good. He is like the river Falgu, <span
id="fr_24"></span>[\*](#fn_24) covered with dry sand, but if you dig a
little you will find a strong invisible current underneath. He has a
spiritual current inside, although he does not show it on the outside."

<span class="margnote">Râmakrishna's love of humor.</span>Then
addressing Vidyâsâgara he continued: "To-day I have at last reached the
ocean (referring to the literal meaning of  the word Vidyâsâgara,—the
ocean of knowledge). So long I have seen only canals, lakes, or, at
most, rivers, but now I see the ocean itself.

Vidyâsâgara: Then, Sir, Thou art welcome to take some salt water from
it.

Bhagavân: No, my dear sir, why salt water? You are not the ocean of
Avidyâ (ignorance),

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

which leads away from God, but you are the ocean of milk, the ocean of
Vidyâ, or true knowledge leading Godward.

Vidyâsâgara: Revered Sir, Thou mayest say *that*.

<span class="margnote">Good works and compassion for
all.</span>Bhagavân: Your Karma proceeds from the Sattwa element of
nature. From it rises compassion. Whatever work is done for the good of
others is absolutely free from fault. It may be called Râjasika, but it
is the activity of Sattwa. There is no harm in such works. Sukadeva and
others like him had compassion for all. They worked for humanity and
helped mankind in the path of Divinity. You are giving free education
and doing charitable works; that is good. He who performs good works
through love, without seeking results, attains to God. But he who works
for name, fame or any other selfish purpose remains bound. Further, I
may say that you have already become *Siddha* (perfected).

Vidyâsâgara: Sir, how is that?

Bhagavân: You know that *Siddha*, or well-boiled potato, becomes soft
and tender. Have you not become tender-hearted by your compassion for
all?

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

Vidyâsâgara: But the paste of Kalai (a kind of pulse) when boiled
(Siddha) becomes harder. Is it not so?

<span class="margnote">Book-learned Pandits like
vultures.</span>Bhagavân, laughing: Yes, but you are not like that. Mere
book-learned Pandits (scholars) are hard-hearted. They do good neither
to themselves nor to others. They are like vultures who soar high in the
sky, but always search after carrion-pits. They may talk about Divine
truths, but their minds are attached to woman and wealth. Their
attachment is to worldly things (Avidyâ). Compassion, Devotion (Bhakti),
Dispassion (Vairâgya)—these are the manifestations of Vidyâ.

Vidyâsâgara was listening to the words of wisdom with whole attention,
while the eyes of other gentlemen present were fixed upon the blissful
face of Râmakrishna radiant with Divine glory.

<span class="margnote">Vidyâ and Avidyâ.</span>The Bhagavân continued:
The Absolute Brahman is beyond the reach of Vidyâ (knowledge) as well as
of Avidyâ (ignorance), which keeps one away from the realization of the
Absolute.

The absolute Brahman is beyond the reach of Mâyâ, while Mâyâ is either
Vidyâ or Avidyâ.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vidyâ-Mâyâ and
Avidyâ-Mâyâ both exist in this world. As there are knowledge (Jnâna) and
Devotion (Bhakti), so also there are lust and greed for wealth. Good and
evil, virtue and vice, are to be found in this world of relativity; but
Brahman is unaffected by them. They exist in relation to Jiva
(individual ego), but cannot touch the Absolute Brahman.

<span class="margnote">Brahman untouched by good and evil.</span>Brahman
may be compared to the light of a lamp. As by the same light one may
read the Holy Scriptures and another may forge a document, while the
light remains unaffected by the good and evil deeds, so is the Absolute
Brahman untouched by the good and evil of the world. He is like the Sun
who shines equally upon the virtuous and the wicked.

If you ask, misery, sin, suffering, unhappiness,—whose are these? I
should answer, they are for the Jiva. They do not affect the Brahman.
Evil to Jiva is not evil to Brahman any more than the venom in the fangs
of a snake is poison to the snake. Others may die of snake-bite, but as
the poison does not hurt the snake, so indeed is the existence of sin
and evil in relation to Jiva alone. Who can describe what the absolute
Brahman is? Whatever

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="margnote">Brahman indescribable.</span>can be uttered by
the mouth has become defiled as it were, like the leavings of food. The
Revealed Scriptures, Vedas, Tantras, Purânas and all Holy Books, have
become defiled as it were, like leavings of food, for they have been
uttered by human mouths. But there is one thing that is never defiled in
this manner and that is the Absolute Brahman. No one has ever succeeded
in describing the Absolute by words of mouth. Brahman is unspeakable,
indescribable, unthinkable.

Vidyâsâgara, interrupting, said to his friends: This is a grand idea.
To-day I have learned this truth, that the Brahman is the one substance
that has never been defiled by the mouth.

Bhagavân: Yes, that is so.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the Vedic father and his two
sons.</span>A certain father had two sons. To instruct them in the
knowledge of Brahman he sent them to an Âchârya (preceptor). After a few
years they returned home and saluted their father. The father was
anxious to know how far they had learned about Brahman, so he asked his
eldest son: "My dear son, you have studied all the Scriptures and
philosophies, tell me what is Brahman like?" The eldest son then tried
to describe

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

the Absolute Brahman by quoting various passages from the Vedas. The
father kept silent.

Turning to his younger son he asked the same question. The younger son
did not answer in words, but remained motionless and communed with the
Brahman in silence. The father then exclaimed: "My dear child, thou hast
approached the realization of the Brahman. Thy silence is a better
answer than the recitation of a hundred texts of the Vedas, for Brahman
is indescribable by words. It is indeed the Absolute Silence." The
knowledge of the Absolute Brahman is attained in the state of Samâdhi.
In that superconscious state Brahman is realized. Then all thoughts
cease to rise and perfect silence prevails in the soul. Even the power
of speech remains unmanifested. How can one describe Brahman by words of
mouth? Man thinks that he has known the Absolute Brahman.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the ant and the sugar.</span>An ant
went to a mount of sugar. The ant did not realize how high was the
mountain, but ate a small particle of sugar and was satisfied. It
carried home another mount of particle in its mouth. On its way it
thought: "Next time I will carry the whole mountain." Such, alas, is the
thought of

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

small minds. They think that they have known the Absolute, not realizing
that Brahman is beyond the reach of mind and thought. However great the
mind may be it cannot fully comprehend the Absolute Brahman.
Sukadeva <span id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25) and other great spiritual
teachers may be compared to large ants. They could carry in their mouth
at utmost eight or ten grains from the mountain of sugar. It is as
absurd to say that Brahman has been fully comprehended by a great man as
it is absurd to say that the whole mountain of sugar was carried away by
a large ant.

What the Vedas and other Scriptures have said about the Absolute is like
the description of the ocean given by a man who saw the vast ocean. When
asked what the ocean was like, he exclaimed in utter amazement: "Oh!
what I have seen; how vast is the expanse! How big are the waves! What a
thundering roar!"

Like unto this is the talk about the Absolute Brahman. The Vedas declare
that Brahman is

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the ocean of the Absolute Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. Sukadeva
and other great

spiritual teachers stood on the shore of that Infinite Ocean, saw it and
touched its waters.

Some believe that even those great souls did not go into the Ocean, for
whoever enters into that ocean of Brahman does not return to this
mundane existence.

<span class="margnote">Parable of a salt doll.</span>A doll made of salt
once went to the ocean to measure its depth. It had a desire to tell
others how deep was the ocean. Alas! Its desire was never satisfied. No
sooner had it plunged into the ocean than it melted away and became one
with the ocean. Who would bring the news regarding the depth? Similar is
the condition of the Jiva (individual ego) who enters into the Infinite
Ocean of the Absolute Brahman.

Some one asked: Bhagavan, is it true that the man who has entered into
Samâdhi, or who has acquired *Brahma Jnânam*, does not speak?

<span class="margnote">Brahman is silence.</span>Râmakrishna to
Vidyâsâgara: Yes, he who has realized Brahman becomes silent.
Discussions and argumentations exist so long as the realization of the
Absolute does not come. If you melt butter in a pan over fire, how long
does it make a noise?

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So long as there
is water in it. When the water is evaporated it ceases to make further
noise. Again if you throw a piece of dough in that hot clarified butter
(Ghee) there will be noise until the cake is thoroughly fried. The soul
of a seeker after Brahman may be compared to fresh butter. It is mixed
with the water of egoism and worldliness. Discussions and argumentations
(Vichâra) of a seeker are like the noise caused during the process of
purification by the fire of knowledge. As the water of egoism and
worldliness is evaporated and the soul becomes purer, all noise of
debates and discussions ceases and absolute silence reigns in the state
of Samâdhi.

<span class="margnote">Egoism of a saint.</span>Thus realizing the
Absolute Brahman in silence, the soul comes down on the plane of
relativity to help others and to teach mankind the highest wisdom of
Brahman. Then he talks again and makes a noise again, as the hot Ghee
does when in contact with a piece of dough. Such a soul retains the
sense of "I" simply to help mankind. Sankarâchârya and other spiritual
teachers kept the purified sense of "I" without which all teaching is
impossible.

The bee buzzes so long as it is outside the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="margnote">Sages teach for the good of others.</span>lotus
and does not settle down in its heart to drink of the honey. As soon as
it tastes of the honey all buzzing is at an end. Similarly all noise of
discussion ceases when the soul of the neophyte begins to drink the
nectar of Divine Love in the Lotus Feet of the Almighty. Sometimes,
however, the bee after being intoxicated by the honey makes a sweet
humming sound. So the God-intoxicated soul sometimes speaks for the good
of others.

A pitcher makes a noise when it is being filled with water in a tank.
But all noise stops as soon as the pitcher is full to the brim. The
noise will be heard again if some water of the pitcher be poured into
another pitcher. (Here water means the water of the Divine Wisdom, and
the soul of a wise man is the pitcher.)

<span class="margnote">Relation between Guru and disciples.</span>The
question flow arises, how do we explain the relation between a perfect
Guru and his disciples? The Guru must talk in order to drive away the
ignorance of his disciples. This kind of discrimination, however, does
no harm. The boiling butter after it is clarified ceases to make any
noise; but if the raw cake made of flour is thrown into it, it will
produce much noise because

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

of the water in the cake. The noise will continue until the cake is
properly fried. The unfried cake may be compared to the disciple, and
the boiling butter to the Guru, the spiritual teacher. The sound of
teaching is heard so long as the disciple is not perfectly enlightened.

<span class="margnote">Non-attachment.</span>Srî Râmakrishna continued:
So long as the individual soul has the slightest attachment to the world
of senses and desires it cannot attain to Brahma-Jnâna. He is a Jnâni
who relinquishes all worldly desires and sense-pleasures by saying, "not
this, not this," and then realizes the Supreme Brahman in Samâdhi.

A Jnâni knows that all phenomena of the universe which are subject to
evolution, whether physical or mental, are within the realm of Mâyâ;
they are unreal and transitory like the objects of vision in a dream.
Therefore as one climbs the stairway step by step until the roof is
reached, so he rises above them step by step, saying "not this," until
he reaches the Absolute Brahman, which is the roof of the phenomenal
universe.

A Jnâni goes so far as to realize that Brahman is the Absolute Reality
and all phenomena unreal. A Vijnâni, however, goes farther and

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

<span class="margnote">All phenomena unreal.</span>realizes more. He
sees that the roof and the steps are all made of the same substance. Few
can stay long on the roof (the realm of the Absolute). All those who
reach this state of Samâdhi must return to lower planes, just as no one
can sing on "Si," the highest note of the gamut, for a long time. The
sense of "I" drags one down. But when a Vijnâni returns from Samâdhi to
a lower plane of consciousness and perceives the world of relativity, he
sees the Brahman everywhere, and that the same Absolute Being appears as
Jiva and all the phenomena of the universe. He realizes, "I am Brahman,"
"I am He."

<span class="margnote">Jnâna-Yoga and Bhakti-Yoga.</span>There are
various paths which lead to the realization of the Absolute Brahman. The
path of a Jnâni is as good as that of a Bhakta. Jnâna-Yoga is true; so
is Bhakti-Yoga. There is another path of Bhakti mixed with Jnâna which
is equally true. So long as the sense of "I, me, mine" remains in the
devotee, the path of Bhakti is easier for him.

A Vijnâni, however, realizes the Absolute Brahman as the unchangeable
Reality of the universe, firm and immutable like the Mount *Sumeru*. It
is beyond all activity of Mâyâ.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He also sees that
the world has evolved out of the three *Gunas* (Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas)
of the Prakriti or Cosmic energy.

<span class="margnote">Mâyâ.</span>Mâyâ or Prakriti consists of Vidyâ
and Avidyâ. Vidyâ is that energy which leads Godward. It manifests
itself as discrimination (Viveka), non-attachment (Vairâgya), devotion
and love of God (Bhakti, Prema). But Avidyâ leads to worldliness. This
energy expresses itself as various passions, desire for wealth and
honor, ambition, work with attachment, selfishness. All these Vidyâ and
Avidyâ forces rise from the Divine Energy of Brahman—they cannot affect
the Brahman. <span class="margnote">Vijnâni and Bhakta</span>The Vijnâni
realizes that the same Absolute. Brahman appears as the Personal God
(Iswara), that He who is beyond all attributes is also the Personal God
with all attributes and blessed qualities. The Vijnâni sees that Jiva
(individual ego), phenomenal world, mind, intellect, Bhakti, dispassion,
knowledge—all these are the glory of the supreme Personal Deity. If
these manifestations of the Divine Glory did not exist, who would have
worshipped Him as the Lord of the universe? If a rich man does not
possess wealth and property, but becomes bankrupt, nobody will call him
rich.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Do you not see how
beautiful is this world? How many varieties of phenomena—the Sun, moon,
stars, various kinds of animals and vegetables, things large and small,
good and bad, some men with great powers, others with few.

Vidyâsâgara: Is it then true, Revered Sir, that God has given to some
greater powers than to others? Is the Lord partial?

<span class="margnote">Unity in diversity.</span>Bhagavân: The Lord
dwells as the all-pervading Being (Vibhu) equally within all living
creatures great or small, nay, even in the smallest ant or animalcule.
The difference lies in the manifestation of powers (Sakti), otherwise
how will it be possible for one strong man to defeat ten men in a
hand-to-hand fight, while a weakling will run away from the presence of
an ordinary mortal?

If there were no difference in powers, why should people respect and
honor you? You have no monstrosity, like two horns on the forehead, that
people will come to see you out of curiosity. You have more compassion,
more wisdom than others, therefore people come to see you and pay
respects to you. Do you not think so?

There is nothing in mere book-learning.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Book-learning.</span>One should study books simply to
find out the ways by which He (the Absolute Brahman) can be realized.

A holy man had a manuscript with him. Some one asked what it contained.
The saint opened it and showed that on every page was written the sacred
formula "Om Râma, "the holy name of the Lord.

<span class="margnote">True meaning of Gitâ.</span>Take the sacred book
of Bhagavad Gitâ. What does it teach? If you wish to know it repeat the
name "Gitâ" ten times in quick succession—"Gi-tâ, gi-tâ, gi-," etc. It
will sound like "tâgi, tâgi," which has the same meaning as the Sanskrit
word "Tyâgi," that is, one who has renounced everything of the world for
the sake of the Lord. One truth which Bhagavad Gitâ teaches is this: "O
Jiva, giving up attachment to objects and pleasures of the world,
struggle to realize God." The mind of a man (whether a saint or a
householder) must be free from all attachment to the world. Then and
then alone the heart will be purified and the Absolute will be realized.

Chaitanya Deva <span id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_26) (God Incarnate of
Nuddea),

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

when travelling on a pilgrimage in the Deccan (Southern India), saw in
one place a man reading aloud the texts of the Gitâ. At a little
distance another man, with unrestrainable tears running down his cheeks,
was listening. Chaitanya Deva asked him whether he understood the
meaning of the texts. The poor man replied: "My Lord, I do not
understand one word of what the Pandit is reading." Chaitanya Deva
questioned him: "Why are you weeping, then?" The devotee answered: "I
see the chariot of Arjuna, and the Blessed Lord Krishna is speaking
before him. This Divine vision brings tears of love to my eyes."

Srî Râmakrishna continued: You may ask why does a Vijnâni prefer to have
Bhakti (love and devotion)? The answer is—Because it is difficult for
one to be free from the sense of "I." In the state of *Nirvikalpa
Samâdhi*, <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27) it may vanish for the
time being, but it comes back again; while for ordinary individuals it
is almost impossible to eliminate this sense of "I, me and mine."
However many times you may cut

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span class="margnote">Sense of "I."</span>off the branches of the
*Aswatthwa* tree, so long as the root is alive new branches will sprout;
similarly you may try to get rid of the sense of "I, "but so long as the
root is alive it will sprout up again and again. Even after acquiring
Brahma-Jnâna the emancipated soul is forced back to the plane of this
"Aham" sense of "I."

If you dream of a tiger you will tremble in every limb and your heart
will throb violently. When you wake up you may realize that it was a
mere dream, but still your heart will go on palpitating all the same.
Similarly the sense of "I" remains even after the realization of the
Absolute.

Thus, if the sense of "I" is the cause of all troubles and it is
impossible to he free from it, let it stay on as "I," the servant of the
Lord.

Râma Chandra (the God Incarnate) once asked his great devotee Hanumân:
"My son, in what relation do you regard me?" The devotee replied: "When
I think of myself as embodied, I am Thy servant and Thou art the Lord.
When I think of myself as the Jiva (Ego) I am Thy part and Thou art the
Universal Whole; but when I think of myself as the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Âtman, I am one
with Thee. Then I realize 'I am Thou and Thou art I.'"

If the sense of "I" clings to one so persistently, let it remain like
that of a true Bhakta who thinks of himself as the servant of the Lord.

<span class="margnote">Ajnânam and Jnânam</span>"I" and "mine"—these two
are the signs of *Ajnânam*, ignorance. My house, my wealth, my learning,
my glory, all these are mine—this idea proceeds from ignorance of one's
true Self, but *Jnânam* or divine knowledge means that state where Jiva
realizes: "O Lord, Thou art the Master of all; house, family, children,
friends, relatives, nay, whatever exists in the universe belongs to
Thee." "Whatever is mine is Thine." "Nothing belongs to me"—such ideas
rise from true knowledge.

It is good for everyone to remember that after death nothing of this
world will remain with us. We have come here simply to perform certain
Karma and gain some experience. Just as country people come to a big
city like Calcutta to do some work, so we have come to fulfil our
desires according to the tendencies with which we were born.

A rich man has given the charge of his beautiful

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<span class="margnote">Parable of the rich man and his
Sircar.</span>garden to his *Sircar* (steward). When visitors come to
see the garden the *Sircar* waits on them attentively. He shows them the
beautiful parts of the garden with luxurious fruit-trees, flower-beds,
palace-like buildings, lakes, etc., saying. "These are, gentlemen, our
mango-trees. This is our orchard; this is our lake; how beautiful are
our flowers! Here you see is our drawing-room with most expensive
furniture, fine paintings by the best artists—all these belong to us."
The same *Sircar* may be found fault with and dismissed by his master at
any time with peremptory order to leave the garden at once. He will not
be allowed sufficient time to pack up his trunk and take his own baggage
with him. Such is the miserable plight of those who lay claim upon
things which do not in reality belong to them.

Everything belongs to the Lord. It is ridiculous for man to say, "I am
Kartâ" (the doer), "All these things are mine."

<span class="margnote">The Lord smiles on two occasions.</span>On two
occasions the Lord cannot help smiling: A person is taken seriously ill
and is about to die. The physician says to the mother of the patient:
"Mother, there is no cause for fear. I shall save

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

your son's life." The physician forgets that the will of the Lord is at
the root of every event of life and death. The Lord then smiles,
thinking: "How foolish this man must be who boasts of saving the life of
his patient when the latter is dying under My will." The Lord smiles
again when two brothers are engaged in partitioning their estate. They
take a measuring-tape and, putting it out across the land, say: "This
portion is mine, and that is yours." The Lord smiles, thinking: "The
whole Universe belongs to Me, but these foolish brothers say: 'This
portion is mine and that is yours.'"

"O Lord, Thou makest everything and Thou art my nearest and dearest One.
This house, this family, these relatives, these friends of mine, nay,
this whole universe belongs to Thee, O Lord." Such is the nature of true
Jnâna (knowledge). But "I do everything, I am the doer. My house, my
family, my children, my friends, everything belongs to me"; all this
proceeds from Ajnâna (ignorance).

<span class="margnote">The Lord alone is thine own.</span>A Guru was
giving this instruction to his disciple: "The Lord alone is thine own
and no one else belongs to thee." The disciple replied: "But my mother
and my wife, who take such good care of me, who love

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

me and feel extremely unhappy when they do not see me, are also my own,
are they not?" The Guru answered: "In this you are mistaken. I will show
you that none of them truly cares for you. Never believe for a moment
that your mother or wife will sacrifice her life for your sake. You can
try and see. Go home and feign excruciating pain and I will come and
show you." The disciple acted accordingly. Doctors were called in, but
no one could afford relief. The mother of the patient was sorrowing and
sighing. The wife and children were weeping. At this moment the
Sannyâsin (Guru) appeared. "The disease is of a serious nature," he
said, "and I do not see any chance of the patient's recovery unless some
one come forward to give his or her life for the patient." At this all
of them looked aghast. The Sannyâsin, addressing the old mother of the
sick man, said: "To live or to die will be the same thing to you, if in
your old age you lose your son who earns for himself and for you all. If
you can give your life in exchange for his, I can save your son. If you,
as mother, cannot make this sacrifice for him, who else in the world
will care to do it?" The old woman stammered through her tears: "Revered
father, I am ready to do

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

anything you order for the sake of my son. But the thing is, my own
life—and what is my life in comparison to that of my son? The
thought—what will become of my little ones after my death, makes me a
coward. Unfortunate that I am, these little ones are in my way!"

While listening to this dialogue between the Sannyâsin and her
mother-in-law, the wife wept bitterly and, addressing her parents, said:
"For your sake, dear father and mother, I cannot make the sacrifice." In
this way everyone found an excuse. Then the Sannyâsin turned to the
patient and said: "Do you see, no one here is ready to sacrifice his
life for you. Do you understand now what I meant by saying that there
was no depending on anybody?" When the disciple saw all this, he
abandoned his so-called home and followed the Sannyâsin, his Guru.

<span class="margnote">Self-surrender and prayer.</span>Srî Râmakrishna
continued: The Absolute Brahman cannot be known by reasoning. Be his
servant and taking refuge with Him pray to Him with earnestness and
sincerity. He will surely reveal Himself unto you. Book-learning or
intellectual discussions cannot reveal the Divinity.

Thus saying the Blessed One sang:

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The Glory of the Divine Mother</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Who knoweth what is Kâli (my Divine Mother)?  
Even the Six Schools of Philosophy get not a glimpse of Her.

2\. The Yogi ever meditateth upon Her at the Mulâdhâra and the
Sahasrâra.  
As the swans, male and female, commune with each other, so in this lotus
(Lotus here is a symbol of Plexus) forest doth Kâli commune with Her
consort (Shiva).

3\. Kâli, the soul of Âtmârâma (Shiva), is as beloved as Sitâ is of
Râma. The majesty of Kâli, Shiva (Kâla) alone can know, forsooth who
else may know it?

4\. For She giveth birth unto the universe; think how vast She is.  
She dwelleth within all things as the will omnipotent.

5\. The Psalmist (Prasâd) <span id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_28) singeth:
"Mortals

</div>

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

may laugh at the thought of swimming across the mighty ocean," and this
my mind perceiveth, but my heart enfoldeth it not; yet it still aspireth
to touch the moon.

</div>

The Blessed One, referring to this song, said: See how Râmaprasâd
describes that books and reasoning cannot reveal the Divine Mother.
Faith is necessary.

<span class="margnote">The omnipotence of faith.</span>Reason is weak.
Faith is omnipotent. Reason cannot go far enough and must stop short of
the goal. Faith will work wonders.

<span class="margnote">The parable of a Brahmin priest and his
boy.</span>There was a certain Brâhmin priest who served in a household
chapel. Once he went away leaving the charge of the service to his son.
He told the boy to place the daily offering of food before the Deity and
see that He ate it. The boy, following the instructions of his father,
placed the offering before the image and silently waited. But the image
neither spoke nor ate. The boy watched for a long tinge. He had firm
faith that the Deity would come down from the altar, take the seat
before the offering and eat it. Then he prayed: "O Lord, come and eat.
It is

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

getting very late; I cannot wait any longer." But the Lord did not
speak. Then the boy began to cry, saying: "Lord, my father told me to
see that Thou didst eat the offering. Why dost Thou not come. Thou
comest to my father and eatest his offering. What have I done that Thou
dost not come to me and eat my offering?" He cried bitterly and for a
long time. Then as he looked up at the seat, he saw the Deity in a human
form eating the offering. When the service was ended and the boy came
out, the members of the household said to him, "If the service is over,
bring out the offering." The boy replied: "Yes, but the Lord has eaten
everything." In amazement they asked: "What did you say?" With absolute
innocence the boy repeated: "Why, the Lord has eaten all that I
offered." Then they entered the chapel and were dumbfounded at the sight
of the empty dishes. Such is the power of true faith and true yearning!

Yes, faith will enable a man to cross the mighty ocean itself without
the least difficulty. In the epic Râmâyana it is said: Râma Chandra (God
Incarnate) worked hard to throw a bridge over the part of the sea
separating Lankâ (Ceylon) from the mainland of India. But as if

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

to prove the majesty, the omnipotence of faith, He gave it to His
Bhakta, the great Hanumân, <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_29) to jump
across the ocean by the unaided power of faith.

It is also told that once a Bhakta, a friend of Vibhishana, <span
id="fr_30"></span>[†](#fn_30) wanted to go across the sea. Vibhishana,
to whom he appealed for help, had the name of Râma (God) written on a
leaf, without the knowledge of his friend. He then said to the Bhakta:
"Take this and be careful that you have it tied to the end of your
cloth. It will enable you to walk across the ocean in safety. But mind,
never look inside, for you will go under the water if you open it." The
Bhakta put faith in his friend's words and walked on the ocean in safety
for some time, but unfortunately his curiosity became his enemy. He
wanted to see what precious thing Vibhishana had given him that had the
power

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

of taking him unhurt over the mighty deep. When he opened it he
discovered a leaf with the name of Râma written on it. He thought what a
trifling thing it was; no sooner did that thought arise in his mind than
he was drowned.

Those who belong to this class of Jivas cannot easily have faith in God,
but those who are born with Divine qualities possess the highest faith
naturally. When Prahlâda <span id="fr_31"></span>[\*](#fn_31) tried to
write the first letter of the Sanskrit alphabet, "K," it brought up
before his mind the name Krishna, and he began to cry. The natural
tendency of a Jiva is to doubt and to become sceptical. Hâzrâ <span
id="fr_32"></span>[†](#fn_32) will not believe in the truth that Brahman
and Divine Mother, the Absolute and His Energy, are one and the same.
Yet, faith is omnipotent. Before it all the powers of nature shrink and
give way. It carries one over seas and mountains with perfect ease. Sin
and

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

iniquity, worldliness and ignorance all vanish before true faith.

The Bhagavân sang:

<span class="smallcaps">The Name of the Lord</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. O my Divine Mother, if I die with Thy hallowed name (Durgâ, Durgâ)
on my lips.  
Then in the end, O Giver of all Bliss, shall it be seen whether Thou
savest Thy poor child drowning in the ocean of sin.

2\. I might have slain a cow or a Brâhmin or an unborn child!  
I might be a drunkard, nay more, the slayer of a woman!  
But of all these dire sins I have not the slightest fear.  
Through faith in Thy Holy Name I can reach the highest bliss of Brahman.

</div>

Yes, faith is at the root of all spiritual progress. Thou canst do
without all other things, only thou must have faith. Have but faith in
the Lord and thou shalt become at once free from the vilest, the
blackest, of all sins.

The one thing needed is faith and Bhakti—love, devotion, prayerfulness,
self-surrender. It

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

is exceedingly difficult, especially in this age, for a man with his
limited faculties to come to my Mother through Vichâra
([discrimination](errata.htm#3) of the Real Brahman from the unreal
phenomenal universe), unaided by the Divine Person. Verily has Prasâd,
the "Sweet Psalmist" of Bengal, laid stress on this difficulty in his
well-known song:

<span class="smallcaps">The Divine Mother and the Absolute
Brahman</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Like a mad man, O mind, what seekest thou in the dark room?  
He (Divine Being) cometh in deep meditation; without that, who can
approach Him?

2\. The moon of desire still shineth in thy secret chamber.  
First bring it under control with all thy might. It will hide itself at
the dawn of Divine wisdom.

3\. Holding this as the ideal, the great Yogi practiseth meditation for
ages. When realization cometh it attracts the soul as a, magnet draws
unto itself a piece of iron.

</div>

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

4\. Thou shalt not find It in the Six Schools of Philosophy, in the
Vedas, Tantras or in the Holy Scriptures. It loveth the sweetness of
true devotion (Bhakti) and abideth in the body with everlasting Bliss.

5\. Prasâd says: O mind, shall I disclose in public (*Châtor*) the true
nature of that which I worship as my Divine Mother? Guess and understand
it from these hints.

</div>

There was a deep silence at the close of this song, which had been
listened to with rapt attention. Everyone was moved.

<span class="margnote">Ramakrishna's samâdhi.</span>At the end of this
song the Bhagavân was once more found to be in that indescribable state
of *Samâdhi*. His sweet divine voice became still. His eyes remained
fixed and steadfast. But his spiritual eye was feasting on the beatific
Vision of the Divine Glory! There was left just enough of
self-consciousness to bring the soul face to face with the Divine
Mother. This blessed Vision the Bhagavân enjoyed for a long time. His
face was radiant with celestial light and expressed by sweet smiles the
unbounded happiness which He was enjoying within Himself, and

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

in His semiconscious state He uttered these words:

<span class="margnote">What is Bhakti?</span>Bhakti, or devotion, means
whole-hearted love for the Lord. The Absolute Brahman is called "Divine
Mother" by the Psalmist. Prasâd asks his mind to understand it by hints;
He who is described in the Vedas as the Absolute Brahman is my Divine
Mother; I am praying to Her.

<span class="margnote">Brahman impersonal and personal.</span>That which
is the Absolute (Nirguna), impersonal beyond all attributes, is also the
same as the Personal God who is with all attributes and blessed
qualities. The Absolute Brahman again is inseparable from the Divine
energy (Sakti).

The term "Brahman" refers to that aspect of Divinity which is impersonal
and which is beyond all activity. But when we think of Him as creating,
preserving and destroying all phenomena, then we call Him the Personal
God, Divine Mother or Kâli.

<span class="margnote">Brahman and Sakti are one.</span>In reality there
is no distinction between "Brahman," or the Impersonal Absolute, and
"Sakti," the Divine Mother. The Brahman and the Sakti are one just as
fire and its burning power are one. As by the word fire we understand
its power of burning,

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

so by the latter we know that it is the same as fire. By realizing the
one both are realized.

They are one just as much as milk and its whiteness are one. We cannot
conceive the milk without the whiteness.

They are one just as a gem and its brightness are one. We cannot
conceive a gem without the brightness.

They are one just as the serpent and its sinuous motion are one. We
cannot conceive of the serpent without the serpentine movements.

He who knows what "light" is has the knowledge of darkness also. He who
has the conception of the phenomenal world must have also some
conception of the Absolute Noumenon. He who knows the Sakti, or the
Personal aspect of the Absolute Being, knows also the Impersonal
Brahman. Again, he who has realized the Absolute Noumenon has also
realized the phenomenon. He who has realized Brahman has also realized
the Personal God or Divine Mother (Sakti).

<span class="margnote">The power the Divine Mother.</span>This Divine
Mother bestows the highest of knowledge of Brahman (Brahma-jnâna) by
bringing her devotee into the state of *Samâdhi*. She it is who brings
him down on the plane of sense-consciousness

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

and allows him to retain the sense of "I" and "me."

By the power of my Divine Mother all mortals (Jiva) possess the sense of
"I" and "mine." She again reveals to the soul of one who is in
*Samâdhi*, that all living beings, nay, the whole universe, is but the
manifestation of the Divine Energy.

It is She who makes one reach the Brahma-jnâna, the highest knowledge of
the Absolute, and She again makes another Her beloved devotee who
surrenders himself to Her omnipotent Will. This truth is the great
secret of all secrets. Therefore the Psalmist says: "Shall I disclose it
in the *Châtor*?"

Vidyâsâgara asked his friend who was sitting near by: "Do you understand
the meaning of *Châtor*?" The friend replied: "I know that '*Chattara'*
means a courtyard within a house."

Vidyâsâgara: Exactly. It may also mean a public market-place. So Râma
Prasâd does not want to make this secret known to the public.

Bhagavân with his smiling face spoke to Vidyâsâgara: "Oh, you are a
Pandit, a great scholar, you must know all this." When I sing the praise
of my Divine Mother I refer to the

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

same Absolute Brahman. The term "Mother" is very sweet. Therefore I like
to call Him "Mother." We must learn to love the Personal God (Iswara).
Through love He can be easily attained. Love, devotion and faith are the
most valuable. Listen to another song. The Bhagavân sang again:

<span class="smallcaps">Love for the Divine Mother</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Ecstasy dawneth when I meditate upon my Divine Mother.  
As is the ardor of thought so is the attainment; but the root must be
perfect faith.

2\. If the mind diveth into the sea of Bliss at the feet of my Mother,
then is there no further need of worship, rituals, sacrifice or
repetition of the Lord's name.

3\. The devotee of the Divine Mother is free even in this life and doth
enjoy everlasting Bliss.

</div>

<span class="margnote">The Lord, the Ocean of Immortality.</span>He who
can dive into the sea of Bliss becomes immortal. The Lord is described
in the Vedas as the Ocean of Immortal Bliss. Whosoever enters into it
becomes free from death. Some people have a wrong idea that too much
meditation upon

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

the Absolute will unbalance the mind. No one becomes unbalanced by
meditating upon the Absolute.

Devotional exercises, rituals, ceremonials, sacrifices or the pouring of
oblations into the sacred fire—such works are needless when true love
for the Lord comes in the heart of the devotee. A fan is needed so long
as there is no breeze. So when the breeze of Divine Love blows all
ritualistic works become unnecessary.

<span class="margnote">selfless works purify the heart.</span>Referring
to Vidyâsâgara the Bhagavân continued: The works which you are doing are
good works. If you can perform them without seeking their result and
without thinking that you are the "doer, "then it will he still better.
The highest result of works done in this selfless manner is the
attainment of true love for God. Such works purify the heart and bring
God-consciousness in the end. But as your love for the Lord becomes more
and more intense, your religious works will become less and less. A
married woman diligently performs the household duties, but she is not
allowed to do any heavy work when she is about to give birth to her
child. You are doing charitable works and other works for the good of
humanity. In

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="margnote">Doing good to the world.</span>reality, however,
they are of great help to yourself. They will purify your heart and
bring unselfish love for God. Man has no power to do good to the world;
the Lord doth everything. He who hath made the Sun and the moon, He who
hath given affection in the hearts of parents, He who hath bestowed
compassion upon the great souls, He who hath brought unselfish love and
devotion in the hearts of saints and sages, doth everything for the good
of His world; who else hath the power to perform any good act? Whosoever
performeth good works without holding any desire for their fruits will
do good for himself.

There is gold inside, under the cover of earth. You have not discovered
it yet. If you once realize this secret treasure your worldly duties
will vanish and you will not care for other works, just as a mother
loves nothing better than to fondle and kiss her new-born baby. Go
onward and do not stop in one place. Remember the parable <span
id="fr_33"></span>[\*](#fn_33) of the wood-cutter and stop not until the
goal is reached. The goal is the realization of God. By His grace His
true

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

devotee can see Him and can talk with Him just as I am talking with you.

Absolute silence prevailed when the Blessed Lord spoke these words with
fire and eloquence. Everyone's heart was moved by that divine love which
was flowing with mighty force within the soul of Bhagavân Srî
Râmakrishna.

With a smiling face the Bhagavân said: You know all that I have told,
but you do not realize how much you possess, in the same manner as
Varuna, the Lord of the ocean, does not care to know how many beautiful
and valuable jewels there are in His boundless treasury of the deep.

Vidyâsâgara: Revered Sir, Thou canst say so.

Bhagavân: Yes; do you not know that very often a millionaire Bâbu does
not know even the names of his own attendants? He does not remember in
what places his valuable things are kept.

Everyone was listening to this interesting conversation when Bhagavân
suddenly asked Vidyâsâgara: "Will you not come to the Temple garden? It
is a beautiful place."

Vidyâsâgara: O yes; certainly. Thou hast been so kind as to come to me,
shall I not return my visit to Thee?

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

Bhagavân: A visit to me! Oh, for shame! for shame!

Vidyâsâgara: My dear Sir, this from Thee! I wish to know why dost Thou
say so?

<span class="margnote">Humility of Râmakrishna.</span>Bhagavân: Well, we
are like fishing-boats, small and light enough to row about on ponds,
narrow canals or even on large rivers, but you are like a big steamer.
Who can tell?—you might founder on the sand-bank if you venture too far
up the stream; but now at this season steamers may go up without much
danger.

Vidyâsâgara: Oh I see; this is the rainy season.

At about eight in the evening it was announced that the carriage was
ready to take Srî Râmakrishna back to the Thâkurbâdi at Dakshineswara.
The Bhagavân became absent-minded for a while; perhaps His mind was
fixed upon the Divine Mother, or perhaps He was asking Her blessing upon
His kind host. The Bhagavân then rose to bid him farewell and
Vidyâsâgara, with a lighted candle in his hand, led the way down-stairs
and through the compound of his house to the gate. Outside the gate a
carriage was waiting to receive the honored guest and His devoted
companions from the Thâkurbâdi. An unexpected sight greeted the eyes of
the

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

party as they came out. It was a man who might have been a little under
forty standing before the gate with folded hands. He was dressed in
white and wore a white turban on his head. He had a fair complexion and
expressive eyes and a smile was on his face. No sooner did he see the
Bhagavân than he fell at His feet with his head touching the ground.

The Bhagavân said: Is it you, Balarâm? How is it that I find you here?

Balarâm <span id="fr_34"></span>[\*](#fn_34) replied, smiling: O Revered
Sir, I have been waiting for some time here at the gate to see Thee.

Bhagavân: Why did you not come in?

Balarâm: I came late, so I would not interrupt Thee, but thought it
better to stay here.

The Bhagavân then stepped into the carriage with His companions.

Vidyâsâgara asked a disciple: Shall I see the carriage hire paid?

The disciple replied: No, Sir, you need not

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

trouble yourself. It has already been paid by a friend.

<span class="margnote">Ramakrishna leaves Vidyâsâgara.</span>The Pandit
then folded his hands and bent his held and body to make his Pranâma
(Salutation) to the Bhagavân. All assembled about the carriage did the
same.  The little group at the gate, with the venerable Vidyâsâgara at
their head still holding the lighted candle in his hand, stood for a
while looking in the direction of the carriage, wondering who this
God-intoxicated Man might be, so wise yet so child-like, so full of joy,
so sweet, so godly! Verily a Light come down to set ablaze the dry bones
of a workaday world! Embodied Love, like the dew of heaven falling on
the dry thirsty heart of man! A Voice crying unto sunken, self-weary
man, "Thou must be born again and love!" A Healer from another clime of
this strange disease of modern life! A Man among men, eager to solve for
them the enigma of the universe!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[99:\*](gork07.htm#fr_21) Pandit Iswara Chandra
Vidyâsâgara was the greatest Hindu scholar of his time in Calcutta. He
was a true philanthropist, a patriot, an educationalist, and the founder
of the Metropolitan Institution in Calcutta. The word Vidyâsâgara is a
Sanskrit title which he acquired on account of his vast erudition. It
means "ocean of knowledge."

<span id="fn_22"></span>[99:†](gork07.htm#fr_22) Râjâ Râmmohun Roy was a
great Hindu reformer who lived between 1774 and 7833 A.D. He was the
first earnest-minded investigator of the science of comparative religion
that the world has produced. He studied the Vedas in Sanskrit and the
Buddhist Scriptures in the original Pâli, <span id="page_100">p.
100</span> the Koran in Arabic, the Old Testament in Hebrew, and the New
Testament in Greek. He denounced the practice of Suttee which was
abolished in 1829. He established the Hindu Unitarian Theistic movement
known as the "Brâhmo Samâj." He was the first Hindu Brahmin of rank and
influence who visited Paris and England. After nearly two years’ stay in
England Râjâ Râmmohun Roy died at Bristol in 1833.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[101:\*](gork07.htm#fr_23) Burdwân, an old city
in Bengal, famous for delicious sweetmeats.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[102:\*](gork07.htm#fr_24) Falgu is the name of
a sacred river near the holy city of Gayâ in India. It was on the hank
of this river that Buddha attained to the highest enlightenment. Its bed
is covered with sand like a desert, but a strong current of pure water
flows underneath.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[108:\*](gork07.htm#fr_25) Sukadeva was the son
of Vyâsâ, the author of the Vedanta Sutras and many of the Purânas. He
was born with the *Brahma Jnâna*, or the knowledge of the Absolute. He,
in his childhood, renounced the world with all its pleasures and
attractions. He is regarded by the Hindus as the Ideal Jnâni, or Knower
of Brahman.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[116:\*](gork07.htm#fr_26) Chaitanya Deva, see
note page [7](gork03.htm#page_7).

<span id="fn_27"></span>[117:\*](gork07.htm#fr_27) Nirvikalpa Samâdhi is
described in the Râja Yoga as the highest state of Samâdhi in which the
soul rises above the sense of "I" and the plane of all thoughts, ideas
and emotions, and reaches the realm of the Absolute.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[124:\*](gork07.htm#fr_28) Prasâd is the
abbreviated form of the full name of the Hindu Psalmist, Râma Prasâd
Sen. He was a great Yogi and a true devotee of the Divine Mother of the
universe. His songs have deep spiritual meanings and Râmakrishna was
very fond of them.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[127:\*](gork07.htm#fr_29) Hanumân was a great
devotee of Râma who, by the power of his absolute faith in the Lord,
jumped across the ocean from India to Lanka. He is regarded by the
Hindus as the Ideal Bhakta of India.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[127:†](gork07.htm#fr_30) Vibhishana was the
brother of Râvana, the King of Lankâ, (Ceylon) who was defeated by Râma,
as described in the Hindu epic Râmâyana. He became a devoted disciple of
Râma and followed His instructions as long as he lived.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[128:\*](gork07.htm#fr_31) Prahlâda was a great
Bhakta who, front his childhood, showed his extreme faith, love and
devotion for the Supreme Lord of the universe. He is the Ideal Bhakta
among the Hindus. His life is described in the Purânas.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[128:†](gork07.htm#fr_32) Hâzrâ was a moral
householder who afterwards devoted his life in search after God. He
became an ascetic and preferred to travel along the path of Jnâna.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[137:\*](gork07.htm#fr_33) See page
[243](gork11.htm#page_243).

<span id="fn_34"></span>[140:\*](gork07.htm#fr_34) Balarâm Basu was a
Hindu Zemindar in Calcutta. He was a true householder disciple of
Râmakrishna. His house was blessed many a time by a visit of Râmakrishna
and His beloved disciples. His whole family regard Râmakrishna as the
Divine Incarnation in a human form. See Chapter XII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Day On the River With Keshab Chunder Sen](gork08)
