[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork12)  [Next](gork14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

### CHAPTER X

### GATHERING OF DISCIPLES AT THE TEMPLE

<span class="smallcaps">Srî Râmakrishna</span> was seated on His seat as
usual with His face to the north. The western and northern doors of the
apartment in which He latterly passed His days looked out on the sacred
waters of the Ganges. Balarâm, Râkhâl, and other devotees and visitors
were seated on a mat spread out on the floor of the room. They were
singing hymns to the accompaniment of musical
[instruments](errata.htm#4.md). One of the songs had particular reference
to the six Lotuses marking the different stages of the Yogi's progress
toward union with the Universal Spirit. At the close of this song the
Bhagavân said:

The six Lotuses mentioned in the Science of Yoga correspond to the seven
mental planes mentioned in the Vedânta. When the mind is

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

<span class="margnote">Seven mental Planes.</span>immersed in
worldliness, it makes its abode in the lowest lotus at the end of the
spine. Sexual desires rise when the mind is in the second lotus, the
sexual organ. When it is in the third, the navel, the man is taken up
with things of the world—eating, drinking, begetting children. In the
fourth mental plane the heart of the man is blessed with the Vision of
Divine Glory and he cries out: "What is all this! What is all this!" In
the fifth plane the mind rests in the throat. The devotee talks only on
subjects related to God and grows impatient if any other subject comes
up in the course of conversation. In the sixth plane the mind is
localized between the eyebrows. The devotee comes face to face with God;
only a thin glass-like partition, so to speak, keeps him separate from
the Divine Person. To him God is like a light within a lantern, or like
a photograph behind a glass frame. He tries to touch the Vision, but he
cannot. His perception falls short of complete realization, for there is
the element of self-consciousness, the sense of "I," kept to a certain
extent. In the last or seventh plane it is perfect Samâdhi. Then all
sense-consciousness ceases and absolute God-consciousness takes its
place. In this state the life

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

of the saint lingers for twenty-one days, after which he passes away.
During these days he ceases to take any food. Milk, if poured into his
mouth, runs out and never gets into the stomach.

<span class="margnote">Sages who have reached the seventh
Plane.</span>The Bhagavân continued: Some sages, who have reached the
seventh or highest plane and have thus attained to God-consciousness,
are pleased to come down from that spiritual height for the good of
mankind. They keep the ego of Vidyâ, or, in other words, the Higher
Self. But this ego is a mere appearance. It is like a line drawn across
a sheet of water. Hanumân was blessed with the vision of God both with
form and without form; but he retained the ego of a servant of God. Such
was also the case with the wise men Nârada, <span
id="fr_80"></span>[\*](#fn_80.md) Sanaka, <span
id="fr_81"></span>[†](#fn_81.md) Sananda, and Sanat Kumâra of ancient
times.

Here the question was asked whether Nârada and others were Bhaktas only
and not Jnânis. The Bhagavân replied: Nârada and others had attained the
highest knowledge (Brahma-Jnâna), but still they went on like the
murmuring

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

waters of the rivulet, talking and singing. This shows that they too
kept this ego of knowledge. They were Jnânis (knowers), but they talked
and sang the praises of the Personal God for the good of others. A
steamboat not only reaches its destination itself but also carries
numbers of people on board to the same place. Preceptors such as Nârada
are like steamboats.

<span class="margnote">Avatâras.</span>The Avatâras or Incarnations of
God are born with Divine powers and Divine qualities. They can go
anywhere and can stay in any state of existence from the highest to the
lowest. They can stand on the top of the house and come down by the
stairs to the ground floor and can go back to the roof again. They
possess the power both to come down and to return. In a seven-story
palace a stranger can only go to the outer quarters, but the king's own
child, the prince of the house, is free to go to every corner.

<span class="margnote">Avatâras and ordinary Jivas.</span>As in
fireworks there is a kind of flower-pot which sends off one kind of
flower for a while, then another kind and still another, possessing, as
it were, an innumerable variety of flowers, so are the Avatâras. Then
there is another kind of flower-pot

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

<span class="margnote">Souls eternally free</span>which when lighted
burns a little and then goes off all at once. Similarly ordinary Jivas,
after long practice and devotional exercises, go up at once in Samâdhi
and do not return. There is another class who may be called eternally
free. From their birth they seek after God and do not care for anything
of the world. We are told of a fabled species of birds called "Homa,"
which live so high up in the heavens, and so dearly love those regions,
that they never condescend to come down to the earth. Even their eggs,
which when laid in the sky begin to fall to the earth by the force of
gravity, are said to be hatched during their downward course, and the
fledglings, finding that they are falling down, at once change their
course and begin to fly upward towards their home, drawn thither by
instinct. Men such as Sukadeva, Nârada, Jesus, Sankarâchârya and others
are like those birds, who even in their boyhood give up all attachment
to the things of this world and betake themselves to the highest regions
of true knowledge and Divine Light. Those who come with the Avatâras are
either souls who are eternally free or who are born for the last time.

The holy men (Paramahamsas) may be divided

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

<span class="margnote">Two classes of Paranahamsas.</span>into two
classes. First, those who declare the Supreme Being to be the Formless
One. Trailanga Swâmi of Benares belonged to this class. Generally
speaking, holy men of this class are comparatively selfish, because they
care only for the liberation of their own souls. Those of the second
class say that God is with form as well as formless, and that He
manifests Himself to His devotees as a Being with form. Have you ever
seen a canal running over into the water of the river with which it is
connected? The canal has sometimes no trace left, being entirely one
with the river-water. But very often there may be noticed a slight
movement in the water which proves its separateness from the river.
Pretty much the same is the case with the Paramahamsa belonging to the
second class. His soul becomes one with the Universal Spirit. <span
class="margnote">Ego of knowledge.</span>Still the ego of knowledge
(Vidyâ) or a slight trace of individuality is kept to mark his separate
existence from the Deity.

Again, such a holy man may be compared to a jar or pitcher of water. A
pitcher filled with water to the brim gives sound, only when a portion
of the water is poured out into another

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

vessel. Similarly the Paramahamsa keeps silent except when his water of
wisdom is poured out into the soul of the disciple. Thus he retains the
ego of knowledge for the purpose of teaching others.

Again, suppose a person digs a well. He is thirsty and drinks of the
water of that well. Yet when his thirst is quenched it is not unusual
for such a person to keep the digging implements,—the hack, the shovel,
the spade,—for the sake of others who may want them for the same
purpose. In the same way a Paramahamsa of the second class, who may have
drunk of the waters of Everlasting Life and have thus quenched his
spiritual thirst, is often anxious to do good to mankind. With this in
view he retains the ego of Knowledge, the ego of Love, and the ego of
the Preceptor.

<span class="margnote">Helping others.</span>Some persons eat mangoes
and then remove all traces of eating by wiping the mouth with a napkin.
They care only for their own pleasure. But there are others who let
people know that they have eaten mangoes and are willing to share their
pleasure with them. Similarly there are Jnânis who enjoy Divine
Communion, and do not think of speaking about it to others; but it was
different with

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

the Gopis of Vrindâvan. They not only enjoyed communion with Krishna,
the God Incarnate, but were willing to share their happiness with
others.

<span class="margnote">Divine communion.</span>Communion with God may be
compared to the process of involution. When one communes with the
Supreme Being one's personality becomes absolutely united with the
Divine Personality. This is the state of Samâdhi. Then, again, when one
returns to the human plane and comes back to the starting-point one sees
that the world and the ego or self are evolved from the same Supreme
Being; and that God, man and nature are interrelated, so that if you
hold on to one of them you realize the others.

<span class="margnote">Fire of Bhakti destroys sins.</span>Call with
Bhakti (love) upon His Hallowed Name and the mountain of your sins shall
disappear as a mountain of cotton-wool will vanish in an instant if it
catches one spark of fire. Worship through fear of hell-fire is intended
for beginners.

Then turning to some of the company present who were singing, the
Bhagavân said: "Will you sing songs which describe the enjoyment that is
realized by the human soul after God-Vision? Râkhâl (Swami Brahmânanda,
one of

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His young
disciples), do you remember the song sung the other day at Nobin Neogi's
house, 'Be intoxicated with the joy of the Lord'?"

One of the company then said: Revered Sir, may we be favored with a song
from Thee?

Bhagavân: What shall I sing? I sing pretty much like yourselves. Very
well; when the time comes, I will sing. So saying, He remained silent
for a while.

The first song that He then sang was about Srî Chaitanya Deva and Srî
Krishna, that is, from the point of view of the Vaishnavas (dualistic
Bhaktas). The last was regarding the Divine Mother.

<span class="smallcaps">Song</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The Devotee and Her Ecstatic Love</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The waves of the Divine Love come dashing against my body. The swell
of the Sea of Love causes the fall of the unrighteous; nay, it drowns
the whole universe.

2\. I think of diving deep near the bottom of the Sea, but the alligator
of ecstasy has swallowed me up. Who is there to feel for me and, holding
me by the hand, drag me out of the water?

</div>

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Song</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The Mother of the Universe, and the Machine of
the Human Body</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. What a fine machine of the human body hath the Divine Mother made!  
How wonderful are the sports She is playing through the machine only six
feet long!

2\. Dwelling within the machine, She holds in Her hand the string that
sets it in motion; but the machine thinks: "I move by my own will," not
knowing Who causes it to move.

3\. The "machine" that has realized Her will not have to be born again.
She Herself is tied in some machines by the string of Bhakti (love).

</div>

ii

At the end of the song the Bhagavân was in Samâdhi. His eyes were fixed
and half-closed. His pulse and the heart-beat were suspended.
Sense-consciousness had left Him, giving place to pure
God-consciousness. Returning a little to the semiconscious state He
talked to the Holy Mother, saying: Do not trouble, O Mother!

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Come down to this
plane. Be still, O Mother! What Thou wishest, O Mother, for everybody
shall come to pass! What shall I say to these people?

<span class="margnote">Discrimination and renunciation.</span> Nothing
can be achieved in the path of spirituality without discrimination
(between the Real and the unreal) and renunciation (non-attachment to
riches, honor, sensual pleasures). Renunciation is of many kinds. One
kind springs from the acute pain due to worldly misery. But the better
kind of renunciation arises from the realization that all worldly
blessings are unreal even when they are within reach. Thus, having all,
the man renounces everything for the sake of God.

<span class="margnote">Time necessary for religious
awakening.</span>Everything rests upon time. For all religious awakening
we must wait. But in the meanwhile the precepts of a Guru, the spiritual
teacher, should be carefully followed, for the impression of these
precepts in the mind of a worldly man may be of great help in time of
need. Another reason is that constant hearing of those precepts may
gradually remove the evil effects of worldly attachment. As the effects
of drunkenness can be removed by making the drunkard

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

<span class="margnote">Worldly attachment and realization.</span>drink
rice-water, so the intoxication of the worldly-minded people can be
cured by the constant hearing of the precepts of a holy Guru. The number
of those who attain Divine Wisdom is very limited. So the Gitâ says:
"Among thousands a few only strive for the realization of God, and among
thousands of such seekers after Truth a few succeed in reaching the
goal." The more a person is attached to the as world, the less is he
likely to attain Divine Wisdom. The less his attachment is, the more is
the probability of his getting it. Thus; wisdom may be said to vary
directly as non-attachment to the world, its pleasures, its riches, and
inversely as attachment to the world.

<span class="margnote">Stages of spirituality.</span>There are different
stages of spirituality. First, there is the state of being struck
speechless at the thought or realization of the Absolute
Brahman,—Existence, Knowledge and Bliss. This is the utmost point as
regards love of God that can be reached by ordinary mortals. Second,
there is the state of ecstatic love. This is attainable only by a few.
They are human beings with extraordinary, original powers and entrusted
with a Divine commission. Being heirs of Divine powers and

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

glories, they form a class of their own. To this class belong the
Incarnations of God like Christ, Krishna, Buddha, and Chaitanya and
their devotees of the highest order.

<span class="margnote">Ecstatic love.</span>The two characteristics of
ecstatic love are, first, the forgetfulness of the external world, and
second, the forgetfulness of one's own body which is so dear to one. The
first is like the unripe mango, the second is like the ripe mango.
Ecstatic love of God is like a string in the hands of the Bhakta which
binds God. The devotee holds the Lord under his control, so to speak.
The Lord must come to him whenever he calls out to Him. In Persian books
it is written that within the flesh are the bones, within the bones is
the marrow, within the marrow, the last and innermost of all, is this
ecstatic love. Srî Krishna is called "*Tribhanga*," that is, the usual
posture of His body is bent in three different angles. Now a soft
substance alone can take such an angular shape, so this form of Srî
Krishna implies that His whole being must have been made very tender by
this ecstatic love.

Chaitanya Deva was the incarnation of Divine Love or Bhakti. He came to
teach mankind true Bhakti. He used to have three states of

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

<span class="margnote">Three states of consciousness in
ecstasy.</span>consciousness in ecstasy. First, consciousness of the
gross and subtle body. At this time he would repeat the Name of the Lord
and sing His praises in Sankirtan. Second, consciousness of the causal
body alone. In this state he would become intoxicated with ecstatic joy,
and retaining partial consciousness of the external, he would dance in
company with other Bhaktas. Third, consciousness of the Absolute. In
this state he would enter into the highest realm of Samâdhi, and rising
above all sense-consciousness, his body would remain apparently
lifeless. These states correspond to the five sheaths of the soul in
Vedânta. According to Vedânta the gross body includes the material form
which is the outermost sheath and the sheath of Prâna or the
sense-organs and sense-powers. The subtle body includes two sheaths,
mental and intellectual. The causal body is the sheath of joyfulness.
Beyond these five is the true Self, the Absolute. When the mind reaches
this state, the highest. Samâdhi or God-consciousness is the result.

How to pray is the next question. Let us not pray for things of this
world, but pray like Nârada. Nârada said to Râma Chandra: "O

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">How to pray.</span>Râma, grant that I may be favored
with Bhakti, love, devotion and self-surrender to the Lotus of Thy
feet." "Be it so," said Râma. "But wilt thou not ask for anything else?"
Nârada replied: "Lord, may it please Thee to grant that I may not be
attracted by Thy Mâyâ, which fascinates the creatures of this world."
Râma Chandra said once more: "Be it so, Nârada; but wilt thou not ask
for something else?" Nârada replied: "No, Lord, that is all I pray for."

<span class="margnote">Degrees of knowledge.</span>Jnâna (knowledge)
varies in degree and kind. There is first the knowledge belonging to men
of the world—ordinary mortals. This knowledge is not sufficiently
powerful. It may be compared to the light of a lamp which illumines only
the inside of a room. The knowledge of a Bhakta (devotee) is a stronger
light and may be compared to the light of the moon which causes to be
visible things outside the room as well as those inside of it. But the
Jnâna of an Incarnation of God is still more powerful and it thus may be
likened to a yet stronger light,—the resplendent glory of the sun. Such
light is the illuminator of the moon as well as of the whole world.
Nothing is problematic. to the Divine Incarnation (Avatâra). He

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

solves the most difficult problems of life and soul as the simplest
things in the world. His exposition of the most intricate questions in
which humanity is interested is such as a child can follow. He is the
sun of Divine Knowledge whose light dispels the accumulated ignorance of
ages.

<span class="margnote">Spiritual knowledge and the worldly.</span>So
long as the man is immersed in worldliness he cannot attain to Knowledge
Divine and cannot see God. Does muddy water ever reflect the sun or any
surrounding object? Spiritual knowledge is occasionally visible in
worldly people, but very seldom. It does not last long. It is like the
light of a lamp. No, no, it is like a ray of the sun—as if a ray were
coming through a very small hole in the wall. Worldly people repeat the
Holy Name of the Lord, but there is no longing in the heart. They have
no persistence. Whether they attain or not, they do not care. They are
bound by Karma and must reap the results of their works. Is there no
remedy for this state, no hope for the worldly man? Yes, there is. Drop
a purifying agent, say a piece of alum, into muddy water; the water is
purified and the impurities settle down at the bottom of the vessel.
Discrimination of

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

the Real from the unreal phenomenal universe and non-attachment to the
world are the two purifying agents. Thus it is that the worldly man
ceases to be worldly and becomes pure.

Worldly people have the knowledge of diversity, which is the same as
ignorance. But true knowledge makes one realize the unity of existence.
"This is gold, that is brass" is ignorance, while "all is gold" is true
knowledge. All differentiation ceases, when true knowledge comes.

<span class="margnote">Sankara and the Pariah.</span>Sankara <span
id="fr_82"></span>[\*](#fn_82.md) was a great Jnâni. He had true
Self-knowledge; he realized one Brahman everywhere and in all beings. He
recognized no distinction in caste or creed. At one time, however, he
had the consciousness of difference; he would differentiate a pariah
from a high-caste Brâhmin or a sage. He would not touch a pariah after
bathing in the sacred river Ganges. One day a pariah was carrying animal
flesh along the river bank as Sankara was coming from his bath and the
pariah ran against him. Sankara exclaimed: "Sirrah, how darest thou
touch me?" The pariah replied: "Neither hast thou touched me

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

nor have I touched thee. The Âtman is pure: it is neither body nor the
elements of the body. It is far above the twenty-four categories of the
universe. Thou art the real Âtman: so am I. How can I touch thee?"
Sankara bowed down before the pariah and lo! the pariah trans figured
himself into Shiva, the Lord of wisdom. At that moment Sankara's
spiritual eyes were open and he realized the absolute oneness of the
Âtman. "I am pure and spotless Âtman, eternally free": this is the
nature of true Self-knowledge.

<span class="margnote">Spiritual practices.</span>Spiritual practices
(Sâdhana) are absolutely necessary for Self-knowledge; but if there be
perfect faith, then a little practice will be enough. One must have
faith in the words of the Guru or spiritual master. <span
class="margnote">Vyâsa and the Gopis.</span>Vyâsa <span
id="fr_83"></span>[\*](#fn_83.md) was about to cross the river Jamunâ. At
this moment the Gopis (shepherdesses) arrived. They also wished to go
across, but there was no ferry-boat. They asked Vyâsa, "Lord, what shall
we do?" Vyâsa replied: "Do not worry, I will get you across the river;
but I am very hungry. Can you give me something to eat?" The Gopis had
with them a quantity of milk, cream and fresh butter.

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He consumed them
all. The Gopis then asked: "What about crossing the river?" Vyâsa stood
near the edge of the water and prayed: "O Jamuna! as I have not eaten
anything to-day, by that virtue I ask Thee to divide the waters, so that
we can walk across Thy bed and reach the other side." No sooner did he
utter these words than the waters parted and the dry bed was laid bare.
The Gopis were amazed. They thought: "How could he say, 'as I have not
eaten anything to-day,' when just now he has eaten so much?" They did
not see that this was a proof of firm faith; that Vyâsa had the faith
that he did not eat anything, but that the Lord who dwelt within him was
the real Eater.

<span class="margnote">Stages of spiritual practice.</span>The first
stage of spiritual practice is association with spiritual people, the
company of holy men. The second stage is faith in things relating to the
Spirit. The third stage is single-minded devotion to one's Ideal. The
Ideal may be one's Guru, the spiritual teacher, the Impersonal Brahman,
the Personal God or any of His manifestations. The fourth stage is the
state of being struck speechless at the thought of God. The fifth stage,
when the feeling of devotion to God reaches the

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

highest point; it is called Mahâbhâva. The devotee sometimes laughs,
sometimes weeps like a madman. He loses all control over his body. This
state is not attained by ordinary human beings who are not capable of
conquering the flesh. It is reached by Incarnations of God who appear in
this world for the salvation of mankind. The sixth stage, Prema or
ecstatic love, goes hand in hand with Mahâbhâva. It is the most intense
love of God and is strictly the highest state of spirituality. The two
marks of this stage are the forgetfulness of this world and the
forgetfulness of self, which includes one's own body.

After delivering this sermon, the Bhagavân said to His audience that He
would be glad to answer any question. But none was asked, so the
Bhagavân continued:

<span class="margnote">Attainment of knowledge gradual.</span>Knowledge
(Jnâna) cannot be communicated all at once. Its attainment must be
gradual Suppose a fever is of a severe type. The doctor would not give
quinine under such circumstances. He knows that such a remedy would do
no good. The fever must first leave the patient, which requires time,
and then the quinine will take effect. Sometimes the fever will go off
without

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

the help of quinine or any other medicine. Precisely the same is the
case with the man who seeks for knowledge. To him religious precepts
often prove useless so long as he is immersed in worldliness. Allow him
a certain time for enjoyment of the things of the world, then his
attachment to the world will gradually wear off This is exactly the
moment for the success of any religious instructions that may be given
to him. Till then all such instructions will be entirely thrown away
like pearls before swine. Many come to me and I have observed how some
of them are anxious to listen to my words. But others of the company
appear to be restless and impatient in my presence. They say to their
friends in whispers: "Let us go, let us go. Well, if you wish to stay,
we will go to the boat and wait for you there." Spiritual awakening is
very much a question of time. The teacher is a mere help.

The meeting then broke up.

ii

<span class="margnote">Karma (past actions).</span>Srî Râmakrishna (to a
disciple): The fact is, all this desire for knowledge or for freedom
depends upon one's Karma in one's previous incarnations.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

Disciple: Yes, Bhagavan, it is so difficult to understand one's self. We
see the self only as it appears to us. Behind it there may be a hundred
previous incarnations. We walk upon the floor of a house but we never
stop to see how it is made and what various things are beneath it.

The Bhagavân smiled at the disciple and left His seat. He went out into
the veranda next to the western door of His room and for a time looked
on the sun which was sinking rapidly towards the horizon. Then He gazed
down upon the holy waters of the sacred stream before Him. A disciple
was walking alone in front of the Temple on the embankment of the
Ganges. He was watching Balarâm and others getting into a boat to return
to Calcutta. It being midsummer, the sacred waters of the river were
broken into waves. The day was drawing to its close, it was past five,
the sky was cloudy and the clouds presented a most wonderful sight,
especially towards the north. In the foreground were the Panchavati,
backed by a line of tall willow trees, with the silver stream flowing
past on their right. In the background were the beautiful dark blue
clouds and the dark stream beneath.

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

The disciple was looking on this charming scene. Suddenly his attention
was arrested by the Bhagavân coming from the south in the direction of
the Panchavati and the willow trees. As Srî Râmakrishna, smiling like a
child of five, came up, the beautiful picture seemed to be more than
complete. There was the universe on the one hand, and on the other the
One Soul who reflected the universe and saw it in its real nature. Yes,
the disciple felt that in that Presence he was as near the solution of
the problem of life as he could be. It was this Presence that made
everything—the images of gods and goddesses, men, women and children,
trees, flowers, leaves, every inch of ground in that Temple instinct
with spirituality and full of the Joy of the Lord: Yes, he felt truly
that it was the God-Man before him that had thrown an irresistible charm
over everything in that wonderful place—over every object, divine or
human, animate or inanimate, seen by the outer or by the inner eye, from
the dust under His Hallowed Feet to those sacred images worshipped in
the Temple or perceived by looking within that other temple, the body of
man, that veritable "revelation in the flesh." He felt like one
spell-bound in that Presence!

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

iii

It was evening. After the usual prayers and other religious exercises
enjoined on the pious Hindu were over, there was yet another meeting
between the Master and the same disciple. The disciple then asked,
referring to the apparently contradictory systems of religious faith
among the. Hindus: Bhagavan, is this a contradiction: some among the
Hindus hold that Srî Krishna is identical with Kâli, the Divine Mother,
while others hold that Srî Krishna is the Âtman, the Absolute, and that
Râdha is Chitsakti, the self-conscious Power that rules the universe,
the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer, the Personal God?

<span class="margnote">God is Infinite.</span>Bhagavân: The former view
is that of the Devi Purân. Be it so, but there need be no contradiction.
God is Infinite. Infinite are the Forms in which He manifests Himself.
Infinite also are the ways leading to Him.

Disciple: Oh, I see! The end in view is to get on the roof of the house.
The means may be various, as Thou hast often said,—a single rope, a
bamboo, a wooden ladder, or a staircase?

Bhagavân: Quite so. That you can understand

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

<span class="margnote">Grace of God.</span>this so quickly is due to the
Grace of God. Without His Grace doubt is never cleared up. Our attitude
towards God should be like that of Hanumân who said to Râma Chandra:
"Lord, I care not for a special time or place for meditation. What alone
I am concerned with is to meditate upon Thee."

<span class="margnote">Love of God the one thing needful.</span>Suppose
you go into a garden to eat mangoes. Is it necessary for you first to
count the number trees in the garden, which may be many thousands, then
the number of branches, which may be hundreds of thousands? Certainly
not; you should at once, on the contrary, proceed to eat. In the same
way, it is useless to enter into all sorts of discussions and
controversies regarding God, which would only cause a waste of time and
energy. One's present and most important duty is to love God, to
cultivate Bhakti or devotion.

Disciple:. Bhagavan, I greatly desire that my work in the world should
become a little less than now. The pressure of work stands in the way of
one's giving one's whole mind to God, does it not?

Bhagavân: Oh yes, no doubt that is so; but

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

a wise man may work *unattached* and then work will not do any harm to
him.

Disciple: But that depends upon the possession of an extraordinary power
of will derived from the realization of God. First realization of God,
then work without attachment. Is it not so, Bhagavan?

<span class="margnote">Power of desire.</span>Srî Râmakrishna: I must
say you are right. But the probability is, you must have desired these
things in your previous incarnations. This reminds me of the story
narrated in one of the Sacred Books. It is said that Srî Krishna had
made his abode in the heart of Râdhâ: so long there was no Lila (the
life of sport that he lived in Vrindâvan). But he felt the desire to
take the form of a human being; the consequence of this desire was that
he came to Vrindâvan. Such is the power of desire. Your duty now is to
pray without ceasing for love of God, so that the bondage of work shall
gradually fall off.

Disciple: Is it, Bhagavan, the duty of the householder to save against a
rainy day?

<span class="margnote">Cast all care On God.</span>Bhagavân: Try to
follow the precept of *Jadrichchâlâbha*, that is, availing oneself of
things that come naturally in one's way without one's having to put

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

forth any efforts for the attainment of those things. Do not take so
much thought for things of that kind, such as saving against a rainy
day. Cast your cares on God. What do you think takes place at the time
of my Samâdhi?

Disciple: Thy spirit is then in the sixth plane mentioned in the
Vedânta. Then Thou comest down to the fifth plane when Thou beginnest to
talk.

Bhagavân: I am only a humble instrument in His hands. He is doing all
these things. I do not know anything.

Disciple: Because of this wonderful self-abnegation all people are drawn
to Thee. Thou didst say that Mâyâ is attachment to one's own relatives
and friends, but Dayâ is love extending to all mankind—even to all God's
creatures. I do not understand the difference. Is not Dayâ a feeling
which makes a man cling to the world?

Bhagavân: Dayâ is not a bad feeling. On the contrary it is elevating and
leads one God-ward. Do you believe in God with form or without form?

Disciple: I go so far as the attributes. God has attributes. So far I
see clearly enough. But

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

is it not a fact that it is impossible to think of the "Formless"
without the help of a form? In any case, we have to go through forms and
symbols.

Bhagavân (smiling): You see that I lay stress upon the worship of God
with form as eminently favorable for the cultivation of devotion.

Disciple: Is Pandit Sasadhar <span id="fr_84"></span>[\*](#fn_84.md) making
any progress in this direction,—in the culture of Bhakti or devotion?

Bhagavân: Yes; but his tendency is in the direction of the path of
knowledge. These men belong to a class of their own. They do not see
that this way is exceedingly difficult. <span
class="margnote">Renunciation.</span>It is sufficient if one can give up
the world in the mind. Outward renunciation is not absolutely necessary.

Disciple: What Thou sayest is, as it seems to me, intended for the weak.
For men of the highest class is meant renunciation in the strict sense
of the word. They must give up the world not only in their mind but also
outwardly.

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

Bhagavân: You have heard all about renunciation as I have taught it.

Disciple: Yes, Bhagavan, I understand by renunciation not only the
absence of attachment to things of this world. It is non-attachment to
things of this world *plus* something. That something is the love of
God.

<span class="margnote">State of God-vision.</span>Bhagavân: You are
right. I am glad that you see this. God-vision cannot be made clear to
others. The state of things that comes about may, however, be described
to a certain extent. You have no doubt been to the theatre to witness a
dramatic performance. Before the performance commences, you must have
noticed that the people are very busy talking to one another on a
variety of subjects,—politics, household affairs, official business. But
no sooner does the drop-curtain go up and mountains, cottages, rivers,
men are presented to view than all noise ceases, all conversation ends
and each individual spectator is all attention to the novel scene that
is being enacted before him. Pretty much the same is the state of him
who is blessed with God-vision.

Disciple: Ecstatic love of God, as Thou hast said this day, is the
string with which to bind

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

the God of love. With such love one may be sure of seeing God. But the
question is whether such love is within the reach of the man of the
world (Grihastha).

The Bhagavân remained silent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[291:\*](gork13.htm#fr_80.md) Nârada, see note page
[168](gork08.htm#page_168.md).

<span id="fn_81"></span>[291:†](gork13.htm#fr_81.md) Sanaka, Sananda, and
Sanat Kumâra were the three Rishis or Seers of Truth in ancient India.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[305:\*](gork13.htm#fr_82.md) Sankara, same as
Sankarâchârya. See note [p. 279](gork12.htm#page_279.md).

<span id="fn_83"></span>[306:\*](gork13.htm#fr_83.md) Vyâsa, see note [p.
108](gork07.htm#page_108.md).

<span id="fn_84"></span>[316:\*](gork13.htm#fr_84.md) See page
[262](gork12.htm#page_262.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Srî Râmakrishna at the Sinti Brâhmo-Samâj](gork14.md)
