[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork16)  [Next](gork18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

### COSSIPUR GARDEN-HOUSE

<span class="smallcaps">Bhagavan Râmakrishna</span> resided for a few
months in a large and beautiful garden at Cossipur, about two miles
north of Calcutta. Here He was constantly surrounded by His most beloved
Sannyâsin disciples and by those women disciples who were especially
devoted to Him.

The Sannyâsin disciples were twelve in number. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[\*](#fn_103.md) Most of them were young men of noble
families and were graduates of the University at Calcutta. They had left
their homes and

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

relatives for His sake. Their one aim in life was to serve their Master,
the living God on earth and the Incarnation of Divinity in a human form.
The love of Srî Râmakrishna captivated their hearts and souls. Indeed
these earnest and sincere disciples were the pillars upon which the
Divine Manifestation was about to build the structure of His universal
mission. The illness which the Bhagavân had assumed upon His physical
form was the means by which He gathered His beloved ones around Him and
gave them the opportunity to nurse and wait upon their Divine Master.
They sacrificed their personal comfort upon the altar of true devotion
and served their Lord with whole heart and soul day after day and night
after night. Their devotion was unique and unparalleled in the religious
history of modern India. It was these young disciples who afterwards
became the world-renowned Swâmis of the Order of Srî Râmakrishna. There
were also householder disciples, like Suresh, Balarâm, Girish, Ram,
Mahendra and others, who used to come frequently to see Râmakrishna and
to serve Him by supplying the household with all necessary things.

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

ii

Râmakrishna occupied the large room on the second floor of the beautiful
house situated in the centre of the spacious garden. He was seated on
His bed, which was spread on the floor, and was surrounded by His
Sannyâsin and householder disciples. Conversation arose concerning
Sannyâs (Renunciation) and a householder's life, and Girish asked:
Bhagavan, which is right—to renounce the world with a view to avoid
worldly cares and suffering or to worship God living with one's family?

<span class="margnote">To live in the world or to renounce
it.</span>Bhagavân referred to the teaching of the Bhagavad Gitâ and
said: He who lives with his family but is unattached to the relations
and things of the world, who performs his duties without seeking the
results of his works, attains to God in the same manner as one who has
renounced the world after realizing that earthly relations and objects
are transitory and unreal. Those who renounce the world merely to avoid
worldly cares and suffering belong to the lowest class of Sannyâsins. He
who has attained to God living in the world is like the man who resides
in a

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

crystal palace and sees everything of the outside as well as of the
inside of the palace.

Girish: Bhagavan, why is it that mind after reaching a very high plane
comes down to the world?

<span class="margnote">Fickleness of the mind.</span>Bhagavân: It is
natural with the mind of one who lives in the world. Sometimes it is on
a high plane and sometimes on a low. Sometimes there is a great upheaval
of devotional feeling, then again it subsides, because the attraction of
lust and wealth is very strong. A devotee who lives in the world may
meditate on God and repeat His holy Name, but again his mind is
attracted by the power of lust and wealth, just as a fly sometimes
lights on the most delicious sweetmeat and sometimes relishes the taste
of filth or of a rotten carcass.

<span class="margnote">A true Sannyâsin.</span>It is different, however,
with those who have renounced the world. They have detached their mind
entirely from lust and wealth and have fixed it upon the Supreme. They
constantly drink the nectar of Divine Love. The mind of a true Sannyâsin
does not care for anything other than the Supreme. He leaves the place
where worldly talk prevails. He listens to discourses about

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

the highest Spiritual Truth alone. A true Sannyâsin does not speak of
worldly matters, he utters no word which has not bearing upon the
Spiritual Ideal. A bee sits on flowers only to drink honey. He does not
care for any other object. Then, referring to Râkhâl (Swami
Brahmânanda), who had a wife and a child before he renounced the world,
Râmakrishna said: Râkhâl and others like him have now understood which
is good and which is evil, which is real and which is unreal. They have
realized that earthly relations are transitory and ephemeral. They will
never again be attached to the world. They are like eels which live in
the mud but remain untouched by it.

Girish: I do not understand all that. Thou hast the power to make
everyone unattached to the world and free from bondage. Thou hast the
power to make everyone perfect whether a Sannyâsin or a householder.
When the Malaya breeze blows it can transform all trees into sandalwood
trees.

<span class="margnote">The worthy will become perfect.</span>Bhagavân:
But pithless trees like the banana- and the cotton-tree are not
transformed into sandalwood. Similarly those who are worthy will become
perfect. Worldliness means attachment to

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

lust and wealth. Many worldly people consider wealth as their heart's
blood. But if you take too much care of wealth, perhaps one day it will
go entirely out of your possession. In our country farmers build earthen
embankments round their fields. Those who do not leave open any passage
for water and take too much care of their embankments, invariably have
theirs washed off first by the tremendous current of the water; but
those who keep one side open, find that their fields become enriched
with alluvial deposits and more fertile in the end. They make the best
use of their riches who spend them in the service of the Lord and of
holy sages. They reap good fruits of their wealth who give freely to the
poor and needy and for the good of humanity.

The Bhagavân continued: I cannot use any object that is given to me by
physicians and medical practitioners who live upon the painful diseases
of other people. However, it is different with those physicians who are
kindhearted, charitable and unselfish.

iii

To destroy the pride and egotism of His disciples, Srî Râmakrishna told
them to wear the

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

<span class="margnote">Taught His disciples renunciation.</span>seamless
ochre robe of the Sannyâsin and to take up the begging-bowl. Being
Himself a perfect Sannyâsin, He loved to see His disciples following Him
in the path of renunciation. On different occasions He sent them out, as
Buddha and Sankara had done with their disciples, to beg food from door
to door. One morning He called certain among His beloved ones,—Narendra,
Sarat, Jogen, Niranjan, Kâli,—and asked them whether they could go forth
with the Sannyâsin's begging-bowl and beg uncooked food for Him. It was
indeed a great blow to the caste pride as well as to the sense of
self-respect of these young disciples. Obeying the Master's wish,
however, they took the begging-bowl in their hands, walked from door to
door in the neighborhood, collected various articles of food, brought
them before their Master and offered them at His holy feet. Bhagavân
Râmakrishna, blessed them and rejoiced at their sincere and earnest
devotion. This was the manner in which the Bhagavân initiated His
disciples in the life of absolute renunciation.

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

iv

<span class="margnote">Meaning of His illness.</span>One evening Srî
Râmakrishna was attended by His faithful servants Sashi
(Râmakrishnânanda) and Kâli (Abhedânanda), who were waiting upon Him.
The Bhagavân opened His mouth and inspired them by saying: The illness
of my body is caused by the sins of those who come and touch my feet. I
purify the sinners by taking their sins upon myself and suffering for
them. He who was Râma, who was Krishna, Buddha, Christ and Chaitanya has
now become Râmakrishna. Blessed are those who know this truth. My Divine
Mother has shown me that the photograph of this body will be kept upon
altars and be worshipped in different houses as the pictures of other
Avatâras are worshipped. My Divine Mother has also shown me that I shall
have to come back again and that my next incarnation will be in the
West.

v

Narendra (Vivekânanda) had extreme longing for the realization of
Brahman the Absolute. One day Bhagavân Râmakrishna, addressing Narendra
in the presence of other

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

disciples, said: I hold the key of the chest which contains the treasure
of the highest realization. I shall not unlock that chest until you have
finished my work which I wish you to do.

vi

<span class="margnote">Cure of His illness.</span>Pandit Sashadhar came
one day to pay his respects to Bhagavân Râmakrishna. Seeing His illness,
he asked Him: Bhagavan, why dost Thou not concentrate Thy mind upon the
diseased part and thus cure Thyself?

The Bhagavân replied: How can I fix my mind, which I have given to God,
upon this cage of flesh and blood?

Sashadhar said: Why dost Thou not pray to Thy Divine Mother for cure of
Thy illness?

The Bhagavân answered: When I think of My Mother the physical body
vanishes and I am entirely out of it, so it is impossible for Me to pray
for anything concerning the body.

Hearing this, Sashadhar bowed at His holy feet and asked His blessing.

vii

The news of Srî Râmakrishna's illness spread like wild-fire among all
those who had known

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Him or heard of
His Divine personality. Hundreds of people came every day to see Him and
to pay reverent homage to Him. Some came to receive His blessing, some
to kiss the dust of His Holy Feet, some to hear a few words uttered by
Him, and others to clear the doubts of their minds. Among these were a
few more devoted ones, like Hari, Gangâdhar, Sâradâ, Tulsi, who
afterwards joined the Order and were known as Turiyânanda, Akhandânanda,
Trigunâtita, and Nirmalânanda. Bhagavân Râmakrishna received them all
with equal kindness and was ever ready to help them. <span
class="margnote">His love for humanity.</span>Although His physical body
was weakened and exhausted, still His desire to help mankind was so
great that He often exclaimed: "I would give twenty thousand bodies like
this if by that I could help one single soul in the path of
righteousness and God-consciousness!"

Dr. Sircar and other physicians gave strict orders to the Sannyâsin
disciples to allow no one to come near the Bhagavân, as He needed
absolute rest and must have no excitement of any kind. The Sannyâsin
disciples followed this advice to the letter and would not allow even
the householder disciples to come near Him or touch His holy body. But
Srî Râmakrishna

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

could not bear this bondage. He burst into tears when He heard of this
restriction. His heart melted with Divine Love and He declared that His
suffering was infinitely less than that of the worldly people who were
groaning under the burden of their worldly cares and anxieties and who
had no one to lift them above this mundane existence. His love for
humanity was so great that, disregarding His bodily welfare, He called
everyone near unto Him in the same manner as Jesus the Christ called all
those who were heavily laden and who sought for peace and rest.

Many a time the Bhagavân declared before His beloved Sannyâsin children:
Divine Mother is working through this form. She has kept it so long
because Her work is not yet finished.

<span class="margnote">His oneness with all.</span>When He could
scarcely speak or swallow any food, the Bhagavân said: I am now speaking
and eating through so many mouths. I am the Soul of all individual
souls. I have infinite mouths, infinite heads, infinite hands and feet.
My pure form is spiritual. It is absolute Existence, Intelligence and
Bliss condensed, as it were. It has neither birth nor death, neither
sorrow, disease nor suffering. It is immortal and perfect. I

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

see the indivisible Absolute Brahman (Sat-chit-ânanda) within me as well
as all around me. You are all like my own parts. The Infinite Brahman is
manifesting Itself through so many human forms. Human bodies are like
pillow-cases of different shapes and various colors, but the cotton wool
of the internal Spirit is one. When Jiva (ego) enters into that Spirit
and becomes one with it, there is neither pain nor suffering. I am the
Infinite Spirit covered by a human skin which has a wound somewhere near
the throat. Mind affects the body and is in turn affected by the body.
When the body is ill, that illness reacts upon the mind. When one is
burned by hot water one says: "This water has burned me," but the truth
is that heat burns and not the water. All pain is in the body, all
disease is in the body, but the Spirit is above pain and beyond the
reach of disease.

<span class="margnote">Purpose of His illness.</span>My illness is to
teach mankind how to think of the Spirit and how to live in
God-consciousness even when there is extreme pain in the body; when the
body is suffering from the agony of pain and starvation, when there is
no remedy within human power, even then the Mother shows that Spirit is
the

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

master of the body. My illness is to set an example of absolute mastery
of the Spirit over matter in this age of materialism and scepticism. My
Divine Mother has brought this illness upon this body to convince the
sceptics of the present age that Âtman is Divine, that God-consciousness
is as true and practical today as it was in the Vedic period, that when
one reaches perfection, freedom from all bondage is attained. My Divine
Mother has shown through Her child what is meant by the various kinds of
Yoga and how people of this age can attain to it. She has also shown
that all Scriptures are true, that all religions are like paths which
lead to the same common goal of the one Infinite Divinity. All of my
religious practices, Yoga practices, devotional exercises have been for
the good of others and not for my own good. My Mother has set through
this form a living example in this age.

"Whosoever will practise one-sixteenth part of what I have said and done
will surely attain to God-consciousness in this life."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[411:\*](gork17.htm#fr_103.md) Narendra
(Vivekânanda), Râkhâl (Brahmânanda), Niranjan (Niranjânanda), Sashi
(Râmakrishnânanda), Sarat (Sâradânanda), Bâburâm (Premânanda), Kâli
(Abhedânanda), Jogin (Yogânanda), Lâtoo (Adbhutânanda), Gopâl
(Advaitânanda), Târak (Shivânanda), Subodh (Subodhânanda).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](gork18.md)
