[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork03)  [Next](gork05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### CHAPTER I

### SRÎ RÂMAKRISHNA AT THE TEMPLE OF DAKSHINESWARA

<span class="margnote">Where Râmakrishna lived.</span><span
class="smallcaps">Bhagavân</span> <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4.md)
<span class="smallcaps">Srî Râmakrishna</span> lived for many years in
Râni Râshmoni's celebrated Temple garden on the eastern bank of the
Ganges in the village of Dakshineswara about four miles north of
Calcutta. This Temple with the garden attached was dedicated by its
foundress (Râni Râshmoni) to the Divine Mother (Kâli). In the northwest
corner of the spacious Temple-compound is a small room which faces on
the west the waters of the sacred river Ganges. This room with its holy
surroundings was consecrated

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

as the dwelling-place for many years of Bhagavân Srî Râmakrishna, whose
Divine Presence made the spot holier and more sacred. It was from this
retired corner that the rays of His Divine glory, emanating from His
God-intoxicated soul, dazzled the eyes of the seekers after Truth and
attracted them to Him as a blazing fire attracts moths from all
quarters. Hundreds of educated men and women were drawn towards this
superhuman personality to listen with the deepest reverence to the words
of wisdom uttered by One who had realized God and who lived in constant
communion with the Divine Mother of the universe.

<span class="margnote">Mahendra's visit to the Temple.</span>One Sunday
in the month of March, 1882, Mahendra, hearing from a friend about this
Divine Man, was so deeply impressed that he came to the Temple garden to
pay Him a respectful visit. It was the day of a special religious
festival and people had gathered in great numbers in Srî Râmakrishna's
room and on the veranda. The Bhagavân was seated on a raised platform,
and on the floor around Him were Kedâr, Suresh, Râm, Manmohan, Bijoy,
and many other devotees. They gazed up into His radiant face and drank
the nectar of the living words of Divine wisdom

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

that fell from His hallowed lips. With a smiling face Srî Râmakrishna
was speaking to them of the power of the Lord's Holy Name and true
Bhakti as the means of attaining God-vision. Addressing Bijoy, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5.md) He asked: What do you say is the means of
attaining to God?

<span class="margnote">Power of the Lord's Holy Name.</span>Bijoy:
Bhagavan, by the repetition of His Holy Name. In this age the Holy Name
of the Lord has saving powers. Bhagavân: Yes, the Holy Name has saving
powers, but there must be earnest longing with it. Without earnest
longing of the heart no one can see God by mere repetition of His Name.
One may repeat His Name, but if one's mind be attached to lust and
wealth, that will not help much. When a man is bitten by a scorpion or a
tarantula, mere repetition of a *mantram* will not do; a special remedy
is necessary.

Bijoy: If that be the case, Bhagavan, then how did Ajâmila, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[†](#fn_6.md) who was the greatest of

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

sinners and committed all sorts of crimes, obtain salvation by repeating
the Name of the Lord at the time of his death?

Râmakrishna: Perhaps in his previous incarnations Ajâmila was righteous
and performed a great many good deeds. Besides, it is said that he
practised asceticism later in this life. It may also be said that at the
last moment of his life the repetition of the Holy Name purified his
heart and therefore he attained salvation. When an elephant is washed,
immediately he throws dust and dirt over himself; but if he is kept in a
clean stall after his bath, then he cannot cover himself with dirt. By
the power of the Holy Name a man may be purified, but he may once more
commit sinful acts because his mind is weak. He cannot promise that he
will never sin again. The water of the Ganges may wash away past sins,
but there is a saying that sins perch on the top of trees. When a man
comes out of the Ganges and stands under a tree, the sins drop over his
shoulders and seize upon him; these old sins ride him, as it were.
Therefore, repeat the Holy Name of the Lord,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

but at the same time pray to Him that you may have true love and
devotion for Him, and that your love for wealth, fame and the pleasures
of the body may decrease because they are transitory, they last only
until to-morrow.

<span class="margnote">All religions lead to God.</span>When there is
true devotion and love, one can reach God by any of the sectarian
religions. The Vaishnavas, the worshippers of Krishna, will attain God
in the same way as the Sâktas, the worshippers of the Divine Mother or
the followers of Vedânta. Those who belong to the Brâhmo-Samâj, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7.md) the Mahometans and Christians, will also
realize God through their respective religions. If you follow any of
these paths with intense devotion, you will reach Him. If there be any
mistake in the path chosen, He will correct the mistake in the long run.
The man who wishes to see Jagannâth <span id="fr_8"></span>[†](#fn_8.md)
may go towards the South instead of

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

towards the North, but some one will sooner or later direct him in the
right way and he will surely visit Jagannâth in the end. The one thing
necessary for realization is whole-hearted and whole-souled devotion to
God.

<span class="margnote">Many names of one God.</span>Vaishnavas,
Mahometans, Christians and Hindus are all longing for the same God; but
they do not know that He who is Krishna is also Shiva, Divine Mother,
Christ and Allah. God is one, but He has many names. The Substance is
one, but is worshipped under different names according to the time,
place and nationality of His worshippers. All the different Scriptures
of the world speak of the same God. He who is described in the Vedas as
Absolute Existence-Intelligence-Bliss or Brahman, is also described in
the Tantras <span id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9.md) as Shiva, in the
Purânas <span id="fr_10"></span>[†](#fn_10.md) as Krishna, in the Koran as
Allah, and in the Bible as Christ. Yet

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="margnote">Bigotry is not right.</span>the various sects
quarrel with one another. The worshippers of Krishna, for instance, say
that nothing can be achieved without worshipping Krishna; those who are
devoted to the Divine Mother think that the worship of the Divine Mother
is the only way to salvation; similarly, the Christians say that no one
can reach heaven except through Christ; He is the only way and
Christianity is the only religion, all other religions are false. This
is narrow-mindedness. "My religion is true while that of others is
false,"—this kind of belief is not right. It is not our business to
correct the errors of other religions. He who has created the world will
correct them in time. Our duty is in some way or other to realize Him.
God can be reached through many paths; each of these sectarian religions
points out a path which ultimately leads to Divinity. Yes; all
religions, are paths, but the paths are not God. I have seen all sects
and all paths. I do not care for them any more. People belonging to
these sects quarrel so much! After trying all religions, I have realized
that God is the Whole and I am His part; that He is the Lord and I am
His servant; again I realize, He is I; I am He.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="margnote">God Personal and Impersonal.</span>People dispute
among themselves, saying: "God is personal, with form. He cannot be
impersonal and formless,"—like the Vaishnavas who find fault with those
who worship the Impersonal Brahman. When realization comes, then all
these questions are settled. He who has seen God can tell exactly what
He is like. As Kavira <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11.md) said: "God
with form is my Mother, God without form is my Father. Whom shall I
blame, whom shall I praise? The balance is even." He is with form, yet
He is formless. He is personal, yet He is impersonal, and who can say
what other aspects He may have!

<span class="margnote">Parable of the elephant and the blind
men.</span>Four blind men went to see an elephant. One touched a leg of
the elephant and said: "The elephant is like a pillar." The second
touched the trunk and said: "The elephant is like a thick club." The
third touched the belly and said: "The

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

elephant is like a huge jar." The fourth touched the ears and said: "The
elephant is like a big winnowing-basket." Then they began to dispute
among themselves as to the figure of the elephant. A passer-by, seeing
them thus quarrelling, asked them what it was about. They told him
everything and begged him to settle the dispute. The man replied: "None
of you has seen the elephant. The elephant is not like a pillar, its
legs are like pillars. It is not like a big water-jar, its belly is like
a water-jar. It is not like a winnowing-basket, its ears are like
winnowing-baskets. It is not like a stout club, its trunk is like a
club. The elephant is like the combination of all these." In the same
manner do those sectarians quarrel who have seen only one aspect of the
Deity. He alone who has seen God in all His aspects can settle all
disputes.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the chameleon.</span>Again: Two
persons were hotly disputing as to the color of a chameleon. One said:
"The chameleon on that palm-tree is of a red color." The other,
contradicting him, replied: "You are mistaken, the chameleon is not red
but blue." Not being able to settle the matter by argument, both went to
the person who always lived under

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

that tree and had watched the chameleon in all its phases of color. One
of them asked him: "Sir, is not the chameleon on that tree red?" The
person replied: "Yes, sir." The other disputant said: "What do you say?
It is not red, it is blue." The person again humbly replied: "Yes, sir."
The person knew that the chameleon is an animal which constantly changes
color; thus it was that he said "yes" to both these conflicting
statements. The Sat-chit-ânanda (the Absolute
Existence-Intelligence-Bliss) likewise has many forms. The devotee who
has seen God in one aspect only, knows Him in that aspect alone. But he
who has seen Him in manifold aspects is alone in a position to say with
authority: "All these forms are of one God and God is multiform." He is
formless and with form, and many are His forms which no one knows.

<span class="margnote">Different aspects of Divinity. </span>God is not
only personal and with form but He can take the form of Krishna, Christ
or any other Incarnation. It is true that He manifests Himself in
infinite forms to fulfil the desires of His devotees. It is also true
that He is formless Indivisible Existence-Intelligence-Bliss Absolute.
The Vedas have described Him to be both

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="margnote">Relation between God Personal and
Impersonal.</span>personal, with form and attributes, and impersonal,
beyond all form and attributes. Do you know how this is? He is like the
infinite ocean of Absolute Existence-Intelligence-Bliss. As in the ocean
intense cold will freeze a portion of the water into ice which may float
in various forms on the water, similarly intense devotion (Bhakti) may
condense a portion of Divinity and make it appear in different forms.
The Personal God with form exists for the sake of His Bhaktas (dualistic
devotees). When the sun of wisdom rises, the block of ice melts and
becomes water once more; above, below, and on every side the Infinite
Being pervades. Therefore there is a prayer in the Scriptures: "O Lord,
Thou art personal with form. Thou art also impersonal and formless. Thou
hast manifested Thyself in a human form and hast lived in our midst, but
in the Vedas Thou art described as beyond speech and mind, Unspeakable,
Imperceptible and Unthinkable." But it can be said that for a certain
class of Bhaktas He is eternally personal and always with form. There
are places where the ice never melts, it becomes crystallized.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Kedâr: <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md) Bhagavan, it is also said in
the Scriptures: "O Lord, Thou art beyond speech and mind, but I have
described Thy Personal form only, do Thou forgive me for this offense."

Bhagavân: Yes, God is with form and also formless. No one can say
positively that He is so much and no more. To a devotee (Bhakta, or
lover of God) the Lord appears as a Personal Being with form, but to one
who has attained to the state of selfless Samâdhi through the path of
discrimination and knowledge He is the formless, Impersonal and Absolute
Brahman.

<span class="margnote">Evening at the Temple.</span>Night had fallen and
the priests were moving the lights before the shrines to the
accompaniment of bells, cymbals, and drums. From the southern end of the
garden was wafted the sweet music played by the Temple musicians upon
flutes and other instruments—the music being carried far over the Ganges
until it was lost. The breeze blowing from the south was gentle and
fragrant with the sweet odor of many flowers. The moon was rising and
the garden was soon bathed in

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

its soft silvery light. It seemed as if nature as well as man was
rejoicing and holding herself in readiness for the sacred ceremony of
the Ârati (evening service).

One by one the disciples began to take their leave. Mahendra <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13.md) and his friend, who had been visiting the
different temples, now wended their way back through the grand
quadrangle to Srî Râmakrishna's chamber. Coming up to the door of the
room, they noticed that it was closed. Near the door stood a
maid-servant named Brindâ. Mahendra spoke to her, saying: Well, my good
woman, is the Holy Man in?

Brindâ: Yes, He is in His room.

Mahendra: I suppose He has many books to read and study?

Brindâ: Oh dear no; not a single one. Everything, even the highest
truths, is spoken by His tongue. His words are all inspired.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

Mahendra: Indeed! Is He now going through he evening service? May we go
in? Will you kindly tell Him of our anxiety to see Him?

Brindâ: Why, you may go in, my. children. Go in and take your seats
before Him.

Thereupon they entered the room. No other people were there. Bhagavân
Srî [Râmakrishna](errata.htm#2.md) was alone, seated as in the afternoon on
the platform beside His bed. Incense was burning and the doors were
closed. Mahendra saluted the Bhagavân with folded hands. A mat was
pointed out on the floor. At His word Mahendra and his friend took their
seats upon it. The Bhagavân asked him: What is your name? Where do you
live? What are you? What has brought you to Barâhanagore? <span
id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14.md)

Mahendra answered each of these questions, but he noticed that in the
course of the conversation Srî Râmakrishna's mind was fixed upon some
other object, on which He was meditating. He was only half-conscious of
the physical plane and His attitude resembled that of a man quietly
seated rod in hand, intent on catching fish. When the float trembles and
the fish bites, the man eagerly looks at the float,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

grasping the rod with all his strength. He does not talk to anyone, but
his whole mind is fixed upon the float. Such was the Bhagavân's
concentration at this moment. Mahendra learned afterwards that this was
the state of Samâdhi or God-consciousness which invariably came over Him
every day during the evening service. Very often in this state He would
become absolutely unconscious of the external world. Mahendra, observing
His abstraction, said to Srî Râmakrishna: I am afraid, Bhagavan, that
Thou wouldst prefer to go through the evening service (Sandhyâ) alone.
In that case we will not disturb Thee any more, but will call some other
time.

Srî Râmakrishna replied: Oh no, you need not be in a hurry.

But He was silent again for a time. He then opened His lips and said:
Sandhyâ? Evening service? It is not that.

A short while after, Mahendra saluted the Bhagavân, who in turn bade him
good-bye, saying, "Come again."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[21:\*](gork04.htm#fr_4.md) "Bhagavân" is a Sanskrit
word meaning "The Blessed Lord." When the word is used without the
accent on "a" of the last syllable it signifies the vocative case used
in addressing a Saviour.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[23:\*](gork04.htm#fr_5.md) Bijoy was the first name
of Bijoy Krishna Goswami, the celebrated preacher, lecturer, writer and
spiritual teacher (Âchârya) of the Brâhmo Samâj in Calcutta.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[23:†](gork04.htm#fr_6.md) Ajâmila was the name of a
sinner who received salvation by repeating the name of the Lord (which
was also the name <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> of his son) at the
last moment of his life. The story of his life is given in the Purânas
and is well known to the Hindus.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[25:\*](gork04.htm#fr_7.md) Brâhmo Samâj is the name
of the Hindu Unitarian church founded by Râjâ Râmmohun Roy in 1830 A D.
It has now various branches in India. The original organization is now
known as the Âdi Samâj Keshab Chunder Sen was the founder of the sect
called "New Dispensation," while Shivanâth Sâstri was the founder of the
Sâdhâran Brâhmo Samâj.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[25:†](gork04.htm#fr_8.md) Jagannâth literally means
the "Lord of the Universe." There is a great Temple at Puri in India
where the Car festival <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> takes place every
year. Hence the common expression "The Car of Juggernath."

<span id="fn_9"></span>[26:\*](gork04.htm#fr_9.md) Tantras are sacred
writings of the Shaiva and Sâkta sects among the Hindus.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[26:†](gork04.htm#fr_10.md) Purânas are the sacred
Scriptures of the Hindus next in authority to the Vedas. There are 18
Great Purânas and many smaller Purânas.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[28:\*](gork04.htm#fr_11.md) Kavira was a Hindu
saint who lived between 1488 and 1512 A.D. Rising from the low caste of
a weaver he became the founder of a Vaishnava sect called after his name
"Kavira Panth." His teachings were so broad and universal that they were
accepted by the Mahometans as well as the Hindus of all castes. Even now
there are thousands among the lower classes of the Hindus who regard him
as their spiritual master.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[32:\*](gork04.htm#fr_12.md) Kedâr was a great
dualistic Bhakta, or a lover of God. He belonged to the Vaishnava sect
of Chaitanya. He regarded Râmakrishna as the Incarnation of Divine Love.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[33:\*](gork04.htm#fr_13.md) Mahendra is the first
name of Babu Mahendra Nath Gupta. He was a professor of English
literature in Calcutta University. He is a devoted householder disciple
of Râmakrishna. He is the author of "Râmakrishna Kathâmrita" (or The
Nectar of the Sayings of Râmakrishna) in Bengali. It was he who kept a
diary of the events which are now translated and embodied in the present
volume.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[34:\*](gork04.htm#fr_14.md) Barâhanagore is a
suburb of Calcutta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Srî Râmakrishna With his Disciples at the
Temple](gork05.md)
