[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork09)  [Next](gork11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

### CHAPTER VII

### SOME INCIDENTS IN THE LIFE OF SRÎ RÂMAKRISHNA (AS TOLD BY HIMSELF)

i

<span class="margnote">Days of struggle.</span>I practised austerities
for a long time. I cared very little for the body. My longing for the
Divine Mother was so great that I would not eat or sleep. I would lie on
the bare ground, placing my head on a lump of earth, and cry out loudly:
"Mother, Mother, why dost Thou not come to me?" I did not know how the
days and nights passed away. I used to have ecstasy all the time. I saw
my disciples as my own people, like children and relations, long before
they came to me. I used to cry before my Mother, saying: "O Mother! I am
dying for my beloved ones (Bhaktas); do Thou bring them to me as quickly
as possible."

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="margnote">All desires fulfilled.</span>At that time
whatever I desired came to pass. Once I desired to build a small hut in
the Panchavati <span id="fr_61"></span>[\*](#fn_61) for meditation and
to put a fence around it. Immediately after I saw a huge bundle of
bamboo sticks, rope, strings and even a knife, all brought by the tide
in front of the Panchavati. A servant of the Temple, seeing these
things, ran to me with great delight and told me of them. There was the
exact quantity of material necessary for the hut and the fence. When
they were built, nothing remained over. Everyone was amazed to see this
wonderful sight.

When I reached the state of continuous ecstasy, I gave up all external
forms of worship; I could no longer perform them. Then I prayed to my
Divine Mother: "Mother, who will now take care of me? I have no power to
take care of myself. I like to hear Thy name and feed Thy Bhaktas and
help the poor. Who will make it possible for me to do these things? Send
me someone who will be able to do these for me." As the answer to this
prayer came Mathura Bâbu, <span id="fr_62"></span>[†](#fn_62) who served
me so long and

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

with such intense devotion and faith! Again at another time I said to
the Mother: "I shall have no child of my own, but I wish to have as my
child a pitre Bhakta, who will stay with me all the time. Send me such
an one." Then came Râkhâl (Brahmânanda).

Those who are my own are parts of my very Self.

ii

<span class="margnote">Visit to Zoological Garden. </span>In referring
to the time of joyous illumination which immediately followed His
enlightenment, He exclaimed:

What a state it was! The slightest cause aroused in me the thought of
the Divine Ideal. One day I went to the Zoological Garden in Calcutta. I
desired especially to see the lion, but when I beheld him, I lost all
sense-consciousness and went into Samâdhi. Those who were with me wished
to show me the other animals, but I replied: "I saw everything when I
saw the king of beasts. Take me home." The strength of the lion had
aroused in me the consciousness of the

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

omnipotence of God and had lifted me above the world of phenomena.

<span class="margnote">Divinity everywhere.</span>Another day I went to
the parade-ground to see the ascension of a balloon. Suddenly my eyes
fell upon a young English boy leaning against a tree. The very posture
of his body brought before me the vision of the form of Krishna and I
went into Samâdhi.

Again I saw a woman wearing a blue garment under a tree. She was a
harlot. As I looked at her, instantly the ideal of Sitâ <span
id="fr_63"></span>[\*](#fn_63) appeared before me! I forgot the
existence of the harlot, but saw before me pure and spotless Sitâ,
approaching Râma, the Incarnation of Divinity, and for a long time I
remained motionless. I worshipped all women as representatives of the
Divine Mother. I realized the Mother of the universe in every woman's
form.

Mathura Bâbu, the son-in-law of Râshmoni, invited me to stay in his
house for a few days. At that time I felt so strongly that I was the
maid-servant of my Divine Mother that I thought of myself as a woman.
The ladies of the house had the same feeling; they did not

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

look upon me as a man. As women are free before a young girl, so were
they before me. My mind was above the consciousness of sex.

What a Divine state it was! I could not eat here in the Temple. I would
walk from place to place and enter into the house of strangers after
their meal hour. I would sit there quietly, without uttering a word.
When questioned, I would say, "I wish to eat here." Immediately they
would feed me with the best things they had.

<span class="margnote">Visit to a poor Brahmin.</span>Once I heard of a
poor Brâhmin who was a true devotee and who lived in a small hut in
Bâghbâzâr. I desired to see him, so I asked Mathura Bâbu to take me to
him. He consented, immediately ordered a large carriage and drove me
there. The Brâhmin's house was so small that he scarcely had room to
receive us, and he was much surprised to see me coming with such a rich
man in such carriage!

At another time I wished to meet Devendra Nâth Tâgore. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[\*](#fn_64) He is a very rich man, but in

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="margnote">Visit to Devendra Nath Tâgore.</span>spite of his
enormous wealth he is devoted to God and repeats His Holy Name. For this
reason I desired to know him. I spoke about him to Mathura Bâbu. He
replied: "Very well, Bâbâ, I will take Thee to him; he was my
classmate." So he took me and introduced me to him, saying: "This holy
man has come to see you. He is mad after God." I saw in him a little
pride and egotism. It is natural for a man who has so much wealth,
culture, fame and social position. I said to Mathura Bâbu: "Tell me,
does pride spring from true wisdom or from ignorance? He who has
attained to the highest knowledge of Brahman cannot possess pride or
egotism, such as 'I am learned,' 'I am wise,' 'I am rich,' and so on."
While I was speaking with Devendra Nâth Tâgore, I went into a state from
where I could see the true character of every individual. In this state
the most

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

learned pandits and scholars appear to me like blades of grass. When I
see that scholars have neither true discrimination nor dispassion, then
I feel that they are like straws; or they seem like vultures who soar
high in the heavens, but keep their minds on the charnel-pits below on
the earth. In Devendra I found both spiritual knowledge and worldly
desire. He has a number of children, some of whom are quite young. A
doctor was present. I said: "When you have so much spiritual knowledge,
how can you live constantly in the midst of so much worldliness? You are
like Râjâ Janaka; you can keep your mind on God, remaining amid worldly
pleasures and luxury. Therefore I have come to see you. Tell me
something of the Divine Being." Devendra then read some passages from
the Vedas and said: "This world is like a chandelier, and each Jiva
(individual soul) is like a light in it." Long ago, when I spent nearly
all my time meditating at the Panchavati, I saw the same thing. When
Devendra's words harmonized with my experience, I knew that he must have
attained to some true knowledge. I asked him to explain. He said: "Who
would have known this world? God has created man to manifest His glory.
If there

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

were no light in the chandelier, it would be all dark. The chandelier
itself would not be visible." After a long conversation Devendra Nâth
Tâgore begged me to come to the anniversary of the Brâhmo-Samâj. I
answered: "If it be the will of the Lord. I go wherever He takes me."

iv

<span class="margnote">Visit to Padmalochana.</span>Padmalochana was the
most eminent scholar in the court of the Râjâ of Burdwan. He came to a
garden-house near Dakshineswara, and as I had a desire to meet him, I
sent Hridai to find out whether he had pride or not. I learned that he
was simple and absolutely free from scholarly pride, so I went to see
him. He was indeed a great scholar and a true Jnâni. He defeated all the
great pandits and theologians. He said that when he was in the court of
the Râjâ a theological discussion arose regarding the Hindu
Trinity,—whether the first person of the Trinity, Brahmâ, was greater
than the third person of the Trinity, Shiva. The pandits referred to him
for the final decision and Padmalochana replied: "I have seen neither
Brahmâ nor Shiva; how can I decide?" He wished to hear me sing the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

praises of my Divine Mother. I had a long conversation with him. He
became truly devoted to me and said: "I have never found so much
happiness anywhere." He revered me although I used to cry for my Divine
Mother like a child.

v

<span class="margnote">Distaste for Worldly conversation.</span>Nothing
but discourses on God appealed to me at this period. If I heard worldly
conversation, I would sit in a corner and weep bitterly. When I went
with Mathura Bâbu to Benares, I was sitting with him in the drawing-room
when some friends came in to see him and began to discuss worldly
affairs. "So much we have gained, so much we have lost." Hearing this I
was in tears and cried aloud: "Mother, why hast Thou brought me here? I
was much better off in the Temple. I have come to the Holy City to hear
only of lust and gold; but there in the Temple I did not have to listen
to such conversation."

I was at this time like a young boy and so Mathura Bâbu fulfilled all
the desires that arose in my mind. My heart and soul, however, were
constantly longing to hear about the

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

<span class="margnote">Longing to hear about the Supreme.</span><span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Supreme Being. I
searched for the places where the Holy Scriptures were expounded. There
was a Brâhmin in the neighborhood who was a great pandit and who had
true faith. I used to go to hear him very often. A saint lived near by
on the bank of the Ganges and I wished to go with this Brâhmin to see
him; but a priest who looked upon the world as a dream discouraged me by
saying: "The body of a saint is an earthly cage; what good can one
obtain by visiting such a cage?" I spoke of this to the Brâhmin and he
replied: "He who thinks of God, he who repeats His Holy Name and has
renounced everything for the sake of the Lord, must not be regarded as
an earthly cage. The priest does not know that the form of a devotee is
a spiritual form full of Divine intelligence." This Brâhmin once asked
me why I had thrown away my Brâhminical thread. I replied: "When the
storm of Divine ecstasy overtook my heart and soul, it blew away all
signs of caste and creed. If you once become mad after God, then you
will understand me." But after some time this Brâhmin himself caught the
madness of Divine ecstasy. He would utter nothing but "Om, Om," and sit
in silence in his own room. He

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

would not mix with or speak to anyone. His friends and relatives called
in physicians. He told one of them: "You can cure my disease, but do not
take my 'Om' from me." Once I went to see him when he was in this state.
I asked him what was the matter and he answered: "The tax-collectors
have been here and I am wondering what I shall do. They said that they
would seize my belongings." I replied: "What will you gain by thinking
in this way? Let them sell your belongings. If they put you in jail,
they cannot harm you, because you say that you are nothing but (Kha)
infinite space." I would often repeat this, his own statement, to him
and say: "As you are infinite space, no tax can be drawn out of you."

vi

<span class="margnote">Absolute frankness.</span>During this period I
was absolutely outspoken. I observed no formality or etiquette; I was
fearless. Once I met a rich Zemindar and asked him: "What is our highest
duty? Is not the attainment of God our highest duty?" He replied: "We
are men of the world; salvation is not for us. When

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

even Yudhisthira, <span id="fr_65"></span>[\*](#fn_65) the purest and
most perfect of mortals, had to see purgatory in a vision because he had
once wavered for half a second from absolute Truth, what can we expect
for ourselves?" I could not bear his words and rebuked him sharply,
saying: "What kind of man are you, that you think of the momentary
vision of purgatory? You must not think of that, but of Yudhisthira's
truthfulness, forgiveness, patience, right discrimination, renunciation,
devotion and love for God."

At another time I went to see a Zemindar who had the title of Râjâ, and
I told him plainly that I could not call him Râjâ because he was not
really one.

One day I saw a pious Brâhmin who was counting his beads on the bank of
the Ganges. I stood near him and knew that his mind was not fixed on God
but on earthly things. Immediately I roused him by striking him on the
shoulder. At another time Râshmoni, the founder of the Temple, was
praying in the Temple while I was singing the holy song of the Divine
Mother. I perceived that her mind was

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

on worldly objects and instantly I roused her in the same manner. In
amazement she folded her hands and remained motionless before me.

vii

<span class="margnote">Visit to Keshab Sen.</span>Keshab Chunder Sen was
suffering from a serious illness. Bhagavân Srî Râmakrishna was very
anxious to see him, so He came one day with a few of His disciples to
Keshab's home, where He was received by some of Keshab's disciples. They
led Him to the drawing-room and seated Him on a couch. The room was
fitted up with modern furniture. The Bhagavân looked at it for a moment;
then His mind turned within and He went into Samâdhi. After recovering
sense-consciousness, He spoke thus:

<span class="margnote">Body and Âtman.</span>There are two, the physical
body and the Âtman; the body is born, so it must die, but Âtman is
deathless. It is separate from the body, like a nut in the shell; but
when the nut is unripe, it is difficult to separate the kernel from the
shell; so it is with worldly people who have not realized God. Their
Âtman remains attached to the body; but in true knowledge the Âtman
appears as separate from the body.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

At this moment Keshab entered the room. He was extremely thin and looked
almost like a skeleton. He could hardly stand on his feet. With great
difficulty he walked to the couch and sat at the feet of Bhagavân Srî
Râmakrishna. The Bhagavân came down from the couch and sat on the floor.
Keshab touched his forehead to the floor and remained prostrate before
Him for some time. Râmakrishna held Keshab's hand and said:

<span class="margnote">Perfect knowledge brings realization of
oneness.</span>So long as there is knowledge of variety, so long there
is bondage. When perfect knowledge comes, man realizes one Spirit in
all. In that state he also sees that the same One has become the
individual soul, and the phenomenal world with its various states and
elements. It is true that the Universal Spirit dwells everywhere, but
His manifestation varies. In some places there is greater manifestation
and in others less. Wherever there is greater manifestation of the
Spirit, there is also greater manifestation of Divine Powers.

First you will have to realize unity by discrimination: "Not this, not
this." Then after reaching this state of realization, when you come down
to phenomena, you will discover that

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

<span class="margnote">Unity and variety.</span>variety has come from
unity and the same unity is the goal of variety. The difference in the
manifestation of Sakti or power makes the variety. When the flood of
spiritual realization comes in the soul, like a sheet of water the
Universal Spirit covers everything. All distinctions vanish. Then a boat
can pass over a field and the way from one place to another becomes
straight across the water.

Keshab was listening with rapt attention. Although the room was crowded,
absolute silence prevailed. The Bhagavân, looking at Keshab, then asked:

<span class="margnote">Meaning of Keshab's illness.</span>How are you?
How do you feel? You are suffering; but your illness has a deep meaning.
In this body you have gone through various stages of spiritual
development; the body is now suffering from the reaction. When the
spiritual waves arise, the consciousness of the body vanishes; but it
tells upon the body in the end. When a big steamer plies in the waters
of the Ganges, I have seen the waves dash against the shore for some
time after; the larger the boat, the stronger the waves; sometimes they
break down the banks. If an elephant enters a small hut,

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

it shakes it and breaks it to pieces; so when the elephant of the
spiritual Ideal enters into the body, it shakes and sometimes shatters
it. What happens; do you know? If there be a fire in the house, it burns
up many things. Similarly, the fire of Divine Wisdom burns all passion,
anger and other enemies, and in the end destroys the sense of "I, me and
mine." The body is then wrenched and shattered. You may think that
everything is finished, but so long as there is the least sign of
illness, so long Re will not make you free. If you enroll yourself as a
patient in a hospital, you cannot come out before you are absolutely
cured.

Keshab began to smile. The Bhagavân continued: Hridai used to say, after
seeing the condition of my body: "I have never seen so much spirituality
with such a state of body!" But although my body was weak, still I never
stopped talking of God with others. At one time, I remember, I was thin
like a skeleton, yet I would continue discussions on spiritual subjects
for hours.

Then shedding tears of sympathy for Keshab, the Bhagavân said: It is His
will. Everything happens by Thy will O Lord! Thou doest Thy

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

<span class="margnote">Everything the will of God.</span>work; by
mistake people say, "I do." The gardener sometimes uncovers the of roots
rose-bushes that the dew may fall upon them. Sometimes he trims off some
of the roots so that the flowers will become larger. Perhaps the Lord is
preparing you to do greater work. But I feel very unhappy when you are
ill. Last time when you were ill, I was so anxious about you that I
would cry at night and pray to my Divine Mother for your recovery.
Sometimes I said to my Mother: "If Keshab passes away, with whom shall I
talk about God?" But this time I do not feel the same way.

At this moment Keshab's aged mother came near the door and addressed the
Bhagavân, saying: "May Keshab be cured of his illness?"

The Bhagavân replied: Pray to my blissful Divine Mother. She will remove
all pain and trouble. (To Keshab) Do not spend so much time with your
family and children. Their company will drag you to worldliness. You
will feel better if you think of God and talk about Him.

Keshab's mother said: Do Thou bless my Keshab.

Râmakrishna: What power have I? God

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

will bless him. Thou doest Thy work, O Divine Mother! People say by
mistake, "I do it." Two are the occasions when the Lord smiles. First,
when brothers remove the chains which partition off the family property,
saying: "This is mine and that is thine"; and secondly, when the
physician of a dying patient declares: "I shall make him live."

 

Keshab then began to cough and could not remain longer, so he bowed down
before the Bhagavân, saluted Him, and with great difficulty walked out
of the room. Keshab's eldest son was there. A Brâhmo devotee said:
Bhagavan, lay Thy hand on his head and bless him.

Râmakrishna replied: It is not for me to bless anyone.

He then gently touched him on his arm and said to the Brâhmo devotee: I
cannot say to anyone, "Be thou cured." I never asked my Divine Mother
for that power. I simply ask for pure love and nothing else.

Srî Râmakrishna then rose to leave. Keshab's disciples accompanied Him
to the door with great reverence, and He passed from the house with His
disciples.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[208:\*](gork10.htm#fr_61) Five sacred trees
planted together to form a grove to be used for contemplation.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[208:†](gork10.htm#fr_62) Mathura Bâbu was the
son-in-law of Râni Râshmoni, <span id="page_209">p. 209</span> the
founder of the Temple garden at Dakshineswara. He recognized the Divine
powers and superhuman character of Srî Râmakrishna and became His
devoted disciple.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[210:\*](gork10.htm#fr_63) Sitâ was the consort
of Râma, the Divine Incarnation and the Hero of Râmâyana. She was the
perfect type of womanhood according to the Hindus.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[211:\*](gork10.htm#fr_64) Devendra Nâth Tâgore
was a Hindu multimillionaire of Calcutta. He was born in 1818 A.D. In
1841 he became <span id="page_212">p. 212</span> a follower of Râjâ
Râmmohun Roy, the founder of the Âdi Brâhmo Samâj, and in 1844 he became
the Âchârya, or the spiritual leader of this Theistic Hindu Church.
During the latter part of his life he retired from the world and devoted
his time entirely to spiritual studies. He was regarded by the Hindus as
the "Maharshi," or the holy man of his age.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[218:\*](gork10.htm#fr_65) Yudhisthira was the
Hero of the Mahâbhârata and the Hindu emperor of ancient India.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Feast at the Garden-House of Surendra](gork11)
