[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gork10)  [Next](gork12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I62OVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gospel of Ramakrishna*, ed. by Swami Abhedananda, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

### FEAST AT THE GARDEN-HOUSE OF SURENDRA <span id="fr_66"></span>[\*](#fn_66)

<span class="smallcaps">Srî Ramakrishna</span> was invited by one of His
beloved disciples, Surendra, a householder, to a feast made in his
garden-house at Kânkurgâchi near Calcutta.

These feasts were invariably occasions for the gathering of His
disciples, devotees and admirers. They were times of real festivity and
rejoicing, during which the Holy Name of God was chanted to the
accompaniment of *Mridangas* and other musical instruments. All the
while the Bhagavân could be seen at His best, singing, dancing with the
joy of the Lord, and frequently lost in that blessed state of ecstasy or
Samâdhi. When the singing of devotional

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

hymns and the spiritual excitement which came with it were over, the
company present would be treated by the Bhagavân to one of those
celestial conversations, so laden with sermons for the spiritual welfare
of humanity, which will never die in the memory of those who had the
rare privilege of listening to Him.

<span class="margnote">Ramakrishna's ecstasy.</span>The first part of
the day was given to Sankirtan (singing forth the Name of the Lord).
They were singing the songs telling of the separation of the Gopis from
the Lord Srî Krishna, who had gone to Mathurâ. In the course of the
songs, the Bhagavân was frequently in a state of Samâdhi. They were
singing. Suddenly He rose to His feet, saying: "O my friend, do thou
bring my beloved Krishna to me or take me over to the place where He
is." The Bhagavân, it would appear, had merged His personality in that
of Râdhâ, <span id="fr_67"></span>[\*](#fn_67) the chief of the Gopis.
He realized that He and Râdhâ were one. With those words He stood
speechless and motionless, with fixed half-closed eyes that moved not,
evidently having lost all sense-consciousness. Coming to Himself, He
again, in a voice that

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

drew tears from the eyes of those who heard Him, cried out: "O my
friend, do me this favor and I shall be thy most devoted servant.
Remember it was thou that taughtest me my love for the Beloved."

The chorus went on singing. Râdhâ was made in the song to say: "O! I
will not go to the bank of the Jamuna to draw water, for coming up to
the Kadamba tree I am put in mind of my own, my Beloved." Râmakrishna,
heaving a sigh, said, "Ah, me!" As the chorus chanted aloud the name of
the Lord, the Bhagavân was again on His feet and in Samâdhi. Recovering
His sense-consciousness, He could only repeat inarticulately: "Kitma,
Kitma," for "Krishna, Krishna."

The Sankirtan was brought to a close by the Bhagavân Himself leading the
chorus in the well-known piece: "Victory to Râdhâ, Victory to Govinda,"
and dancing with His disciples, who formed a ring around Him.

<span class="margnote">The madness of love for the Lord. </span>The
dancing and singing had all taken place in the reception-hall. The
Bhagavân then withdrew into one of the adjoining rooms to the west. To a
disciple He said, talking of the Gopis: How wonderful was their
devotion! At the sight of the

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tamâl tree they
were seized with the very madness of love.

Disciple: This was also the case with Chaitanya. Looking at the forest
he thought it was Vrindâvan, the sacred birthplace of Srî Krishna, that
was before him!

Bhagavân: Oh! if anyone is but favored with a single particle of this
ecstatic love! What devotion! What intense love! Of this devotion they
not only had the full complement (sixteen Annas) but a great deal more
than the full complement—five Sikâs and five Annas! This is called the
madness of Divine Love. The chief thing is to have intense love and
sincere and earnest longing for God. On whatever path you may travel,
whether you believe in the Divinity with or without form, whether you
have faith in God-incarnate in a human form or not,—if you have intense
love and sincere longing for Him, you are sure to attain to Him. He
alone knows what He is like. He Himself will make you realize His Divine
Nature. Why should you be mad after the things of the world? If you must
be mad, be mad for God. There is a madness of Divine Love, a madness of
Bhakti, or ecstasy, and a madness of Jnâna. Râdhâ had the madness of

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Divine Love.
Hanumân showed the madness of true devotion. When Sitâ was forced by
Râma to prove her chastity by going through the ordeal of fire, Hanumân,
although a devotee of Râma, was so maddened that he wished to kill his
Lord, the Divine Incarnation. I saw a true Jnâni, who wandered like a
madman. He came to the Temple garden. He had so realized the oneness of
the Spirit in every living creature that when he saw a dog eating the
remains of a dish, he held him by the ears and said: "Brother, wilt thou
eat all?" He then took a portion and ate with the dog. He said to
Hridrai: "When the holy waters of the Ganges and the water of the gutter
appear the same, then will come the realization of Divine oneness."

At one time I had this madness. I used to walk like a madman, seeing the
same Spirit everywhere and recognizing neither high nor low in caste or
creed. I could eat even with a Pariah. I had the constant realization
that Brahman is Truth and the world is unreal like a dream. Once Mathura
Bâbu took me in a boat. The Mohammedan crew were cooking and I was about
to eat with them, but Mathura Bâbu would not let me. In that state I
used to

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

bow down before everybody and would ask them to repeat the Holy Name of
the Lord. As in a violent storm a screen of dust rises, hiding the trees
of different kinds and making all trees appear alike, so in that storm
of spiritual vision I could not distinguish one man from another as high
or low.

A devotee: Bhagavan, how can a man live in the world and experience any
of these kinds of madness?

Srî Râmakrishna: These states are not for those who are living in the
world and performing the duties of the world, but for those who have
absolutely renounced internally and externally. External renunciation is
not for those who live in the world. They should practise internal
renunciation or mental non-attachment.

(To a disciple) A man brought a bottle of wine; I went to touch it but
could not.

Disciple: Why, Bhagavan?

<span class="margnote">Divine intoxication.</span>Râmakrishna: When
Divine bliss is attained, one becomes intoxicated with it, he does not
need to drink wine. When I see the feet of my Divine Mother, I feel as
intoxicated as if I had drunk five bottles of wine. In this state one
cannot eat anything and everything.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

Disciple: As regards eating, one should eat what one gets.

<span class="margnote">Food for a Bhakta.</span>Râmakrishna: That
depends upon the spiritual state. In the path of Jnâna that produces no
harm; when a Jnâni eats, he pours the food as an offering in the fire of
Kundalini. But for a Bhakta it is different. A Bhakta should eat only
pure food, such food as he can freely offer to his Beloved Lord. Animal
food is not for a Bhakta. But at the same time, I must say, if a man
loves God after eating the flesh of a pig, he is blessed, and wretched
is the man who lives on milk and rice, but whose mind is absorbed in
lust and gold. Once I took as *mantram* the name of Allah from a
Mohammedan teacher and repeated the name for several days and ate their
food.

ii

The Bhagavân then came back into the hall followed by His disciples and
seated Himself. A pillow was placed for Him to recline upon. Before
touching it, He said, "*Om tat sat*" (Brahman is the only Reality). The
pillow was, of course, one which had been used by the unholy men of the
world, and the Bhagavân was purity itself. It was getting late, but no
dinner was

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

being served and the Bhagavân became a little impatient like a child.
Surendra, the host, was a beloved disciple of the Lord. The Bhagavân
said: Surendra's disposition has grown admirable. He is very generous;
those who go to him for help never come away disappointed. Then he is
very outspoken. He is bold enough to speak the truth.

<span class="margnote">Truthfulness.</span>In this age truthfulness is
the best of all ascetic practices. He who is firm in truthfulness
attains to God. Lack of truthfulness destroys all virtue. For this
reason, when I say anything even inadvertently, such as, "I shall go
there. I shall do that," I must go, because I have said it. I may lose
my firmness in truthfulness if I do not keep my word to the very letter.
Openness as opposed to dissimulation is the fruit of the practice of
many religious austerities in one's previous incarnations. In a
well-known song by Tulsi Dâs <span id="fr_68"></span>[\*](#fn_68) it is
said: "Give up dissimulation and

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

cunning." Do you not see that whenever God has taken a human form, this
great virtue of guilelessness has never failed to come to view? Look at
Dasaratha, the father of Râma, and Nanda Ghosh, the father of Srî
Krishna. They were both free from guile. (To a young disciple) Like men
of the world, you have accepted a position, but you are working for your
mother. Otherwise I should have said: "For shame! For shame! You must
serve only the Lord." (To Mani Mullik) This young man is open and
guileless to a degree; only nowadays he occasionally tells untruths,
that is all. The other day he said that he would come to see me, but he
did not. (To Mahendra) You went to see Bhagavân Das; how did you like
him?

Mahendra: Yes, Revered Sir, I went to see him. The great Vaishnava sage
has become very old. He was lying down when I saw him; a disciple put
some food into his mouth. He can hear only when addressed in loud tones.
After hearing Thy name, he said to me: "You need not fear anything.
Râmakrishna is a

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Divine
Manifestation. To worship His name is to worship God."

Here Mahima came in and the Bhagavân exclaimed: This is a visit quite
unexpected! We expect at most a shallop in this poor river of ours, yet
here comes a ship! But then it is the rainy season!

The conversation next turned on the spiritual aspect of feasts and the
Bhagavân said to Mahima: Why is it that people are fed at a feast? Do
you not think that it is the same as offering a sacrifice to God who is
the Living Fire in all creatures? But bad men, not God-fearing, guilty
of adultery and fornication, should on no account be entertained at a
feast. Their sins are so great that several cubits of earth beneath the
place where they eat become polluted.

iii

Protâp Chunder Mozoomdâr, <span id="fr_69"></span>[\*](#fn_69) a member
of the Brâhmo-Samâj, entered and saluted Srî

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Râmakrishna. The
Bhagavân, as usual, returned his salutation with His well-known modesty,
bowing very low. Mozoomdâr said: Revered Sir, I have recently been to
Darjeeling.

Srî Râmakrishna: But you do not appear to be much the better for the
change. What is the matter with you?

Mozoomdâr: The same complaint to which Keshab Chunder Sen succumbed.

<span class="margnote">Egotism rises from ignorance.</span>A certain
Mahratta lady was then spoken of. Mozoomdâr said that she had been to
England and had embraced Christianity. He asked the Bhagavân whether He
had ever heard of the woman. The Bhagavân replied: No, but from what I
hear from you, I should think she must be a person who wishes to make a
name for herself. Egotism of this kind is not good. Those who seek for
fame are under a delusion. "I do this or that," this sense arises from
ignorance. But "O Lord, Thou art doing everything" is true

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

knowledge. God is the real Actor, others are actors in name only.

<span class="margnote">The ego of a calf.</span>The calf says, "Hâmmâ"
or "Aham" (I). Now look at the troubles caused by the self which says
"I, I." In the first place, the calf is sometimes taken into the field
where it is yoked to the plough. It is there made to work on from
morning till evening, alike in the sun and in the rain. Its troubles are
not yet over. It is very often killed by the butcher. Its flesh is eaten
as meat. Its skin is tanned into hides which are then made into shoes.
The sufferings of the calf in this state know no bounds. But that is not
all. Drums are made with the skin which is thus mercilessly beaten,
sometimes with the hand and sometimes with the drumstick. It is only
when out of its entrails are made strings for the bows used for carding
cotton that the troubles of the poor creature are over. And that is
because it no longer says, "Hâmmâ, Hâmmâ" (I, I), but "Tuhum, Tuhum" (It
is Thou, O Lord! It is Thou!). Similarly, when Jiva (ego) says, "O Lord!
Not I but Thou art the doer and actor, I am merely an instrument in Thy
hand," it becomes free from all the world's troubles and attains to
absolute freedom from birth and

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

rebirth in this world of sorrow and suffering.

A devotee: How can Jiva become free from egoism (Ahamkâra)?

Bhagavân: Egoism does not leave until one has realized God. If anyone
has become absolutely free from egoism (Ahamkâra) you must know that
that person has seen and realized Divinity.

Devotee: Revered Sir, what are the signs of one who has seen and
realized God?

<span class="margnote">Signs of one who has realized
God.</span>Bhagavân: The signs of one who has seen God are thus
described in Bhâgavatam. There are four kinds. First, His conduct is
like that of a child. A truly wise man who has seen the Lord becomes
like a child. A child has no real egoism. He is not bound by any custom.
The self of the child is nothing at all like the self of the grownup
man. The second sign is that one who has seen God does not care for his
body or his dress. Purity and impurity seem to him the same. Third, Such
an one sometimes acts like a madman, now laughing, now weeping, and the
next moment talking to himself; now dressed like a Bâbu (gentleman) and
now taking his one garment under his arm and going quite naked like

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

a child. Lastly, he may remain inert and motionless for a long time in
the state of Samâdhi.

Devotee: After God-vision does egoism (Ahamkâra) disappear entirely?

Bhagavân: Sometimes the Lord wipes out the last stain of egoism, as in
the state of Samâdhi. Again, sometimes He leaves a faint trace of
egoism, but that is harmless. It is like that of an innocent child, who
knows not the doing of injury to anyone. The steel sword is turned into
gold by the touch of the Philosopher's Stone. It still retains its shape
but it does not injure anyone.

Bhagavân to Mozoomdâr: You have been to England and America. Tell me all
about what you saw there.

Mozoomdâr: Sir, people in England mostly worship what Thou callest
Kânchan (gold), but there are some good men and women who are not so
attached to worldliness. Generally speaking, one sees nothing but
worldly activity (Rajas) everywhere from beginning to end.

<span class="margnote">Attachment to work.</span>Bhagavân: I have seen
the same thing too. Why in England and America alone? Attachment to work
is to be found in every country. That worldly activity is the first
chapter of life. So long

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

as the Rajas quality predominates, attachment to work increases. One
cares more for one's own worldly good,—riches, honor, fame. It gradually
leads to ignorance which makes one forget God, the Reality of the
universe. God cannot be realized until the Sattwa qualities, such as
devotion, right discrimination, dispassion and compassion for all,
prevail. All attachment to lust and gold proceeds from Rajas and Tamas
qualities, but work cannot be renounced entirely. Propelled by nature
(Prakriti) you plunge into work even against your wish. Therefore I say
you should work with non-attachment; in other words, you should work
without seeking the fruit.

In a great religious ceremony we give alms to the poor and do various
other charitable works and may think that we are absolutely unattached
to the results of such works, but in the end we find that the desire for
name and fame has crept up in the heart, we do not know how. But he
alone who has seen and realized God can become absolutely unattached to
work and its result.

A devotee: What is the path for those who have not realized God? Is it
necessary for them to give up all work and worldly activity?

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span class="margnote">Path of devotion.</span>Râmakrishna: In this age
(Kâli-Yuga) the path of devotion and love (Bhakti-Yoga) is easy for all.
The practice of Nârada's Bhakti is better adapted to this Yuga. One
should repeat the Holy Name of the Lord and chant His praises and with
earnest and sincere heart, pray to Him, saying: "O Lord, grant me Thy
divine Wisdom, Thy divine Love. Do Thou open my eyes and make me realize
Thee."

When Karma Yoga is so difficult to practice, one should pray to the Lord
in this manner: "O Lord! Do Thou reduce our Karma to a minimum, and the
little work that we daily perform, may we do it with non-attachment by
Thy grace. O Lord! Do not let our desire for work increase in number and
bind us to worldliness."

<span class="margnote">Is work the aim of life?</span>Devotee: People of
the West (in England and America) always say, "Work, work, work." Is not
work (Karma) then the end and aim of life?

Râmakrishna: The end and aim of life is the attainment of God. Work
(Karma) is nothing but the first chapter of life; how can it be its end
and aim? But work, without seeking the result, is a means, not the end.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

No one, however, can avoid work (Karma). Every mental action is a Karma.
"I am thinking," "I meditate," "I feel," each of these is a Karma. The
more one attains to true devotion the less becomes one's worldly work.
The pleasures of the world do not satisfy such a soul. They lose their
charm. How can one who has tasted the *Sherbet* made with pure
crystallized sugar be pleased with the taste of a drink made with
molasses or treacle? On one occasion a Karma Yogi (Sambhu) said to me:
"May Thy blessing be that my wealth be spent in building hospitals and
dispensaries, in making roads, in sinking wells for travelers, in
establishing schools, colleges, and in other good works." Whereupon I
replied: "Sambhu, all these works are good when they are performed with
non-attachment. But that is very difficult. In any case you should
always keep in mind that the end and aim of your human existence is the
attainment of God and not hospitals and dispensaries. Suppose the Lord
appears before you and graciously offers to fulfill your desires. Will
you then pray for dispensaries and hospitals, tanks and wells, roads and
serais, or will you say: 'O Lord! Grant that I may have pure and
unalloyed

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

<span class="margnote">Attainment of God-vision.</span>love for Thee and
unswerving devotion to Thy feet, that I may always feel Thy presence and
realize Thee under all conditions'?" Hospitals, dispensaries and all
these things are transitory; God alone is the Reality, all else is
unreal. Once placed face to face with the Vision Divine, we see them as
no better than dreams and then we pray for more light, more wisdom, more
Divine Love, the love which lifts a man to God, the love which makes us
realize that we are really sons of the Supreme Being, of whom all that
can be said is that He exists, that He is Knowledge itself in the
highest sense, and that He is the Eternal Fountain of Love and Bliss.
Again, when one attains to God-vision, one feels that God alone is the
real Actor in the universe, the Doer of all things, and that we can do
nothing. If God does everything, then why, instead of realizing Him,
shall we get entangled in the meshes of worldly works? First realize
God; then, if it be His will, many hospitals and dispensaries may be
established. Therefore, I say, never lose sight of this goal of life
that I have pointed out for you, but move onward through the practices
of devotion and love. When you have advanced far enough you will know
that God alone is the Reality,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

that all the things of the world are unreal and that the highest end and
aim of life is the attainment of God.

<span class="margnote">Parable of a wood-cutter.</span>There was a
wood-cutter who led a very miserable life with the small means he could
procure by daily selling a load of wood brought from a neighboring
forest. Once a Sannyâsin, who was passing that way, saw him at work and
advised him to go further into the forest, saying: "Move onward, my
child, move onward." The woodcutter obeyed the injunction and proceeded
onward until he came to a sandalwood-tree, and being much pleased, he
took away with him as many sandal logs as he could carry, sold them in
the market and derived much profit. Then he began to wonder within
himself why the good Sannyâsin had not told him anything about the wood
of the sandal-tree, but had simply advised him to move onward. So the
next day he went on beyond the place of the sandalwood until he came
upon a copper-mine, and he took with him all the copper that he could
carry, and selling it in the market, got more money by it. Next day,
without stopping at the copper-mine, he proceeded further still, as the
Sâdhu had advised him to do, and he

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

came upon a silver-mine and took with him as much of it as he could
carry, sold it and got even more money, and so daily proceeding further
and further, he found gold-mines and diamond-mines and at last became
exceedingly rich. Such is also the case with the man who aspires after
true Knowledge. If he does not stop in his progress after attaining a
few extraordinary and supernatural powers, he at last becomes really
rich in the eternal knowledge of Truth.

So go on, my children, and never lose sight of your ideal! Go onward and
never stop until you have reached the goal. Arriving at a particular
stage, do not get the idea that you have reached your journey's end.
Work is only the first stage of the journey. Bear in mind that doing
works *unattached* is exceedingly difficult, that therefore Bhakti Yoga,
the path of love, is better suited to this age, and that work, even if
unattached, is not the end of your life, but only a means to an end. So
march on and never halt till you have come up to the great Ideal of your
life—the realization of God.

Referring to lectures given by members of religious bodies like the
Brâhmo Samâj and

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

<span class="margnote">Lectures and sermons of preachers.</span><span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Harisabhâ, <span
id="fr_70"></span>[\*](#fn_70) the Bhagavân said: One can form an
estimate of a man from the lectures he delivers. A pandit was lecturing
as the preceptor (Âchârya) of a certain Harisabhâ. In the course of his
sermon he said: "The Lord has not *Rasa* (sweetness). Let us make Him
sweet by giving Him our love and devotion." By sweetness he meant love
and tenderness.

<span class="margnote">Story of a boy and the cow-house.</span>It
reminded me of the story in which a boy was trying to convince his
friends that his uncle had a great many horses by saying, he had a whole
cow-house full of horses. Of course any intelligent person could at once
see that a cow-house was not the same as a stable and that horses are
never kept in a cow-house. What would people think after hearing such
absurd statements? They would laugh and come to the conclusion that the
uncle had no horses at all. See how absurd it is to say that God is
devoid of sweetness, God I who is the Fountain-head of all sweet and
tender qualities!

Then turning to Mozoomdâr the Bhagavân said: You are an educated and
intelligent man,

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

you are a deep thinker. Keshab and yourself were like the brothers
Gour <span id="fr_71"></span>[\*](#fn_71) (Chaitanya) and Netâi. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[†](#fn_72) You have had enough of this world—enough
of lectures, controversies, schisms and the rest. Do you still care for
them? Now, it is high time for you to collect your scattered mind and
turn towards God. Plunge into the ocean of Divinity.

Mozoomdâr: Yes, Revered Sir, that I ought to do. There is no doubt about
it. But all this I do simply to preserve Keshab's name and reputation.

<span class="margnote">Story of a man and his cottage.</span>Râmakrishna
(smiling): You believe that you are doing all this, as you say, for
Keshab, but after a while this idea will change and you will think
differently, Let me tell you a story. A man built a cottage on a
mountain-top. It cost him hard labor and much money. After a few days
there arose a cyclone and the cottage began to rock to and fro. He was
very anxious to save

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

it, so he prayed to the Wind-god, saying: "Lord, I beseech thee, do not
destroy this cottage"; but the Wind-god did not listen. He prayed again,
but the cottage kept on rocking. Then he thought out a plan to save it.
He remembered that in the mythology Hanumân was the son of the Wind-god.
Instantly he cried out: "Lord, I beg of Thee, spare this cottage, for it
belongs to Hanumân, Thy son." But the Wind-god did not listen. Then he
said, "Lord, I pray Thee, spare this cottage, for it belongs to
Hanumân's Lord, Râma." Still the Wind-god did not listen. Then, as the
cottage was about to topple over, the man, to save his life, ran out of
it and began to swear, saying: "Let it go to destruction! What is that
to me?" You may now be anxious to preserve Keshab's name; but console
yourself with the thought that it was after all owing to God's will that
the religious movement connected with his name was set on foot, and that
if the movement has had its day, it is also owing to that same Divine
will. Therefore dive deep into the sea. And the Bhagavân sang:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Dive deep, dive deep, dive deep, O my mind! into the sea of Beauty.

</div>

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Make a search in
the regions lower, still lower below the bottom of the sea:  
Thou wilt surely find the jewel of *Prema* (intense love of God).

2\. Within thy heart Vrindâvan (the abode of the God of Love).  
Search, search, search; searching Thou wilt find it.  
Then in the heart shall burn, burn, burn the Lamp of Wisdom without
ceasing.

3\. Who is it that steers the boat on land, on land, on land?  
Says Kuvir: Listen, listen, listen; meditate on the Lotus feet of Guru.

</div>

Do you hear the song? You have finished your lectures, quarrels and
fights. Now dive in this ocean. There is no fear of death in this sea.
It is the sea of Immortality. Do not fear that one becomes unbalanced by
meditating on God. I once said to Narendra (Vivekânanda)—

Mozoomdâr (interrupting): Who is this Narendra?

Bhagavân: Oh, there is a young man of that

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

<span class="margnote">God, the sea of Immortality.</span>name. Well, I
said to Narendra: "God is like a sea of immortal syrup. Would you not
dive deep into this sea? Suppose, my boy, there is a basin containing
the syrup of sugar and that you are a fly anxious to drink of the sweet
liquid. Where would you sit and drink?" Narendra said in reply: "Why!
from the edge of the basin! If I go far from the edge I may be drowned
and lose my life." Thereupon I said to him: "My boy, in the sea of
Divinity there is no fear of that kind. Do you not know that it is the
sea of Immortality? Whosoever dives into this sea does not die but
obtains everlasting life." He who is mad after God can never become
unbalanced or insane. (To the Bhaktas)

<span class="margnote">Work without devotion.</span>Work without
devotion (Bhakti) to God has in this age no ground to stand upon. First
cultivate devotion (Bhakti); all other things—schools, dispensaries, and
charitable works shall, if you wish, be added unto you. First devotion,
then work. Work, apart from devotion or love of God, is helpless and
cannot stand.

Mozoomdâr made inquiries about the disciples. He asked whether those who
came to the Bhagavân were getting better in the spirit

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<span class="margnote">Ideal of a wet-nurse.</span>day by day. The
Bhagavân said: I place before them the ideal of a wet-nurse as teaching
them how to live in this world. The maid-servant referring to her
master's house says, "This is our house." All the while she knows that
her home is far away in a distant village, to which her thoughts are all
sent forth. Again, referring to the master's child in her arms, she will
say: "My Hari has grown very wicked," or "My Hari likes to eat this or
that," and so on. But all the while she knows that Han is not her own. I
tell those who come to me to live a life unattached like this
maid-servant. I tell them to live unattached to this world, to be in the
world but not of the world, and at the same time to have their mind
directed to God, the heavenly home from whence all come. I tell them to
pray for love of God (Bhakti), which will help them so to live.

<span class="margnote">Agnosticism in Europe and America.</span>After a
short time the conversation turned on the agnosticism of Europe and
America, and Mozoomdâr said: Whatever people in the West may profess to
be, none of them, as it seems to me, is an atheist at heart. The
European thinkers all admit an unknown Power behind the universe.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

Bhagavân: How can they be atheists when they believe in Sakti, the
Eternal Energy?

Mozoomdâr: They also admit the moral government of the universe.

As Mozoomdâr rose to take leave, the Bhagavân said to him: What shall I
say? It is better that you cease to have anything to do with all those
things—schisms, controversies, etc. All quarrels and disputes spring
from egotism and attachment to the world. These keep men away from God.
Therefore abandon all earthly attachment and fix your mind on the
Almighty.

v

Mozoomdâr then saluted the Bhagavân and withdrew. After he had gone, a
devotee asked: Revered Sir, Thou didst go to see Vidyâsâgara, what dost
Thou think of him?

Râmakrishna: Vidyâsâgara is a very learned scholar. He is kind and
charitable, but he has no spiritual consciousness. There is gold inside;
if he had been aware of it, he could not have devoted so much of his
time to external work. Eventually his work would have been finished. If
he knew that God was dwelling within his heart, his mind would have been
fixed in

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

thinking and meditating on Him. Some people have to perform work without
attachment for a long time before true dispassion for the world comes;
then the mind runs towards God and becomes absorbed in Him. Whatever
work Vidyâsâgara has done for others has been very good and helpful.
<span class="margnote">Compassion and attachment.</span>To be kind and
compassionate is also good; but there is a difference between compassion
and attachment. Compassion is good, but attachment is not. Attachment is
love for wife, children, brother, sister, father, mother and other
relatives, while true compassion is equal love for all living creatures.

Mahendra: Is compassion also a bondage?

<span class="margnote">Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas.</span>Râmakrishna: This
question is not for ordinary mortals. Compassion is the result of the
Sattwa quality. The Sattwa quality is protective, the Rajas quality is
creative, and Tamas is destructive: but Brahman the Absolute is beyond
these three qualities, Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas. It is also beyond
Prakriti or nature. Where there is absolute Reality, no quality of
nature can reach. As a thief cannot go to the exact spot where the
treasure is, because he is afraid of being caught, so Sattwa, Rajas, and
Tamas, like

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

thieves, cannot go to the realm where is the treasure of the Absolute.

<span class="margnote">Parable of the three robbers.</span>A man was
going through the woods. On his way he was caught by a band of three
robbers. They took away everything he had. Then the first robber asked:
"What is the use of keeping this man alive?" And drawing his sword, he
was about to kill him, when the second robber stopped him, saying: "What
good will be done by killing him? Tie his hands and feet and throw him
to one side." So they bound his hands and feet and went away leaving him
by the roadside. After they had been gone for a while, the third robber
returned and said to him: "Ah! are you hurt? Come, let me untie the
cords and release you." Then when he had removed the cords, he said:
"Now come with me. I will show you the road." After walking for a long
distance, they found the road, and then the robber said: "Look, there is
your home. Follow the road and you will soon reach it." The man,
thanking him, replied: "Sir, you have done me a great service. I am
greatly obliged to you. Will you not come with me to my house?" The
robber answered: "No, I cannot go there; the guard would find me out."

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span class="margnote">Three Gunas of nature.</span>This world is the
wilderness. The three robbers are the three Gunas of nature,—Sattwa,
Rajas, and Tamas. Jiva or the individual soul is the traveler;
self-knowledge is his treasure. The Tamas quality tries to destroy the
Jiva, the Rajas quality binds him with the fetters of the world, but the
Sattwa quality protects him from the actions of Rajas and Tamas. By
taking refuge with the Sattwa quality, Jiva becomes free from lust and
anger, which are effects of Tamas; the Sattwa quality also emancipates
the Jiva or the individual soul from the bondage of the world. But
Sattwa quality itself is also a robber. It cannot give Divine wisdom or
the knowledge of the Absolute. It leads one, however, up to the path of
the Supreme Abode and then it says: "Behold, there is thy home!" Then it
disappears. Even the Sattwa quality cannot go near the abode of the
Absolute.

<span class="margnote">About the Absolute nothing can be
told.</span>What the Absolute is no one can tell. He who has attained
the Absolute can not give any information about it. Four travelers
discovered a place enclosed by a high wall, with no opening anywhere.
They were very anxious to see what

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

<span class="margnote">Parable of the four travelers.</span>was inside.
So one of them climbed to the top of the wall and as he looked in, he
shouted with amazement and joy, "Ha! ha! ha!" and without giving any
information to his fellow-travellers, he jumped inside. The others did
likewise. Whoever climbs to the top of the wall jumps inside with
extreme joy and never comes back to give the news of what he has found.
Such is the realm of the Absolute. The great souls who have realized the
Absolute have not come back, because after attaining the highest
knowledge of Brahman, one absolutely loses the sense of "I." The mind
ceases to be active, and all sense-consciousness vanishes. This state is
called Brahma-Jnâna or Divine wisdom.

A devotee: Revered Sir, did not the perfected soul Sukadeva attain to
Brahma-Jnâna, the Knowledge of the Absolute?

Râmakrishna: Some say that Sukadeva saw the ocean of the Absolute
Brahman and touched its waters, but he did not go into the water;
therefore he was able to come back and teach mankind. Others believe
that he attained to the Absolute Brahman and then returned to help
humanity.

Devotee: Does sectarianism exist after the

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

knowledge of the Absolute (Brahma-Jnâna) has been attained?

<span class="margnote">Sectarianism and Brahma-Jnâna.</span>Râmakrishna:
I was talking with Keshab Sen of this Brahma-Jnâna. Keshab asked me to
say more about the Absolute. I replied: "If I say more, your sect and
creed will vanish." Keshab answered: "Revered Sir, then I do not wish to
hear more." Still, I said to Keshab: "'I, me, mine,' this is ignorance;
'I am the doer,' 'I am the actor,' 'This is my wife, these are my
children, my property, wealth, fame,' all these arise from ignorance."
Keshab replied: "Revered Sir, nothing will be left, if the sense of 'I'
be abandoned." <span class="margnote">The unripe and ripe "I."</span>I
answered: "Keshab, I do not ask you to abandon the whole of the sense of
'I'; but leave out the unripe 'I'—'I am the doer,' 'my wife, my
children, I am the teacher,' abandoning this sense of 'I,' retain the
ripe 'I'—'I am His servant, I am His devotee,' 'I am not the doer, but
He is the Actor.'"

Devotee: Can the ripe "I" make a sect?

Râmakrishna: I said to Keshab: "I am the leader of a sect, I have
founded a sect, I am teaching others, all these proceed from the sense
of the unripe 'I.'" Therefore I asked

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span class="margnote">Keshab and his disciples.</span><span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Keshab to abandon this
"I." I also said to him: "You talk of your sect, many members of your
sect have resigned." Keshab replied: "Revered Sir, after remaining for
three years under my instructions, they have now joined another sect,
and at the time of leaving, they criticised and slandered me." I said to
him: "You do not understand the inner nature of your disciples. You must
study their predominant traits and you must not make disciples
indiscriminately."

Râm Bâbu <span id="fr_73"></span>[\*](#fn_73): Bhagavan, I do not see
what good has been done by the New Dispensation of Keshab Sen. If Keshab
himself had realized God, the condition of his disciples and followers
would have been different. In my opinion he has had no realization.

Srî Râmakrishna: Oh yes, he must have some realization; otherwise why
should so many people honor and respect him? Why do they not honor and
respect the leaders of other branches of the Brâhmo-Samâj in the same

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

way? Without Divine will no one can command such respect from the
masses. <span class="margnote">A spiritual leader must renounce the
world.</span>A man cannot become a true spiritual leader unless he
practises absolute renunciation. Without this people will have no faith
in him. They will say: "This man is worldly. He himself enjoys the
pleasures of the flesh and wealth, yet he tells us that God is Truth
while the world is unreal like a dream." The world will not receive his
teachings unless he has renounced everything. A few people may listen to
him and follow him. Keshab Sen was in the world and had his mind on
worldly things. He tried to support his family by giving lectures and by
marrying his daughter to a prince, thus protecting his worldly relations
and social position. <span class="margnote">Why God cannot be
seen.</span>Once Keshab asked me: "Why can I not see God?" I answered:
"Because you have absorbed yourself in seeking the honor and respect of
people, in education and so on. So long as the child is absorbed in
playing with its dolls, the mother does not come. But when the child
throws away the doll and cries for the mother, the mother cannot stay
away. You think that you are a leader, but the Divine Mother thinks: 'My
child believes that he has become a leader

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

and is happy; let him enjoy his belief.'" <span class="margnote">The
Absolute and the Divine Mother.</span>I also told him to believe in the
Divine Mother, that the Absolute and the Divine Mother are one. The
Divine Mother is the eternal Energy. They are inseparable. They appear
as separate so long as we are conscious of the body and as we try to
describe them by words. Eventually Keshab believed in the Divine Mother.
Once he came with his disciples to see me. I asked him to give a
lecture, so he delivered his lecture and after it I had a long talk with
him. <span class="margnote">God, His devotee and His word one.</span>I
said: He who is the Personal God manifests in one form as His devotee
and in another form as His word." Then I went on to say to him: "You are
living in the realm of Mâyâ (worldliness). This Mâyâ does not let anyone
know God. It keeps all in ignorance."

<span class="margnote">Delusive power of Mâyâ.</span>How wonderful is
its power! It entangles even a Divine Incarnation and makes Him suffer
from hunger, thirst, sorrow, misery, like an ordinary mortal. Do you not
see how Râma, the Divine Incarnation, suffered for Sitâ? How with great
sorrow, He wept bitterly when Sitâ was stolen away from Him? In the
Hindu mythology there is a story

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

<span class="margnote">Vishnu as a boar.</span>that Vishnu incarnated in
the form of a boar to destroy the demons; but after destroying the
demons, He did not care to return to his Heaven, He wanted to live as a
boar. He had some little ones and He was happy with them. The Devas of
the heaven thought: "How is it that our Lord does not come back? What
has happened?" Then they went to Shiva and asked Him to persuade Vishnu
to return to His heaven. Shiva came and entreated Him, but He was taking
care of His young ones and paid no heed. Then Shiva tore open His body
with His triad and freed Him from His self-delusion. Vishnu then laughed
and returned to His heavenly abode. Such is the power of Mâyâ! To go
beyond its realm and rise above the Gunas (qualities) is extremely
difficult. He who has attained to God has transcended Mâyâ with its
qualities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[225:\*](gork11.htm#fr_66) See note page
[177](gork08.htm#page_177).

<span id="fn_67"></span>[226:\*](gork11.htm#fr_67) See note page
[191](gork09.htm#page_191).

<span id="fn_68"></span>[232:\*](gork11.htm#fr_68) Tulsi Dâs was a great
Hindu poet who lived between 1544 and 1624 A.D. He was a devoted
worshipper of Râma. His Hindi poem, "Râmâyana," or history of Râma, as
well as Proverbs and other verses, are to this day household words in
every town and rural district where the Hindi language <span
id="page_233">p. 233</span> is spoken. He is regarded by the people as a
Hindu saint of the Vaishnava sect.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[234:\*](gork11.htm#fr_69) Protâp Chunder
Mozoomdâr is well known in America as Mr. Mozoomdar. He was a co-worker
of Keshab Chunder Sen and became a leader of the "New Dispensation" sect
of the Brâhmo-Samâj. He came to the Parliament of Religions at Chicago
in 1893 A.D., and delivered addresses in <span id="page_235">p.
235</span> many principal cities of America. He was the author of the
"Oriental Christ." In 1879 he wrote his celebrated article on
"Râmakrishna," which was published in the *Theistic Quarterly Review* of
India; and which was incorporated with "My Master" by Swami Vivekânanda.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[245:\*](gork11.htm#fr_70) Harisabhâ is an
orthodox Hindu Society.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[246:\*](gork11.htm#fr_71) "Gour" is the
abbreviated form of "Gourânga," another name of Chaitanya. See note page
[7](gork03.htm#page_7).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[246:†](gork11.htm#fr_72) "Netâi" is also the
abbreviated form of "Nityânanda," the most powerful preacher among the
followers of Chaitanya. He is regarded by the Vaishnavas of this sect as
the spiritual brother of Gourânga.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[257:\*](gork11.htm#fr_73) Râm Bâbu was a
devoted householder disciple of Srî Râmakrishna. He was a scientist and
a teacher of chemistry in the Medical College of Calcutta. He was a good
speaker and a writer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Visit to a Hindu Pandit and Preacher](gork12)
