[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twp04)  [Next](twp06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# III. THE WITCH-PERSECUTION AT TRIER.

It was, however, not till a century later, in the second half of the
sixteenth century, that the witch-persecutions reached their height. One
of the fiercest was that which raged in the dominions of the
Elector-Archbishop of Trier (Trèves) in western Germany. One who had
been an eye-witness, the canon Linden, in later years described it thus:

### 1. THE SCOPE OF THE PERSECUTION.

Linden, *Gesta Trevirorum* (from his manuscript in the City Library of
Trier.) <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) Latin.

Inasmuch as it was popularly believed that the continued sterility of
many years was caused by witches through the malice of the Devil, the
whole country rose to exterminate the witches. This movement was
promoted by many in office, who hoped wealth from the persecution. And
so, from court to court throughout the towns and villages of all the
diocese, scurried special accusers, inquisitors, notaries, jurors,
judges, constables, dragging to trial and torture human beings of both
sexes and burning them in great numbers. Scarcely any of those who were
accused escaped punishment or were there spared even the leading men in
the city of Trier. For the Judge, <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12)
with two Burgomasters, several Councilors and Associate Judges, canons
of sundry collegiate churches, parish-priests, rural deans, were swept
away in this ruin. So far, at length, did the madness of the furious
populace and of the courts go in this thirst for blood and booty that
there was scarcely anybody who was not smirched by some suspicion of
this crime.

Meanwhile notaries, copyists, and innkeepers grew rich. The executioner
rode a blooded horse, like a noble of the court, and went clad in gold
and silver; his wife vied with noble dames in the richness of her array.
The children of those convicted and punished were sent into exile; their
goods were confiscated; plowman and vintner failed--

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

hence came sterility. A direr pestilence or a more ruthless invader
could hardly have ravaged the territory of Trier than this inquisition
and persecution without bounds: many were the reasons for doubting that
all were really guilty. This persecution lasted for several years; and
some of those who presided over the administration of justice gloried in
the multitude of the stakes, at each of which a human being had been
given to the flames.

At last, though the flames were still unsated, the people grew
impoverished, rules were made and enforced restricting the fees and
costs of examinations and examiners, and suddenly, as when in war funds
fail, the zeal of the persecutors died out.

### 2. THE RECANTATION OF LOOS.

Delrio, Disquisitiones Magicae, lib. v, appendix I. Latin.

It was during this persecution at Trier that Comelius Loos, a scholar of
Dutch birth who held a professorship in the university of that city,
dared to protest against both the persecution itself and the
superstitions out of which it grew. Failing in his appeals to the
authorities, he wrote a book to set forth his views; but the manuscript
was seized in the hands of the printer, and Loos himself thrown into
prison. Thence he was brought out, in the spring Of 1593, and, before
the assembled church dignitaries of the place, pronounced a solemn
recantation. This recantation has been preserved by the Jesuit Delrio in
the great work which in 1599-1600 he published in support of the
persecution. Thus Delrio tells the story:

And, finally, as I have made mention of Losæus Callidius, who tried by a
thousand arts to make public the book which he had written in defence of
the witches (and some fear that even yet some evil demon may bring this
about), I have brought for an antidote the Recantation signed by him.
Its authentic and so-called original copy is in the possession of a
devout and most honorable man, Joannes Baxius, J. U. Lie. (whose energy
and zeal against this nefarious heresy God will some day reward), from
whom 1 have received the following transcript, certified by a notary:

I, Cornelius Losæus Callidius, born at the town of Gouda in Holland, but
now (on account of a certain treatise On Trite and False
Witchcraft, <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) rashly and presumptously
written without the knowledge and permission of the superiors of this
place, shown by me to others, and then sent to be printed at Cologne)
arrested and imprisoned in the Imperial

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

Monastery of St. Maximin, near Trier, by order of the Most Reverend and
Most Illustrious Lord, the Papal Nuncio, Octavius, Bishop of Tricarico:
whereas I am informed of a surety that in the aforesaid book and also in
certain letters of mine on the same subject sent clandestinely to the
clergy and town council of Trier, and to others (for the purpose of
hindering the execution of justice against the witches, male and
female), are contained many articles which are not only erroneous and
scandalous, but also suspected of heresy and smacking of the crime of
treason, as being seditious and foolhardy, against the common opinion of
decisions and bulls of theological teachers and the decisions and bulls
of the Supreme Pontiffs, and contrary to the practice and to the
statutes and laws of the magistrates and judges, not only of this
Archdiocese of Trier, but of other provinces and principalities, I do
therefore revoke, condemn, reject, and repudiate the said articles, in
the order in which they are here subjoined.

1\. In the first place, I revoke, condemn, reject, and censure the idea
(which both in words and writing I have often and before many persons
pertinaciously asserted, and which I wished to be the head and front of
this my disputation) that the things which are written about the bodily
transportation or translation of witches, male and female, are
altogether fanciful and must be reckoned the empty superstition; \[and
this I recant\] both because it smacks of rank heresy and because this
opinion partakes of sedition and hence savors of the crime of treason.

2\. For (and this in the second place I recant), in the letters which I
have clandestinely sent to sundry persons, I have pertinaciously,
without solid reasons, alleged against the magistracy that the
\[aerial\] flight of witches is false and imaginary; asserting,
moreover, that the wretched creatures are compelled by the severity of
the torture to confess things which they have never done, and that by
cruel butchery innocent blood is shed and by a new alchemy gold and
silver coined from human blood.

3\. By these and by other things of the same sort, partly in private
conversations among the people, partly in sundry letters addressed to
both the magistracies, <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) I have
accused of tyranny to their subjects the superiors and the judges.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

4\. And consequently, inasmuch as the Most Reverend and Most Illustrious
Archbishop and Prince-Elector of Trier not only permits witches, male
and female, to be subjected in his diocese to deserved punishment, but
has also ordained laws regulating the method and costs of judicial
procedure against witches, I have with heedless temerity tacitly
insinuated the charge of tyranny against the aforesaid Elector of Trier.

5\. I revoke and condemn, moreover, the following conclusions of mine,
to wit: that there are no witches who renounce God, pay worship to the
Devil, bring storms by the Devils aid, and do other like things, but
that all these things are dreams.

6\. Also, that magic (*magia*) ought not to he called witchcraft
(*maleficium*), nor magicians (*magi*) witches (*malefici*), and that
the passage of Holy Scripture, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live"
(*Maleficos non patieris vivere*), <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)
is to be understood of those who by a natural use of natural poisons
inflict death.

7\. That no compact does or can exist between the Devil and a human
being.

8\. That devils do not assume bodies.

9\. That the life of Hilarion written by St. Jerome is not authentic.

10\. That there is no sexual intercourse between the Devil and human
beings.

11\. That neither devils nor witches can raise tempests, rainstorms,
hail-storms, and the like, and that the things said about these are mere
dreams.

12\. That spirit and form apart from matter cannot be seen by man.

13\. That it is rash to assert that whatever devils can do, witches also
can do through their aid.

14\. That the opinion that a superior demon can cast out an inferior is
erroneous and derogatory to Christ. <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16)

15\. That the Popes in their bulls do not say that magicians and witches
perpetrate such things (as are mentioned above).

16\. That the Roman Pontiffs granted the power to proceed against
witches, lest if they should refuse they might be unjustly accused of
magic, just as some of their predecessors had been justly accused of it.

These assertions, all and singular, with many calumnies, falsehoods,

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

and sycophancies, toward the magistracy, both secular and
ecelesiastical, spitefully, immodestly, and falsely poured forth,
without cause, with which my writings on magic teem, I hereby expressly
and deliberately condemn, revoke, and reject, earnestly beseeching the
pardon of God and of my superiors for what I have done, and solemnly
promising that in future I will neither in word nor in writing, by
myself or through others, in whatsoever place it may befall me to be,
teach, promulgate, defend, or assert any of these things. If I shall do
to the contrary, I subject myself thenceforward, as if it were now, to
all the penalties of the law against relapsed heretics, recusants,
seditious offenders, traitors, backbiters, sycophants, who have been
openly convicted, and also to those ordained against perjurers. I submit
myself also to arbitrary correction, whether by the Archbishop of Trier
or by any other magistrates under whom it may befall me to dwell, and
who may he certified of my relapse and of my broken faith, that they may
punish me according to my deserts, in honor and reputation, property and
person.

In testimony of all which I have, with my own hand, signed this my
recantation of the aforesaid articles, in presence of notary and
witnesses.

(*Signed*)

CORNELIUS LOOSÆUS CALLIDIUS.

(*and attested*)

Done in the Imperial Monastery of St. Maximin, outside the walls of
Trier, in the abbot's chamber, in presence of the Reverend, Venerable,
and Eminent Sirs, Peter Binsfeld, <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)
Bishop of Azotus, vicar-general in matters spiritual of the Most
Reverend Archbishop of Trier, our most element lord, and Reinerus, abbot
of the said monastery, Bartholomæus van Bodeghem, of Delft, J. U. L.,
Official of the Ecclesiastical Court of Trier, Georgius von
Helffenstein, Doctor of Theology, Dean of the Collegiate Church of St.
Simeon in the city of Trier, and Joannes Colmann, J. U. D., Canon of the
said church and Seal-Bearer of the Court of Trier, <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) etc., in the year of Our Lord 1592 *more
Trev*., <span id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19) on

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

Monday, March 15th, in the presence of me the notary undersigned and of
the worthy Nicolaus Dolent and Daniel Maier, secretary and copyist
respectively of the Reverend Lord Abbot, as witnesses specially called
and summoned to this end.

(*Signed*)

ADAMUS HEC Tectonius, Notary,

(*And below*)

Compared with its original and found to agree, by me the undersigned
Secretary of the town of Antwerp,

G. KIEFFEL.

Here you have the Recantation in full. And yet afterwards again at
Brussels, while serving as curate in the church of Notre Dame de la
Chapelle, he was accused of relapse, and was released only after a long
imprisonment, and being again brought into suspicion (whence you way
understand the pertinacity of his madness) escaped a third indictment
through a premature death; but (much the pity!) left behind not a few
partisans, men so imperfectly versed in medicine and sound theology as
to share this stupid error. Would that they might he wise, and seriously
realize at last how rash and noxious it is to prefer the ravings of a
single heretic, Weyer, <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](twp06.htm#fn_20) to
the judgment of the Church!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[13:1](twp05.htm#fr_11) Printed in Hontheim's
*Historia Trevirensis diplomatica* (iii, p. 170, note) and in Wyttenbach
and Müller's ed. of the *Gesta Trevirorum*; but with more care in Burr,
*The Fate of Dietrich Flade*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13:2](twp05.htm#fr_12) Dr. Dietrich Flade,
judge of the secular court at Trier and deputy governor of the city, was
perhaps the most eminent victim of the witch-persecution in Germany. It
is probable that he owed his fate in part or wholly to his attempt to
check the persecution. Tortured into confession, he was burned in 1589.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14:1](twp05.htm#fr_13) This book, confiscated
by the ecclesiastical authorities, has been partly recovered in our own
day.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15:1](twp05.htm#fr_14) i. e. both lay and
spiritual.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16:1](twp05.htm#fr_15) Exodus, xxii, 18.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[16:2](twp05.htm#fr_16) A marginal note here
cites Luke, xi.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[17:1](twp05.htm#fr_17) Binsfeld, suffragan
bishop and real head of ecclesiastical affairs in the diocese, was
doubtless the prime mover in the punishment of Loos. He had himself
written a book, *De confessionibus maleficorum et sagarum* (Trier,
1589), to prove that the confessions of witches were worthy of all
faith.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[17:2](twp05.htm#fr_18) i. e., the
ecclesiastical court, of which Bodeghem was the head (the Official).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[17:3](twp05.htm#fr_19) 1593, according to our
calendar; according to the *mos Trevirense* the year began on March
25th.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Witch-Persecution at Bonn.](twp06)
