[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twp02)  [Next](twp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

# I. THE THEORY OF WITCH-PERSECUTION.

Perhaps no better statement of the theory of witch-persecution, as it
came to be accepted in all lands and by all shades of faith throughout
Christendom, can anywhere be found than that of the Rev. Cotton Mather
in a sermon which did much to make that theory known and effective in
New England. The sermon, preached in Boston in 1689, was speedily
printed, under the title of *A Discourse on Witchcraft*, in Mather's
*Memorable Providences relating to Witchcraft and Possessions* (Boston,
1689). This book, "recommended by the Ministers of Boston and
Charleston," was in no small degree responsible for the great Salem
persecution, which broke out in 1692.

### 1. THE NATURE AND REALITY OF WITCHCRAFT.

Cotton Mather: Memorable Providences relating to Witchcrafts and
Possessions (Boston, 1689), pp. 4-9 of "A Discourse on Witchcraft."
English.

Such an Hellish thing there is as *Witchcraft* in the World. There are
Two things which will be desired for the advantage of this Assertion. It
should *first* be show'd,

WHAT *Witchcraft* is;

My Hearers will not expect from me an accurate *Definition* of the *vile
Thing*; since the Grace of God has given me the Happiness to speak
without *Experience* of it. But from Accounts both by *Reading* and
*Hearing* I have learn'd to describe it so.

WITCHCRAFT is the Doing of *Strange* (and for the most part *Ill*)
Things by the help of *evil Spirits*, *Covenanting* with (and usually
*Representing* of ) the woful children of men.

This is the *Diabolical Art* that *Witches* are notorious for.

First. *Witches* are the Doers of *Strange* Things. They cannot indeed
perform any proper *Miracles*; those are things to be done only by the
*Favourites* and *Embassadours* of the LORD. But *Wonders* are often
produced by them, though chiefly such Wonders as the Apostle calls in 2.
*Thes.* 2. 9. *Lying wonders*. There are *wonderful Storms* in the
*great* World, and *wonderful Wounds* in the *little* World, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) often effected by these *evil Causes*. They
do things which transcend the ordinary *Course* of Nature, and which
puzzle the ordinary *Sense* of Mankind. Some *strange* things are done
by them in a way of *Real Production*. They do really *Torment*, they do
really *Afflict* those that their Spite shall extend unto. Other
*Strange* Things are done by them in a way of *Crafty Illusion*. They do
craftily make of the *Air*, the

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

*Figures* and *Colours* of things that never can be truly created by
them. All men might *see*, but, I believe, no man could *feel*, some of
the Things which the *Magicians* of *Egypt* exhibited of old.

Secondly. They are not only *strange* Things, but *Ill* Things, that
*Witches* are the Doers of. In this regard also they are not the Authors
of *Miracles*: those are things *commonly* done for the *Good* of Man,
alwaies done for the *Praise* of *God*. But of these *Hell-hounds* it
may in a special manner be said, as in *Psal*. 52, 3. *Thou lovest evil
more than good*. For the most part they labour to robb *Man* of his
*Ease* or his *Wealth*; they labour to wrong *God* of His *Glory*. There
is Mention of Creatures that they call *White Witches*, which do only
*Good-Turns* for their Neighbours. I suspect that there are none of that
sort; but rather think, *There is none that doeth good, no, not one*. If
they *do good*, it is only that they *may* do *hurt*.

Thirdly. It is by virtue of *evil Spirits* that *Witches* do what they
do. We read in *Ephes*. 2, 2. about the *Prince of the power of the
air*. There is confined unto the *Atmosphere* of our *Air* a vast
*Power*, or *Army* of *Evil Spirits*, under the Government of a Prince
who employes them in a continual Opposition to the Designs of GOD: The
Name of that *Leviathan*, who is the *Grand-Seigniour of Hell*, we find
in the Scripture to be *Belzebub*. Under the Command of that mighty
Tyrant, there are vast *Legions* & *Myriads* of Devils, whose
*Businesses* & *Accomplishments* are not all the same. Every one has his
*Post*, and his *Work*; and they are all glad of an opportunity to be
mischievous in the World. These are they by whom *Witches* do exert
their Devillish and malignant Rage upon their *Neighbours*: And
especially Two Acts concur hereunto. The *First* is, Their *Covenanting*
with the Witches. There is a most hellish *League* made between them,
with various *Rites* and *Ceremonies*. The *Witches* promise to serve
the *Devils*, and the *Devils* promise to *help* the witches; *How?* It
is not convenient <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) to be related. The
*Second* is, their *Representing* of the Witches. And hereby indeed
these are drawn into *Snares* and *Cords* of Death. The Devils, when
they go upon the Errands of the *Witches*, do bear their *Names*; and
hence do *Harmes* too come to be carried from the *Devils* to the
*Witches*. We need not suppose such a wild thing as the *Transforming*
of those Wretches into *Bruits* or *Birds*, as we too often do.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

It should next be proved *THAT* Witchcraft *is*.

The *Being* of such a thing is denied by many that place *a great part*
of their *small wit* in derideing the Stories that are told of it. Their
chief Argument is, That they never *saw* any Witches, therefore there
are *none*. Just as if you or I should say, We never met with any
*Robbers* on the Road, therefore there never was any *Padding* there.

Indeed the *Devils* are loath to have true Notions of *Witches*
entertained with us. I have beheld them to put out the eyes of an
enchaunted Child, when a Book that proves, *There is Witchcraft*, was
laid before her. But there are especially Two Demonstrations that evince
the Being of that Infernal mysterious thing.

First. We have the Testimony of *Scripture* for it. We find
*Witchcrafts* often mentioned, sometimes by way of *Assertion*,
sometimes by. way of *Allusion*, in the Oracles of God. Besides that, We
have there the History of diverse *Witches* in these infallible and
inspired Writings. Particularly, the Instance of the *Witch* at *Endor*,
in 1 *Sam*. 28, 7. is so plain and full that *Witchcraft* it self is not
a more amazing thing, than any *Dispute* about the Being of it, after
this. The Advocates of *Witches* must use more *Tricks* to make Nonsense
of the *Bible*, than ever the *Witch* of *Endor* used in her Magical
Incantations, if they would evade the Force of that famous History. They
that will believe no *Witches*, do imagine that *Jugglers* only are
meant by them whom the Sacred Writ calleth so. But what do they think of
that law in *Exod*. 22. 18. *Thou shalt not suffer a Witch to live?*
Methinks 'tis a little too hard to punish every silly *Juggler* with so
great Severity.

Secondly. We have the *Testimony* of *Experience* for it. What will
those *Incredulous*, who must be the only Ingenious men, say to This?
Many *Witches* have like those in Act. 19. 18. *Confessed and shewed
their Deeds*. We see those things done, that it is impossible any
Disease or any Deceit should procure. We see some hideous *Wretches* in
hideous *Horrours* confessing, *That they did the Mischiefs*. This
*Confession* is often made by them that are owners of as much Reason as
the people that laugh at all *Conceit* of *Witchcraft*: the exactest
Scrutiny of skilful Physicians cannot find any Distraction in their
minds. This *Confession* is often made by them that are apart One from
another, and yet they *agree* in all the Circumstances of it. This
Confession is often made by them that at the same time will produce the
*Engines* and *Ensignes* of their *Hellish Trade*, and give the
standers-by an

Ocular Conviction

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

of *what* they do, and *how*. There can he no Judgment left of any
*Humane Affairs*, if such *Confessions* must be Ridiculed: all the
*Murders*, yea, and all the *Bargains* in the World must be meer
*Imaginations* if such *Confessions* are of no Account.

### 2. THE DUTY OF PERSECUTION.

Bodin, De la Démonomanie des Sorciers, Paris, 1580 liv. iv, chap. 5.
French.

Jean Bodin, jurist and statesman, was not only one of the most eminent
European publicists of the sixteenth century, but one of the most
rational and tolerant thinkers of his time. Yet even such a man could
thus write "Of the punishments deserved by witches":

There are two means by which states are maintained in their weal and
greatness--reward and penalty: the one for the good, the other for the
bad. And, if the distribution of these two be faulty, nothing else is to
be expected than the inevitable ruin of the state. . . .

But those greatly err who think that penalties are established only to
punish crime. I hold that this is the least of the fruits which accrue
therefrom to the state. For the greatest and the chief is the appeasing
of the wrath of God, especially if the crime is directly against the
majesty of God, as is this one. . . . Now, if there is any means to
appease the wrath of God, to gain his blessing, to strike awe into some
by the punishment of others, to preserve some from being infected by
others, to diminish the number of evil-doers, to make Secure the life of
the well-disposed, and to punish the most detestable crimes of which the
human mind can conceive, it is to punish with the utmost rigor the
witches . . . . <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) Now, it is not within
the power of princes to pardon a crime which the law of God punishes
with the penalty of death--such as are the crimes of witches. Moreover,
princes do gravely insult God in pardoning such horrible crimes
committed directly against his majesty, seeing that the pettiest prince
avenges with death insults against himself. Those too who let the
witches escape, or who do not punish them with the utmost rigor, may
rest assured that they will lie abandoned by God to the mercy of the
witches. And the country which shall tolerate this will be scourged with
pestilences, famines, and wars; and those which shall take vengeance on
the witches will be blessed by him and will make his anger to cease.
Therefore it is that one accused

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of being a witch ought never to be folly acquitted and set free unless
the calumny of the accuser is clearer than the sun, inasmuch as the
proof of such crimes is so obscure and so difficult that not one witch
in a million would be accused or punished if the procedure were governed
by the ordinary rules. . . .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](twp03.htm#fr_0) i. e., in Man--the
microcosm. The "great world" is the universe.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](twp03.htm#fr_1) i. e., not seemly: perhaps
because the details are too vile, perhaps because the preacher will not
tempt his hearers.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:1](twp03.htm#fr_2) Bodin then proceeds to
enumerate fifteen distinct crimes, all horrid, of which every witch is
guilty, and argues that, in default of proof, violent presumption should
suffice for the sentence of witches to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Beginnings of the Witch-Persecutions.](twp04)
