[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe120)  [Next](prwe122.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE CROWZA STONES.

ST JUST, from his home in Penwith, being weary of having little to do,
except offering prayers for the tinners and fishermen, went on a visit
to the hospitable St Keverne, who had fixed his hermitage in a
well-selected spot, not far from the Lizard headland. The holy brothers
rejoiced together, and in full feeding and deep drinking they pleasantly
passed the time. St Just gloried in the goodly chalice from which he
drank the richest of wines, and envied St Keverne the possession of a
cup of such rare value. Again and again did he pledge St Keverne; their
holy bond of brotherhood was to be for ever; Heaven was to witness the
purity of their friendship, and to the world they were to become
patterns of ecclesiastical love.

The time came when St Just felt he must return to his flock; and
repeating over again his vows, and begging St Keverne to return his
visit, he departed--St Keverne sending many a blessing after his good
brother.

The Saint of the west had not left his brother of the south many hours
before the latter missed his cup. Diligent search was made in every
corner of his dwelling, but no cup could be found. At length St Keverne
could not but feel that he had been robbed of his treasure by his
western friend. That one in whom he had placed such confidence--one to
whom be had opened his heart, and to whom he had shown the most
unstinting hospitality--should have behaved so treacherously, overcame
the serenity of the good man. His rage was excessive. After the first
burst was over, and reason reasserted her power, St Keverne felt that
his wisest course was to pursue the thief; inflict summary punishment on
him, and recover his cup. The thought was followed by a firm resolve,
and away St Keverne started in pursuit of St Just. Passing over Crowza
Down, some of the boulders of "Ironstone" which are scattered over the
surface caught his eye, and presently he whipped a few of these stone
pebbles into his pockets, and hastened onward.

When he drew near Tre-men-keverne he spied St Just. St Keverne worked
himself up into a boiling rage, and toiled with increased speed up the
hill, hallooing to the saintly thief; who pursued his way for some time
in the well-assumed quiet of conscious innocence.

Long and loud did St Keverne call on St Just to stop, but the latter was
deaf to all calls of the, kind--on he went, quickening, however, his
pace a little.

At length St Keverne came within a stone's throw of the dissembling
culprit, and calling him a thief--adding thereto some of the most choice
epithets from his holy vocabulary--taking a stone from his pocket, he
let it fly after St Just.

The stone falling heavily by the side of St Just convinced him that he
had to deal with an awkward enemy, and that he had best make all the use
he could of his legs. He quietly untied the chalice, which he had
fastened to his girdle, and let it fall to the ground. Then, still as if
unconscious of his follower, he set off to run as fast as his ponderous
body would allow his legs to carry him. St Keverne came up to where his
cup glistened in the sunshine. He had recovered his treasure, he should
get no good out of the false friend, and he was sadly jaded with his
long run. Therefore he took, one by one, the stones from his pockets--he
hurled them, fairly aimed, after the retreating culprit, and cursed him
as he went.

There the pebbles remained where they fell,--the peculiarity of the
stone being in all respects unlike anything around, but being clearly
the Crowza stones,--attesting the truth of the legend; and their
weights, each one 'being several hundred pounds, proving the power of
the giant saint.

Many have been the attempts made to remove these stones. They are
carried away easily enough by day, but they ever return to the spot on
which they now repose, at night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Longstone](prwe122.md)
