[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe195)  [Next](prwe197) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PITMEN'S OMENS AND GOBLINS.

IT is curious to notice the correspondence between the superstitions of
the coal-miner and those employed in the metalliferous mines. The
following comes very opportunely to our hand :--

The superstitions of pitmen were once many and terrible; but so far from
existing now-a-days, they are only matters of tradition among the old
men. One class only of superstitious does exist among a few of the older
and less-educated pitmen--namely, the class of omens, warnings, and
signs. If one of these pitmen meet or see a woman, if he catch but a
glimpse of her draperies, on his way, in the middle of the night to the
pit, the probability is that he returns home and goes to bed again. The
appearance of a woman at this untimely hour has often materially impeded
the day's winning, for the omen is held not to be personal to the
individual perceiving it, but to bode general ill lack to all. The walk
from home to pit mouth, always performed at dead of the night, was the
period when omens were mostly to be looked fob. The supernatural
appearance of a little white animal like a rabbit, which was said to
cross the miner's path, was another warning not to descend. Sometimes
the omens were rather mental than visual. The pitmen in the midland
counties have, or had, a belief, unknown in the north, in aerial
whistlings, warning them against the pit who, or what the invisible
musicians were, nobody pretended to know; but for all that, they must
have been counted and found to consist of seven, as "The Seven
Whistlers" is the name they bear to this day. Two goblins were believed
to haunt the northern mines. One was a spiteful elf; who indicated his
presence only by the mischief he perpetrated. He rejoiced in the name of
"Cutty Soams," and appears to have employed himself only in the stupid
device of severing the rope-traces or soams, by which an
assistant-putter--honoured by the title of "the fool "-- is yoked to the
tub. The strands of hemp which were left all sound in the board at
"kenner-time," were found next morning severed in twain. "Cutty Soams"
has been at work, could the fool and his driver say, dolefully knotting
the cord. The other goblin was altogether a more sensible, and, indeed,
an honest and hard-working bogie, much akin to the Scotch brownie, or
the hairy fiend, whom Milton rather scurvily apostrophises as a lubber.
The supernatural personage in question was no other than a ghostly
putter, and his name was "Bluecap." Sometimes the miners would perceive
a light blue flame flicker through the air, and settle on a full
coal-tub, which immediately moved towards the rolley-way, as though
impelled by the sturdiest sinews in the working. Industrious Bluecap was
at his vocation; but he required, and rightly, to be paid for his
services, which he modestly rated as those of an ordinary average
putter; therefore once a fortnight Bluecap's wages were left for him in.
a solitary corner of the mine. If they were a farthing below his due,
the indignant Bluecap would not pocket a stiver; if they were a farthing
above his due, indignant Bluecap left the surplus revenue where he found
it. The writer asked his informant, a hewer, whether, if Bluecap's wages
were now-a-days to be left for him, he thought they would be
appropriated; tlse man shrewdly answered, he thought they would be taken
by Bluecap, or by somebody else. Of the above notions it must be
understood that the idea of omens is the only one still seriously
entertained, and even its bold upon the popular mind, as has been before
stated, is becoming weaker and weaker.--*Colliery Guardian, May* 23,
1863.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dead Hand](prwe197)
