[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe013)  [Next](prwe015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE GIANT OF ST MICHAEL'S MOUNT LOSES HIS WIFE.

  
THE giant on the Mount and the giant on Trecrobben Hill were very
friendly. They had only one cobbling-hammer between them, which they
would throw from one to the other, as either required it. One day the
giant on the Mount wanted the hammer in a great hurry, so he shouted, "
Holloa, up there! Trecrobben, throw us down the hammer, woost a'?"

"To be sure," sings out Trecrobben; "here! look out, and catch 'm."

Now, nothing would do but the giant's wife, who was very nearsighted,
must run out of her cave to see Trecrobben throw the hammer. She had no
hat on; and coming at once out into the light, she could not distinguish
objects. Consequently, she did not see the hammer coming through the
air, and received it between her eyes. The force with which it was flung
was so great that the massive bone of the forehead of the giantess was
crushed, and she fell dead at the giant's feet. You may be sure there
was a great to-do between the two giants. They sat wailing over the dead
body, and with their sighs they produced a tempest. These were
unavailing to restore the old lady, and all they had to do was to bury
her. Some say they lifted the Chapel Rock and put her under it, others,
that she is buried beneath the castle court, while some--no doubt the
giants' detractors--declare that they rolled the body down into the sea,
and took no more heed of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tom and the Giant Blunderbuss or, The Wheel and Exe
Fight](prwe015.md)
