[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe224)  [Next](prwe226) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"THE FURRY "--HELSTONE

THIS ancient custom, which consists in dancing through the streets of
the town, and entering the houses of rich and poor alike, is thus well
described -

"On the 8th of May, at Heistone, in Cornwall, is held what is called
'the Furry.' The word is supposed by Mr Polwhele to have been derived
from the old Cornish word fir, a fair or jubilee. The morning is ushered
in by the music of drums and kettles, and other accompaniments of a
song, a great part of which is inserted in Mr Polwhele's history, where
this circumstance is noticed. So strict is the observance of this day as
a general holiday, that should any person be found at work, he is
instantly seized, set astride on a pole, and hurried on men's shoulders
to the river, where he is sentenced to leap over a wide place, which he,
of course, fails in attempting, and leaps into the water. A small
contribution towards the good cheer of the day easily compounds for the
leap. About nine o'clock the revellers appear before the grammar school,
and demand a holiday for the schoolboys, after which they collect
contributions from houses. They then *fade* into the country (*fade*
being an old English word for *go*), and, about the middle of the day,
return with flowers and oak-branches in their hats and caps. From this
time they dance hand in hand through the streets, to the sound of the
fiddle, playing a particular tune, running into every house they pass
without opposition. In the afternoon a select party of the ladies and
gentlemen make a progress through the street, and very late in the
evening repair to the ball-room. A stranger visiting the town on the
eighth of May would really think the people mad, so apparently wild and
thoughtless is the merriment of the day. There is no doubt of 'the
Furry' originating from the 'Floralia,' anciently observed by the Romans
on the fourth of the calends of May."--

Every-Day Book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Midsummer Superstitious Customs](prwe226)
