[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe316)  [Next](prwe318.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

WOEFUL MOOR, AND BODRIGAN'S LEAP

** **THE Bodrigans, from a very early period, were connected with the
borough of Looe. Otto, or Otho de Bodrigan, was lord of the manor of
Pendrim and Looe in the reign of 'Edward II. Another Otho de Bodrigan
was sheriff of Cornwall in the third of Richard II., A.D. 1400.

Sir Henry Bodrigan was "attaynted for taking part with King Richard III.
against Henry VII. ; and, after flying into Ireland, Sir Richard
Egecombe, father of Sir Pears Egecombe, had Bodrigan, and other parcels
of Bodrigari's lands; and Trevanion had part of Bodrigan's lands, as
Restronget and Newham, both in Falmouth Haven."

On the Barton of Bodrigan there exists what are evidently the remains of
ancient fortifications, and near them a piece of waste land known as the

Woeful Moor.

Here Sir Henry Edgecombe and Trevanion defeated the great Bodrigan. He
fled, and tradition preserves, on the side of the cliff, the spot known
as Bodrigan's Leap, from which he leapt into the sea, and swam to a ship
which kept near the shore. As he leapt the precipice, he bequeathed,
with a curse, "his extravagance to the Trevanions, and his folly to the
Edgecombes."

These families divided between them an estate said to be worth, in those
days, £10,000 per annum.

"At that period in our history when the law of the strongest was the
rule, three families in Cornwall were engaged in a series of domestic
wars; these were Bodrigan, Trevanion, and Edgecumbe. And when Richard
the Third obtained sovereign power, on the division which then took
place in the York faction, Bodrigan endeavoured to seize the property of
Edgecumbe, with little respect, as it would seem, for the life of the
possessor; but in the final struggle at Bosworth Field, where Henry
Tudor put an entire end to this contest for power under the guise of
property, by seizing the whole to himself, Trevanion and Edgecumbe had
the good fortune to appear on the winning side, and subsequently availed
themselves to the utmost of belligerent rights against Bodrigan, as he
had attempted to dQ before against them. The last of that family was
driven from his home, and seems to have perished in exile. His property
was divided between the two families opposed to him, and, after the
lapse of three hundred and fifty years, continues to form a large
portion of their respective posses*sions."--Gilbert,* vol iii., p. 204.

William de Bodrigan was lord of the manor of Restronget, in the 12th of
Henry IV. The family possessed it till the beginning of the reign of
Henry VII., when, on the attainder of Bodrigan, it was given to William
Trevanion. \[a\]

\[a\] See Gilbert, vol. iii., p. 193, and Bond's account of the
Trelawnys in Bond's Looe

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pengerswick Castle](prwe318.md)
