[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe178)  [Next](prwe180.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

KENIDZHEK WITCH.

ON the tract called the "Gump," near Kenidzhek, is a beautiful well of
clear water, not far from which was a miner's Cot, in which dwelt two
miners with their sister. They told her never to go to the well after
daylight; they would fetch the water for her. However, on one Saturday
night she had forgotten to get in a supply for the morrow, so she went
off to the well. Passing by a gap in a broken-down hedge (called a
*gurgo)* near the well, she saw an old woman sitting down, wrapped in a
red shawl; she asked her what she did there at that time of night, but
received no reply; she thought this rather strange, but plunged her
pitcher in the well; when she drew it up, though a perfectly sound
vessel, it contained no water; she tried again and again, and, though
she saw the water rushing in at the mouth of the pitcher, it was sure to
be empty when lifted out. She then became rather frightened; spoke again
to the old woman, but receiving no answer, hastened away, and came in
great alarm to her brothers. They told her that it was on account of
this old woman they did not wish her to go to the well at night. What
she saw was the ghost of old Moll, a witch who had been a great terror
to the people in her lifetime, and had laid many fearful spells on them.
They said they saw her sitting in the gap by the wall every night when
going to bed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witches of the Logan Stone](prwe180.md)
