[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe356)  [Next](prwe358.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE NORTH SIDE OF A CHURCH

I HAVE been favoured with the following remarks on this subject by the
Rev. J. C. Atkinson, of Danby, Grosmont :-

I translate the following from Hylten Cuvalliecs' *Wärend och Wirdurne*,
pp. 287, 288.

"Inasmuch as all light and all vigour springs from the sun, our Swedish
forefathers always made their prayers with their faces turned towards
that luminary. When any spell or charm in connection with an 'earth-fast
stone' is practised, even in the present day, for the removal of
sickness, the patient invariably turns his face towards the east, or the
sun. When a child is to be carried to church to be baptized, th Wärend
usage is for the godmother first to make he morning prayer, face towards
the east, and then ask the parents three several times what the child's
name is to be. The dead are invariably interred with their feet lying
eastward, so as to have their faces turned towards the rising sun.
*Frånsols*, or with or in a northerly direction, is, on the other hand,
according to an ancient popular idea, *the home of the evil spirits. The
Old Northern Hell was placed far away in the North*. When any one
desires to remove or break any witch spell, or the like, by means of
'reading ' (or charms), it is a matter particularly observed that the
stone (*i.e*., an 'earth-fast' one), is sought to the northward of the
house. In like, manner also the 'bearing tree'

(any tree which produces fruit, or quasi fruit, apples, pears, &c.,
*rowan tree*, especially, and white thorn herbs), or the shrew mouse, by
means of which it is hoped to remedy an evil spell, must be met with in
a northerly direction from the patient's home. Nay, if one wants to
charm away sickness over (or into) a running stream, it must always be
one which runs northwards. On the self same grounds it has ever been the
practice of the people of the Wärend district, even down to the present
time, not. to bury their dead frånsols--or to the northward--of the
church. In that part of the churchyard the contemned *främlings högen*
(strangers' burial, place) always has its site, and in it are buried
malefactors, friendless wretches, and utter strangers. A very old idea,
in like manner connects the north side of the church with suicides'
graves," &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Peculiar Words and Phrases](prwe358.md)
