[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe102)  [Next](prwe104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE DEVIL AND HIS DANDY-DOGS.

  
A POOR herdsman was journeying homeward across the moors one windy
night, when he heard at a distance among the Tors the baying of hounds,
which he soon recognised as the dismal chorus of the dandy-dogs. It was
three or four miles to his house; and very much alarmed, he hurried
onward as fast as the treacherous nature of the soil and the uncertainty
of the path would allow; but, alas! the melancholy yelping of the
hounds, and the dismal bolloa of the hunter came nearer and nearer.
After a considerable run, they had so gained upon him, that on looking
back,--oh horror! he could distinctly see hunter and dogs. The former
was terrible to look at, and had the usual complement of saucer-eyes,
horns, and tail, accorded by common consent to the legendary devil. He
was hiack, of course, and carried in his hand a long hunting-pole. The
dogs, a numerous pack, blackened the small patch of moor that was
visible; each snorting fire, and uttering a yelp of indescribably
frightful tone. No cottage, rock, or tree was near to give the herdsman
shelter, and nothing apparently remained to him but to abandon himself
to their fury, when a happy thought suddenly flashed upon him and
suggested a resource. Just as they were about to rush upon him, he fell
on his knees in prayer. There was strange power in the holy words he
uttered; for immediately, as if resistance had been offered, the
hell-hounds stood at bay, howling more dismally than ever, and the
hunter shouted, 'Bo Shrove,' which (says my informant means in the old
language, 'The boy trays,' at which they all drew off on some other
pursuit and disappeared."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Spectral Coach](prwe104)
