[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe197)  [Next](prwe199.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

DORCAS, THE SPIRIT OF POLBREEN MINE.

POLBREEN MINE is situated at the foot of the hill known as St Agnes
Becon. In one of the small cottages which immediately adjoins the mine
once lived a woman called Dorcas.

Beyond this we know little of her life; but we are concerned-chiefly
with her death, which, we are told, was suicidal.

From some cause, which is not related, Dorcas grew weary of life, and
one unholy night she left her house and flung herself into one of the
deep shafts of Polbreen Mine, at the bottom of which her dead and broken
body was discovered. The remnant of humanity was brought to the surface;
and after the laws of the time with regard to suicides had been
fulfilled, the body of Dorcas was buried.

Her presence, however, still remained in the mine. She appears,
ordinarily to take a malicious delight in tormenting the industrious
miner, calling him by name, and alluring him from his tasks. This was
carried on by her to such an extent, that when a "tributer" had made a
poor month, he was asked if he had "been chasing Dorcas." \[a\]

Dorcas was usually only a voice. It has been said by some that they have
seen her in the mine, but this is doubted by the miners generally, who
refer the spectral appearance to the fears of their "comrade."

But it is stated as an incontrovertible fact, that more than one man who
has met the spirit in the levels of the mine has had his clothes torn
off his back; whether in anger or in sport, is not clearly made out. On
one occasion, and on one occasion only, Dorcas appears to have acted
kindly. Two miners, who for distinction's sake we will call Martin and
Jacky, were at work in their end, and at the time busily at work
"beating the borer."

The name of Jacky was distinctly uttered between the blows. He stopped
and listened--all was still. They proceeded with their task a blow on
the iron rod.--" Jacky." Another blow. --

"Jacky." They pause--all is silent. "Well, thee wert called, Jacky,"
said Martin, "go and see."

Jacky was, however, either afraid, or he thought himself the fool of his
senses.

Work was resumed, and "Jacky ! Jacky ! Jacky !" was called more
vehemently and distinctly than before.

Jacky threw down his heavy hammer, and went from his companion, resolved
to satisfy himself as to the caller.

He had not proceeded many yards from the spot On which he had been
standing at work, when a mass of rock fell from the roof of the level,
weighing many tons, which would have crushed him to death. Martin had
been stooping, holding the borer, and a projecting corner of rock just
above him turned off the falling mass. He was securely enclosed, and
they had to dig him out, but he escaped without injury. Jacky declared
to his dying day that he owed his life to Dorcas.

Although Dorcas's shaft remains a part of Polbreen Mine, I am informed
by the present agent that her presence has departed.

\[a\] A tributer is a man who agrees with the adventurers in a mine to
receive a certain share of the profits on the ore raised by him in lieu
of wages. This account is settled wonthly or bi-monthly, which will
explain the phrase a 'poor month."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hingston Downs](prwe199.md)
