[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe086)  [Next](prwe088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE PADSTOW "HOBBY-HORSE." \[a\]

   
AT the time of the spring festival, which is observed at Helston as a
revel in honour, probably, of Flora, and hence called the "Furry-day,"
and by the blowing of horns and gathering of the "May" in St Ives and
other places, the people of Padstow were a few years since in the habit
of riding the "hobby-horse" to water. This hobby-horse was, after it had
been taken round the town, submerged in the sea. The old people said it
was once believed that this ceremony preserved the cattle of the
inhabitants from disease and death. The appearance of a white horse
escaping from the flood which buried the Lionesse, is told at several
points, on both the north and south coast, and the riding of the
hobby-horse probably belongs to this tradition. In support of this idea,
we must not forget the mermaid story associated with the harbour of
Padstow.

The water-horse is a truly Celtic tradition. We have it in the "Arabian
Nights," and in the stories of all countries in the south of Europe. Mr
Campbell, "West Highland Tales," says he finds the horse brought
prominently forward in the Breton legends, and that animal figures
largely in the traditions of Scotland and Ireland.

Has the miners' phrase --" a horse in the lode," applied to a mass of
unproductive ground in the middle of a mineral lode; or, "Black Jack
rides a good horse," signifying that zinc ore gives good promise for
copper -- anything to do with these traditions?

\[a\] See Appendix P.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St Michsel's Mount - The White Rock in the Wood](prwe088.md)
