[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe024)  [Next](prwe026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHANGELINGS.

  
A CORRESPONDENT, to whom I am much indebted for many curious examples of
the folk-lore of the people in the -remote districts to the west of
Penzance, says, in reference to some stories of fairy changelings--"I
never knew but one child that had been kept by the Spriggans more than
three days. It was always complaining, sickly, and weakly, *and had the
very face of a changeling*."

It has been my fortune, some thirty or forty years since, to have seen
several children of whom it had been whispered amongst the peasantry
that they were changelings. In every case they have been sad examples of
the influence of mesenteric disease--the countenance much altered --
their eyes glassy and sunk in their sockets--the nose sharpened--the
cheeks of a marble whiteness, unless when they were flushed with hectic
fever--the lips sometimes swollen and of a deep,- red colour, and small
ulcers not unfrequently at the angles of the mouth. The wasted frame,
with sometimes strumous swellings, and the unnatural abdominal
enlargement which accompanies disease of mesenteric glands, gives a very
sad, and often a most unnatural appearance to the sufferer. The intense
ignorance which existed in many of the districts visited by me, at the
period named, has been almost dispelled by the civilising influences of
Wesleyanism. Consequently, when ascrofulous child is found in a family,
we no longer hear of its being a changeling; but, within a very recent
period, I have heard it said that such afflicted children had been
"ill-wished."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lost Child](prwe026)
