[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe159)  [Next](prwe161.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ARTHUR AT THE LAND'S-END.

BOLERIUM, or *Bellerium,* is the name given by the ancients to the
Land's-End. Diodorus writes Belerium; Ptolemy, Bolerium. Milton adopts
this name in his "Lycidas," and leads his readers to infer that it was
derived from the Giant Bellerus. It is quite possible that in Milton's
time the name of one of the numerous giants who appear to have made the
Land's-End district their dwelling-place, might have still lived in the
memories of men. Certain it is no such giant is remembered now. \[a\]

In a map of Saxon England we find the Land's-End called Pxxxxxxxxx and
in some early English books this promontory is named *Penrlien-guard,*
and *Penrlien-gard,* said to signify the "Headland of Blood." \[b\] The
old Cornish people called this promontory "Pen-von-las," the "End of the
Earth," hence we, derive the name of the Land's-End. May not this
sanguinary name have been derived from a fact, and that actually several
battles were fought by the Britons under the command of Arthur, with the
Saxons or the Danes, in this neighbourhood ? We have not far off the
*Field of Slaughter,* "Bollait," where the ancient people of Cornwall
made their final stand against the Saxons. On this field flint
arrow-heads have frequently been found. The tradition of Vellan-Druchar,
which is but one of several I have heard of a similar character, points
to the same idea. Arthur, according to one story, held possession of
Trereen Castle for some time. Another castle on the north coast is said
to have been occupied by him. An old man living in Pendean once told me
that the land at one time "swarmed with giants, until Arthur, the good
king, vanished them all with his cross-sword."

\[a\] Carew says, 'a promontory (by *Pomp.. Mela.,* called Balerium; by
*Diodorus Valerium* ; by *Voladerane,* Heleaium; by the Cornish, Pedu an
laas; and by the English, the Land's-End)."--*Survey*

of Cornwall

\[b\] Pxxxxxxxxxxxx--The name of the Land's-End in the Saxon map; in the
text ,  Camden xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Traditions of the Danes in Cornwall](prwe161.md)
