[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe115)  [Next](prwe117.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LAYING A GHOST.

TO the ignorance of men in our age in this particular and mysterious
part of philosophy and religion,--namely, the communication between
spirits and men,--not one scholar out of ten thousand, though otherwise
of excellent learning, knows anything of it, or the way how to manage
it. This ignorance breeds fear and abhorrence of that which otherwise
might be of incomparable benefit to mankind."

Such is the concluding paragraph of "An Account of an Apparition,
attested by the Rev. Wm. Ruddell, Minister at Launceston, in Cornwall,"
1665.

A schoolboy was haunted by Dorothy Dingley; we know not why, but the boy
pined. He was thought to be in love; but when, at the wishes of his
friends, the parson questioned him, he told him of his ghostly visitor,
and he took the parson to the field in which he was in the habit of
meeting the apparition; and the reverend gentleman himself saw the
spectral Dorothy, and afterwards he showed her to the boy's father and
mother. Then comes the story of the laying. "The next morning being
Thursday, I went out very early by myself, and walked for about an
hour's space in meditation and prayer in the field next adjoining to the
Quartiles. Soon after five, I stepped over the stile into the disturbed
field, and had not gone above thirty or forty paces before the ghost
appeared at the further stile. I spoke to it with a loud voice, in some
such sentences as the way of these dealings directed me; whereupon it
approached, but slowly, and when I came near it it moved not. I spoke
again, and it answered again in a voice which was neither very audible
nor intelligible. I was not the least terrified, therefore I persisted
until it spake again and gave me satisfaction. But the work could not be
finished at this time; wherefore the same evening, an hour after sunset,
it met me again, near the same place, and after a few words on each side
it quietly vanished, and neither doth appear since, nor ever will more
to any man's disturbance." \[a\]

\[a\] "Historical Survey of Cornwall," C. S. Gilbert.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Flying Spirit](prwe117.md)
