[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe251)  [Next](prwe253.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

MOON SUPERSTITIONS.

 

THE following superstitions are still prevalent on the north coast of
Cornwall :--

"This root (the sea-poppy), so much valued for removing all pains in the
breast, stomach, and intestines, is good also for disordered lungs, and
is so much better here than in other places, that the apothecaries of
Cornwall send hither for it; and some people plant them in their gardens
in Cornwall, and will not part with them under sixpence a root. A very
simple notion they have with regard to this root, which falls not much
short of the Druids' superstition in gathering and preparing their
selago and samolus. This root, you must know, is accounted very good
both as an emetic and cathar­tic. If, therefore, they design that it
shall operate as the former, their constant opinion is that it should be
scraped and sliced upwards--that is, beginning from the root, the knife
is to ascend towards the leaf;--but if that it is intended to operate as
a cathartic, they must scrape the root downwards. The *senecio* also, or
groundsel, they strip upwards for an emetic and down' wards for a
cathartic. In Cornwall they have several such groundless opinions with
regard to plants, and they gather all the medicinal ones when the moon
is just such an age; which, with many other such whims, must be
considered as the reliques of the Druid superstition." \[a\]

They, the 'Druids, likewise used great, ceremonies in gathering,. an
herb called *samolus*, marsh-wort, or fen-berries, which consisted in a
previous fast, in not looking back during the time of their plucking it,
and, lastly, in using their left hand only; from this last ceremony,
perhaps, the herb took the name of *samol*, which, in the Phoenician
tongue, means the left hand. This herb was considered to be
particularly' efficacious in curing the diseases incident to swine and
cattle.--( C. S. Gilbert.)

\[a\] Borlase's Observations on the Ancient and Present State of the
Island of Scilly" "Notes and Queries," vol. x. p. 181. 1854.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cures for Whooping Cough](prwe253.md)
