[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe019)  [Next](prwe021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE HACK AND CAST.

  
IN the parish of Goran is an intrenchment running from cliff to cliff,
and cutting off about a hundred acres of coarse ground. This is about
twenty feet broad, and twenty-four feet high in most places.

Marvellous as it may appear, tradition assures us that this was the work
of a giant, and that he performed the task in a single night. This
fortification has long been known as *Thica Vosa*, and the Hack and
Cast.

The giant, who lived on the promontory, was the terror of the
neighbourhood, and great were the rejoicings in Goran when his death was
accomplished through a stratagem by a neighbouring doctor.

The giant fell ill through eating some food--children or otherwise--to
satisfy his voracity, which had disturbed his stomach. His roars and
groans were heard for miles, and great was the terror throughout the
neighbourhood. A messenger, however, soon arrived at the residence of
the doctor of the parish, and he bravely resolved to obey the summons of
the giant, and visit him. He found the giant rolling on the ground with
pain, and he at once determined to rid the world, if possible, of the
monster.

He told him that he must be bled. The giant submitted, and the doctor
moreover said that, to insure relief, a large hole in the cliff must be
filled with the blood. The giant lay on the ground, his arm extended
over the hole, and the blood flowing a torrent into it. Relieved by the
loss of blood, he permitted the stream to flow on, until he at last
became so weak, that the doctor kicked him over the cliff, and killed
him. The well-known promontory of The Dead Man, or Dodman, is so called
from the dead giant. The spot on which he fell is the "Giant's House,"
and the hole has ever since been most favourable to the growth of ivy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Giant Wrath, or Ralph](prwe021.md)
