[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe006)  [Next](prwe008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE RIVAL GIANTS.

  
THOSE who have visited the Logan Rock will be familiar with the several
groups which form the Treryn promontory. Treryn Castle, an ancient
British fortress, the Cyclopean walls of which, and its outer earthwork,
can still be traced, was the dwelling of a famous giant and his wife. I
have heard it said that he gave his name to this place, but that is, of
course, doubtful. This giant was chief of a numerous band, and by his
daring he held possession, against the giants of the Mount, of all the
lands west of Penzance. Amongst the hosts who owned allegiance to him,
was a remarkable fine young fellow, who had his abode in a cave, in the
pile of rocks upon which the Logan Rock stands. This young giant grew
too fond of the giantess, and it would appear that the lady was not
unfavourably inclined towards him. Of their love passes, however, we
know nothing. Tradition has only told us that the giantess was one day
reclining on the rock still known as the Giant Lady's Chair, while the
good old giant was dosing in the Giant's Chair which stands near it,
when the young and wicked lover stole behind his chief and stabbed him
in the belly with a knife.\[a\] The giant fell over the rocks to the
level ridge below, and there he lay, rapidly pouring out his life-blood.
From this spot the young murderer kicked him into the sea, ere yet his
life was quite extinct, and he perished in the waters.

The guilty pair took possession of Treryn Castle, and, we are told,
lived happily for many years.

\[a\] Mr Halliwell infers from this that the story is Saxon. See
"Wanderings in the Footsteps of the Giants"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Giants of Trencrom, or Trecrobben](prwe008)
