[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe142)  [Next](prwe144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

WELL WORSHIP.

"A well there is in the west country,  
And a clearer one never was seen."  
Robert Southey

"One meek cell,  
Built by the fathers o'er a lonely well,  
Still breathes the Baptist's sweet remembrance round  
A spring of silent waters."  
*Echoes from Old Cornwall--R. S.* HAWKES.

SPRING of water has always something about *it* which gives rise to holy
feelings. From the dark earth there wells up a pellucid fluid, which in
its apparent tranquil joyousness gives gladness to all around. The
velvet mosses, the sword. like grasses, and the feathery ferns, grow
with more of that light and vigorous nature which indicates a fulness of
life, within the charmed influence of a spring of water, than they do
elsewhere.

The purity of the fluid impresses itself; through the *eye,* upon the
mind, and its power of removing all impurity is felt to the soul. "Wash
and be clean," is the murmuring call of the waters, as they overflow
their rocky basins, or grassy vases; and deeply sunk in depravity must
that man be who could put to unholy uses one of nature's fountains. The
inner life of a well of waters, bursting from its grave in the earth,
may be religiously said to form a type of the soul purified by death,
rising into a glorified existence and' the fulness of light. The
tranquil beauty of the rising waters, whispering the softest music, like
the healthful breathing of a sleeping infant, sends a feeling of
happiness through the soul of the thoughtful observer, and the inner man
is purified by its influence, as the outer man is cleansed by ablution.

Water cannot be regarded as having an inanimate existence. Its
all-pervading character and its active nature, flowing on foi ever,
resting never, removes it from the torpid elements, and places it, like
the air, amongst those higher creations which belong to the vital powers
of the earth. The spring of water rises from the cold dark earth, it
runs, a silver cord glistening in the sunshine, down the mountain-side.
The ril (prettily called by Drayton "a rillet ") gathers rejoicingly
other waters unto itself; and it grows into a *brooklet* in its course.
At length, flowing onward and increasing in size, the *brook* state of
being is fairly won; and then, by the gathering together of some more
dewdrops, the full dignity of a stream is acquired. Onwards the waters
flow, still gleaming from every side, and wooing new *runlets* to its
bosom, eager as it were to assume the state which, in America, would be
called a "run" of water. Stream gathers on stream, and run on run; the
union of waters becomes a *river;* rolling in its maturity, swelling in
its pride, it seeks the ocean, and there is absorbed in the eternity of
waters. Has ever poet yet penned a line which in any way conveys to the
mind a sense of the grandeur, the immensity of the sea? I do not
remember a verse which does not prove the incapacity of the human mind
to embrace in its vastness the gathering together of the waters in the
mighty sea. Man's mind is tempered, and his pride subdued, as he stands
on the sea-side and looks on the undulating expanse to which, to him,
there is no end. A material eternity of rain-drops gathered into a mass
which is from Omnipotence and is omnipotent. The influences of heaven
falling on the sheeted waters, they rise at their bidding and float in
air, making the skies more beautiful or more sublime, according to the
spirit of the hour. Whether the clouds float over the earth, illumined
by sun-rays, like the cars of loving angels; or rush wildly onward, as
if bearing demons of vengeance, they are subdued by the mountains, and
fall reluctantly as mists around the rocks, condense solemnly as dews
upon the sleeping flowers, sink to earth resignedly as tranquil rains,
or splash in tempestuous anger on its surface. The draught, in whatever
form it comes, is drunk with avidity, and, circulating through the
subterranean recesses of the globe, it does its work of re-creation, and
eventually reappears a bubbling' spring, again to run its round of
wonder-working tasks.

Those minds which saw a God in light, and worshipped a Creator in the
sun, felt the power of the universal solvent, and saw in the diffusive
nature of that fluid which is everywhere something more than a type of
the regenerating Spirit, which all, in their holier hours, feel
necessary to clear off the earthiness of life. Man has ever sought to
discover the spiritual in the material, and, from the imperfections of
human reason, he has too frequently reposed on the material, and given
to it the attributes which are purely spiritual. Through all ages the
fountains of the hills and valleys have claimed the reverence of men;
and waters presenting themselves, under aspects of beauty, or of terror,
have been regarded with religious feelings of hope or of awe.

As it was of old, so is it to-day. It was but yesterday that I stood
near the font of Royston Church, and heard the minister read with
emphasis, "None can enter into the kingdom of God except he be
regenerate and born anew of water." Surely the simple faith of the
peasant mother who, on a spring morning, takes her weakly infant to some
holy well, and three times dipping it in its clear waters, uttering an
earnest prayer at each immersion, is but another form of the prescribed
faith of the educated churchman.

Surely the practice of consulting the waters of a sacred spring, by
young men and maidens, is but a traditional faith derived from the early
creeds of Greece--a continuance of the *Hydromancy* which sought in the
Castahian fountain the divination of the future.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Well of St Constantine](prwe144)
