[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe052)  [Next](prwe054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ROMANCES OF TREGEAGLE.

THE DEMON TREGEAGLE.

"In Cornwaile's fair land, bye the poole on the moore.  
Tregeagle the wicked did dwell."  
--Tregeagle; or Dozmare Pool.  
by John Penwarne

"Thrice he began to tell his doleful tale,  
And thrice the sighs did swallow up his voice."  
- Thomas Sackville

WHO has not heard of the wild spirit Tregeagle? He haunts equally the
moor, the rocky coasts, and the blown sand-hills of Cornwall. From north
to south, from east to west, this doomed spirit is heard of, and to the
day of judgment he is doomed to wander, pursued by avenging fiends. For
ever endeavouring to perform some task by which he hopes to secure
repose, and being for ever defeated. Who has not heard the howling of
Tregeagle? When the storms come with all their strength from the
Atlantic, and urge themselves upon the rocks around the Land's End, the
howls of the spirit are louder than the roaring of the winds. When calms
rest upon the ocean, and the waves can scarcely form upon the resting
waters, low wailings creep along the coast. These are the wailings of
this wandering soul. When midnight is on the moor or on the mountains,
and the night winds whistle amidst the rugged cairns, the shrieks of
Tregeagle are distinctly heard. We know, then, that he is pursued by the
demon dogs, and that till daybreak he must fly with all speed before
them. The voice of Tregeagle is everywhere, and yet he is unseen by
human eye. Every reader will at once perceive that Tregeagle belongs to
the mythologies of the oldest nations, and that the traditions of this
wandering spirit in Cornwall, which centre upon one tyrannical
magistrate, are but the appropriation of stories which belong to every
age and country. Tradition thus tells Tregeagle's tale.

There are some men who appear to be from their births given over to the
will of tormenting demons. Such a man was Tregeagle. He is as old as the
hills, yet there are many circumstances in the story of his life which
*appear* to remove him from this remote antiquity. Modern legends assert
him to belong to comparatively modern times, and say that, without
doubt, he was one of the Tregeagles who once owned Trevorder near
Bodmin. We have not, however, much occasion to trouble ourselves with
the man or his life; it is with the death and the subsequent existence
of a myth that we are concerned.

Certain it is that the man Tregeagle was diabolically wicked. He seems
to have been urged on from one crime to another until the cup of sin was
overflowing.

Tregeagle was wealthy beyond most men of his time, and his wealth
purchased for him that immunity, which the Church, in her degenerate
days, too often accorded to those who could aid, with their gold or
power, the sensual priesthood. As a magistrate, he was tyrannical and
unjust, and many an innocent man was wantonly sacrificed by him for the
purpose of hiding his own dark deeds. As a landlord, he was rapacious
and unscrupulous, and frequently so involved his tenants in his toils,
that they could not escape his grasp. The stain of secret murder clings
to his memory, and he is said to have sacrificed a sister whose goodness
stood between him and his demon passions; his wife and children perished
victims to his cruelties. At length death drew near to relieve the land
of a monster whose name was a terror to all who heard it. Devils waited
to secure the soul they had won, and Tregeagle in terror gave to the
priesthood wealth, that they might fight with them and save his soul
from eternal fire. Desperate was the struggle, but the powerful
exorcisms of the banded brotherhood of a neighbouring monastery, drove
back the evil ones, and Tregeagle - slept with his fathers, safe in the
custody of the churchmen, who buried him with high honours in St Breock
Church. They sang chants and read prayers above his grave, to secure the
soul which they thought they had saved. But Tregeagle was not fated to
rest. Satan desired still to gain possession of such a gigantic sinner,
and we can only refer what ensued to the influence of the wicked
spiritings of his ministers.

A dispute arose between two wealthy families respecting the ownership of
extensive lands around Bodmin. The question had been rendered more
difficult by the nefarious conduct of Tregeagle, who had acted as
steward to one of the claimants, and who had destroyed ancient deeds,
forged others, and indeed made it appear that he was the real proprietor
of the domain. Large portions of the land Tregeagle had sold, and other
parts were leased upon long terms, he having received all the money and
appropriated it. His death led to inquiries, and then the transactions
were gradually brought to light. Involving, as this did, large sums of
money--and indeed it was a question upon which turned the future
well-doing or ruin of a family--it was fought by the lawyers with great
pertinacity. The legal questions had been argued several times before
the judges at the assizes. The trials had been deferred, new trials had
been sought for and granted, and every possible plan known to the
lawyers for postponing the settlement of a suit had been tried. A day
was at length fixed, upon which a final decision must be come to, and a
special jury was sworn to administer justice between the contending
parties. Witnesses innumerable were examined as to the validity of a
certain deed, and the balance of evidence was equally suspended. The
judge was about to sum up the case and refer the question to the jury,
when the defendant in the case, coming into court, proclaimed aloud that
he had yet another witness to produce. There was a strange silence in
the judgment-hall. It was felt that something chilling to the soul was
amongst them, and there was a simultaneous throb of terror as Tregeagle
was led into the witness-box.

When the awe-struck assembly had recovered, the lawyers for the
defendant commenced their examination, which was long and terrible. The
result, however, was the disclosure of an involved system of fraud, of
which the honest defendant had been the victim, and the jury
unhesitatingly gave a verdict in his favour.

The trial over, every one expected to see the spectre-witness removed.
There, however, he stood, powerless to fly, although he evidently
desired to do so. Spirits of darkness were waiting to bear him away, but
some spell of holiness prevented them from touching him. There was a
struggle with the good and the evil angels for this sinner's soul, and
the assembled court appeared frozen with horror. At length the judge
with dignity commanded the defendant to remove his witness.

"To bring him from the grave has been to me so dreadful a task, that I
leave him to your care, and that of the Prior's, by whom he was so
beloved." Having said this, the defendant left the court.

The churchmen were called in, and long were the deliberations between
them and the lawyers, as to the best mode of disposing of Tregeagle.

They could resign him to the devil at once, but by long trial the worst
of crimes might be absolved, and as good churchmen they could not
sacrifice a human soul. The only thing was to give the spirit some task,
difficult beyond the power of human nature, which might be extended far
into eternity. Time might thus gradually soften the obdurate soul, which
still retained all the black dyes of the sins done in the flesh, that by
infinitely slow degrees repentance might exert its softening power. The
spell therefore put upon Tregeagle was, that as long as he was employed
on some endless assigned task, there should be hope of salvation, and
that he should be secure from the assaults of the devil as long as he
laboured steadily. A moment's rest was fatal-- labour unresting, and for
ever, was his doom.

One of the lawyers, remembering that Dosmery Pool \[a\] was bottomless,
and that a thorn-bush which had been flung into it, but a few weeks
before, had made its appearance in Falmouth Harbour, proposed that
Tregeagle might be employed to empty this profound lake. Then one of the
churchmen, to make the task yet more enduring, proposed that it should
be performed by the aid of a limpet-shell having a hole in it.

This was agreed to, and the required incantations were duly made. Bound
by mystical spells, Tregeagle was removed to the dark moors and duly set
to work. Year after year passed by, and there, day and night, summer and
winter, storm and shine, Tregeagle was bending over the dark water,
working hard with his perforated shell; yet the pool remained at the
same level.

His old enemy the devil kept a careful eye on the doomed one, resolving,
if possible, to secure so choice an example of evil. Often did he raise
tempests sufficiently wild, as he supposed, to drive Tregeagle from his
work, knowing that if he failed for a season to labour, he could seize
and secure him. These were long tried in vain; but at length an
auspicious hour presented itself.

Nature was at war with herself, the elements had lost their balance, and
there was a terrific struggle to recover it. Light-flings flashed and
coiled like fiery snakes around the rocks of Roughtor. Fire-balls fell
on the desert moors and hissed in the accursed lake. Thunders peeled
through the heavens, and echoed from hill to hill; an earthquake shook
the solid earth, and terror was on all living. The winds arose and raged
with a fury which was irresistible, and hail beat so mercilessly on all
things, that it spread death around. Long did Tregeagle stand the
"pelting of the pitiless storm," but at length he yielded to its force
and fled. The demons in crowds were at his heels. He doubled, however,
on his pursuers, and returned to the lake; but so rapid were they, that
he could not rest the required moment to dip his shell in the flow
seething waters.

Three times he fled round the lake, and the evil ones pursued him. Then,
feeling that there was no safety for him near Dosmery Pool, he sprang
swifter than the wind across it, shrieking with agony, and thus, --
since the devils cannot cross water, and were obliged to go round the
lake, -- he gained on them and fled over the moor.

Away, away went Tregeagle, faster and faster the dark spirits pursuing,
and they had nearly overtaken him, when he saw Roach Rock and its chapel
before him. He rushed up the rocks, with giant power clambered to the
eastern window, and dashed his head through it, thus securing the
shelter of its sanctity. The defeated demons retired, and long and loud
were their wild wailings in the air. The inhabitants of the moors and of
the neighbouring towns slept not a Wink that night.

Tregeagle was safe, his head was within the holy church, though his body
was exposed on a bare rock to the storm. Earnest were the prayers of the
blessed hermit in his cell on the rock to be relieved from his nocturnal
and sinful visitor.

In vain were the recluse's prayers. Day after day, as he knelt at the
altar, the ghastly head of the doomed sinner grinned horridly down upon
him. Every holy ejaculation fell upon Tregeagle's ear like molten iron.
He writhed and shrieked under the torture; but legions of devils filled
the air, ready to seize him, if for a moment he withdrew his head from
the sanctuary, Sabbath after Sabbath the little chapel on the rock was
rendered a scene of sad confusion by the interruptions which Tregeagle
caused. Men trembled with fear at his agonising cries, and women
swooned. At length the place was deserted, and even the saint of the
rock was wasting to death by the constant perturbation in which he was
kept by the unholy spirit, and the demons who, like carrion birds,
swarmed around the holy cairn. Things could not go on thus. The monks of
Bodmin and the priests from the neighbouring churches gathered together,
and the result of their long and anxious deliberations was, that
Tregeagle, guarded by two saints, should be taken to the north coast,
near Padstow, and employed in making trusses of sand, and ropes of sand
with which to bind them. By powerful spell, Tregeagle was removed from
Roach, and fixed upon the sandy shores of the Padstow district. Sinners
are seldom permitted to enjoy any peace of soul. As the ball of sand
grew into form, the tides rose, and the breakers spread out the sands
again a level sheet; again was it packed together and again washed
away.--Toil! toil ! toil! day and night unrestingly, sand on sand grew
with each hour, and ruthlessly the ball was swept, by one blow of a sea
wave, along the shore.

The cries of Tregeagle were dreadful; and as the destruction of the sand
heap was constantly recurring, a constantly increasing despair gained
the mastery over hope, and the ravings of the baffled soul were louder
than the roarings of the winter tempest.

Baffled in making trusses of sand, Tregeagle seized upon the loose
particles and began to spin them into a rope. Long and patiently did he
pursue his task, and hope once more rose like a star out of the midnight
darkness of despair. A rope was forming, when a storm came up with all
its fury from the Atlantic, and swept the particles of sand away over
the hills.

The inhabitants of Padstow had seldom any rest. At every tide the
howlings of Tregeagle banished sleep from each eye. But now so fearful
were the sounds of the doomed soul,: in the madness of the struggle
between hope and despair, that the people fled the town, and clustered
upon the neighbouring plains, praying, as with one voice, to be relieved
from the sad presence of this monster.

St Petroc, moved by the tears and petitions of the people, resolved to
remove the spirit; and by the intense earnestness of his prayers, after
long wrestling, he subdued Tregeagle to his will. Having chained him
with the bonds which the saint had forged with his own hands, every link
of which had been welded with a prayer, St Petroc led the spirit away
from the north coast, and stealthily placed him on the southern shores.

In those days Ella's Town, now Helston, was a flourishing port. Ships
sailed into the estuary, up to the town, and they brought all sorts of
merchandise, and returned with cargoes of tin from the mines of Breage
and Wendron.

The wily monk placed his charfe at Bareppa, and there condemned him to
carry sacks of sand across the estuary of the Loo, and to empty them at
Porthleven, until the beach was clean down to the rocks. The priest was
a good observer. He knew that the sweep of the tide was from Trewavas
Head round the coast towards the Lizard, and that the sand would be
carried back steadily and speedily as fast as the spirit could remove
it.

Long did Tregeagle labour; and, of course, in vain. His struggles were
giant-like to perform his task, but he saw the sands return as regularly
as he removed them. The sufferings of the poor fishermen who inhabited
the coast around Porthleven were great. As the howlings of Tregeagle
disturbed the dwellers in Padstow, so did they now distress those
toil-worn men.

"When sorrow is highest.

Relief is nighest."

And a mischievous demon-watcher, in pure wantonness, brought that relief
to those fishers of the sea.

Tregeagle was laden with a sack of sand of enormous size, and was wading
across the mouth of the estuary, when one of those wicked devils, who
were kept ever near Tregeagle, in very idleness tripped up the
heavily-laden spirit. The sea was raging with the irritation of a
passing storm; and as Tregeagle fell, the sack was seized by the waves,
and its contents poured out across this arm of the sea.

There, to this day, it rests a bar of sand, fatally destroying the
harbour of Ella's Town. The rage of the inhabitants of this
seaport,--now destroyed,--was great; and with all their priests, away
they went to the Loo Bar, and assailed their destroyer. Against human
anger Tregeagle was proof. The shock of tongues fell harmlessly on his
ear, and the assault of human weapons was unavailing.

By the aid of the priests, and faith-inspired prayers, the bonds were
once more placed upon Tregeagle; and he was, by the force of bell, book,
and candle, sent to the Land's End. There he would find no harbour to
destroy, and but few people to terrify. His task was to sweep the sands
from Porthcurnow Cove round the headland called Tol-Peden-Penwith, into
Nanjisal Cove. Those who know that rugged headland, with its cubical
masses of granite, piled in Titanic grandeur one upon another, will
appreciate the task; and when to all the difficulties are added the
strong sweep of the Atlantic current, -- that portion of the Gulf-stream
which washes our southern shores,--it will be evident that the
melancholy spirit has, indeed, a task which must endure until the world
shall end.

Even until to-day is Tregeagle labouring at his task. In calms his
wailing is heard; and those sounds which some call the "soughing of the
wind," are known to be the moanings of Tregeagle; while the coming
storms are predicated by the fearful roarings of this condemned mortal.

\[a\] Or .*Dozmare*. Unfortunately for its bottomless character, in a
recent hot and rainless summer, this little lake became dry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jahn Tergagle the Steward](prwe054.md)
