[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe177)  [Next](prwe179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TREWA, OR TREWE, THE HOME OF WITCHES.

AS we walk from Nancledrea Bottoms towards Zennor we pass Trewa
(pronounced *Truee),* which is said to have been the place where at
Midsummer all the witches of the west met. Here are the remains of very
ancient tin stream works, and these, I was informed, "were the remains
of bals which had been worked before the deluge; there was nothing so
old anywhere else in Cornwall." Around us, on the hill-sides and up the
bottoms\~ huge boulders of granite are most fantastically scattered. All
these rocks sprang from the ground at the call of the giants. At Embla
Green we still see the ruins of the Giant's House, but all we know of
this Titan is that he was the king. On one side we have the "Giant's
Well," and not far off the "Druid's Well," and a little before us is
Zennor coit or cromlech.

From this point the scenery is of the wildest description. The granite
cairns are spread around in every direction, and many of those masses
are so strangely fashioned by the atmospheric influences ever acting on
them, that fancy can readily fashion them into tombs and temples. Rock
basins abound on these hills, and of ruined cromlechs there are many.
Whatever the local historians may say, local traditions assure us that
on Midsummer Eve all the witches in Penwith gathered here, and that they
lit fires on every cromlech, and in every rock basin, until the' hills
were alive with flame, and renewed their vows to the evil ones from whom
they derived their power. Hence, to this day this place is called Burn
Downs. Amidst these rock masses there was one pile remarkable amidst all
the others for its size, and--being formed of cubical masses-- for its
square character. This was known as the Witches' Rock, and here it was
said they assembled at midnight to carry on their wicked deeds. This
rock has been removed, and with it the witches have died; the last real
witch in Zennor having passed away, as I have been told, about thirty
years since, and with her, some say, the fairies fled. I have, however,
many reasons for believing that our little friends have still a few
'haunts in this locality. There is but one reason why we should regret
the disappearance of the Witches' Rock.

Any one touching this rock nine times at midnight was insured against
bad luck.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kenidzhak Witch](prwe179.md)
