[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe145)  [Next](prwe147.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

GULVAL WELL.

YOUNG woman, with a child in her arms, stands by the side of Gulval
Well, in Fosses Moor. There is an expression of extreme anxiety in her
interesting face, which exhibits a considerable amount of intelligence.
She appears to doubt, and yet be disposed to believe in, the virtues of
this remarkable well. She pauses, looks at her babe, and sighs. She is
longing to know something of the absent, but she fears the well may
indicate the extreme of human sorrow. While she is hesitating, an old
woman advances towards her, upon whom the weight of eighty years was
pressing, but not over-heavily; and she at once asked the young mother
if she wished to ask the well after the health of her husband.

"Yes, Aunt Alcie," she replied; "I ant so anxious. I have not heard of
John for six long months. I could not sleep last night, so I rose with
the light, and came here, determined to ask the well; but I am afraid. O
Aunt Alcie, suppose the well should not speak, I should die on the spot
!"

"Nonsense, cheeld," said the old woman; "thy man is well enough; and the
well will boil, if thee 'It ask it in a proper spirit."

"But, Aunt Alcie, if it sends up puddled water, or if it remains quiet,
what would become of me ?"

"Never be foreboding, cheeld; troubles come quick without running to
meet 'em. Take my word for it, the fayther of thy little un will soon be
home again. Ask the well ! ask the well !"

"Has it told any death or sickness lately ?" asked the young mother.

"On St Peter's eve Mary Curnew questioned the water about poor Willy."

"And the water never moved ?"

"The well was quiet; and verily I guess it was about that time he died."

"Any sickness, Aunt Alcie ?"

"Jenny Kelinach was told, by a burst of mud, how ill her old mother was;
but do not be feared, all is well with Johnny Thomas."

Still the woman hesitated; desire, fear, hope, doubt, superstition, and
intelligence struggled within her heart and brain.

The old creature, who was a sort of guardian to the well, used all her
rude eloquence to persuade Jane Thomas to put her question, and at
length she consented. Obeying the old woman's directions, she knelt on
the mat of bright green grass which grew around, and leaning over the
well so as to see her face in the water, she repeated after her
instructor,

"Water, water, tell me truly,  
Is the man I love duly  
On the earth, or under the sod,  
Sick or well,--in the name of God ?"

Some minutes passed in perfect silence, and anxiety was rapidly turning
cheeks and lips pale, when the colour rapidly returned.

There was a gush of clear water from below, bubble rapidly followed
bubble, sparkling brightly in the morning sunshine. Full of joy, the
young mother rose from her knees, kissed her child, and exclaimed, "I am
happy now ! " \[a\]

\[a\] Hals, speaking of Gelval well, thus describes it and its virtues
:-- In Fosses Moor part of this manor of Lanesly, its this parish, is
that well-known fountain called Gulval Well. To which place great
numbers of people, time out of mind, have resorted for pleasure and
profit of their health, as the credulous country people do in these
days, not only to drink the waters thereof, but to inquire after the
life or death of their absent friends; where, being arrived, they
demanded the question at the well whether such a person by name be
living, in health, sick, or dead. If the party be living and in health,
the still quiet water of the well-pit, as soon as the question is
demanded, will instantly bubble or bon up as a pot, clear crystalline
water; if sick, foul and puddled waters; if the party be dead, it will
neither bubble, boil up, nor alter ita colour or still motion. However,
I can speak nothing of the truth of those supernatural facts from my own
sight or experience, but write from the mouths of those who told me they
had seen and proved the veracity thereof. Finally, it is a strong and
courageous fountain of water, kept neat and clean by an old woman of the
vicinity, to accommodate strangers, for her own advantage, by blazing
the virtues and divine qualities of those waters."--,Hals, *quoted by
Gibert, Parochial History of Cornwall,* vol. ii. p. 121.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Well of St Keyne](prwe147.md)
