[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe349)  [Next](prwe351) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ST NEOT

THE following account of this celebrated saint, as given by Mr Davies
Gilbert, will not be without interest :-- "Multitudes flocked to him
from all parts. He founded a monastery, and repaired to Rome for a
confirmation, and for blessing at the hands, of the Pope; these were
readily obtained. He returned to his monastery, where frequent visits
were made to him by King Alfred, on which occasions he admonished and
instructed the great founder of English liberty, and finally quitted
this mortal life on the 31st of July about the year 883, in the odour of
sanctity so unequivocal that travellers all over Cornwall were solaced
by its fragrance. Nor did the exertions of our saint terminate with his
existence on earth; he frequently appeared to King Alfred, and sometimes
led his armies in the field. But if the tales of these times are
deserving of any confidence, the nation is really and truly indebted to
St Neot for one of the greatest blessings ever bestowed on it. To his
advice, and even to his personal assistance as a teacher, we owe the
foundation by Alfred of the University at Oxford.

"The relics of St Neot remained at his monastery in Cornwall till about
the year 974, when Earl Alric, and his wife Ethelfleda, having founded
.a religious house at Eynesbury, in Huntingdonshire, and being at a loss
for some patron saint, adopted the expedient of stealing the body of St
Neot; which was accordingly done and the town retains his name, thus
feloniously obtained, up to this time. The monastery in Cornwall
continued feebly to exist after this disaster through the Saxon times;
but having lost its palladium, it felt the ruiner's hand; and almost
immediately after the Norman Conquest it was finally suppressed. Yet the
memory of the local saint is still cherished by the inhabitants of the
parish and of the neighbourhood--endeared, perhaps, by the tradition of
his diminutive stature, reduced in their imagination to fifteen inches
of height; and to these feelings we, in all probability, owe the
preservation of the painted glass, the great decoration of this church,
and one of the principal works of Art to be seen in
Cornwall"--*Gilbert's Hist, Corn*., vol. iii. p. 262.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sisters of Glen-Neot](prwe351)
