[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe090)  [Next](prwe092.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE SANDS AT LELANT AND PHILLACK.

   
THERE is a tradition that Lelant and Phillack towns were all meadow
land, and that the whole was covered with sand in a single night. Also
that the low tract of land extended on both sides of Hayle far beyond
the present bar, so that the sea has swallowed up some hundreds of
acres. The people say that the sight of the ancient church and village
of Lelant was somewhere seaward of the Black Rock;--the ancient
burial-ground has been long washed away,--and that human teeth are still
frequently found on the shore after a great *undertoe*, that takes the
sand out to sea. Many circumstances seem to confirm the probability of
the tradition. The sand was drifting inland at such a rate before the
reed-like plant called by the present inhabitants the *spire* was
planted, that the whole of the land about the village would have been
rendered worthless ere this, but for the stability given to it. The land
from which the sand has been cleared, on the sea side of the church, has
evidently been ploughed, as the furrows are quite apparent between the
ridges. They say that there was a market held in Lelant when St Ives was
scarcely a village. Lelant being the mother church, would seem to prove
this. One can easily understand how a large tract of land of the nature
of that under Lelant sand-hills would be washed away in a comparatively
short time, as the soil at the low-water level is a many clay. This is
constantly being washed down by high tides, and carried away by the
undercurrent, as it contains no stone to form a pebbly beach, and
therefore there is nothing left to protect the shore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: "The island" St Ives](prwe092.md)
