[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe050)  [Next](prwe052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE PISKIE THRESHERS.

  
MANY an industrious farmer can speak of the assistance which he has
received from the piskies. Mr T. Q. Couch tells a story of this kind so
well that no other is required. \[a\] Long, long ago, before
threshing-machines were thought of, the farmer who resided at C --, in
going to his barn one day, was surprised at the extraordinary quantity
of corn that had been threshed the previous night, as well as to
discover the mysterious agency by which it was effected. His curiosity
led him to inquire into the matter; so at night, when the moon was up,
he crept stealthily to the barn door, and looking through a chink, saw a
little fellow, clad in a tattered suit of green, wielding the "dreshel"
(flail) with astonishing vigour, and beating the floor with blows so
rapid that the eye could not follow the motion of the implement. The
farmer slunk away unperceived, and went to bed, where he lay a long
while awake, thinking in what way he could best show his gratitude to
the piskie for such an important service. He came to the conclusion at
length, that, as the little fellow's clothes were getting very old and
ragged, the gift of a new suit would be a proper way to lessen the
obligation; and, accordingly, on the morrow he had a suit of green made,
of what was supposed to be the proper size, which he carried early in
the evening to the barn, and left for the piskie's acceptance. At night
the farmer stole to the door again to see how the gift was taken. He was
just in time to see the elf put on the suit, which was no sooner
accomplished than, looking down on himself admiringly, he sung --

"Piskie fine, and piskie gay,  
Piskie now will fly away."

. \[a\] See Notes and Queries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Muryan's Bank](prwe052.md)
