[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe130)  [Next](prwe132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ST GERMAN'S WELL.

THE good St German was, it would appear, sent into Cornwall in the reign
of the Emperor Valentinian, mainly to suppress the Pelagian heresy. The
inhabitants of the shores of the Tamar had long been schooled into -the
belief in original sin, and they would not endure its denial from the
lips of a stranger. In this they were supported by the monks, who had
already a firm footing in the land, and who taught the people implicit
obedience to their religious instructors, faith in election, and that
all human efforts were unavailing, unless supported by priestly aid. St
German was a man with vast powers of endurance. He preached his
doctrines of freewill, and of the value of good works, notwithstanding
the outcry raised against him. His miracles were of the most remarkable
character, and sufficiently impressive to convince a large body of the
Cornish people that he was an inspired priest. St German raised a
beautiful church, and built a monastic house for the relief of poor
people. Yet notwithstanding the example of the pure life of the saint,
and his unceasing study to do good, a large section of the priests and
the people never ceased to persecute him. To all human endurance there
is a limit, and even that of the saint weakened eventually, before the
never-ceasing annoyances -by which he was hemmed in.

One Sabbath morning the priest attended as usual to his Christian
duties, when he was interrupted by a brawl amongst the outrageous
people, who had come in from all parts of 'the country with a
determination to drive him from the place of his adoption. The holy man
prayed for his persecutors, and he entreated them to calm their angry
passions and listen to his healing words. But no words could convey any
healing balm to their stormy hearts. At length his brethren, fearing
that his life was in danger, begged him to fly, and eventually he left
the church by a small door near the altar, while some of the monks
endeavoured to tranquillise the people. St German went, a sad man, to
the cliffs at the Rame head, and there alone he wept in agony at the
failure of his labours. So intense was the soul-suffering of this holy
man, that the rocks felt the power of spirit-struggling, and wept with
him. The eyes of man, a spiritual creation, dry after the outburst of
sorrow, but when the gross forms of matter are compelled to sympathise
with spiritual sorrow, they remain for ever under the influence; and
from that day the tears of the cliffs have continued to fall, and the
Well of St German attests to this day of the saint's agony. The saint
was not allowed to remain in concealment long. The crowd of opposing
priests and the peasantry were on his track. Hundreds were on the hill,
and arming themselves with stones, they descended with shouts,
determined to destroy him. St German prayed to God for deliverance, and
immediately a rush, as of thunder, was heard upon the hills--a chariot
surrounded by flames, and flashing light in all directions, was seen
rapidly approaching. The crowd paused, fell back, and the flaming car
passed on to where St German knelt. There were two bright angels in the
chariot; they lifted the persecuted saint from the ground, and placing
him between them, ascended into the air.

"Curse your persecutors," said the angels. The saint cursed them; and
from that time all holiness left the church he had built. The saint was
borne to other lands, and lived to effect great good. On the rocks the
burnt tracts of the chariot wheels were long to be seen, and the Well of
Tears still flows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How St Piran reached Cornwall](prwe132)
