[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe072)  [Next](prwe074.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TWELVE-O'CLOCK STONE.

  
NUMBERS of people would formerly visit a remarkable Logan stone, near
Nancledrea, which had been, by supernatural power, impressed with some
peculiar sense at midnight. Although it was quite impossible to move
this stone during daylight, or indeed by human power at any other time,
it would rock like a cradle exactly at midnight. Many a child has been
cured of rickets by being placed naked at this hour on the
twelve-o'clock stone. If, however, the child was "misbegotten," or, if
it was the offspring of dissolute parents, the stone would not move, and
consequently no cure was effected. On the Cuckoo Hill, eastward of
Nancledrea, there stood, but a few years since, two piles of rock about
eight feet apart, and these were united by a large flat stone carefully
placed upon them,--thus forming a doorway which was, as my informant
told me, "large and high enough to drive a horse and cart through." It
was formerly the custom to march in procession through this "doorway" in
going to the twelve-o'clock stone.

The stone-mason has, however, been busy hereabout; and every mass of
granite, whether rendered notorious by the Giants or holy by the Druids,
if found to be of the size required, has been removed. \[a\]

\[a\] The following are a few of the interesting remains of old Cornwall
which have entirely disappeared from the neighbourhood within a few
years--

Between St Ives and Zennor, on the lower road over Tregarthen Down and a
Logan rock. An old man, perhaps ninety years of age, told me he had
often logged it, and that it would make a noise which could be heard for
miles.

At Balnoon, between Nancledrea and Knill's Steeple, some miners came
upon "two slabs of granite cemented together," which covered a walled
grave three feet square--an ancient kistvean. In it they found an
earthenware vessel containing some black earth, and a leaden spoon. The
spoon was given to Mr Praed of Trevetha, and may possibly be in the
possession of the present proprietor. The kistvean was utterly
destroyed.

At Brunnion, not far from St Ives, in the garden attached to the house
which is occupied by the Hoskings, is an arched doorway of
carefully-worked granite. Tradition said this doorway belonged to an
ancient church, and that the present garden was the burial-ground. Close
by, at Treveerack, is a field known as the "Chapel Field," in which the
plough is constantly turning up stones which have been carefully
chiselled.

In Bosprenis Croft there was a very large colt or cromlech. It is said
to have been fifteen feet square, and not more than one foot thick in
any part. This was broken in two parts some years since, and taken to
Penzance to form the beds for two ovens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Men-Scryfa](prwe074.md)
