[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe226)  [Next](prwe228.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CRYING THE NECK.

OWING to the uncertain character of the climate of Cornwall, the farmers
have adopted the plan of gathering the sheaves of wheat, as speedily as
possible, into "arishmows." These are solid cones from ten to twelve
feet high, the heads of the stalks turned inwards, and the whole capped
with a sheaf of corn inverted. Whence the term, I know not; but "arish"
is commonly applied to a field of corn recently cut, as, "Turn the geese
in upon the 'arish' "-- that is, the short stubble left in the ground.

After the wheat is all cut on most farms in Cornwall and Devon, the
harvest people have a custom of " crying the neck." I believe that this
practice is seldom omitted on any large farm in these counties. It is
done in this way. An old man, or some one else well acquainted with the
ceremonies used on the occasion (when the labourers are reaping the last
field of wheat), goes round to the shocks and sheaves, arid picks out a
little bundle of all the best ears he can find; this bundle he ties up
very neat and trim, and plaits and arranges the straws very tastefully.
This is called "the neck" of wheat, or wheaten-ears. After the field is
cut out, and the pitcher once more circulated, the reapers, binders, and
the women stand round in a circle. The person with "the neck" stands in
the centre, grasping it with both his hands. He first stoops and holds
it near the ground, and all the men forming the ring take off their
hats, stooping and holding them with both hands towards the ground. They
then all begin at once, in a very pro-longed and harmonious tone, to
cry, "The neck !" at the same time slowly raising themselves upright,
and elevating their arms and hats above their heads; the person with the
neck also raising it on high. This is done three times. They then change
their cry to "We yen ! we yen !" which they sound in the same prolonged
and slow manner as before, with singular harmony and effect, three
times. This last cry is accompanied by the same movements of the body
and arms as in crying "the neck." I know nothing of vocal music, but I
think I may convey some idea of the sound by giving you the following
notes in gamut --

<span id="img_Hunt06"></span> ![](img/Hunt06.jpg)

Let these notes be played on a flute with perfect crescendoes and
diminuendoes, and perhaps some notion of this wild-sounding cry may be
formed. Well, after this they all burst out into a kind of loud, joyous
laugh, flinging up their hats and caps into the air, capering about, and
perhaps kissing the girls. One of them then gets "the neck," and runs as
hard as he can down to the farmhouse, 'where the dairy-maid, or one of
the young female domestics, stands at the door prepared with a pail of
water. If he who holds "the neck" can manage to get into the house in
any way unseen, or openly by any other way than the door at which the
girl stands with the pail of water, then he may lawfully kiss her; but,
if otherwise he is regularly soused with the contents of the bucket. I
think this practice is beginning to decline of late, and many farmers
and their men do not care about keeping up this old custom. The object
of crying "the neck" is to give notice to the surrounding country of the
end of the harvest, and the meaning of" we yen" is "we have ended." It
may probably mean "we end," which the uncouth and provincial
pronunciation has corrupted into "we yen." The "neck" is generally hung
up in the farmhouse, where it often remains for three or four years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Drinking the Apple-Trees on Twelfth-Night](prwe228.md)
