[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe246)  [Next](prwe248.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CURES FOR WARTS.

 

I. THE vicar of Bodmin found, not long since, a bottle full of pins laid
in a newly-made grave. I have heard of this as an unfailing remedy; each
wart was touched with a new pin, and the pin then dropped into the
bottle. I am not quite certain that it was necessary that the bottle
should be placed in a newly-made grave; in many cases burying it in the
earth, and especially at a "four cross-roads," was quite sufficient. As
the pins rust, the warts decay.

 

II\.  A piece of string should be taken, and as many knots tied on it as
there are warts on the body; each wart being carefully touched with the
knot dedicated to it. The string is then to be buried, and the warts
fade away as it decays. A few years since a ship-wright in Devonport
dockyard professed to cure warts by merely receiving from an indifferent
person a knotted string,--the knots of which, had been tied by the
afflicted. What he did with the string I know not.

 

III.  To touch each wart with a pebble, place the pebbles in a bag, and
to lose the bag on the way to church, was for many years a very
favourite remedy; but the unfortunate person who found the bag received
the warts. A lady once told me that she picked up such a bag, when a
child, and out of curiosity, and in ignorance, examined the contents.
The result was that she had, in a short time, as many warts as there
were stones in the bag.

 

IV\. Another remedy was to *steal* a piece of meat from a butcher's
stall in the public market, and with this to touch the warts, and bury
it. As the meat putrefied the warts decayed.

 

V.        I remember, when quite a child, having a very large "seedy
wart" on one of my fingers. I was taken by a distant relation, an
elderly lady, residing in Gwinear, to some old woman, for the purpose of
having this wart charmed. I well remember that two charred sticks were
taken from the fire on the hearth, and carefully crossed over the fleshy
excrescence, while some words were muttered by the charmer. I know not
how long it was before the wart disappeared, but certainly, at some
time, it did so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Cure for Paralysis](prwe248.md)
