[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe180)  [Next](prwe182.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

MADGY FIGGY'S CHAIR.

ALL those who have visited the fine piles of rocks in th vicinity of the
so-called "St Levan," Land's-End, callec Tol-Pedden-Penwith, - and
infinitely finer than anything immediately surrounding the most western
promontory itself,--cannot have failed to notice the arrangement of
cubical masses of granite piled one upon the other, known as the

Chair Ladder.

This remarkable pile presents to the beat of the Atlantic waves a sheer
face of cliff of very considerable height, standing up like a huge
basaltic column, or a pillar built by the Titans, the horizontal joints
representing so many steps in the so-called " Ladder.

"

On the top is placed a stone of somewhat remarkable shape, which is by
no great effort of the imagination converted into a chair. There it was
that Madgy Figgy, one of the most celebrated of the St Levan and Burian
witches, was in the habit of seating herself when she desired to call up
to her aid the spirits of the storm. Often has she been seen swinging
herself to and fro on this dizzy height when a storm has been coming
home upon the shores, and richly-laden vessels have been struggling with
the winds. From this spot she poured forth her imprecations on man and
beast, and none whom she had offended could escape those withering
spells; and from this " chair," which will ever bear her name, Madgy
Figgy would always take her flight. Often, starting like some huge bird,
mounted on a stem of ragwort, Figgy has headed a band of inferior
witches, and gone off rejoicing in their iniquities to Wales or Spain.

This old hag lived in a cottage not far from Raftra, and she and all her
gang, which appears to have been, a pretty numerous crew, were notorious
wreckers. On one occasion, Madgy from her seat of storms lured a
Portuguese Indiaman into Perloe Cove, and drowned all the passengers. As
they were washed on shore, the bodies were stripped of everything
valuable, and buried by Figgy and her husband in the green hollow, which
may yet he seen just above Perloe Cove, marking the graves with a rough
stone placed at the head of the corpse. The spoils on this occasion must
have been large, for all the women were supplied for years with rich
dresses, and costly jewels were seen decking the red arms of the girls
who laboured in the fields. For a long time gems and gold continued to
be found on the sands. Howbeit, amongst the bodies thrown ashore was one
of a lady richly dressed, with chains of gold about her. "Rich and rare
were the gems she wore," and not only so, but valuable treasure was
fastened around her, she evidently hoping, if saved, to secure some of
her property. This body, like all the others, was stripped; but Figgy
said there was a mark on it which boded them evil, and she would not
allow any of the gold or gems to be divided, as it would be sure to
bring bad luck if it were separated. A dreadful quarrel ensued, and
bloodshed was threatened; but the diabolical old Figgy was more than a
match for any of the men, and the power of her impetuous will was
superior to them all.

Everything of value, therefore, belonging to this lady was gathered into
a heap, and placed in a chest in Madgy Figgy's hut. They buried the
Portuguese lady the same evening; and after dark a light was seen to
rise from the grave, pass along the cliffs, and seat itself in Madgy's
chair at Tol-Pedden. Then, after some hours, it descended, passed back
again, and, entering the cottage, rested upon the chest. This curious
phenomenon continued for more than three months,--nightly,--much to the
alarm of all but Figgy, who said she knew all about it, and it would be
all right in time. One day a strange-looking and strangely-attired man
arrived at the cottage. Figgy's man (her husband) was at home alone. To
him the stranger addressed himself by signs,--he could not speak
English, so he does not appear to have spoken at all,--and expressed a
wish to be led to the graves. Away they went, but the foreigner did not
appear to require a guide. He at once selected the grave of the lady,
and sitting down upon it, he gave vent to his pent-up sorrows. He sent
Figgy's man away, and remained there till night, when the light arose
from the grave more brilliant than ever, and proceeded directly to the
hut, resting as usual on the chest, which was now covered up with old
sails, and all kinds of fishermen's lumber.

The foreigner swept these things aside, and opened the chest. He
selected everything belonging to the lady, refusing to take any of the
other valuables. He rewarded the wreckers with costly gifts, and left
them--no one knowing from whence he came nor whither he went. Madgy
Figgy was now truly triumphant. "One witch knows another witch, dead or
living," she would say; "and the African would have been the death of us
if we hadn't kept the treasure, whereas now we have good gifts, and no
gainsaying 'em." Some do say they have seen the light in Madgy Figgy's
chair since those times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Old Mage Figgy and the Pig](prwe182.md)
