[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe141)  [Next](prwe143.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THEODORE, KING OF CORNWALL

 RIVIERE, near Hayle, now called Rovier, was the palace of Theodore, the
king, to whom Cornwall appears to have been indebted for many of its
saints. This Christian king, when the pagan people sought to destroy the
first missionaries, gave the saints shelter in his palace, St Breca, St
Iva, St Burianna, and many others, are said to have made Riviere their
residence. It is not a little curious to find traditions existing, as it
were, in a state of suspension between opinions. I have heard it said
that there was a church at Rovier--that there was once a great palace
there; and again, that Castle Cayle was one vast fortified place, and
Rovier another. Mr Davies Gilbert quotes Whitaker on this point -

"Mr Whitaker, who captivates every reader by the brilliancy of his
style, and astonishes by the extent of his multifarious reading, draws,
however, without reserve, on his fertile imagination, for whatever facts
may be requisite to construct the fabfic of a theory. He has made
Riviere the palace and residence of Theodore, a sovereign prince of
Cornwall, and conducts St Breca, St Ira, with several companions, not
only into Hayle and to this palace, after their voyage from Ireland, but
fixes the time of their arrival so exactly, as to make it take place in
the night. In recent times thi name of Riviere, which had been lost in
the common pronunciation, Rovier, has revived in a very excellent house
built by Mr Edwards on the farm, which he completed in 1791." \[a\]

\[a\] Parochial History, vol. iii. p. 423.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Well Worship](prwe143.md)
