[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe079)  [Next](prwe081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PIPER'S HOLE, SCILLY

  
ON the banks of Peninnis, in St Mary's, is Piper's Hole, which
communicates, as tradition saith, with the island of Tresco, where
another orifice known by the same name is seen. Going in at the orifice
at Peninnis Banks in St Mary's, it is above man's height, and of as much
space in its breadth, but grows lower and narrower farther in a little
beyond which entrance appear rocky basins, or reservoirs, continually
running over with fresh water, descending as it distils from the sides
of the rocky passage. By the fall of water heard further in, it is
probable there may be rocky descents in the passage. The drippings from
the sides have worn the passage, as far as it can be seen, into very
various angular surfaces. Strange stories are related of this passage,
of men going so far in that they never returned; of dogs going quite
through, and coming out at Tresco, with most of their hair off; and such
like incredibles. But its retired situation, where lovers retreat to
indulge their mutual passion-, has made it almost as famous as the cave
wherein Dido and Aeneas met of old. Its water is exceeding good. \[a\]

\[ a\] Heath's "Scilly Isles." These stories of Piper's Hole are still
told, and many of the ignorant inhabitants regard it with superstitious
dread. The Fugoe Hole, at the Land's End, has yet to be spoken of in the
Witch stories. Several who have attempted to penetrate this hole have
escaped only by great luck --" by the skin of their teeth," as the
saving is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Devil's Coit &c](prwe081)
