[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe012)  [Next](prwe014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE LORD OF PENGERSWICK AND THE GIANT OF ST MICHAEL'S MOUNT.

  
THE giant who dwelt on St Michael's Mount had grown very old, and had
lost all his teeth; still he was the terror of the neighbouring
villages. The horrid old monster--who had but one eye, and that one in
the middle of his forehead--would, whenever he required food--which was
pretty often--walk or wade across to Market-Jew, as the tide might be,
select the best cow in the neighbourhood, and, swinging it over his
shoulders, return to his island. This giant had often taken cattle from
the Pengerswick estate; and one day he thought he should like another of
this choice breed. Accordingly, away he went, across the sea, to
Pengerswick Cove. The giant did not know that the lord of Pengerswick
had returned from the East, a master of "white-witchcraft," or magic.
The lord had seen the giant coming, and he began to work his spells. The
giant was bewildered, yet he knew not how. At last, after much trouble,
he caught a fine calf tied its four feet together, passed his great head
between the fore and hind legs, and, with the calf hanging on his
shoulders, he trod in joy towards the shore. He wandered on in perfect
unconsciousness of the path, and eventually he found himself on the
precipitous edge of the great black rock which still marks the western
side of Pengerswick Cove. As if the rock had been a magnet, the giant
was chained fast. He twisted, turned, and struggled in vain. He found
himself gradually becoming stiff, so that at last he could neither move
hand nor foot; yet were his senses more keenly alive than ever. The
giant had to remain thus, during a long winter's night, with the calf
bleating, as never calf bleated before, into his ear. In the morning
when the enchanter thought he had punished the giant sufficiently, he
mounted his mare, and rode down to the shore. He disenchanted the giant,
by giving him a severe horse­whipping, and he then made him drop the
calf. He continued to flog the giant until he leaped off the rock into
the sea, through which in great agony he waded to the Mount; and from
that day to this he has never ventured on the mainland.

 We learn, however, from undoubted authority, that some time after this,
Tom, the giant of Lelant, visited the giant on the Mount, and, finding
him half starved, he took his aunt Nancy from Gulval to see his friend,
with a large supply of butter and eggs. The old giant was exceedingly
glad to see the farmer's wife, bought all her store at a very
extravagant price, and bargained and paid in advance for more. He had a
store of wealth in the caverns of the Mount. The knowing old woman kept
him well supplied as long as the giant had money to pay her; and aunt
Nancy's family became the wealthiest in the parish of Gulval.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Giant of St. Michael's Mount loses his wife](prwe014.md)
