[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe188)  [Next](prwe190.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TINNER OF CHYANNOR \[a\]

THE village of Trereen, near the Logan Stone, was at one time an
important market-town. Here came all the tin-streamers who worked from
Penberth to the hills, and to protect the place and the valuable
property which was accumulated here, Castle Trereen was built. Here
came-- or rather into the cove near it came--the Tyrian merchants. They
were not allowed to advance beyond the shores, lest they should discover
the country from which the tin was brought. But it is not of them that
we have now to tell, but of a knot of tinners who came from the low
country between Chyannor and Trengothal. These were assembled round the
Garrack Zans, which then stood in the centre of the market-place of
Trereen. Times had been bad, and they were consulting together what they
had better do. The "streams" had failed them, and they believed all the
tin was worked out. Some of them had heard that there was tin in "the
country a long way off." some miles beyond Market-Jew; but they had but
a very dim idea of the place or of the people. One of them, who, though
an old man, was more adventurous than any of his comrades, said he would
travel there and see what could be done. It was then determined that Tom
Trezidder should try his fortune, and the others would wait until he
came home again, or sent for them to come to him. This was soon noised
about, and all the women, old and young, came to say" Good-bye" to Tom.
His parting with his wife was brief but bitter. He bore up well, and
with a stout heart started on his adventure. Tom Trezidder arrived at
length at a place not far from Goldsythney, and here he found one of the
Jew merchants, who farmed the tin ground, and sold the tin at St
Michael's Mount; and the Jew was very anxious to engage so experienced a
"streamer" as Tom was. Tom, nothing loath, took service for a year. He
was to have just enough to live on, and a share of profits at the year's
end. Tom worked diligently, and plenty of tin was the result of his
experienced labour. The year expired, and Tom looked for his share of
the profits. The Jew contrived to put Tom off, and promised Tom great
things if he would stop for another year, and persuaded him to send for
some of his old comrades, clenching every argument which he employed
with a small piece of advice, "Never leave an old road for a new one,"

The other tiriners were shy of venturing so far, so that two or three
only could be persuaded to leave the West Country. With Tom and with his
brethren the year passed by, and at the end he got no money, but only
the same piece of advice, "Never leave an old road for a new one." This
went on for a third year, when all of them, being naturally tired of
this sort of thing, resolved to go home again.

Tom Trezidder was a favourite with his master, and was greatly esteemed
for his honesty and industry by his mistress.

When they left she gave Tom a good currant cake to take home to his old
woman, and told him to remember the advice, "Never leave an old road for
a new one."

The tinners trudged on together until they were on the western side of
Penzance. They were weary, and they found that since they had left home
a new road had been made over the hills, which saved them a considerable
distance--in fact it was a "short cut." On they went. "No," says Tom;
"never leave an old road for a new one." They all laughed at him, and
trudged on. But Tom kept in the old road along the valley round the
hill. When Torn reached the other end of the "short cut" he thought he
would rest a bit, and he sat down by the road-side and ate his *fuggan.*
This his mistress had given him, that he might not break his cake until
he got home.

He had not sat long when he heard a noise, and, looking up the hill, he
saw his comrades, who he thought were miles in advance of him, slowly
and sorrowfully descending it. They came at last to where Tom was
seated, and a sad tale had they to tell, They had scarcely got into the
new road when they were set upon by robbers, who took from them "all
their little bit of money," and then beat them because they had no more.

Tom, you may be sure, thought the piece of advice worth something now,
as it had saved his bacon.

Tom arrived home at last, and glad was the old woman to see her old man
once again; so she made him some "herby tea" at once. He showed his wife
the cake, and told her that all he had received for his share of profits
was the piece of advice already given.

The ladies who read this story will understand how vexed was Tom's
wife,--there are but few of them who would not have done as she did,
that was to seize the cake from the table and fling it at her husband's
head, calling him an old fool. Tom Trezidder stooped to avoid the blow.
Slap against the corner of the dresser went the cake, breaking in pieces
with the blow, and out on the lime-ash floor rolled a lot of gold coins.

This soon changed the aspect of things; the storm rolled back, and
sunshine was once more in the cottage. The coins were all gathered up,
and they found a scrap of paper, on which, when they got the priest to
read it, they discovered was written an exact account of each year's
profits, and Tom's share. The three years' shares had been duly hoarded
for him by his master and mistress; and now this old couple found they
had enough to make them comfortable for the rest of their days. Many
were the prayers said by Tom and his wife for the happiness and health
of the honest Jew tin merchant and his wife.

\[a\] See Appendix BB.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Who are the Knockers ?](prwe190.md)
