[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe346)  [Next](prwe348) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ST PIRAN--PERRAN ZABULOE

"IT is rather a curious circumstance," says Davies Gilbert, "that the
word *Zabuloe* added to Perran, for the distinction of this parish, is
not Celtic, but through the French *sable*, from *sabalum*, a word
frequently used by Pliny, as indicative of sand or gravel.

"The encroachments of the sand have caused no less than three churches
to be built, after considerable intervals of time, in this parish. The
last was commenced in 1804; and in this year (1835), a building has been
discovered more ancient than the first of these churches, and not
improbably the Oratory of St Perran himself. The length of this chapel
within the walls is 25 feet, without, 30 feet; the breadth within, 12 ½
feet; and the height of the walls the same.

" At the eastern end is a neat altar of stone covered with lime, 4 feet
long, by 2 ½ feet wide, and 3 feet high. Eight inches above the centre
of the altar is a recess in the wall, where probably stood a crucifix;
and on the north side of the altar is a small doorway, through which the
priest may have entered. Out of the whole length, the chance! extended
exactly 6 feet. In the centre of what may be termed the nave, in the
south wall, occurs a round arched doorway, highly ornamented. The
building is, however, without any trace of window; and there is only one
small opening, apparently for the admission of air.

"The discovery has excited much curiosity throughout the neighbourhood;
which has, unfortunately, manifested itself by the demolition of
everything curious in this little oratory, to be borne away as
relics."--*Gilbert*.

"Very little is known concerning the saint who has given his name to the
three Perrans. He is, however, held in great veneration, and esteemed
the patron of all Cornwall, or at least of the mining
district."--*Hals*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St Chiwidden](prwe348)
