[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe140)  [Next](prwe142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ST NECTAN'S KIEVE AND THE LONELY SISTERS.

 FAR up the deep and rocky vale of Trevillet, in the parish of Tintagel,
\[a\] stands on a pile of rocks the little chapel of the good St Nectan.
No holy man ever selected a more secluded, or a more lovely spot in
which to pass a religious life. From the chapel rock you look over the
deep valley full of trees. You see here and there the lovely
trout-stream running rapidly towards the sea; and, opening in the
distance, there rolls *-* the mighty ocean itself. Although this oratory
is shut in amongst the woods, so as to be invisible to any one
approaching it by land, until they are close upon it, it is plainly seen
by the fishermen or by the sailor far off at sea; and in olden time the
prayers of St Nectan were sought by all whose business was in the "deep
waters."

The river runs steadily along within a short distance of St Nectan's
Chapel, and then it suddenly leaps over the rock--a beautiful fall of
water--into St Nectan's Kieve. This deep rock basin, brimming with the
clearest water, overflows, and another waterfall carries the river to
the lower level of the valley. Standing here within a circular wall of
rocks, you see how the falling fluid has worked back the softer
slate-rock until it has reached the harder masses, which are beautifully
polished by the same agent. Mosses, ferns, and grasses decorate the
fall, fringing every rock with a native drapery of the most exquisite
beauty. Here is one of the wildest, one of the most untrained, and, at
the same time, one of the most beautiful spots in Cornwall, full of
poetry, and coloured by legend. Yet here comes prosaic man, and by one
stroke of his every-day genius, he adds, indeed, a colour to the violet.
You walk along the valley, through paths trodden out of the undergrowth,
deviously wandering up hill, or down hill, as rock or tree has
interposed. Many a spot of quiet beauty solicits you to loiter, and
loitering, you feel that there are places from which the winds appear to
gather poetry. You break the spell, or the ear, catching the murmur of
the waters, dispels the illusions which have been created by the eye,
and you wander forward, anxious to reach the holy " Kieve,"--to visit
the saint's hermitage. Here, say you, is the place to hold "commune with
Nature's works, and view her charms unrolled," when, lo, a well made
door, painted lead colour, with a real substantial lock, bars your way,
and Fancy, with everything that is holy, flies away before the terrible
words which inform you that trespassers will be punished, and that the
key can be obtained at ---------. Well was it that Mr Wilkie Collins
gave "up the attempt to discover Nighton's Kieve ; " \[b\] for had he,
when he had found it, discovered this evidence of man's greedy soul, it
would have convinced him that the "evil genius of fairy mythology," who
so cautiously hid "the nymph *-* of the waterfall," was no other than
the farmer, who, as he told me, "owns the fee," and one who is resolved
also to pocket the fee before any pilgrim can see the oratory and the
waterfall of St Nectan. Of course this would have turned the placid
current -of the thoughts of" the Rambler beyond Railways," which now
flow so pleasantly, into a troubled stream of biliary bitterness.

St Nectan placed in the little bell-tower of his secluded chapel a
silver bell, the notes of which were so clear and- penetrating that they
could be heard far off at sea. When the notes came through the air, and
fell on the ears of the seamen, they knew that St Nectan was about to
pray for them, and they prostrated themselves before Heaven for a few
minutes, and thus endeavoured to win the blessing.

St Nectan was on the bed of death. There was strife in the land. A
severe struggle was going on between the Churchmen, and endeavours were
being made to introduce a new faith.

The sunset of life gave to the saint the spirit of prophecy, and he told
his weeping followers that the light of their religion would grow dim in
the land; but that a spark would for ever live amidst the ashes, and
that in due time it would kindle into a flame, and burn more brightly
than ever. His silver bell, he said, should never ring for others than
the true believer. He would enclose it in the rock of the Kieve; but
when again the true faith revived, it should be recovered, and rung, to
cheer once more the land.

One lovely summer evening, while the sun was slowly sinking towards the
golden sea, St Nectan desired his attendants to carry him to the bank
which overhung the "Kieve," and requested them to take the bell from the
tower and bring it to him. There he lay for some time in silent prayer,
waiting as if for a sign, then slowly raising himself from the bed on
which he had been placed, he grasped the silver bell. He rang it sharply
and clearly three times, and then he dropped it into the transparent
waters of the Kieve. He watched it disappear, and then he closed his
eyes in death. On receiving the bell the waters were troubled, but they
soon became clear as before, and the bell was nowhere to be seen.

St Nectan died, and two strange ladies from a foreign land came and took
possession of his oratory, and all that belonged unto the holy man. They
placed--acting, as it was believed, on the wishes of the saint
himself--his body, all the sacramental plate, and other sacred
treasures, in a large oak chest. They turned the waters of the fall
aside, and dug a grave in the river bed, below the Kieve, in which they
placed this precious chest. The waters were then returned to their
natural course, and they murmur ever above the grave of him who loved
them. The silver bell was concealed in the Kieve, and the saint with all
that be. longed to his holy office rested beneath the river bed. The
oratory was dismantled, and the two ladies, women evidently of high
birth, chose it for their dwelling. Their seclusion was perfect. "Both
appeared to be about the same age, and both were inflexibly taciturn.
One was never seen without the other. If they ever left the house, they
only left it to walk in the more unfrequented parts of the wood; they
kept no servant; they never had a visitor; no living soul but themselves
ever crossed the door of their cottage." \[c\] The berries of the wood,
a few roots which they cultivated, with snails gathered from the rocks
and walls, and fish caught in the stream, served them for food.
Curiosity was excited; the mystery which hung around this solitary pair
became deepened by the obstinate silence which they observed in every\~
thing relating to themselves. The result of all this was an anxious
endeavour, on the part of the superstitious and ignorant peasantry, to
learn their secret. All was now conjecture, and the imagination commonly
enough filled in a wild picture : devils or angels, as the case might
be, were seen ministering to the solitary ones. Prying eyes were upon
them, but the spies could glean no knowledge. Week, month, year passed
by, and ungratified curiosity was dying through want of food, when it
was discovered that one of the ladies had died. The peasantry went in a
body to the chapel; no one forbade their entering it now. There sat a
silent mourner leaning over the placid lace of her dead sister. Hers
was, indeed, a silent sorrow--no tear was in her eye, no sigh hove her
chest, but the face told all that a remediless woe had fallen on her
heart. The dead body was eventually removed, the living sister making no
sign, and they left her in her solitude alone. Days passed on; no one
heard of no one probably inquired after, the lonely one. At last a
wandering child, curious as children are, clambered to the window of
the- cell and looked in. There sat the lady; her handkerchief was on the
floor, and one hand hung strangely, as if endeavouring to pick it up,
but powerless to do so. The child told its story--the people again
flocked to the chapel, and they found one sister had followed the other.
The people buried the last beside the first, and they left no mark to
tell us where, unless the large flat stone which lies in the valley, a
short distance from the foot of the fall, and beneath which, I was told,
"some great person was buried," may be the covering of their tomb. No
traces -of the history of these solitary women have ever been
discovered.'

Centuries have passed away, and still the legends of the buried bell and
treasure are preserved. Some long time since a party of men resolved to
blast the "Kieve," and examine it for the silver bell. They were miners,
and their engineering knowledge, though rude, was sufficient to enable
them to divert the course of the river above the falls, and thus to
leave the "Kieve" dry for them to work on when they had emptied it,
which was an easy task. The "borer" now rung upon the rock, holes were
pierced, and, being charged, they were blasted. The result was, however,
anything but satisfactory, for the rock remained intact. Still they
persevered, until at length a voice was heard amidst the ring of the
iron tools in the holes of the rock. Every hand was stayed, every face
was aghast, as they heard distinctly the ring of the silver bell,
followed by a clear solemn voice proclaiming, "The child is not yet born
who shall recover this treasure."

The work was stopped, and the river restored to its old channel, over
which it will run undisturbed until the day of which St Nectan
prophesied shall arrive.

When, in the autumn of 1863, I visited this lovely spot, my guide, the
proprietor, informed me that very recently a gentleman residing, I
believe, in London, dreamed that an angel stood on a little bank of
pebbles, forming a petty island, at the foot of a waterfall, and
pointing to a certain spot, told him to search there and he would find
gold and a mummy. This gentleman told his dream to a friend, who at once
declared the place indicated to be St Nectan's waterfall. Upon this, the
dreamer visited the West, and, upon being led by the owner of the
property to the fall, he at once recognised the spot on which the angel
stood.

A plan was then and there arranged by which a search might be again
commenced, it being thought that as an angel had indicated the spot, the
time for the recovery of the treasure had arrived.

Let us hope that the search may be deferred, lest the natural beauties
of the spot should be destroyed by the meddling of men, who can threaten
trespassers,--fearing to lose a sixpence,--and who have already
endeavoured to improve on nature, by cutting down some of the rock and
planting rhododendrons.

The Rev. R. S. Hawker, of Morwenstow, has published in his "Echoes of
Old Cornwall" a poem on this tradition, which, as it is but little
known, and as it has the true poetic ring, I transcribe to adorn the
pages of my Appendix X.

\[a\] TINTAGEL. is the usual name. Gilbert, in his "Parochial History,"
has it "DUNDAGELL, *alias* DYNDAGELL, *alias* BOSITHNEY;" in
"Doomsday-book" it is called "DUNECHEINE." Tonkin writes "Dindagel or
Daundagel," and sometimes DUNGIOGEL. "A King Nectan, or St Nectan, is
said to have built numerous churches in several parts of Scotland, as
well as in other parts of the kingdom of the Northern Picts*."--Wilson's
Prehistoric Annals of Scotland.*

\[b\] It is called indifferently Nectan, Nathan, Nighton, or Knighton's
Kieve.

\[c\] Rambles beyond Railways. By Wilkie Collins. Mr Collins was
curiously misled by those *who* told him the tradition. The building
which these strange solitary women Inhabited was St Nectan's, or, as he
and many others write it, St Nighton's, Chapel, and not a cottage. They
died, as Mr Collins describes it: but either he, or those from whom he
learned the tale, has filled in the picture from imagination. I
perceive, on referrIng to Mr Walter White's admirable little book, "A
Londoner's Walk to the Land's End, that he has made the same mistake
about the cottage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Theodore, King of Cornwall](prwe142)
