[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe062)  [Next](prwe064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE OLD MAN OF CURY

MORE than a hundred years since, on a fine summer day, when the sun
shone brilliantly from a cloudless sky, an old man from the parish of
Cury, or, as it was called in olden time, Corantyn, was walking on the
sands in one of the coves near the Lizard Point. The old man was
meditating, or at least he was walking onward, either thinking deeply,
or not thinking at all --.that is, he was "lost in thought "--when
suddenly he came upon a rock on which was sitting a beautiful girl with
fair hair, so long that it covered her entire person. On the in-shore
side of the rock was a pool of the most transparent water, which had
been left by the receding tide in the sandy hollow the waters had
scooped out. This young creature was so absorbed in her
occupation,--arranging her hair in the watery mirror, or in admiration
of her own lovely face, that she was unconscious of an intruder.

The old man stood looking at her for some time ere he made up his mind
how to act. At length he resolved to speak to the maiden. "What cheer,
young one?" he said; "what art thee doing there by thyself then, this
time o' day?" As soon as she heard the voice, she slid off the rock
entirely under the water.

The old man could not tell what to make of it. He thought the girl would
drown herself, so he ran on to the rock to render her assistance,
conceiving that in her fright at being found naked by a man she had
fallen into the pool, and possibly it was deep enough to drown her. He
looked into the water, and, sure enough, he could make out the head and
shoulders of a woman, and long hair floating like fine sea-weeds all
over the pond, hiding what appeared to him to be a fish's tail. He could
not, however, see anything distinctly, owing to the abundance of hair
floating around the figure. The old man had heard of mermaids from the
fishermen of Gunwalloe; so he conceived this lady must be one, and he
was at first very much frightened. He saw that the young lady was quite
as much terrified as he was, and that, from shame or fear, she
endeavoured to hide herself in the crevices of the rock, and bury
herself under the sea-weeds.

Summoning courage, at last the old man addressed her, "Don't 'e be
afraid, my dear. You needn't mind me. I wouldn't do ye any harm. I 'm an
old man, and wouldn't hurt ye any more than your grandfather."

After he had talked in this soothing strain for some time, the young
lady took courage, and raised her head above the water. She was crying
bitterly, and, as soon as she could speak, she begged the old man to go
away.

"I must know, my dearie, something about ye, now I have caught ye. It is
not every day that an old man catches a merry-maid, and I have heard
some strange tales of you water-ladies. Now, my dear, don't 'e be
afraid, I would not hurt a single hair of that beautiful head. How came
ye here?" After some further coaxing she told the old man the following
story:-- She and her husband and little ones had been busy at sea all
the morning, and they were very tired with swimming in the hot sun; so
the merman proposed that they should retire to a cavern, which they were
in the habit of visiting in Kynance Cove. Away they all swam, and
entered the cavern at mid-tide. As there was some nice soft weed, and
the cave was deliciously cool, the merman was disposed to sleep, and
told them not to wake him until the rise of the tide. He was soon fast
asleep, snoring most lustily. The children crept out and were playing on
the lovely sands; so the mermaid thought she should like to look at the
world a little. She looked with delight on the children rolling to and
fro in the shallow waves, and she laughed heartily at the crabs fighting
in their own funny way. "The scent from the flowers came down over the
cliffs so sweetly," said she, "that I longed to get nearer the lovely
things which yielded those rich odours, and I floated on from rock to
rock until I came to this one; and finding that I could not proceed any
further, I thought I would seize the opportunity of dressing my hair."
She passed her fingers through those beautiful locks, and shook out a
number of small crabs, and much broken sea-weed. She went on to say that
she had sat on the rock amusing herself until the voice of a mortal
terrified her, and until then she had no idea that the sea was so far
out, and a long dry bar of sand between her and it. "What shall I do?
what shall I do? Oh! I'd give the world to get out to sea! Oh ! oh! what
shall I do?"

The old man endeavoured to console her; but his attempts were in vain.
She told him her husband would "carry on" most dreadfully if he awoke
and found her absent, and he would be certain of awaking at the turn of
the tide, as that was his dinnertime. He was very savage when he was
hungry, and would as soon eat the children as not, if there was no other
food at hand. He was also dreadfully jealous, and if she was not at his
side 's'hen he awoke, he would at once suspect her of having run off
with some other merman. She begged the old man to bear her out to sea.
If he would but do so, she would procure him any three things he would
wish for. Her entreaties at length prevailed; and, according to her
desire, the old man knelt down on the rock with his back towards her.
She clasped her fair arms around his neck, and locked her long finny
fingers together on his throat. He got up from the rock with his
burthen, and carried the mermaid thus across the sands. As she rode in
this way, she asked the old man to tell her what he desired.

"I will not wish," said he, "for silver and gold, but give me the power
to do good to my neighbours: first, to break the spells of witchcraft;
next, to charm away diseases; and thirdly, to discover thieves, and
restore stolen goods."

All this she promised he should possess; but he must come to a half-tide
rock on another day, and she would instruct him how to accomplish the
three things he desired. They had reached the water, and taking her comb
from her hair, she gave it to the old man, telling him he had but to
comb the water and call her at any time, and she would come to him. The
mermaid loosened her grasp, and sliding off the old man's back into the
sea, she waved him a kiss and disappeared. At the appointed time the old
man was at the half-tide rock,--known to the present time as the
Mermaid's Rock,--and duly was he instructed in many mysteries. Amongst
others, he learned to break the spells of witches from man or beast; to
prepare a vessel of water, in which to show to any one who had property
stolen the face of the thief; to charm shingles, tetters, St Antony's
fire, and St Vitus's dance; and he learnt also all the mysteries of
bramble leaves, and the like.

The mermaid had a woman's curiosity, and she persuaded her old friend to
take her to some secret place, from which she could see more of the dry
land, and of the funny people who lived on it, "and had their tails
split, so that they could walk." On taking the mermaid back to the sea,
she wished her friend to visit her abode, and promised even to make him
young if he would do so, which favour the old gentleman respectfully
declined. A family, well known in Cornwall, have for some generations
exercised the power of charming, &c. They account for the possession of
this power in the manner related. Some remote great-grandfather was the
individual who received the mermaid's 'comb, which they retain to the
present day, and show us evidence- of the truth of their being
supernaturally endowed. Some people are unbelieving enough to say the
comb is only a part of a shark's jaw. Sceptical people are never lovable
people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mermaid's Vengence](prwe064)
