[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe148)  [Next](prwe150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE WELL AT ALTAR-NUN.

CURE OF INSANITY.

MONGST the numerous holy wells which exist in Cornwall, that of
Alternosi, or Altar-Nun, is the only one, as far as I can learn, which
possessed the virtue of curing the insane.

We are told that Saint Nunne or Nuanita was the daughter of an Earl of
Cornwall, and the mother of St David; that the holy well, which is
situated about a mile from the cathedral of St David, was dedicated to
her; and that she bestowed on the waters of the Cornish well those
remarkable powers, which were not given to the Welsh one, from her
fondness for the county of her birth.

Carew, in his "Survey of Cornwall," thus describes the practice :--

"The water running from St Nun's well fell into a square and enclosed
walled plot, which might be filled at what depth they listed. Upon this
wall was the frantic person put to stand, his back towards the pool, and
from thence, with a sudden blow in the breast, tumbled headlong into the
pond; where a strong fellow, provided for the nonce, took him, and
tossed him up and down, amongst and athwart the water, till the patient,
by foregoing his' strength, had somewhat forgot his fury. Then was he
conveyed to the church, and certain masses said over him; upon which
handling, if his right wits returned, St Nun had the thanks; but if
there appeared small amendment, he was bowssened again and again, while
there remained in him any hope of life or recovery."

The 2d of March is dedicated to St Nun, and the influence of the water
is greatly exalted on that day.

Although St Nun's well has been long famous, and the celebrity of its
waters extended far, yet there was a belief prevailing amidst the
uneducated, that the sudden shock produced by suddenly plunging an
insane person into water was most effective in producing a return to
reason.

On one occasion, a woman of weak mind, who was suffering under the
influence of a religious monomania, consulted me on the benefit she
might hope to receive from electricity. The burden of her
ever-melancholy tale was, that "she had lost her God; "and she told me,
with a strange mixture of incoherence and reason, that her conviction
was, that a sudden shock would cure her. She had herself proposed to her
husband and friends that they should take her to a certain rock on St
Michael's Mount, stand her on it, with her back to the sea, when "the
waters were the strongest, at the flowing of the tide;" and after having
prayed with her, give her the necessary blow on the chest, and thus
plunge her into the waters below. I know not that the experiment was
ever made in the case of this poor woman, but I have heard of several
instances where this sudden plunge had been tried as a cure for
insanity.

Mr T. Q. Couch thus describes the present condition of this well in a
paper on "Well-Worship: " \[a\]

"On the western side of the beautiful valley through which flows the
Trelawney River, and near Hobb's Park, in the parish of Pelynt,
Cornwall, is St Nun's, or St Ninnie's Well. Its position was, until
lately, to be discovered by the oak-tree matted with ivy, and the
thicket of willow and bramble which grew upon its roof. The front of the
well is of a pointed form, and has a rude entrance about four feet high,
and spanned above by a single flat stone, which leads into a grotto with
arched roof. The walls on the interior are draped with luxuriant fronds
of spleenwort, hart's-tongue, and a rich undercovering of liverwort. At
the further end of the floor is a round granite basin, with a deeply
moulded brim, and ornamented on' its circumference with a series of
rings, each enclosing a cross or a ball. The water weeps into it from an
opening at the back, and escapes again by a hole in the bottom. This
interesting piece of antiquity has been protected by a tradition which
we could wish to attach to some of our cromlechs and circles in danger
of spoliation."

According to the narrative given by Mr Bond in his "History of Looe,"
the sacred

protection given must have been limited in time, as the following story
will prove :--

"KIPPISCOMBE LANE,

Probably so called from a consecrated well on the right hand .side of
the road. The titular saint of this well is supposed to have been St
Cuby, now corrupted into Keby's Well. The spring flows Into a circular
basin or reservoir of granite, or of some stone like it, two feet four
inches at its extreme diameter at top, and about two feet high. It
appears to have been neatly carved and ornamented in its lower part with
the figure of a griffin, and round the edge with dolphins, now much
defaced. The water was formerly carried off by a drain or hole at the
bottom, like those usually seen in fonts and piscinas. This basin (which
I take to be an old font) was formerly much respected by the neighbours,
who conceived some great misfortune would befall the person who should
attempt to remove it from where it stood, and that it required immense
power to remove it. A daring fellow, however (says a story), once went
with a team of oxen for the express purpose of removing it. On his
arrival at the spot, one of the oxen fell down dead, which so alarmed
the fellow that he desisted from the attempt he was about to make. There
are several loose stones scattered round this basin or reservoir,
perhaps the remains of some building which formerly enclosed it--a small
chapel likely. The last time I saw this reservoir, it had been taken
many feet from where it used to stand, and a piece of the brim of it had
been recently struck off ?'

\[a\] Notes and Queries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St Gundred's Well at Roach Rock](prwe150)
