[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe034)  [Next](prwe036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE PIXIES OF DARTMOOR.

  
THERE is a celebrated piskie haunt at Costellas in Cornwall (says Mrs
Bray), where they have been seen sitting in a ring--the men smoking
after .the most approved fashion of the Dutch burgomaster, and the women
spinning, perhaps in emulation of the frugal vrow.

I never heard of this place. Like the rest of the "good people," piskies
are fond of music, and the sound of their "harp and pipe and symphony,"
is occasionally heard at nightfall. It is said that a man once passing
one of the piskie rings, and hearing them dancing and singing within it,
threw a large stone into the midst of the circle, when the music at once
ceased and a dreadful shriek arose.

The appearance of *the pixies* of Dartmoor is said to resemble that of a
bale or bundle of rags. In this shape they decoy children to their
unreal pleasure. A woman, on the northern borders of the moor, was
returning home late on a dark evening, accompanied by two children, and
carrying a third in her arms, when, on arriving at her own door, she
found one missing. Her neighbours, with lanthorns, immediately set out
in quest of the lost child; whom they found sitting under a large
oak-tree, well known to be a favourite haunt of the pixies. He declared
that he had been led away by two large bundles of rags, which had
remained with him until the lights appeared, when they immediately
vanished. \[a\]

The pixies of Dartmoor, notwithstanding their darker character, aided
occasionally in household work. A washer-woman was one morning greatly
surprised, on coming down-stairs, to find all her clothes neatly washed
and folded. She watched the next evening, and observed a pixie in the
act of performing this kind office for her: but she was ragged and mean
in appearance, and Betty's gratitude was sufficiently great to- induce
her to prepare a yellow petticoat and a red cap for the obliging pixie.

\[a\] For additional information respecting the pixies of the banks of
the Tamar and the Tavy, the reader is referred to Mrs Bray's
"Traditions, Legends, Superstitious, and Sketches of Devonshire."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairy Fair in Germoe](prwe036.md)
