[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe252)  [Next](prwe254.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CURES FOR WHOOPING COUGH

 

I.       GATHER nine spar stones from a running stream, taking care not
to interrupt the free passage of the water in doing so Then dip a quart
of water from the stream, which must be taken in the direction in which
the stream runs ;-- by no means must the vessel be dipped against the
stream. Then make the nine stones red hot, and throw them into the quart
of water. Bottle the prepared water, and give the afflicted child a
wine-glass of this water for nine mornings following. If this will not
cure the whooping-cough, nothing else can, says the believer.

II\. A female donkey of three years old was taken, and, the child was
drawn naked nine times over its back and under its belly. Then three
spoonfuls of milk were drawn from the teats of the animal, and three
hairs cut from the back and three hairs cut from the belly were placed
in it, this was to stand for three hours to acquire the proper virtue,
and then the child drank it in three doses.

This ceremony was repeated three mornings running, and my informant said
the child was always cured. I knew of several children who were treated
in this manner in one of the small villages between Penzance and Madron
Church town, some twenty or thirty years since. There were some doggerel
lines connected with the ceremony, which have escaped my memory, and I
have endeavoured, in vain, to find any one remembering them. They were
to the effect that, as Christ placed the cross on the ass's back when he
rode into Jerusalem, and so rendered the animal holy, if the child
'touched where Jesus sat, it should cough no more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cure of Toothache](prwe254.md)
