[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe314)  [Next](prwe316) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHURCHES BUILT IN PERFORMANCE OF VOWS.

** **THERE are several churches which, tradition tells us, owe their
origin to vows made by terrified men that they would, if relieved from
their dangers, build a temple to God.

Amongst these may be named Brent Tor, thus spoken of by Mr Bray :--

"The church of Brent Tor is dedicated to St Michael. And there is a
tradition among the vulgar that its foundation was originally laid at
the foot of the hill **;** but that the enemy of all angels, the Prince
of Darkness, removed the stones by night from the base to the
summit,--probably to he nearer his own dominion, the air,--but that,
immediately on the church's being dedicated to St Michael, the patron of
the edifice hurled upon the devil such an enormous mass of rock that he
never afterwards ventured to approach **it.** Others tell us that **it**
was erected by a wealthy merchant, who vowed, in the midst of a
tremendous storm at sea (possibly addressing him. self to his patron, St
Michael, that if he escaped, he would built a church on the first land
he descried." \[a\]

Brent Tor is a very remarkable hill, and can be seen far off at sea.
This may possibly lend some support to the latter tradition.

St Anthony, in Kerrier, is likewise stated to be the consequence of a
vow. Soon after the Conquest, as some persons of rank and fortune were
coming to England from Normandy, they were overtaken by a violent storm,
from which they expected immediate destruction. In the midst of their
distress, they directed their prayers to St Anthony, and laid themselves
under a solemn vow to erect a church to his memory, if he would save
them from shipwreck; and that this church should be erected on the very
spot where they should first get on shore. Driven by the tempest, they
were conducted, by a power fully equal to that which St Anthony might be
supposed to possess, into St Mawe's harbour, and happily landed on that
very spot where the church now stands. And it appears that the materials
with which the tower is built, and the situation which the church and
tower occupy, are calculated to give sanction to this tradition.

\[a\] "Traditions, Legends, Superstitions, and Sketches of Devonshire,"
by Mrs Bray, who gives a letter of her husband's, for some time vicar of
Tavistock.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bolait, The Field of Blood](prwe316)
