[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe002)  [Next](prwe004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE AGE OF THE GIANTS.

  
 

"Eald ents geweorc  
Idiu stodon."--

The Wanderer. Exeter Book.

"The old works of giants  
Stood desolate."--THOMAS WRIGHT.

IN wandering over some of the uncultivated tracts which still maintain
their wildness, austerely and sullenly, against the march of
cultivation, we are certain of finding rude masses of rock which have
some relation to the giants. The giant's hand, or the giant's chair, or,
it may be, the giant's punch-bowl, excites your curiosity. What were the
mental peculiarities of the people who fixed so permanently those names
on fantastic rock-masses? What are the conditions--mental or
otherwise--necessary for the preservation of these ideas? are questions
which I have often asked myself when wandering amidst the Tors of
Dartmoor, and when seated upon the granite masses which spread
themselves so strangely, yet so picturesquely, over Cam Brea and other
rocky hills' in Cornwall. When questions of this kind are continually
recurring, the mind naturally works out some reply, which satisfies at
least itself; and it consequently not unfrequently reposes contentedly
on a fallacy as baseless as the giant-spectre of the mountain mists.
This may possibly be the condition at which I have arrived, and many of
my readers may smile at my dreams. It is not in my nature to work
without some hypothesis; but I endeavour to hold it as loosely as
possible, that it may be yielded up readily the moment a more promising
theory is born, whoever may be its parent--wherever its birthplace.

Giants, and every form of giant-idea, belong to the wilds of nature. I
have never discovered the slightest indication of the existence of a
tradition of giants, of the true legendary type, in a fertile valley or
in a well-cultivated plain. Wherever there yet linger the faint shadows
of the legendary giant, there the country still retains much of its
native wildness, and the inhabitants have, to a great extent, preserved
their primitive character In other words, they have nurtured a gloomy
imagination, and permitted ignorance to continue its melancholy
delusions. The untaught mind, in every age, looks upon the grander
phenomena of nature with feelings of terror, and endeavours to explain
them by the aid of those errors which have been perpetuated from father
to son since the days when the priests of superstition sought to rule
the minds of men by exciting their fears.

I shall have to tell, by and by, the story of a so-called giant, who
could bestride the lovely river which flows through the luxuriant valley
of Tavistock, where, also, the inquiring traveller is shown his grave.
The giant's grave in Penrith churchyard is familiar to me; and in or
near many a picturesque village, shadowed by noble trees, and surrounded
by richly-clothed fields, I can point to mounds, and to stones, which
are said to be the resting-places of giants. These, however, will
invariably be found to be rude monuments to ordinary men, who were
possessed of more wealth, intelligence, courage, or strength than their
fellows: men who have been the objects of hero-worship, but whose names
have perished amidst the wrecks of time. It may be argued that these
village giants are creations of the same character as those of the true
legendary type, and that both result from analogous operations in the
human mind. It may be so; but how vastly different must have been the
constitution of those minds to which we owe the creations of the Titans
of our mountains and the large men of our lowlands. Had I the learning
necessary for the task of showing that our legendary giant is of
Oriental origin, I have not the required leisure to pursue that inquiry
to its end; and I leave it to abler men, contenting myself, and, let me
hope, satisfying my readers, by studying the subject in its more simple
aspects.

I find, over a tract of country extending, from the eastern edge of
Dartmoor to the Land's End--and even beyond it, to the Scilly Islands --
curious relics of the giants. This district is in many respects a
peculiar one. The physical features of the country are broadly marked;
and, even after the civilising influences of centuries, wild nature
contests with man, and often maintains her supremacy. On one hand we see
industry taking possession of the hills, and holding them firm in its
ameliorating grasp; on the other, we find the sterile moor and the
rock-spread region still resisting successfully the influences of man
and his appliances. When I travel into other parts of the British Isles,
and reach a district having the same general features, I usually
discover some outstanding memory of the giants, often, it must be
admitted, faint and ill-defined. The giant Tarquin, almost forgotten
amidst the whir of spindles, "who had his dwelling in a well-fortified
castle near Manchester, on the site of what is yet known by the name of
Castlefield," and Carados--

"A mighty giant, just pull'd down,

Who lived near Shrewsbury's fair town"--

may be quoted as examples of the fading myths. \[a\]

I therefore draw the conclusion that those large masses of humanity--of
whom Saturn devouring his own children would seem to be the parental
type--can exist only in the memories of those races who are born and
live amidst the sublime phenomena of nature.

On the rugged mountain, overspread with rocks which appear themselves to
be the ruins of some Cyclopean hail, amidst which the tempests play,
still harmless in their fury;--here, where the breezes of spring and
summer whistle as with some new delight--where the autumnal winds murmur
the wildest music, or make the saddest wail; and the winter storms, as
if joyous in their strength, shout in voices of thunder from cairn to
cairn;--here does the giant dwell! On the beetling cliff, where coming
tern-pests delight to send those predicating moanings, which tell of the
coming war of winds and waves;--on rocks which have frowned for ages on
the angry sea, and in caverns which mock, by repeating, the sounds of
air and water--be they joyous as the voice of birds, or wild and solemn
as the howl of savages above the dead; -- here does the giant dwell!

In the valley, too, has he sometimes fixed his home; but the giant has
usually retired from business when he leaves the hills. Even here we
miss not the old associations. Huge boulders are spread on every side;
rock-masses are overgrown with furze, ferns, mosses, and heaths; and
torrents rush from the hills, bringing, as it were, their native music
with them. Wherever, indeed, the giants have made a home, we find a
place remarkable for the grand scale on which the works of nature are
displayed.

The giants of Danmonium--as that region was once named to which I have
confined my inquiries--will be found to be a marked race. They appear to
bear about them the characteristics of the giants of the East. They have
the peculiarities which may be studied in those true Oriental Titans,
Gog and Magog, who still preside so grimly and giantly at our City
feasts. They have none of that stony, cold-hearted character which marks
the giants of Scandinavia; and although Mr Keightley \[b\] would connect
the mighty Thor with the no less mighty giants of the Arabian stories, I
think, it can be shown that all those of the West of England resemble
their Northern brethren only in the manner in which the sensual monsters
succumb to the slightest exercise of thought.

Mr J. O. HaIliwell appears to have been a little surprised at
discovering, during a very short residence in the West of Cornwall, that
the Land's End district was "anciently the chosen land of the giants;"
that it was "beyond all other the favourite abode and the land of the
English giants." Peculiarly fitted for the inquiry as Mr Halliwell is,
by his life-long studies, it is to be regretted that he spent so brief a
period amidst "what still remains of these memorials of a Titan race."
\[c\]

Who were the giants? Whence came they? \[d\] I asked myself these
questions when, seated in the Giant's Chair, I have looked down upon a
wide expanse of" furzy downs," over which were scattered in picturesque
confusion vast masses of granite rocks, every one of them standing in
monumental grandeur, inscribed by the finger of tradition with memorials
of this mighty race. Did Cormelian and Cormoran really build St
Michael's Mount? Did Thunderbore walk the land, inspiring terror by his
extreme ugliness? Did Bolster persecute the blessed St Agnes, until she
was compelled by stratagem to destroy him? Did, indeed, our British
Titans play at quoits and marbles with huge rocks? Is it a fact that all
the giants died of grief after Corineus overthrew Gog Magog on Plymouth
Hoe? Let us, if only for amusement -- and to give to a light work some
appearance of Research--examine a few antiquated authorities, who may be
said--n their own way.--indirectly to answer those questions.

M. Pezron, D.D., and abbot of *La Chamoye* wrote a strange book, "The
Antiquities of Nations," which in 1706 was "Englished by Mr Jones."
\[e\]

In his Epistle Dedicatory to Charles Lord Halifax, speaking of the
"Famous Pezron," Mr Jones asks, "Was there ever any before him that
attempted to Trace the Origin of the *Celtae*, who with Great
Probability of Truth, were the same People, and spoke the same Language,
as our Ancient *Britain's* did, and their Descendants continue to do to
this Day, so high as *Gomer* and the *Gomarians*?"

This authority, with a great display of learning, proves that Gomer, the
eldest son of Japhet, was the chief of the Gomarians, and that these
Gomarians afterwards were called Galatians, or Gauls. We further learn
from him that a section of the Gomarians were called Sacae, and that the
Sacae went into Phrygia, and afterwards assumed the name of TITANS. This
race, "and especially the Princes that commanded them, exceeded all
others in Bulk and Strength of Body; and hence it is that they have been
looked upon to be terrible people, and, as it were, Giants. The
Scripture itself, the Rule of Truth, even gives such an Idea as this, of
those famous and potent men, who, according to it, ruled over all the
Earth. *Judith*, speaking of them in her fine Song, called them *Giants*
the sons of the *Titans*. \[f\] And the Prophet Isaiah informs us, also,
that these Giants were anciently Masters of the World."

This mighty race dwelt in mountains, woods, and rough and inaccessible
places, and "they lay in the Hollows of Valleys, and the like Places of
Shelter and retirement, because they had no Houses in those Times." The
learned abbot proceeds, exerting all his powers to prove that the Titans
were the true Celtae--that a people of Greece were the descendants of
the Titans--that Gomerwas "the true stock of the Gauls "--and that
Magog, his brother, "is also looked upon to be the Origin of the
*Scythians*, or People of *Great Tartary*." \[g\]

To seize on another authority, who appears to connect the Oriental with
the British cromlech, and through those the people whose remains they
cover, we will quote Dr E. D. Clarke, who describes \[h\] a Cyclopean
structure visited by him near Kiel, consisting of three upright stones,
supporting horizontally an enormous slab of granite. After mentioning
several cromlechs of a similar character, and other "stupendous vestiges
of Cyclopean architecture," he says--" There is nothing Gothic about
them--nothing denoting the *Cimbri* or the *Franks*, or the old *Saxons*
-- but rather the ancient *Gaulish*, the ancient British, and the
ancient irish; and if this be admitted, they were *Titan-Celts*:

the GIANTS of the *sacred*, and the CYCLOPS of the *heathen*
historians." I am informed that Mr Christy has lately examined several
cromlechs in Algeria; beneath each he found a human skeleton.

Such may be presumed to be the sources from which sprang the giants of
Cornwall, whose Iabours--of which relics still remain--prove them to
have been a race by the side of whom

"In stature the tall Amazon

Had stood a pigmy's height."

Everything they have left us informs us that they were men who

"Would have ta'en  
Achilles by the hair, and bent his neck,  
Or with a finger stay'd Ixion's wheel." \[i\]

With these evidences, who then dares say that the *Samotheans*, who,
under the reign of *Bardus*, people this island, were not subdued by
*Albion*, a giant son of Neptune, "who called the land after his own
name, and reigned forty-four years." \[j\] Let us not forget the
evidence also given by Milton in his "Lycidas," when he asks, in his
poetic sorrow, if his friend

"Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old,  
Where the great Vision of the guarded Mount  
Looks towards Namancos and Bayona's hold."

Bellerian was the name formerly given to the promontory of the Land's
End. It was the home of a mighty giant, after whom, in all probability,
the headland was called. \[k\]

Tradition throws a faint light back into those remote ages, and informs
us that Cyclopean walls, vast earthworks, and strangely-piled masses of
rock, which still remain, imperishable monuments of animal power, in
various parts of the ancient Danmonium, were the works of the giants.
With the true history of Jack the Giant-Killer--of him of the
Bean-Stalk--and some others, we are all acquainted. We listened to those
histories ere yet the dark seed of that troublesome weed--doubt--had
germinated. They were poured forth from loving lips into believing ears;
and often in the sleep of innocency have we buried our heads in the
maternal bosom to hide the horrid visage of some Cormoran Blunderbore,
or Thunderbore, and escape the giant's toils. By this process the
stories were imprinted on memory's tablets with an indelible ink, and
for long years, the spunge and water--which is employed by the pioneers
in the great March of Intellect--has been used almost in vain.
Notwithstanding the influences which have been brought to bear, with no
kindly spirit, upon the old-world tales, we have still lingering, though
in ruins, the evidences by which they were supported. Mr Thomas Wright,
in his "Memoir on the Local Legends of Shropshire," quotes from (and
translates his quotation) an Anglo-Saxon poem, which bears the title of
"The Ruin," in the "Exeter Book .

"Wondrous is this waIl.stone,  
The fates have broken it,  
Have burst the burgh.place;  
The work of giants is perishing."

From the Land's End \[l\] to the eastern edge of Dartmoor, the perishing
works of the giants--wondrous wall-stones--are yet to be found. In many
instances the only records by which we can mark the homes of the giants
are the names which yet cling to the rocks on the hills where they
dwelt. The Giant's Cradle, on Trecrobben Hill, reminds us of the great
man's infancy, as does also the Giant's Spoon, which is near it. The
giant of Trecrobben was, beyond question, a temperate one, as the
Giant's Well, without the walls of his castle, incontestibly proves. But
what shall we say of his neighbour, who dwelt at Beersheba, where the
Giant's Bowl is still suggestive of imbibitions deep. The monumental
mass of granite on Dartmoor, known as *Bowerman's Nose*, may. hand down
to us the resting-place and name of a giant whose nose was the index of
his vice; though Carrington, in his poem. of " Dartmoor," supposes these
rocks to be

"A granite god,--  
To whom, in days long flown, the suppliant knee  
In trembling homage bow'd."

Let those, however, who are curious in this problem visit the granite
idol; when, ' as Carrington assures us, he will find that. the
inhabitants of

"The hamlets near  
Have legends rude connected with the spot  
(Wild swept by every wind), on which he. stands,  
The Giant of the Moor."

Of the last resting-places of the giants there are many. Mardon; on
Dartmoor, has a *Giant's Grave*, \[m\] and from that rude region,
travelling westward, we find these graves--proving the mortality of even
this Titan race--rising on many a moor and mountain, until, crossing the
sea, we see numerous giants' graves in the Scilly Islands; as though
they had been the favourite resting-places of the descendants of those
who dreamed of yet more western lands, beneath the setting sun, which
were, even to them, "the Islands of the Blest." \[n\]

There is scarcely a pile of rocks around our western shore upon which
the giants have not left their impress. At Tol-Pedden-Penwith we have
the Giant's Chair; at Cam Boscawen we see the Giant's Pulpit. If we
advance nearer to the towns, even the small mass of rocks behind
Street-an-Noan, near Penzance, called Tolcarne, has the mark of the
Giant's Foot. The priests, however, in the season of their rule, strove
to obliterate the memories of those great pagans. They converted the
footprint at Tolcarne -- and similar indentations elsewhere--into the
mark of the devil's hoof, when he stamped in rage at the escape of a
sinner, who threw himself from the rock, strong in faith, into the arms
of the Church. In more recent times, this footmark has been attributed
to the devil jumping with joy, as he flew off, from this spot, with some
unfortunate miller, who had lost his soul by mixing china clay with his
flour. The metamorphosis of ancient giants into modern devils is a
curious feature in our inquiry. At Lemorna we have the Giant's Cave. On
Gulval Cairn we find also the giant's mark, which the magic of Sir H.
Davy's science could not dispel. \[o\] On Carn Brea are no end of
evidences of these Titans--the Giant's Hand rivalling in size any of the
monstrous monuments of the Egyptian gods. Thus, in nearly every part of
the country where granite rocks prevail, the monuments of the giants may
be found\~ Why do the giants show such a preference for granite? At
Looe, indeed, the Giant's Hedge is a vast earthwork; but this is an
exception, \[p\] unless the Bolster in St Agnes is a giant's work. In
pursuing the dim lights which yet remain to guide us to the history of
the giants, we must not forget the record of the Fatal Wrestling on
Plymouth Hoe,

\[a\] See "Popular Traditions of Lancashire," by J. Roby, Esq., MR S.L.
Bohn, I843

\[b\] Tales and Popular Fictions; their Resemblance and Transmission
from Country to Country. By Thomas Keightley. 1834.

\[c\] Rambles in Western Cornwall by the Footsteps of the Giants, with
Notes on the Celtic Remains of the Land's End District, and the Islands
of Scilly. By J. O. Halliwell, F.R.S. 1861.

\[d\] That these Titans lived down to historic times is suggested by the
following:-- "Guy, Earl of Warwick, fought at the request of Athelstan a
combat with Colbrand, a Danish giant, and slew him"--*Gilbert*, quoting
Carew, who again quotes Walter of Exeter. Vol. iv., p. 111

\[e\] The Antiquities of Nations: more particularly of the Celtae or
Gaul,, taken to be originally the same People as our Ancient Britain's.

\[f\] Judith xvi, 7: "Neither the sons of the Titans smite him, nor high
giants set upon him."

\[g\] Those who are curious in this matter may examine also, "Gomer; or,
A Brief Analysis of the Language and Knowledge of the Ancient Cymry. By
John Williams, A M., Oxen., Archdeacon of Cardigan."

\[h\] Travels in Various Countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa, vol.
ix., p. 59

\[i\] Hyperion. By John Keats

\[j\] The History of Britain. By John Milton, Second edition, 1678.

\[k\] Keightley, who of all men should have traced this Bellerus to his
home, in his "Life of Milton" confuses St Michael's Mount and the Land's
End, and "conceives the giant Bellerus to have been an invention of
Milton's." The evidence of the "History of Britain" shows with how much
diligence the legendary lore which existed in 1678 had been sought out
by the poet; and his grand epic proves with how much reverence Milton
studied our own mythology. I could lead the reader to twenty places
around the Land's End which were not discovered even by Mr J. O.
Halliwell when rambling "in Western Cornwall by the Footsteps of the
Giants," upon which Bellerus, although he has not left his name, has
left a long-enduring record. See Appendix A.

\[l\] "Not far from the land's ende there is a little village called
*Trebegean*--in English, *The towne of the Giant's Grave*,--near
whereunto, and within memory (as I have been informed), certain workmen,
searching for Tynne, discovered a long square vault, which contained the
bones of an excessive bigge carkas, and verified this Ethnology of the
name."--

Carew's Survey of Cornwall

\[m\] See Shorts's Collection, p. 28.

\[n\] Mr Augustus Smith, in the Reports of the Royal Institution of
Cornwall, has described one of the graves opened by him during a visit
paid by the Cambrian Archeological Society to the Scilly Isles.

Hugh Miller, in his "Scenes and Legends of the North of Scotland," tells
us a story of the giants of Cromarty, which shows us that they were
intimately related to the giants of Cornwall. Moreover, from him we
learn something of the parentage of our giants, for we presume the
Scottish myth may be applied with equal truth to the Titans of the south
"Diocletian, king of Syria, say the historians, had thirty-three
daughters, who, like the daughters of Danaus, killed their husbands on
their wedding-night. The king, their father, in abhorrence of their
crime, crowded them all into a ship, which he abandoned to the mercy of
the waves, and which was drifted by tides and winds, until it arrived on
the coast of Britain, then an uninhabited island. There they lived
solitary, subsisting on roots and berries, the natural produce of the
soil, until an order of demons, becoming enamoured of them, took them
for their wives, and a tribe of giants, who must be regarded as the true
aborigines of the country, if indeed the demons have not a prior claim,
were the fruits of those marriages. Less fortunate, however, than even
their prototypes, the Cyclops, the whole tribe was extirpated a few
years after by Brutus, the parricide, who, with a valour to which mere
bulk could render no effectual resistance, overthrew Gog, Magog, and
Termagol, and a whole host of others with names equally terrible." The
Cromarty legends give accounts of a ponderous stone flung from the point
of a spindle across Dornoch Firth; and of another yet larger, still to
be seen, a few miles from Dingwall, which was thrown equally far, and
which bears the impress of the giant's finger and thumb. Also, they tell
us of the cailiiach-nore, or great woman, who "front a pannier filled
with earth and stones, which she carried on her back, formed almost all
the hills of Ross-shire" The Sutars, as the promontories Cromarty are
named, served as the work-stools of two giants, who were shoemakers, or
soutars, and hence, says Hugh Miller, "in process of time the name
soutar was transferred by a common metonytny from the craftsmen to their
stools, the two promontories, and by this name they have ever since been
distinguished."

\[o\] Sir H. Davy, when a youth, would frequently steal to Gulval Cairn,
and in its solitude pursue his studies.

\[p\] See Davies Gilbert's History, vol. iv., p. 29.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Corineus and Gogmagog](prwe004)
