[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe053)  [Next](prwe055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

JAHN TERGAGLE THE STEWARD.

  
THERE are numerous versions of this legend, and sundry statements I made
as to the man who is supposed to have achieved the no very envious
immortality which he enjoys.

One or two of these may interest the reader.

The following very characteristic narrative, from a much-esteemed
correspondent, gives several incidents which have not a place in the
legend as I have related it, which comprehends the explanation given for
the appearance of Tregeagle at so many different parts of the county.

The Tregeagle, of whom mention occurs in the writings of Cornish
legendary authors, was a real person: a member of a respectable family,
resident during the seventeenth century at Trevorder, in the parish of
St Breock, and identical probably with a John Tregeagle whose tombstone
may yet be seen in the parish church there, close to the chancel.

Lingering one day amid the venerable arches of that same church, the
narrator, a native of the parish, encountered, near a small transept
called the Trevorder aisle, the sexton, a man then perhaps of about
eighty years of age. The conversation turning not unnaturally on the
"illustrious dead," the narrator was gratified in receiving from the
lips of the old man the following characteristic specimen of folk-lore,
the greater part of which has remained clearly imprinted in his memory
after a Iapse of many years; though \[he thinks he has had to supply the
very last sentence of all from the general popular tradition\] here and
there he may have had to supply a few expressions:

"Theess Jahn Tergagle, I 'ye a heerd mun tell, sir, he was a steward to
a lord. \[a\]

"And a man came fore to the court and paid ax rent: and Jahn Tergagle
didn't put no cross to az name in the books.

"And after that Tergagle daied: and the lord came down to look after az
rents: and when he zeed the books, he zeed this man's name that there
wasn't no cross to ut.

"And he rent for the man, and axed 'n for az rent: and the man said he'd
apaid az rent: and the lord said he hadn't, there warn't no cross to az
name in the books, and he tould 'n that he 'd have the law for 'ii if he
didn't pay.

"And the man, he didn't know what to do: and he went yore to the
minister of Simonward; \[b\] and the minister axed 'n if he'd a got
faith: and the man, he hadn't got faith, and he was obliged for to come
homewards again.

"And after that the 'Zaizes was coming naigh, and he was becoming
afeerd, sure enough: and he went yore to the minister again, and tould'n
he'd a got faith; the minister might do whatever a laiked.

"And the minister draed a ring out on the floor: and he caaled out dree
times, Jahn Tergagle, Jahn Tergagle, Jahn Tergagle I and (I 've a heerd
the ould men tell ut, sir) theess Jahn Tergagle stood before mun in the
middle of the ring.

"And he went yore wi' mun to the Ezaizes, and gave ax evidence and tould
how this man had a paid az rent; and the lord he was cast.

"And after that they was come back to their own house, theess Jahn

Tergagle he gave mun a brave deal of trouble; he was knackin' about the
place, and wouldn't laive mun alone at all.

"And they went yore to the minister, and axed he for to lay un. "And the
minister zaid, thicky \[c\] was their look-out; they'd a brought'n up,
and they was to gett 'n down again the best way they could. And I 've a
heerd the ould men tell ut, sir. The minister he got dree hunderd pound
for a layin' of un again.

"And first, a was bound to the old epping-stock \[d\] up to Churchtown;
\[e\] and after that a was bound to the ould oven in T'evurder; James
Wyatt down to Wadebridge, he was there when they did open ut.

"And after that a was bound to Dozmary Pool; and they do say that there
he ez now emptying of it out with a lampet.shell, with a hole in the
bottom of ut."

This is a very ancient idea, and was one of the torments of the
classical Tartarus.The treacherous daughters of Danaus being condemned
therein to empty Leth with a bottomless vessel:--

"Et Danai proles Veneris quae numma laesit,  
In cava Lethaeas solia portat aquas."

Dosmare Pool is a small lake or tarn on the Bodmin Moors, a fit
representative of Lethe, with its black water and desolate environs.--J.
C. H.

Another correspondent to whom I am much indebted for valuable notes on
the folk-lore of the Land's End district, sends me the following
version:

You may know the story better than I do; however, I 'll give you the
west-country version. A man in the neighbourhood of Redruth, I think (I
have almost forgotten the story), lent a sum of money to another without
receiving bond or note, and the transaction was witnessed by Tregagle,
who died before the money was paid back. When the lender demanded the
money, the borrower denied having received it. He was brought into a
court of justice, when the man denied on oath that he ever borrowed the
money, and declared that if Tregagle saw any such thing take place, he
wished that Tregagle would come and declare it. The words were no sooner
out of his mouth than Tregagle stood before him, and told him that it
was easy to bring him, but that he should not find it so easy to put him
away. Tregagle followed the man day and night, wouldn't let him have a
moment's rest, until he got all the parsons, conjurors, and other wise
men together, to lay him. The wise ones accomplished this for a short
time by binding the spirit to empty Dosmery (or Dorsmery) Pool with a
crogan (limpet-shell). He soon finished the job and came to the man
again, who sent for Parson Corker, of Burrian, who was a noted hand for
laying spirits, driving the devil from the bedside of old villains, and
other kinds of jobs of the same kind. When the parson came into the room
with the spirit and the man, the first thing the parson did was to draw
a circle and place the man to stand within it; the spirit took the form
of a black bull, and (roared as you may still hear Tregagle roar in
Genvor Cove before a northerly storm) did all he could to get at the man
with his horns and hoofs. The parson continued reading all the time. At
first the reading seemed to make him more furious, but little by little
he became as gentle as a lamb, and allowed the parson to do what he
would with him, and consented at last to go to Genvor Cove (in Escols
Cliff), and make a truss of sand, which he was to carry above a certain
rock in Escols Cliff. He was many years trying, without being able to
accomplish this piece of work, until it came to a very cold winter, when
Tregagle, by taking water from the stream near by, and pouring oyer the
sand, caused it to freeze together, so that he finished the task, came
back 'to the man, and would have torn him in pieces, but the man
happened to have a child in his arms, so the spirit couldn't harm him.
The man sent for the parson without delay; Parson Corker couldn't manage
him alone, this time; had to get some more parsons to help,--very
difficult job;--bound Tregagle at last to the same task, and not to go
near the fresh water. He is still there, making his truss of sand and
spinning sand ropes to bind it. What some people take to be the
"*calling of the northern cleves*" (cliffs) is the roaring of Tregagle
because there is a storm coming from the north to scatter his sand.
\[f\] W. B.

\[a\] Lord--i.e., a Iandlord.

\[b\] St Breward.

\[c\] Thicky, correctly written thilke -- i.e., the ilka, a true word
frequent in Chaucer.

.\[d\] Perhaps Uppingstock, an erection of stone steps for the farmers'
wives to get on their horses by.

\[e\] Not Chũrchtown, but Churchtówn.

\[f\] In connection with the incident given of Tregeagle and the child,
the following is interesting--

I find in the *Temple Bar* Magazine for January 1862, "The Autobiography
of an Evil Spirit," professing to be an examination of a strange story
related by Dr Justinus Kerner. In this a woman is possessed by a devil
or sometimes by devils. "Sometimes a legion of fiends appeared to take
possession of her, and the clamour on such occasions is compared to that
of a pack of hounds. Amid all these horrors her confinement occurred,
which was the means of procuring her some respite, as the demon appeared
to have no power over her while her innocent babe was in her arms." T,,
this the author adds the following note:--

This ancient general and beautiful superstition is graphically
illustrated in the legend of Swardowski, the Polish Faust. Satan, weary
of the services the magician is continually requiring at his hands,
decoys him to a house in Cracow, where, for some unexplained reason, he
expects to have him at a disadvantage. Put on his guard by the
indiscretion of a flock of ravens and owls, who cannot suppress their
satisfaction at seeing him enter the house, Swardowski snatches a
new-born child from the cradle and paces the room with it in his arms.
In rushes the devil, as terrible as horns, tail, and hoofs can make
hint; but confronted with the infant, recoils and collapses *instanter*.
This suggests to him the propriety of resorting to "moral suasion;" and
after a while he thus addresses the magician,--" Thou art a gentleman
and knowest that *verbum nobile debet esse stabile*." Swardowski feels
that he cannot break his word of honour as a gentleman, replaces the
child in the cradle, and flies up the chimney with his companion. In the
Confusion of his faculties, however, the demon would seem to have
mistaken the way; at all events, the pair fly upwards instead of
downwards,--Swardowski lustily intoning a hymn till suddenly he finds
his companion gone, and himself fixed at an immeasurable height in the
air, and hears a voice above him saying, "Thus shalt thou hang until the
day of judgment!" He has, however, changed one of his disciples into a
spider, and is in the habit of letting him down to collect the news of
earth. When, therefore, we see any floating threads of gossamer, we may
suspect that "a chiel's amang us taking notes," though it is not equally
probable that he will ever "prent them."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dosmery Pool](prwe055)
