[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe312)  [Next](prwe314.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PACKS OF WOOL THE FOUNDATION OF THE BRIDGE OF WADEBRIDGE

LOVEBONE was the vicar of Wadebridge, and there was a ferry across the
river. It was a frequent custom for the farmers to ride their horses and
to drive their cattle across when the tide was low, and frequently men
and beasts were lost in the quicksands formed on the rising of the tide.
A sad accident of this kind happened, and Lovebone resolved on building
a bridge; as Leland says in his " Itinerary," "Then one Lovebone, vicar
of Wadebridge, moved with pitie, began the bridge, and with great paine
and studie, good people putting their help thereto, finished it with
xvii fair and great uniform arches of stone."

Great was the labour, and frequent the disappointment. Pier after pier
were built, and then they were lost in the sands. A "fair structure" was
visible at night, in the morning there was no trace of the work of the
masons. Lovebone almost despaired of success, indeed he was about to
abandon the work, when he dreamed that an angel came with a flock of
sheep, that he sheared them, let the wool fall into the water, and
speedily built the bridge upon the wool.

Lovebone awoke with a new idea. He gathered from the farmers around, all
the wool they would give him, he put it loosely into packs, placed these
thickly upon the sand, and built his piers. The work remains to this day
in proof of the engineering skill of the suggesting angel. \[a\]

Quoting Beaumont and Fletcher's "Knight of the Burning Pestle," we find
the Citizen saying to the Prologue:

"Why could you not be content as well as others, with the Legend of
Whittington? or the Life and Death of Sir Thomas Gresham, with the
building of the Royal Exchange? or the Story of Queen Eleanor, with the
rearing of London Bridge upon woolsacks?"

\[a\] see Keightons "Tales and Popular Fictions," p. 247

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Last Wolf in England](prwe314.md)
