[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe163)  [Next](prwe165) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SLAUGHTER BRIDGE.

HISTORIANS and poets have made the world familiar with King Arthur. We
know how Merlin deceived, by his magic, the beautiful Igerna, so that
she received King Uter as her husband. We know also that Uter P.endragon
died, and that his son, by Igerna, reigned King of Britain. How Arthur
ruled, and how he slaughtered all the enemies of Britain, is told in the
chronicles. But even at Tintagel \[a\] all is silent respecting the king
or his celebrated Round Table.

"In the days of King Arthur the Mount of Cornwall was kept by a
monstrous giant," is familiar to us all; and it is curious to find a
tradition that the extirpation of these Titans was due to Arthur and
Christianity, as already related. At Slaughter Bridge I heard the story,
but it did not sound like a tradition; the true native character was not
in the narrative,--That in 824 the Cornish and Saxons fought so bloody a
battle that the river ran red with blood. On Slaughter Bridge Arthur is
said to have killed his nephew, Modred, but that, previously to this
last fight, Modred wounded his uncle with a poisoned sword, nearly in
front of Worthyvale House. A single stone laid over a stream, having
some letters cut on ifs lower surface, is believed to mark the exact
spot where Arthur received his death-wound.

\[a\]  "I shall offer conjecture touching the name of this place, which
I will not say is right, but only probable. *Tin* is the same as *Din,
Dines,* and *Diveth,* deceit; so that *Tindixel,* turned, for easier
pronunciation, to *Tintagel, Dindagel,* or *Daundagel * signifies
*Castle of Deceit,* which name might be aptly given to it from the
famous deceit practised here by Uter Pendragon by the help of Merlin's
enchantment."--Tonkin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Camelford and King Arthur](prwe165)
