[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe029)  [Next](prwe031.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE PISKIES IN THE CELLAR.

  
THE following story, for which I am indebted to Mr T. Q. Couch, will
remind the reader of "The Cluricaun" and "The Haunted Cellar," in "Fairy
Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland." By T. Crofton Croker,
Esq.

On the Thursday immediately preceding Christmas-tide (year not
recorded), were assembled at "The Rising Sun" the captain and men of a
stream work \[a\] in the Couse below. This Couse was a flat, alluvial
moor, broken by gigantic mole-hills, the work of many a generation of
tinners. One was half inclined, on looking at the turmoiled ground, to
believe with them that the tin grew in successive crops, for, after
years of turning and searching, there was still enough left to give the
landlord his dole, and to furnish wages to some dozen streamers. This
night was a festival observed in honour of one .*Picrous*, \[b\] and
intended to celebrate the discovery of tin on this day by a man of that
name. The feast is still kept, though the observance has dwindled to a
supper and its attendant merrymaking.

Our story has especially to do with the adventures of one of the party,
John Sturtridge, who, well primed with ale, started on his homeward way
for Luxulyan Church-town. John had got as far as Tregarden Down without
any mishap worth recording, when, alas! he happed upon a party of the
little people, who were at their sports in the shelter of a huge granite
boulder. Assailed by shouts of derisive laughter, he hastened on
frightened and bewildered, but the Down, well known from early
experience, became like ground untrodden, and after long trial no gate
or stile was to be found. He was getting vexed, as well as puzzled, when
a chorus of tiny voices shouted, "Ho! and away for Par Beach!" John
repeated the shout, and was in an instant caught up, and in a twinkling
found himself on the sands of Par. A brief dance, and the cry was given,
"Ho! and away for Squire Tremain's cellar!" A repetition of the Piskie
cry found John with his elfish companions in the cellars at Heligan,
where was beer and wine galore. It need not be said that he availed
himself of his opportunities. The mixture of all the good liquors so
affected him that, alas! he forgot in time to catch up the next cry of
"Ho ! and away for Par Beach!" In the morning John was found by the
butler, groping and tumbling among butts and barrels, very much muddled
with the squire's good drink. His strange story, very incoherently told,
was not credited by the squire, who committed him to jail for the
burglary, and in due time he was convicted and sentenced to death.

The morning of his execution arrived; a large crowd had assembled, and
John was standing under the gallows-tree, when a commotion was- observed
in the crowd, and a little lady of commanding mien made her way through
the opening throng to the scaffold. In a shrill, sweet voice, which John
recognised, she cried, "Ho! and away for France!" Which being replied
to, he was rapt from the officers of justice, leaving them and the
multitude mute with wonder and disappointment.

\[a\] A "stream work" is a place where tin is obtained from the drift
deposits. Streamers" are the sinners who wash not the tin.

\[b\] Picrous day is still kept up in Luxulyan. See Appendix 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Spriggans of Trencrom Hill](prwe031.md)
