[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe046)  [Next](prwe048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE SMALL PEOPLE'S GARDENS.

  
IF the adventurous traveller who visits the Land's End district will go
down as far as he can on the south-west side of the Logan Rock Cairn,
and look over, he will see, in little sheltered places between the
cairns, close down to the water's edge, beautifully green spots, with
here and there some ferns and cliff-pinks. These are the gardens of the
Small People, or, as they are called by the natives, Small Folk. They
are beautiful little creatures, who appear to pass a life of constant
enjoyment amongst their own favourite flowers. They are harmless and if
man does not meddle with them when they are holding their fairs--which
are indeed high festivals--the Small Folk never interfere with man or
anything belonging to him. They are known to do much good, especially
when they discover a case of oppressed poverty; but they do it in their
own way. They love to do good for its own sake, and the publication of
it in any way draws down their censure, and sometimes severe anger, on
the object whom it was their purpose to serve. To prove that those
lovely little creatures are no dream, I may quote the words of a native
of St Levan:

"As I was saying, when I have been to sea close under the cliffs, of a
fine summer's night, I have heard the sweetest of music, and seen
hundreds of little lights moving about amongst what looked like flowers.
Ay! and they are flowers too, for you may smell the sweet scent far out
at sea. Indeed, I have heard many of the old men say, that they have
smelt the sweet perfume, and heard the music from the fairy gardens of
the Castle, when more than a mile from the shore." Strangely enough, you
can find no flowers but the sea-pinks in these lovely green places by
day, yet they have been described by those who have seen them in the
midsummer moonlight as being covered with flowers of every colour, all
of them far more brilliant than any blossoms seen in any mortal garden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St Levan Fairies](prwe048.md)
