[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe343)  [Next](prwe345.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

AMBROSIAE PETRAE

IN connection with the Bambury stone in Worcestershire, Mr. Jabez Allies
remarks, and Dr. Nash is of the same opinion, that it was in all
probability originally *Ambury*. He then gives us several examples of
the occurrence of this name--as Ambreforde in Yorkshire, Ambrelie in
Sussex, Ambresberie in Wilts, Ambresdone in Oxfordshire, and many
others. \[a\]

"The ancients distinguished stones, erected with a religious view, by
the name of amber, by which was signified anything solar and divine.
\[b\]

"Respecting the Phoenicians being the founders of the Druidical
discipline in Britain, one fact weighs more with me than a thousand
arguments. I allude to the Tyrian coin, on which appear the tree, the
sacred fire, the two stone pillars of Hercules (Thoth), and the singular
legend, Tyr. Col. (Colony of Tvrians), and the still more remarkable
words under the erect stones, AMBPOΣIE IIETPE (Ambrosiae Petrae), the
anointed rocks. Let the reader remember the monkish traditions of
Ambrosius, the exact likeness of these pillars on this coin to the
stones at Stonehenge, the Ambrosiae Petrae; and if he does not think the
origin of Ambrosbury, or Amesbury, was derived from the Ambrosiae
Petrae, or anointed rocks of the Tyrian colonists, he will think the
coincidence most remarkable." \[c\]

"*Main Ambrosiae petrae* *ambrosiae*, signify the stones anointed with
holy oil, consecrated; or, in a general sense, a temple, altar, or place
of worship." \[d\]

\[a\] Allies' "Worcestershire"

\[b\] Bryant's "Ancient Mythology"

\[c\] Bowles' "Hermes Britannicus."

\[d\] Stukeley, Stonehenge, See Akerman "On the Stone Worship, of the
Ancients, Illustrated by their Coins." "Transactions of the Numismatic
Society," January 1838.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Padstow Hobby Horse](prwe345.md)
