[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe338)  [Next](prwe340.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ST PIRAN'S-DAY AND PICROUS-DAY.

HONE, in his "Every-Day Book," has the following remarks on St Piran :

"This saint, anciently of good repute in Cornwall, is not mentioned by
Butler. According to Porter, he was born in Ireland, and became a hermit
there. He afterwards came to England, and settling at Cornwall, had a
grave made for hint, entered into it, and dying on the 6th of March, 'in
the glorie of a great light and splendour that appeared at the same
instant,' was buried at Padstow. 'He is reported,' says Porter, 'to have
wrought manie wonderful miracles in his lifetime, which, because they
tend rather to breed an incredulous amazement in the readers, than move
to anie workes of virtues or pietie, we have willingly omitted.' We have
had a specimen of such miracles as Father Porter deemed worthy of
belief; those of St Piran, which would have caused 'incredulous
amassment' in Porter's readers, must have been 'passing wonderful.'"

"*St .Piran's.day* is said to be a favourite with the tinners. Having a
tradition that some secrets regarding the manufacture of tin was
communicated to their ancestors by that saint, they leave the
manufacture to shift for itself for that day, and keep it as a holiday."
\[a\]

Mr T. Q. Couch obligingly favours me with the following note on
Picous-day:--

"The second Thursday before Christmas-day is a festival observed by the
tinners of the district of Blackmore, and known as .Picrous day. It is
not at present marked by any distinctive ceremonies, but it is the
occasion of a supper and much merry-making. The owner of the tin-stream
contributes a shilling a man towards it. *This is said to be the feast
of the discovery of tin by a man named Picrous*. My first impression was
that the day took its name from the circumstance of a pie forming the
pièce de résistance of the supper; butt this explanation is not allowed
by tinners, nor sanctioned by the usages of the feast. What truth there
may be in the tradition of the first tinner, Picrous, it is now too late
to discover, but the notion is worth recording. It has occurred to me
whether, from some similarity between the names (not a close one, I
admit it), the honours of Picrous may not have been transferred to St
Piran, who is generally said to be the patron saint of tunners. St Piran
is not known in Blackmore, and his festival is on the <sub>5</sub>th of
March. The tinners also have a festival to commemorate the discovery of
smelting."

\[a\] Gilbert's "History."

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moses Pitt's Letter Respecting Anne Jeffries](prwe340.md)
