[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe239)  [Next](prwe241.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE FACTION FIGHT AT CURY GREAT TREE.

 ON a green knoll in the centre of the intersection of the road from
Helston to the Lizard, and Mawgan to Cury, flourished an ash-tree of
magnificent dimensions. The peculiarity of its position, together with
its unusual size, in the midst of a district singularly destitute of
trees, rendered it famous throughout the surrounding neighbourhood; and
in designating a special locality, reference was, and still continues to
be, made to "Cury Great Tree," as a position generally known. During the
last fifty years the tree has been gradually decaying, and at present
only a portion of the hollow trunk remains, which is rapidly
disappearing. It stands about haif way up a gentle rise facing the
north; and in passing over the road, the country people speak of a dim
tradition of a time when the "road ran with blood." The occasion of
this, which is almost forgotten, was a faction fight, on a large scale,
between the men of the parishes of Wendron and Breage, happening about a
hundred years since. A wreck took place near the Lizard, and the
Wendron-men being nearest, were soon upon the spot to appropriate
whatever flotsam and jetsam might come in their way. Returning laden
with their spoils, they were encountered at the Great Tree by the
Wendron-men bound on a similar errand, and . a fight, as a matter of
course, ensued, which was prolonged till the following day. The contest
is said to have been a most terrible one, each party being armed with
staves. The savage nature of the fight may be inferred from the
following fact :-- A Wendron-man named Gluyas, having been disabled, was
put upon the top of the roadside hedge, out of the *melée,* when he was
seen by a Breage termagant known as "Prudy the Wicked," and by her
quickly dragged into the road, "Prudy" exclaiming, "Ef thee artn't ded,
I make thee," suiting the action to the word by striking Gluyas with her
patten iron until he was dead. There is some account of Prudy's having
been taken before the "Justice," but she does not appear to have been
punished. These fights between parishes were so common in those days
that any death occurring in the fray was quietly passed over as a thing
of course, and soon forgotten. "So late as thirty years since it was
unsafe to venture alone through the streets of the lower part of this
town (Helston) after nightfall on a market-day owing to the frays of the
Breage, Wendron, and Sithney men." So writes a friend residing in
Helston.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Towednack Cuckoo Feast](prwe241.md)
