[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe333)  [Next](prwe335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE GIANT OF NANCLEDRY; AND TREBIGGAN THE GIANT

FROM time to time, in. Cornwall and other places, bones of a large size
have been found, and very exaggerated accounts of these finds have beets
published. Some years since it was currently reported that the bones of
a giant had been discovered in Wendron, and they were said to be
"prodigious.

I have endeavoured to trace this matter. And now I have evidence to show
that the whole affair was greatly exaggerated. The following extracts
from letters will place the whole matter in its true light :--

"The discovery under the chancel window at Wendron, in the beginning of
the year 1855, consisted simply of a *large collection of bones*,
plainly human, at the depth of less *than two feet* beneath the floor!
This accounted in a great measure for the extraordinary dampness of this
part of the church, and which it was in part my object to get rid of.

"Many of these bones, especially the femoral and crural, were certainly
of an unusual magnitude, as compared with others which from time to time
had been disinterred in the churchyard when a grave had been dug. I
cannot state with any degree of certainty whether the dimensions of the
largest bones were accurately measured.

"Being desirous to re-inter the bones found in the chancel of Wendron as
nearly as possible in the same place, though at a considerable depth, we
came at length (after the removal of much damp soil) to a perfect stone
sarcophagus, as far as I recollect about six feet in length. The upper
lid of this was not to be found. In the said sarcophagus, containing
little more than dust, we laid all the gigantic bones which had been
discovered."

Another correspondent informs me, that closer inquiry has probably
connected these bones with a well known man.

The curate of the parish informs me "that there is a brass in the church
to the memory of 'Metheruny,' attached to the collegiate establishment
of Glaseney in the time of Henry VIII., which he supposed to refer to a
grave situated in the spot where the relics referred to by Mr. Boraston
were found. Mr. Mime also told me, that among the published engravings
of Holbein's portraits was a fine one of this 'Metheruny,' respecting
whom are some interesting particulars in King's 'Monumenta Antiqua,'
Dugdale's 'Monasticon,' and Bulase's 'Cornwall.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Geese Dancing - Guise Dancing - Guizards](prwe335)
