[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe207)  [Next](prwe209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE SMUGGLER'S TOKEN.

UNTIL about the time of the close of the last French war, a large
portion of the inhabitants of the south-west coast of Cornwall were in
some way or other connected with the practice of smuggling. The traffic
with the opposite coast was carried on principally in boats or undecked
vessels. The risks encountered by their crews produced a race of hardy,
fearless men, a few of whom are still living, and it has been said that
the Government of those days winked at the infraction of the law, from
an unwillingness to destroy so excellent a school for seamen. Recently
the demand for ardent spirits has so fallen off that there is no longer
an inducement to smuggle; still it is sometimes exultingly rumoured
that, the "Coast Guard having been cleverly put off the scent, a cargo
has been successfully run." The little coves in the Lizard promontory
formed the principal trading places, the goods being taken as soon as
landed to various places of concealment, whence they were withdrawn as
required for disposal. About eighty years since, a boat, laden with
"ankers" of spirits, was about, with its crew, to leave Mullian Cove for
Newlyn. One of the farmers concerned in the venture, members of whose
family are still living, was persuaded to accompany them, and entered
the boat for the purpose, but, recollecting he had business at Helston,
got out again, and the boat left without him. On his return from
Helston, late in the evening, he sat down exclaiming, "The boat and all
on board are lost ! I met the men as I passed the top of Halzaphrort (a
very high cliff on the road), with their hair and clothes dripping wet
!" In spite of the arguments of his friends, he persisted in his
statement. The boat and crew were never more heard of and the farmer was
so affected by the circumstance, that he pined and died shortly after.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hooper of Sennen Cove](prwe209)
