[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe095)  [Next](prwe097.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE GARRICK ZANS, OR HOLY ROCK.

FEW years--really but a few years--since, the stone altars on which the
first inhabitants of these islands lit their holy fires had yet a place
amongst us. In the village of Roskestall stood one such altar; in Treen
was to be found another. These huge masses of rock, rendered sacred by
the memories surrounding them, have been wantonly removed, and employed
in most cases in furnishing pillars at the "grand entrances" of the
houses of the squire farmers of the Land's End district; or they have
been yet more rudely served, and are to be found at the entrance to a
pigsty, or in the gate-posts to a potato-field.

The extinction of several of the old families is, to the present day,
ascribed by the peasantry to the unholy act of removing or breaking up
of the Garrick Zans in the village of Escols. The rock in the village of
Mayon was called indifferently *table-mayon* (mön), or the Garrack Zans.
Within our memory is the gathering of the villagers around the Holy
Rock. It was their custom, when anything was stolen, or a misdemeanour
committed, to light a fire on this altar, and when the fagots were in
full blaze, all those who sought to prove their innocence took a burning
stick from the rock and spat on the blazing end. If they could
extinguish the fire by spitting on the stick, they were declared
innocent; but if the mouth was so dry as not to generate sufficient
moisture to be heard "frizzing" on it, that unfortunate individual was
suspected, if not declared, to be guilty. \[a\] The Midsummer bonfire
was first lighted on the rock in Escols, next on the Chapel Hill; then
all the other beacon hills were soon ablaze. Many superstitious rites
were formerly performed on the Garrack Zans, which are only found now as
the amusements of young people on the eves of St Agnes and Midsummer.

\[a\] Boys at school, to prove the truth or falsehood of any charge,
will take a stick from the fire and practise upon it in the same manner.
May not the custom of joining hands and passing through the embers of a
dying bonfire, for good luck, be a vestige of the same ritual?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fire Ordeal for the Cure of Disease](prwe097.md)
