[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe138)  [Next](prwe140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ST NEOT AND THE FISHES.

 On one occasion, when the saint was at his devotions, an angel appeared
unto him, and showing him three fishes in the well, he said, "These are
for thee; take one each day for thy daily food, and the number shall
never grow less: the choice of one of three fishes shall be thine all
the days of thy life." Long time passed by, and daily a fish was taken
from the well, and three awaited his coming every morning. At length the
saint, who shared in human suffering, notwithstanding his piety, fell
ill; and being confined to his bed, St Neot sent his servant Barius to
fetch him a fish for his dinner. Barius, being desirous of pleasing, if
possible, the sick man's taste, went to the well and caught two fishes.
One of these he broiled, and the other he boiled. Nicely cooked, Barius
took them on a dish to his master's bedside, who started up alarmed for
the consequences of the act of his servant, in disobedience to the
injunctions of the angel. So good a man could not allow wrath to get the
mastery of him; so he sat up in his bed, and, instead of eating, he
prayed with great earnestness -over the cooked fish. At last the spirit
of holiness exerted its full power; St Neot commanded Barius to return
at once and cast' the fish into the well. Barius went and did as his
master had told him to do; and, lo, the moment the fishes fell into the
water they recovered life, and swam away with the third fish, as if
nothing had happened to them.

All these things, and more, are recorded in the windows of St Neot's
Church. \[a\]

\[a\] See Appendix U.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Probus and Grace](prwe140)
