[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe318)  [Next](prwe320) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE CLERKS OF CORNWALL.

** **

I. "IN the last age there was a familiarity between the parson and the
clerk and the people which our feelings of decorum would revolt at *--
e.g.,* 'I have seen the ungodly flourish like a

green bay.tree.'

'How can that be, maister ?' said the clerk of St Clement's. Of this I
was myself an ear-witness."

II\. "At Kenwyn, two dogs, one of which was the parson's, were fighting
at the west end of the church; time parson, who was then reading the
second lesson, rushed taut of the pew and went down and parted them;
returning to his pew, and doubtful where he had left *off,* he asked the
clerk, 'Roger, where was I ?' 'Why, down parting the dogs, maister,'
said Roger."

III\. "At Mevsgizzey, when non-resident clergymen officiated, it was
usual with the squire of the parish to invite them to dinner. Several
years ago, a non-resident clergyman was requested to do duty in the
church of Mevagizzey on a Sunday when the Creed of St Athanaoius is
directed to he read. Before he had begun the service, the parish clerk
asked him whether he intended to read the Athanasian Creed that morning.
'Why?' said the clergyman. 'Because if you do, no dinner for you at the
squire's, at Penwarne."

IV\. "A very short time since parish clerks used to read the first
lesson. I once heard the St Agnes clerk cry out, 'To the mouth of the
burning *viery vurnis,* and spake, and said, Sisadrac, Meshac, and
Abednego, *com voath and com hether'* (Daniel iii)"

V. "The clerk of Lamorran, in giving out the psalm. 'Like a timorous
bird to distant mountains fly,' always said, 'Like a timmersumburde,'
&c., &c., with a shake of the head, and a quivering voice, which could
not but provoke risibility."--.*Hone's*

Table-Book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Fairy Caught](prwe320)
