[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](prwe303)  [Next](prwe305.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PECULIAR WORDS AND PHRASES \[a\]

"THE people in the west," writes a correspondent, "have I adopted many
words from the Danish invaders." Tradition assures us that the
sea-rovers of the North frequently landed at Witsand Bay, burned and
pillaged the villages of Escols and Mayon, sometimes took off the women,
but never made a settlement. Certain red-haired families are often
referred to as Danes and the dark-haired people will not marry with "a
red-haired Dane.' He continues :-- "If you were in Buryan Church town
this evening, you might probably hear Betty Trenoweth say, 'I 'll take
off my *touser* \[toute serve\], and run up to Janey Angwins to *cousey*
\[causer\] a spell; there's a lot of boys gone in there, so there'll be
a grand *courant* \[de courir\], I expect.' In a short time Betty may
come back disappointed, saying, ' 'Twas a mere *cow's courant* after
all, cheld vean--all hammer and tongs.'"

The *touser* is a large apron or wrapper to come quite round and keep
the under garments clean. By a *courant* with the boys, they mean a game
of running romps. It is not at all uncommon in other parts of the
country to hear the people say, "It was a  fine *courant*," "We 'ye had
a good *courant*," when they intend to express the enjoyment of some
pleasure party. These are, however, probably more nearly allied to
Norman-French.

There are some proverbial expressions peculiar to the west :-

"Sow barley in dree, and wheat in pul." \[b\]

"To make an old nail good, right it on wood."

" Fill the sack, then it cars stand."  
The last meaning that neither man nor beast can work on an empty
stomach.

The following are a few of less common expressions, presenting
remarkable words :-

'Tis not *bezibd*--It is not allotted me.

He will never *scrip* it--He will never escape it.

He is nothing *pridy*--He is not handsome.

Give her *dule*--Give her some comfort or consolation.

Hark to his *lidden*--Listen to his word or talk.

-  It was *twenty* or *some*--It was about twenty.

The wind brings the *pilme*--The wind raises the dust.

How thick the *brusse* lies--How thick the dust lies.

He is *throyting*--He is cutting chips from sticks.

He came of a good *havage*--He belongs to a good or respectable family.

*Hame*--a straw collar with wooden collar-trees, to which are fastened
the rope traces.

*Scalpions* (buckthorn, or rather buckhorn)--salt dried fish, usually
the whiting.

"Eating fair maids, or fermades--(*fumadoes*) --\[pilcbards\], and
drinking mahogany \[gin and treacle\]."

\[a\] See Appendix EE.

\[b\] In vul. - meaning in mud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bells of Forrabury Church](prwe305.md)
