[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prwe114)  [Next](prwe116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE WARNING.

THE following instance is given me, as from the party to whom it
happened, "a respectable person, of undoubted veracity." "When a young
man, fearing and caring for no one, I was in the habit of visiting
Sancreed from Penzance, and of returning in the evening. One night I
took up my hat to return, and went out at the door. It was a most
beautiful night, when, without the most remote assignable reason, I was
seized in a manner I never experienced either before or since. I was
absolutely 'terror-stricken,' so that I was compelled to turn back to
the house, a thing I had never done before, and say, 'I must remain here
for the night.' I could never account for it; and without caring to be
called superstitious, have regarded it as a special interposition of
Providence. It was reported that shortly before, a lad, who had driven
home a farmer's daughter to her father's house in the neighbourhood, had
suddenly been missed, and no clue to his whereabouts had ever been
found. About four or six weeks after my adventure, a gang of
sheep-stealers who had carried on their depredations for a long time
previous, were discovered in the neighbourhood; their abode, indeed,
adjoined the road from Sancreed to Penzance, and I cannot help believing
it probable, that had I returned that night I should have encountered
the gang, and perhaps lost my life. Years afterwards, one of the gang
confessed that the boy had come suddenly upon them during one of their
nefarious expeditions. He was seized, and injudiciously said, 'Well, you
may get off once or twice, but you 're sure to be hanged in the end.'
'Thee shan't help to do it,' said one, and the poor boy was murdered,
and his body thrown into a neighbouring shaft."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Laying a Ghost](prwe116)
