[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index) 
[Celtic](../../celt/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lpy166) 
[Next](lpy168) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

# NOTES

*The Hosting of the Sidhe* ([p. 3](lpy003.htm#page_3)).--The gods of
ancient Ireland, the Tuatha De Danaan, or the Tribes of the goddess
Danu, or the Sidhe, from Aes Sidhe, or Sluagh Sidhe, the people of the
Faery Hills, as these words are usually explained, still ride the
country as of old. Sidhe is also Gaelic for wind, and certainly the
Sidhe have much to do with the wind. They journey in whirling wind, the
winds that were called the dance of the daughters of Herodias in the
Middle Ages, Herodias doubtless taking the place of some old goddess.
When the country people see the leaves whirling on the road they bless
themselves, because they believe the Sidhe to be passing by. Knocknarea
is in Sligo, and the country people say that Maeve, still a great queen
of the western Sidhe, is buried in the cairn of stones upon it. I have
written of Clooth-na-Bare in *The Celtic Twilight*. She "went all over
the world, seeking a lake deep enough to drown her faery life, of which
she had grown weary, leaping from hill to hill, and setting up a cairn
of stones wherever her feet lighted, until, at last, she found the
deepest water in the world in little Lough Ia, on the top of the bird
mountain, in Sligo." I forget, now, where I heard this story, but it may
have been from a priest at Collooney. Clooth-na-Bare would mean the old
woman of Bare, but is evidently a corruption of Cailleac Bare, the old
woman of Bare, who, under the names Bare, and Berah, and Beri, and
Verah, and Dera, and Dhira, appears in the legends of many
places.--1899-1906.

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

*The Host of the Air* ([p. 7](lpy007.htm#page_7)).--This poem is founded
on an old Gaelic ballad that was sung and translated for me by a woman
at Ballisodare in County Sligo; but in the ballad the husband found the
keeners keening his wife when he got to his house.--1899.

 

*He mourns for the Change that has come upon Him and His Beloved, and
longs for the End of the World* ([p. 17](lpy015.htm#page_17)).--My deer
and hound are properly related to the deer and hound that flicker in and
out of the various tellings of the Arthurian legends, leading different
knights upon adventures, and to the hounds and to the hornless deer at
the beginning of, I think, all tellings of Usheen's journey to the
country of the young. The hound is certainly related to the Hounds of
Annwoyn or of Hades, who are white, and have red ears, and were heard,
and are, perhaps, still heard by Welsh peasants, following some flying
thing in the night winds; and is probably related to the hounds that
Irish country people believe will awake and seize the souls of the dead
if you lament them too loudly or too soon. An old woman told a friend
and myself that she saw what she thought were white birds, flying over
an enchanted place, but found, when she got near, that they had dogs'
heads; and I do not doubt that my hound and these dog-headed birds are
of the same family. I got my hound and deer out of a last century Gaelic
poem about Oisin's journey to the country of the young. After the
hunting of the hornless deer, that leads him to the seashore, and while
he is riding over the sea with Niamh, he sees amid the waters--I have
not the Gaelic poem by me, and describe it from memory--a young man
following a girl who has a golden apple, and afterwards a hound with one
red ear following a deer with no horns. This hound and this deer seem
plain images of the desire of man "which is for the woman," and "the
desire of the woman which is for the desire of the man," and of all
desires that are as these. I have read them in this way in *The
Wanderings of* 

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Usheen* or Oisin, and have made my lover sigh
because he has seen in their faces "the immortal desire of immortals."

The man in my poem who has a hazel wand may have been Aengus, Master of
Love; and I have made the boar without bristles come out of the West,
because the place of sunset was in Ireland, as in other countries, a
place of symbolic darkness and death.--1899.

 

*The Cap and Bells* ([p. 25](lpy022.htm#page_25)).--I dreamed this story
exactly as I have written it, and dreamed another long dream after it,
trying to make out its meaning, and whether I was to write it in prose
or verse. The first dream was more a vision than a dream, for it was
beautiful and coherent, and gave me the sense of illumination and
exaltation that one gets from visions, while the second dream was
confused and meaningless. The poem has always meant a great deal to me,
though, as is the way with symbolic poems, it has not always meant quite
the same thing. Blake would have said, "the authors are in eternity,"
and I am quite sure they can only be questioned in dreams.--1899.

 

*The Valley of the Black Pig* ([p. 27](lpy023.htm#page_27)).--All over
Ireland there are prophecies of the coming rout of the enemies of
Ireland, in a certain Valley of the Black Pig, and these prophecies are,
no doubt, now, as they were in the Fenian days, a political force. I
have heard of one man who would not give any money to the Land League,
because the Battle could not be until the close of the century; but, as
a rule, periods of trouble bring prophecies of its near coming. A few
years before my time, an old man who lived at Lisadill, in Sligo, used
to fall down in a fit and rave out descriptions of the Battle; and a man
in Sligo has told me that it will be so great a battle that the horses
shall go up to their fetlocks in blood, and that their girths, when it
is over, will rot from their bellies for lack of a hand to unbuckle
them. If

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

one reads Rhys' *Celtic Heathendom* by the light of Frazer's *Golden
Bough*, and puts together what one finds there about the boar that
killed Diarmuid, and other old Celtic boars and sows, one sees that the
battle is mythological, and that the Pig it is named from must be a type
of cold and winter doing battle with the summer, or of death battling
with life.--1899-1906.

 

*The Secret Rose* ([p. 36](lpy030.htm#page_36)).--I find that I have
unintentionally changed the old story of Conchubar's death. He did not
see the Crucifixion in a vision but was told of it. He had been struck
by a ball made out of the dried brains of an enemy and hurled out of a
sling; and this ball had been left in his head and his head had been
mended, the Book of Leinster says, with thread of gold because his hair
was like gold. Keeling, a writer of the time of Elizabeth, says, "In
that state did he remain seven years, until the Friday on which Christ
was crucified, according to some historians; and when he saw the unusual
changes of the creation and the eclipse of the sun and the moon at its
full, he asked of Bucrach, a Leinster Druid, who was along with him,
what was it that brought that unusual change upon the planets of Heaven
and Earth. 'Jesus Christ, the Son of God,' said the Druid, 'who is now
being crucified by the Jews.' 'That is a pity,' said Conchubar; 'were I
in his presence I would kill those who were putting him to death.' And
with that he brought out his sword, and rushed at a woody grove which
was convenient to him, and began to cut and fell it; and what he said
was, that if he were among the Jews, that was the usage he would give
them, and from the excessiveness of his fury which seized upon him, the
ball started out of his head, and some of the brain came after it, and
in that way he died. The wood of Lanshraigh, in Feara Rois, is the name
by which that shrubby wood is called."

I have imagined Cuchulain meeting Fand "walking among flaming dew,"
because, I think, of something in Mr. Standish O'Grady's books.

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

I have founded the man "who drove the gods out of their liss," or fort,
upon something I have read about Caolte after the battle of Gabra, when
almost all his companions were killed, driving the gods out of their
liss, either at Osraighe, now Ossory, or at Eas Ruaidh, now Asseroe, a
waterfall at Ballyshannon, where Ilbreac, one of the children of the
goddess Danu, had a liss. But maybe I only read it in Mr. Standish
O'Grady, who has a fine imagination, for I find no such story in Lady
Gregory's book.

I have founded "the proud dreaming king" upon Fergus, the son of Roigh,
but when I wrote my poem here, and in the song in my early book, "Who
will drive with Fergus now," I only knew him in Mr. Standish O'Grady,
and my imagination dealt more freely with what I did know than I would
approve of to-day.

I have founded him "who sold tillage, and house, and goods," upon
something in "The Red Pony," a folk tale in Mr. Larminie's *West Irish
Folk Tales*. A young man "saw a light before him on the high road. When
he came as far, there was an open box on the road, and a light coming up
out of it. He took up the box. There was a lock of hair in it. Presently
he had to go to become the servant of a king for his living. There were
eleven boys. When they were going out into the stable at ten o'clock,
each of them took a light but he. He took no candle at all with him.
Each of them went into his own stable. When he went into his stable he
opened the box. He left it in a hole in the wall. The light was great.
It was twice as much as in the other stables." The king hears of it, and
makes him show him the box. The king says, "You must go and bring me the
woman to whom the hair belongs." In the end, the young man, and not the
king, marries the woman.--1899-1906.

 

*The Shadowy Waters* ([p. 99](lpy058.htm#page_99)).--I published in 1902
a version of "The Shadowy Waters," which, as I had no stage experience
whatever, was unsuitable for stage

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

representation, though it had some little success when played during my
absence in America in 1904, with very unrealistic scenery before a very
small audience of cultivated people. On my return I rewrote the play in
its present form, but found it still too profuse in speech for stage
representation. In 1906 I made a stage version, which was played in
Dublin in that year and is now in my volume of plays. The present
version must be considered as a poem only.--1922.

 

*Prefatory Poem* ([p. 175](lpy080.htm#page_175)).--"Free of the ten and
four" is an error I cannot now correct, without more rewriting than I
have a mind for. Some merchant in Villon, I forget the reference, was
"free of the ten and four." Irish merchants exempted from certain duties
by the Irish Parliament were, unless memory deceives me again for I am
writing away from books, "free of the eight and six."--1914.

 

*Poems beginning with that "To a Wealthy Man" and ending with that "To a
Shade"* (pp. [193](lpy083.htm#page_193)-199).--In the thirty years or so
during which I have been reading Irish newspapers, three public
controversies have stirred my imagination. The first was the Parnell
controversy. There were reasons to justify a man's joining either party,
but there were none to justify, on one side or on the other, lying
accusations forgetful of past service, a frenzy of detraction. And
another was the dispute over "The Playboy." There may have been reasons
for opposing as for supporting that violent, laughing thing, though I
can see the one side only, but there cannot have been any for the lies,
for the unscrupulous rhetoric spread against it in Ireland, and from
Ireland to America. The third prepared for the Corporation's refusal of
a building for Sir Hugh Lane's famous collection of pictures. . . .

\[NOTE.--I leave out two long paragraphs which have been published in
earlier editions of these poems. There

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

is no need now to defend Sir Hugh Lane's pictures against Dublin
newspapers. The trustees of the London National Gallery, through his
leaving a codicil to his will unwitnessed, have claimed the pictures for
London, and propose to build a wing to the Tate Gallery to contain them.
Some that were hostile are now contrite, and doing what they can, or
letting others do unhindered what they can, to persuade Parliament to
such action as may restore the collection to Ireland.--Jan. 1917.\]

These controversies, political, literary, and artistic, have showed that
neither religion nor politics can of itself create minds with enough
receptivity to become wise, or just and generous enough to make a
nation. Other cities have been as stupid--Samuel Butler laughs at
shocked Montreal for hiding the Discobolus in a cellar--but Dublin is
the capital of a nation, and an ancient race has nowhere else to look
for an education. Goethe in *Wilhelm Meister* describes a saintly and
naturally gracious woman, who getting into a quarrel over some trumpery
detail of religious observance, grows--she and all her little religious
community--angry and vindictive. In Ireland I am constantly reminded of
that fable of the futility of all discipline that is not of the whole
being. Religious Ireland--and the pious Protestants of my childhood were
signal examples--thinks of divine things as a round of duties separated
from life and not as an element that may be discovered in all
circumstance and emotion, while political Ireland sees the good citizen
but as a man who holds to certain opinions and not as a man of good
will. Against all this we have but a few educated men and the remnants
of an old traditional culture among the poor. Both were stronger forty
years ago, before the rise of our new middle class which showed as its
first public event, during the nine years of the Parnellite split, how
base at moments of excitement are minds without culture.--1914.

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

Lady Gregory in her Life of Sir Hugh Lane assumes that the poem which
begins "Now all the truth is out" ([p. 197](lpy085.htm#page_197)), was
addressed to him. It was not; it was addressed to herself.--1912.

 

*The Dolls* ([p. 232](lpy109.htm#page_232)).--The fable for this poem
came into my head while I was giving some lectures in Dublin. I had
noticed once again how all thought among us is frozen into "something
other than human life." After I had made the poem, I looked up one day
into the blue of the sky, and suddenly imagined, as if lost in the blue
of the sky, stiff figures in procession. I remembered that they were the
habitual image suggested by blue sky, and looking for a second fable
called them "The Magi" (p. 231), complementary forms of those enraged
dolls.--1914.

 

"Unpack the Loaded Pern" (p. 263).--When I was a child at Sligo I could
see above my grandfather's trees a little column of smoke from "the pern
mill," and was told that "pern" was another name for the spool, as I was
accustomed to call it, on which thread was wound. One could not see the
chimney for the trees, and the smoke looked as if it came from the
mountain, and one day a foreign sea-captain asked me if that was a
burning mountain.--1919.

 

*The Phases of the Moon* ([p. 301](lpy146.htm#page_301)), *The Double
Vision of Michael Robartes* ([p. 316](lpy151.htm#page_316)), *Michael
Robartes and the Dancer* ([p. 323](lpy152.htm#page_323)).--Years ago I
wrote three stories in which occurs the names of Michael Robartes and
Owen Aherne. I now consider that I used the actual names of two friends,
and that one of these friends, Michael Robartes, has but lately returned
from Mesopotamia where he has partly found and partly thought out much
philosophy. I consider that John Aherne is either the original of Owen
Aherne or some near relation of the man that was, and that both he and
Robartes, to whose

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

namesake I had attributed a turbulent life and death, have quarrelled
with me. They take their place in a phantasmagoria in which I endeavour
to explain my philosophy of life and death, and till that philosophy has
found some detailed exposition in prose certain passages in the poems
named above may seem obscure. To some extent I wrote them as a text for
exposition.--1922.

 

*A Note on the Setting of these Poems to Music*.--A musician who would
give me pleasure should not repeat a line, or put more than one note to
one syllable. I am a poet not a musician, and dislike to have my words
distorted or their animation destroyed, even though the musician claims
to have expressed their meaning in a different medium.--1922.

W. B. Y.

 

THE END

Printed in Great Britain by R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, Edinburgh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisements](lpy168)
