[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flhl26)  [Next](flhl28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4OOY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Folk-lore of the Holy Land, Moslem, Christian and Jewish*, by J. E.
Hanauer \[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

#### THE SECRET OF SUCCESS

IN a town not far from the capital there lived, years ago, a young man
noted for his learning. He had completed his studies at the great
University of El Azhar at Cairo, and was a master in all the seven
sciences and an owner of the seven tongues, a beautiful caligraphist, a
poet so accomplished that his verse were said by his friends to deserve
to be affixed to the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

gates of the Ka’aba at Mecca, <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) and a
scholar so erudite that none grudged him the right to wear the wide
formal and much respected shape of turban called "mûkleh." But, despite
these advantages, he could not get on in the world, having no
influential relative to push him forward. Nothing discouraged, however,
he resolved, being ambitious, to gain the notice and approbation of the
Sultan himself, and, as a result, position and wealth, for he was poor
although of stately presence.

He therefore wrote a magnificent poem in praise of the great Khan and
mighty Khakan, the Commander of the Faithful, our Sovereign Lord the
Sultan Fulân, <span id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_78.md) ibn-es-Sultan Fulân,
Sultan of the Arabians, the Persians, and the Rûm, whose fame and
influence extended over the seven continents and across the seven seas.
When the ode was finished he forwarded it to the potentate, having sold
nearly everything he possessed in order to gain the favour of the
various officials through whose hands the document would. have to pass
before it could be laid at the foot of the couch whereon reposed the
Sovereign of the Age.

Great were the hopes this young man founded on his verses, but yet
greater was his disgust when the "sheykh el Hara," (or headman of the
street in which he lived) one day sent for him and called upon him to
sign a receipt for fifty dinârs out of the Imperial treasury, and when
he had done so, coolly told him that forty dinârs had gone to pay the
fees of various officials between the throne and himself,

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

that he himself must keep five for his own fee, and three on some other
pretext, leaving the poet a balance of two only. Thoroughly disgusted
with his want of success, but being of a persevering character, our hero
wrote a second ode yet more beautiful than the former, and then started
on foot for Stambûl, resolved not to trust to intermediaries, but to lay
his work himself at the feet of the well-spring of all earthly bounty.
He reached the capital on a Thursday evening and took a lodging at a
khan. The next morning, having been to the bath, he arranged his turban
and robes in such a manner as to make a good impression, and then took
up a position near the entrance of the mosque in which the Padishah was
wont to perform his public devotions week after week. As soon as the
Sultan appeared the poet rushed forward, and, falling at the Sovereign's
feet, presented his poem. The paper was graciously received by the
monarch, who immediately afterwards passed into the mosque. The poet
awaited his return and when the Sultan came out and saw him standing, he
graciously commanded him to follow him to the palace. On reaching it the
Sultan read the poem, and, being pleased with it, went to his private
money-chest, and, taking out ten dinârs gave them to the young man.
Noticing the look of disappointment on the latter's face, and being
himself in a very good humour, the Padishah told him to say why he was
not pleased and to speak frankly without fear or reserve. On receiving
such encouragement, the poet fell at his Sovereign's feet, told him of
his aspirations, his disappointments,

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

and how he had spent the whole of his property in striving to achieve
success and attain a high position. "My son," said the benevolent ruler,
when the poet had stopped speaking, "be content with what I now give
you. For you to receive more at present would only be a cause of trouble
to you, for it would be sure to excite the attention, and rouse the envy
and hatred, of your neighbours. I will, however, add to it something of
greater worth than all the talents and learning which you already
possess. I will tell you what is the secret of success in life. It is
expressed in the one Arabic word "Heylim." <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) " Make 'Heylim' your rule of life and you
will be sure to attain eminence." With these words the scholar was
dismissed. Walking home, he pondered on his Sovereign's strange advice.
Suddenly a bright idea struck him. Meeting a well-dressed Greek priest
in the lonely road, he accosted him. "O Nazarene, son of a dog, change
clothes with me." The priest objected at first, but finally yielded to
the Moslem's threats, and was glad to be allowed to go his way unharmed,
as a Mohammedan ’âlim or savant, whilst the poet, as a Greek priest,
returned to Istanbûl took a room in a quiet khan, and remained in
retirement till his hair was grown so long as to enable him to pass for
a priest of the Orthodox Church.

Having attained this object he called on the Sheykh el Islâm and desired
a private interview which was granted. "Three nights ago," said the
impostor, "I had a dream which greatly troubled

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

me. It has been repeated on the two succeeding nights. I dreamt that a
venerable man, who had such and such features, and wore such and such a
garb," (here he gave a description which would remind learned Moslems of
the traditional appearance of the Founder of Islâm), "appeared to me and
declaring that he had been sent to teach me the true religion, made me
repeat the following prayer after him several times till I knew it by
heart. When I could do this, he told me to come to you, repeat what he
had taught me, and ask for further instruction." He then, to the
Sheykh's great surprise, repeated the "Fatha" or first chapter of the
Koran with great unction. The Sheykh el Islâm cross-questioned his
visitor shrewdly but failed to disconcert him. It appeared he was in
truth a Christian priest to whom Mohammed himself had taught the first
rudiments of Islâm, a most interesting convert. The highest religious
official in the Moslem world, therefore, vouchsafed him the desired
instruction, and received him into his house. Next day he informed his
host that he had again dreamed that he was visited by the venerable
person, and that the latter had taught him a second set of texts, which
he was to ask the Sheykh to expound to him. He then repeated the second
sûra of the Koran, entitled "The Cow," and containing 286 verses,
without making a mistake in a single vowel-point or accent. The Sheykh
was astonished beyond measure, and not a little flattered at the thought
that the Prophet should have singled *him* out to be the religious
instructor

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

of so miraculous a disciple. What would his enemies say when it became
known that his authority was not only upheld by the Khalìfeh, but by
Mohammed himself?

During the next night the pseudo-Christian was taught, as he stated, the
third sûra, and on the following morning he repeated it correctly to his
host who then expounded it. Next night the fourth sûra was revealed, and
so on, till the Sheykh could no longer abstain from inviting the learned
of his acquaintance to come and witness the marvel. They came, saw,
heard, questioned and cross-questioned, but found more than their match,
and retired greatly mystified, if not convinced. In the meantime the
case of conversion was spoken of openly throughout Stambûl. The
Christians dared not gainsay the exultant Moslems who boasted of the
wonderful conversion of a great Christian theologian which had been
effected by the Prophet himself assisted by the Sheykh el Islâm. The
fame of the latter went up by bounds. His "fetwahs" or legal decisions
were humbly accepted. Gifts came to him from all sides, and being a
generous man, he shared them with his pupil.

The supposed Christian, however, retained his clerical habit, asserting
that the Prophet had bidden him not to lay it aside nor be admitted into
the pale of El Islâm by circumcision till his instruction was complete.
In due time news respecting the extraordinary case reached the Commander
of the Faithful, who, being a wise man, first inquired about the time
when this remarkable Nazarene first applied

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

to the Sheykh el Islâm for instruction. His suspicions roused, he
commanded that the supposed Christian should be brought to him
privately. The Sultan knew him at a glance, in spite of his disguise and
long hair, and sternly inquired what was meant by this mummery. "O Ruler
of the Age!" replied the scamp, falling at his feet, "Your Majesty
advised me to 'heylim' and I, obeying the precept, have found it
profitable." He then told his story, which greatly amused the Sultan,
who sent word to the Sheykh el Islâm that he himself would be
responsible for the further progress of the interesting convert, who
would remain in the palace as his guest. After this, having commanded
the palace barber to attend the rogue, and dressed him in clothes
befitting a true believer, he made him one of his private secretaries,
and by degrees advanced him to higher posts in the Government. Ever
since that time the plain rule "Heylim," or in other words, "kiss a dog
on his mouth till you have got what you want from him," <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_80.md) has been well observed in the East.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[148:1](flhl27.htm#fr_78.md) This, from internal
evidence, I judge to be a Christian fable.--ED.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[148:2](flhl27.htm#fr_79.md) Fulân=" So and so ";
*cf*. Span. Don Fulano.--ED.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[150:1](flhl27.htm#fr_80.md) The English
expressions "flatter, insinuate, ingratiate yourself, and dissimulate "
hardly express the full significance of this one word.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[153:1](flhl27.htm#fr_81.md) Bûss el kelb ala fummo
hatta takdi gharadak minno; in the dâraji (common) Arabic of
Palestine.--ED.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Origin of Three Well-Known Sayings](flhl28.md)
