[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flhl10)  [Next](flhl12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4OOY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folk-lore of the Holy Land, Moslem, Christian and Jewish*, by J. E.
Hanauer \[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

### VIII

#### DAVID AND SOLOMON

*Some of the Best Traditions*

DAÛD (on whom be peace) was singularly pious and anxious to do his duty
to Allah as well as to his neighbour. He therefore used to divide his
time into three parts, devoting one day to the worship of Allah and the
study of Scripture, the second to matters of State, and the third to
domestic duties and the earning of a livelihood. He was led to work with
his own hands for the support of his family by the following
circumstance.

When he first came to the throne he was anxious to know whether his
people were satisfied with his rule, and, knowing how worthless is the
praise of courtiers, he resolved to find out for himself. He therefore
went about disguised among the common people and heard what was thought
of his administration. On one such occasion he was informed by an angel
in human form that the great fault of his government was that the king
lived at the expense of the public treasury, instead of working with his
hands for daily bread. On hearing this, Daûd was greatly troubled, and
besought Allah to show him some kind of trade by the proceeds of which
both he and his family might be able to live without burdening the
nation. Hereupon Gabriel was sent to teach the king the art of making
coats of mail. Thenceforth, during his leisure hours, the king was
always to be

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

found at work in his armoury, and there was a great demand for his
handiwork, as the armour he made was proof against all weapons. The
usual price of a full suit of mail was six thousand dinârs. The king
made them at the rate of one a day. One-third of the proceeds went
towards the support of his family, one-third in alms, and the remainder
to purchase materials for the building of the Temple. Suleymân also had
a trade. He knew the art of kneading stone, and moulding it into various
shapes, in the same way that a pastry-cook or a baker moulds dough. Some
colonnettes with curiously twisted, rope-like marble shafts in the Dome
of the Rock of Jerusalem are shown as his work.

 

Daûd made a pilgrimage to the graves of the patriarchs at Hebron, and,
on his return to Jerusalem, expressed in prayer a longing to be as
favoured of Allah as they were. He even went so far as to say that he
was sure that, if exposed to their temptations, he would overcome them;
with the prospect of a like reward. In answer to this prayer Allah told
Daûd that his petition would be granted, but that, seeing how the race
of Adam had degenerated, the All Merciful, in granting his request, had
added a favour with which the patriarchs had not been indulged: that he
should be informed of the exact time of his trial.. The date and hour
were thus announced to the pious king.

When the day arrived, Daûd, full of confidence, shut himself up in the
tower which still bears his name, and gave orders that he was on no
account

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

to be disturbed. He passed the time in reading and meditation. Then, as
now, many wild rock-doves flew around the tower, and the king was
presently roused from his devotions by a flutter of wings. Looking up,
he saw, just outside the window, a most wonderful pigeon, its plumage
gleaming with prismatic colours, and looking as if it had feathers of
gold and silver studded with precious jewels. The king threw some crumbs
on to the floor, and the bird came in and picked them up at his feet,
but eluded every attempt at capture. At last it flew to the window and
settled on one of the bars. Daûd tried again to catch it, but the
creature flew away, and it was then, as he was looking after it, that he
saw that which led to his great crimes in the matter of Uriah.

Two angels were some time afterwards sent, in human form, to reprove the
fallen monarch. On their arrival at the gate of Daûd's tower they were
refused entrance by the guards; but, to the latter's great astonishment,
they easily scaled the fortress wall and entered the royal chamber.
Surprised at their coming in unannounced and without leave, Daûd
demanded to know their business with him. He was thunderstruck when,
having related the parable of the one ewe lamb, <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) they denounced his iniquity. When they had
fulfilled their mission they departed, leaving the king so full of
remorse at his failure to resist the temptation sent in answer to his
prayer, that he wept day and night. Mountains and hills, trees and
stones, beasts and flying things,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

which had been wont to echo his songs of praise to Allah, now joined in
his lamentations. There was universal weeping, and the tears of Daûd
himself flowed so copiously that they filled both the Birket es
Sultan, <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) and the Birket Hammâm el
Batrak. <span id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24) At last a prophet was sent
to tell the contrite sinner that, in consideration of his penitence,
Allah pardoned the sin against Himself, but that, for the crime against
his fellow-man, he must obtain forgiveness from the person injured. The
king then made a pilgrimage to the tomb of Uriah, and there confessed
his sins, when a voice came from the tomb saying: "My Lord the King,
since your crime has secured me Paradise, I forgive you with all my
heart." "But, Uriah," said Daûd, "I did it to get possession of your
wife." To this there was no answer, until Daûd, in despair, prayed Allah
to make Uriah forgive him. Then the voice came again from the tomb: "I
forgive thee, O King, because for one wife torn from me on earth, Allah
has given me a thousand in Heaven."

 

In the southern wall of the Dome of the Rock, often erroneously called
the Mosque of ’Omar, on the right hand side, just outside the door,
there are two small slabs of marble which, having been sliced from the
same block, show the same veining, and have been fastened side by side
in such a way that the vein-lines form a figure which resembles two
birds perched on opposite sides of a vase. The picture

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

is framed in marble of a darker colour. Connected with the picture is
the following story.

The great Suleymân el Hakìm was sitting one day near a window of his
palace, listening to the love-talk of two pigeons upon the house-top.
Said the male bird loftily: "Who is Suleymân the king? And what are all
his buildings to be so proud of? Why, I, if I put my mind to it, could
kick them down in a minute!"

Hearing this, Suleymân leant out of the window and called the boaster,
asking how he could tell such a lie. "Your Majesty," was the cringing
reply, "will forgive me when I explain that I was talking to a female.
You know one cannot help boasting in such circumstances." The monarch
laughed and bade the rogue begone, warning him never to speak in that
tone again. The pigeon, after a profound reverence, flew to rejoin his
mate.

The female at once asked why the king had called him. "Oh," came the
answer, "he had overheard what I was saying to you, and asked me not to
do it." So enraged was Suleymân at the irrepressible vanity of the
speaker that he turned both birds into stone, as a warning to men not to
boast, and to women not to encourage them. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

Suleymân was well acquainted with the language of plants. Whenever he
came across a new plant he asked its name, uses, the soil and
cultivation by which it flourished, and also its properties; and the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

plant answered. He laid out the first botanical garden.

One day, in the Temple courts, he noticed a young plant of a kind
unknown to him. He promptly asked its name. "El Kharrûb," was the
answer. Now El Kharrûb means the destroyer. "Of what use art thou?"
continued the king. "To destroy thy works," replied the plant. On
hearing this Suleymân exclaimed in sorrow, "What! has Allah prepared the
cause of the destruction of my works during my lifetime?"

Then he prayed that his decease, whenever it should occur, might be
hidden from the Jân till all mankind should be aware of it. His reason
for making this petition was his fear that if the Jân should know of his
death before mankind knew of it, they would seize the opportunity to do
mischief and teach men iniquity. Having prayed thus, the king dug up the
Kharrûbeh and planted it close to a wall in his garden, where, to
prevent, as far as might be, any harm coming from it, he watched it
daily, till it had grown into a strong, stout sapling. He then cut it
down and made of it a walking-stick on which he would lean when he sat
superintending the labours of the evil spirits he kept slaving for him,
to prevent them from exercising their power and ingenuity against
mankind.

Now, many years before, Belkis, Queen of Sheba, had come to prove
Suleymân with hard questions, one of which was how to pass a silk thread
through a bead, the perforation in which was not straight through, but
winding like the body of a moving

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

serpent. It had been a hard task, but it was performed, at the king's
request, by a small white worm or maggot which, taking the end of the
thread between its teeth, crawled in at one end and out at the other. To
reward this insignificant creature for its work, the king granted its
request that it might lodge inside the seed-vessels and other parts of
plants and feed thereon. Unknown to Suleymân it had found a home under
the bark of the young Kharrûb-tree, his staff, and had penetrated to the
very centre of the trunk. The time arrived for the king to die, and he
happened to be sitting as usual, leaning on his staff, when Azrael came
and took away his soul, unknown to the Jân; who worked on steadily for
full forty years, not knowing that the king was dead, because the staff
upheld his corpse just as if it had been alive. At last, however, the
worm hollowed out the staff, which suddenly broke in two, so that the
body of Suleymân rolled to the ground and the evil spirits knew that
their tyrant was dead. To this day the traveller in the East is shown a
huge unfinished stone in the quarries at Ba’albec, and others in
different parts of the country, and is informed that they are some of
the tasks left unfinished by the Jân, when at last they were sure that
Suleymân el Hakìm was dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[46:1](flhl11.htm#fr_22) 2 Sam. xii. 1-6.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[47:1](flhl11.htm#fr_23) Traditionally known as
the Lower Pool of Gihon.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[47:2](flhl11.htm#fr_24) Traditionally known as
the Pool of Hezekiah.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[48:1](flhl11.htm#fr_25) *Cf*. King Solomon and
the Butterflies in Mr Rudyard Kipling's "Just So Stories."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. El Khudr](flhl12)
