[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups10)  [Next](bups12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**OF THANKSGIVING FOR VASUBANDH,**

**THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA**

127\. Among those doctrines taught of our Lord Vasubandh, the great
priest hath persuaded us who are full of sinful desires to accept the
Divine Promise of our infinite Father.

128\. Only to Him who is above all things is known the glory of the Land
of Peace. Wide as the sky and boundless is it spread forth.

129\. Whoso believeth in the power of the Divine Promise shall verily be
at one with the holy Essence, even as the turbid stream is clear and
pure within the ocean depth when they have flowed together.

130\. When the assemblage of the believers in the holy faith is born
within that Land of Purity that hath sprung from the lotus of the true

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

enlightenment, soon shall their heart's desire be fulfilled in them.

131\. The heavenly spirits and those souls freed from illusion, they who
are born in the land of purity from the wisdom deep as the ocean of the
Divine Promise, differ not the one from the other in their powers. Pure
are they as the air is pure.

132\. Vasubandh, that exalted master of excelling works, who himself
hath found refuge in the Buddha of Infinite Light, hath declared that
whoso is borne in the Vehicle of the Divine Promise shall without doubt
attain unto the Promised Land.

133\. Whoso taketh refuge in the Buddha of Infinite Light, that light
that shineth unto all the worlds of the Ten Regions, shall be called,
according to the teaching of that master of excelling works, a man whose
heart is great, and to him shall the True Light be shown.

134\. He whose heart is great and who shall attain unto the true
enlightenment is he also that desireth the salvation of all living, and
verily the true faith given of that Blessed One is salvation.

135\. The single heart perceiveth the true faith, and so doing is strong
and clear as the diamond, and this strength is the wisdom of the supreme
that strengtheneth us.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

136\. When we shall attain unto the Promised Land, which is that Nirvana
past all understanding, there shall we labour abundantly for the
salvation of all living things. For so the Sutra teaches us in these
words: "A heart that inclineth to the succour of others."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Thanksgiving for Donran, the Great Teacher of China](bups12)
