[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

The following advertisements appeared at the end of the original text.
they are included for completeness.

THE WISDOM OF THE EAST

SERIES

Edited by L. <span class="smallcaps">Cranmer-Byng</span> and Dr. S. A.
<span class="smallcaps">Kapadia</span>

THE SERIES AND ITS PURPOSE

This Series has a definite object. It is, by means of the best Oriental
literature—its wisdom, philosophy, poetry, and ideals —to bring together
West and East in a spirit of mutual sympathy, goodwill, and
understanding. From India, China, Japan, Persia, Arabia, Palestine, and
Egypt these words of wisdom have been gathered.

NEW VOLUMES.

BUDDHIST PSALMS. Translated from the Japanese of Shinran Shōnin by <span
class="smallcaps">S. Yamabe</span> and <span class="smallcaps">L. Adam
Beck</span>. 3/6 net.

THE SECRET ROSE GARDEN OF SA’D UD DIN MAHMŪD SHABISTARĪ. Rendered from
the Persian, with an Introduction, by <span class="smallcaps">Florence
Lederer</span>. 3/6 net.

THE RHYTHM OF LIFE. Based on the Philosophy of Lao-Tse. By <span
class="smallcaps">Henri Borel</span>. Translated by <span
class="smallcaps">M. E. Reynolds</span>. 3/6 net

*INDIAN*

THE RELIGION OF THE SIKHS. By <span class="smallcaps">Dorothy
Field</span>. 3/6 net.

BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES. A Selection Translated from the Pāli with
Introduction by <span class="smallcaps">E. J. Thomas</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">M.A.</span> 3/6 net.

THE HEART OF INDIA. Sketches in the History of Hindu Religion and
Morals. By <span class="smallcaps">L. D. Barnett</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">M.A.</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Litt.D.</span>,.
Professor of Sanskrit at University College, London. 3/6 net.

BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE: An Outline of the Philosophy of the Vedānta. As set
forth by the Upanishads and by Sankara. By <span class="smallcaps">L. D.
Barnett</span>, <span class="smallcaps">M.A.</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Litt.D.</span>, Professor of Sanskrit at University
College, London. 3/6 net.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

THE BUDDHA'S "WAY OF VIRTUE." A Translation of the Dhammapada. By <span
class="smallcaps">W. C. D. Wagiswara</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">K. J. Saunders</span>, Members of the Royal Asiatic
Society, Ceylon branch. 3/6 net.

THE PATH OF LIGHT. Rendered for the first time into English from the
Bodhi-charyāvatāra of Sānti-Deva. A Manual of Mahā-Yāna Buddhism. By
<span class="smallcaps">L. D. Barnett</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">M.A.</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Litt.D.</span>
3/6 net.

LEGENDS OF INDIAN BUDDHISM. Translated from "L’Introduction à l’Histoire
du Buddhisme Indien" of Eugène Burnouf, with an Introduction by <span
class="smallcaps">Winifred Stephens</span>. 3/6 net.

THE WAY OF THE BUDDHA. Selections from the Buddhist texts, together with
the original Pāli, with Introduction by <span class="smallcaps">Herbert
Baynes</span>, <span class="smallcaps">M.R.A.S.</span> 3/6 net.

*IRANIAN (Persian, Pehlvi, Zend, etc.)*

THE DIWAN OF ZEB-UN-NISSA. The First Fifty Ghazals Rendered from the
Persian by <span class="smallcaps">Magan Lal</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Jessie Duncan Westbrook</span>. With an Introduction
and Notes. 3/6 net.

THE RUBA’IYÁT OF HÁFIZ. Translated with Introduction by <span
class="smallcaps">Syed Abdul Majid</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">LL.D.</span> Rendered into English Verse by <span
class="smallcaps">L. Cranmer-Byng</span>. 2/6 net.

THE SPLENDOUR OF GOD. Being Extracts from the Sacred Writings of the
Bahais. With Introduction by <span class="smallcaps">Eric
Hammond</span>. 3/6 net.

THE TEACHINGS OF ZOROASTER, and the Philosophy of the Parsi Religion.
Translated with Introduction by <span class="smallcaps">Dr. S. A.
Kapadia</span>, Lecturer, University College, London. and Edition, 3/6
net.

THE PERSIAN MYSTICS.

I. Jalálu’d-dín Rumí. By F. <span class="smallcaps">Hadland
Davis</span>. 3/6 net.

H. Jámí By <span class="smallcaps">F. Hadland Davis</span>. 3/6 net.

THE BUSTĀN OF SA’DI. From the Persian. Translated with Introduction by
<span class="smallcaps">A. Hart Edwards</span>. 3/6 net.

SA’DI’S SCROLL OF WISDOM. By SHAIKH SA’DI. With Introduction by Sir
<span class="smallcaps">Arthur N. Wollaston</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">K.C.I.E.</span> 2/6 net. With Persian Script added.
3/6 net.

THE ROSE GARDEN OF SA’DI. Selected and Rendered from the Persian with
Introduction by <span class="smallcaps">L. Cranmer-Byng</span>. 2/6 net.

*ARABIC*

THE POEMS OF MU‘TAMID, KING OF SEVILLE. Rendered into English Verse by
<span class="smallcaps">Dulcie Lawrence Smith</span>. With an
Introduction. 2/6 net.

ABU’L ALA, THE SYRIAN. By <span class="smallcaps">Henry Baerlein</span>.
3/6 net.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

THE ALCHEMY OF HAPPINESS. By <span class="smallcaps">Al Ghazzali</span>.
Rendered into English by <span class="smallcaps">Claud Field</span>. 3/6
net.

THE AWAKENING OF THE SOUL. From the Arabic of <span
class="smallcaps">Ibn Tufail</span>. Translated with Introduction by
<span class="smallcaps">Paul Brönnle</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Ph.D.</span> 2/6 net.

THE RELIGION OF THE KORAN. With Introduction by Sir <span
class="smallcaps">Arthur N. Wollaston</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">K.C.I.E.</span> 2/6 net.

ARABIAN WISDOM. Selections and Translations from the Arabic by <span
class="smallcaps">John Wortabet</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">M.D.</span> 2/6 net.

THE SINGING CARAVAN. Some Echoes of Arabian Poetry By <span
class="smallcaps">Henry Baerlein</span>. 3/6 net.

THE DIWAN OF ABU’L-ALA. By <span class="smallcaps">Henry
Baerlein</span>. 2/6 net.

*HEBREW*

ANCIENT JEWISH PROVERBS. Compiled and Classified by <span
class="smallcaps">A. Cohen</span>, late Scholar of Emmanuel College,
Cambridge. 3/6 net.

THE WISDOM OF THE APOCRYPHA. With an Introduction by <span
class="smallcaps">C. E. Lawrence</span>, Author of "Pilgrimage," etc.
3/6 net.

*CHINESE*

A FEAST OF LANTERNS. Rendered with an Introduction by <span
class="smallcaps">L. Cranmer-Byng</span>, Author of "A Lute of Jade,"
"The Odes of Confucius," etc. 3/6 net.

YANG CHU'S GARDEN OF PLEASURE. Translated from the Chinese by Professor
<span class="smallcaps">Anton Forke</span>. With an Introduction by
<span class="smallcaps">H. Cranmer-Byng</span>. 2/6 net.

TAOIST TEACHINGS. From the Mystical Philosophy of Lieh Tzŭ. Translated
by <span class="smallcaps">Lionel Giles</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">M.A.</span> 3/6 net.

A LUTE OF JADE. Being Selections from the Classical Poets of China.
Rendered with an Introduction by <span class="smallcaps">L.
Cranmer-Byng</span>. and Edition. 3/6 net.

THE CLASSICS OF CONFUCIUS.

I. The Book of Odes (Shi-King). By <span class="smallcaps">L.
Cranmer-Byng</span>. 2/6 net.

II\. The Book of History (Shu-King). By <span class="smallcaps">W. Gorn
Old</span>. 2/6 net.

THE SAYINGS OF CONFUCIUS. A new Translation of the greater part of the
Confucian Analects, with Introduction and Notes by <span
class="smallcaps">Lionel Giles</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">M.A.</span> (Oxon.), Assistant in the Department of
Oriental Books and Manuscripts of the British Museum. 3/6 net.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

THE CONDUCT OF LIFE; or, The Universal Order of Confucius. A translation
of one of the four Confucian Books, hitherto known as the Doctrine of
the Mean. By, <span class="smallcaps">Ku Hung Ming</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">M.A.</span> (Edin.). 2/6 net.

THE BOOK OF FILIAL DUTY. Translated from the Chinese of the Hsiao Ching
by <span class="smallcaps">Ivan Chên</span>, First Secretary to the
Chinese Legation. 2/6 net.

THE SAYINGS OF LAO TZŬ. From the Chinese. Translated with Introduction
by <span class="smallcaps">Lionel Giles</span>, of the British Museum.
2/6 net.

MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC. Selections from the Philosophy of Chuang
Tzŭ. With Introduction by <span class="smallcaps">Lionel Giles</span>,
<span class="smallcaps">M.A.</span> (Oxon.), Assistant at the British
Museum. 3/6 net.

THE FLIGHT OF THE DRAGON. An Essay on the Theory and Practice of Art in
China and Japan, based on Original Sources. By <span
class="smallcaps">Laurence Binyon</span>. 3/6 net.

*JAPANESE*

THE SPIRIT OF JAPANESE ART. By <span class="smallcaps">Yone
Noguchi</span>. 3/6 net.

THE SPIRIT OF JAPANESE POETRY. By <span class="smallcaps">Yone
Noguchi</span>. 3/6 net.

THE WAY OF CONTENTMENT. Translated from the Japanese of Kaibara Ekken by
<span class="smallcaps">Ken Hoshino</span>. 3/6 net.

THE MASTER-SINGERS OF JAPAN. Being Verse Translations from the Japanese
Poets. By <span class="smallcaps">Clara A. Walsh</span>. 3/6 net.

WOMEN AND WISDOM OF JAPAN. With Introduction by <span
class="smallcaps">S. Takaishi</span>. 2/6 net.

*EGYPTIAN*

ANCIENT EGYPTIAN LEGENDS. By <span class="smallcaps">Margaret A.
Murray</span>. 3/6 net.

THE BURDEN OF ISIS. Being the Laments of Isis and Nephthys. Translated
from the Egyptian with an Introduction by <span class="smallcaps">James
Teackle Dennis</span>. 2/6 net.

THE INSTRUCTION OF PTAH-HOTEP AND THE INSTRUCTION OF KE’GEMNI. The
Oldest Books in the World. Translated from the Egyptian with
Introduction and Appendix by <span class="smallcaps">Battiscombe
Gunn</span>. 2/6 net.

*Editorial Communications should be addressed to  
*<span class="smallcaps">The Editors Of The Wisdom Of The East
Series</span>,  
<span class="smallcaps">50A, Albemarle Street, London, W.I</span>

LONDON: JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W,

 
