[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bups11)  [Next](bups13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028Y4KM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Psalms*, by S. Yamabe and L. Adams Beck, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**OF THANKSGIVING FOR DONRAN, THE**

**GREAT TEACHER OF CHINA**

137\. Donran, that great teacher of China, being instructed of
Bodhi-ruci, the priest of India, sought refuge in the Land of Purity,
and thus doing he burned with fire the books of the Taoist teaching
which he had aforetime held in honour.

138\. Having thus cast from him the writings that he had so many years
diligently studied, he preached unto all men the doctrine of the Divine
Promise, and, so teaching, he led men that are fast bound in the fetters
of illusion, in at the Gate of the Great Peace.

139\. A mighty King of this world brought homage unto him in his
monastery and put unto him this question, saying: "If so it is that the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Land of Purity
should be in all the Ten Regions, how then is it declared unto us in the
Sutra that it is in the Western Heaven?"

140\. And with humble piety he replied:

"Of this matter can I not tell thee. It is too high for me. Still am I
in the lower rank of wisdom, even still small is my knowledge. I cannot
fathom this great mystery."

141\. All men in the priesthood or the people who know not the rock of
their trust, did Donran the Great Priest guide unto the sure refuge of
the doctrine of the Land of Bliss.

142\. He abode in the Temple of the Great Rock, being favourably bidden
thereto by the King of the Gi Dynasty, and in the evening of his days he
travelled into the district of Dun.

143\. And this King of the Gi Dynasty reverently offered unto him the
holy title of Shinran (Ran of Divinity) and the honourable name of "Rock
of the Venerable Ran"—that his dwelling-place should be called by it.

144\. Great and mighty upon the people was his spiritual power in the
temple of Genchu and in the fourth year of Kokwa of the Gi Dynasty the
Temple of Yosen became his beloved dwelling.

145\. And when he had reached sixty-seven

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

years, he sought his final refuge in the Eternal Kingdom. And at that
departing were vouchsafed many holy marvels unto which all men, both of
the priests and people; came and did reverence.

146\. And when Donran the Great High Priest had departed into the Peace,
the King of the Gi Dynasty by a royal order commanded there should be
built for him a holy monument in the lands of Dun.

147\. What man could know the unsearchable mystery of the faith and
deeds of the Divine Promise were it not for that most excelling
commentary of Donran the wise Priest, which he wrote concerning the
teaching of Vasubandh that had lived aforetime.

148\. He who believeth that the Sole Vehicle of the Divine Promise, most
perfect, most mighty, receiveth within itself the Greatest of Sinners,
and this because it is its chief will so to do, will receive the depth
of this essential teaching—namely, that before the eyes of the
Instructed, illusion and wisdom are in their Essence One.

149\. Among the Five Mysteries that are preached in this Sutra, the
mystery of the Divine Power of the Enlightened One is highest, and this
is the holy vow of our Blessed One, this and this only.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

150\. Unto us hath our Father given those two spiritual gifts. Of these
the first is the Virtue whereby we attain unto His Kingdom, and the
second is the Virtue whereby having so attained we return into this
world for the Salvation of men. By the merit of these two gifts are we
initiates of the true faith and of its deeds.

151\. When we shall have attained unto the faith and the deeds of the
Merciful Promise through our Father that is in all things able to give
them unto us, birth and death are henceforward as Nirvana. And this is
called the Gift of Departure.

152\. And when we shall have attained unto that height which is desire
for the ingathering of all beings into Paradise, shall we return again
into this world that we may be Saviours of Men. And this is called the
Gift of Returning.

153\. That "Single Mind" expounded unto us by Vasubandh, the Master of
Writings that excel, is nothing other than the faith of us that are now
fast bound in illusion. So teacheth Donran the Great Teacher in his
Commentary.

154\. The Buddha of that inexpressible Light that shineth into the
worlds of the Ten Regions, being for ever enlightened in the night of
ignorance,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

hath most certainly opened the way of Nirvana to every man who even for
one moment rejoiceth in receiving His Divine Promise.

155\. By the merit of His Infinite Light, when we attain unto that faith
divine and omnipotent, the ice of illusion shall melt into the water of
perfect wisdom.

156\. Sin is made one with virtue in its essence, even as ice is one
with water. The more there is ice, so much the more water is there. So
also is the binding up of sin with virtue.

157\. In the unbounded ocean of the Holy Name is not seen even one
single death of a blasphemer. For the myriad streams of sin are on
purity with the ocean of righteousness when they have flowed into the
impurity thereof.

158\. When the streams of illusion have flowed into the Great Sea of the
Merciful Promise of the Enlightened One, whose light shineth into all
the worlds of the Ten Religions, then shall they too become the pure
water of the Perfect Wisdom.

159\. No other way is there of attaining unto the Perfect Enlightenment
save only by birth into the Land of Gladness, and therefore have all the
Enlightened Ones exhorted men that they should receive the Doctrine of
the Kingdom Purity.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

160\. The Great Priest hath well taught us that in order to cleanse our
deeds, words, and thoughts of deceitfulness, our Father hath performed
the three of His pure and universal.

161\. There is no way unto the Kingdom of Gladness save only by
attaining unto the true faith through that Holy Name, the very Jewel of
Wonder.

162\. When the new birth through the clearness of the Divine Promise is
attained in the Eternal Kingdom, it is not like unto the birth of this
world; then is there no inferiority even in those that in this world
were sinners, for they have entered into Paradise.

163\. The Holy Name of the Buddha of that Boundless Light that shineth
into all the worlds of the Ten Regions, and the glory of His Wisdom,
destroy the darkness of ignorance in the Eternal Night, thus fulfilling
all the desires of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Unrighteous Deeds](bups13)
