[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ema08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

### DEMONIACAL POSSESSION, DREAMS, GHOSTS, LUCKY AND UNLUCKY DAYS, HOROSCOPES, PROGNOSTICATIONS, TRANSFORMATIONS, AND THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS.

THE Egyptians, in common with many other Eastern nations, believed that
certain sicknesses and diseases might be cured by certain medicaments
pure and simple, but that others needed not only drugs but the recital
of words of power to effect their cure. There is good reason for
thinking that some diseases were attributed to the action of evil
spirits or demons, which had the power of entering into human bodies and
of vexing them in proportion to their malignant nature and
influence, <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139.md) but the texts do not
afford much information on the matter. Incidentally, however, we have
one interesting proof that foreign peoples believed that the Egyptians
were able to cure the diseases caused by demoniacal possession, and the
exercise of their power

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

on the occasion described was considered to be so noteworthy that the
narrative of it was inscribed upon a stele <span
id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140.md) and setup in the temple <span
id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141.md) of the god Khonsu at Thebes, so that all
men might read and know what a marvellous cure his priests had effected.
It appears that king Rameses II. was in Mesopotamia "according to his
wont, year by year," and all the chiefs of the countries round about
came to pay their respects to him, and they sought to obtain his
goodwill and protection, probably even an alliance, by bringing to him
gifts of gold, and lapis-lazuli, and turquoise, and of every kind of
valuable thing which the land produced,

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

and every man sought to outdo his neighbour by the lavishness of his
gifts. Among others there came the Prince of Bekhten, and at the head of
all the offerings which he presented to His Majesty he placed his eldest
daughter, who was very beautiful. When the king saw her he thought her
the most beautiful girl he had ever seen, and he bestowed upon her the
title of "Royal spouse, chief lady, Râ-neferu" (*i.e.*, "the beauties of
Râ," the Sun-god), and took her to Egypt; and when they arrived in that
country the king married her. One day during the fifteenth year of the
king's reign, when His Majesty was in Thebes celebrating the festival of
Amen-Râ, a messenger came to the king and reported the arrival of an
ambassador from the Prince of Bekhten who had brought rich gifts for the
royal lady Râ-neferu. When he had been led into the king's presence, he
did homage before him, saying, "Glory and praise be unto thee, O thou
Sun of the nations; grant that we may live before thee!" Having said
these words be bowed down and touched the ground with his head three
times, and said, "I have come unto thee, O my sovereign Lord, on behalf
of the lady Bent-ent-resht, the younger sister of the royal spouse
Râ-neferu, for, behold, an evil disease hath laid hold upon her body; I
beseech thy Majesty to send a physician <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142.md) to see her." Then the king straightway
ordered the books of the "double house

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

<span id="img_20900"></span> ![](img/20900.jpg)

Stele recording the casting out of the devil from the Princess of
Bekhten. On the right the king is offering Incense to Khonsu
Nefer-hetep, and on the left a priest is offering incense to Khonsu,
"the great god who driveth away devils." (From Prisse, *Monuments*,
plate 24.)

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

of life" to be brought and the learned men to appear, and when they had
come into his presence he ordered them to choose from among their number
a man "wise of heart and cunning of finger," that he might send him to
Bekhten; they did so, and their choice fell upon one Tehuti-em-heb. This
sage having come before the king was ordered to set out for Bekhten in
company with the ambassador, and he departed; and when they had arrived
there the Egyptian priest found the lady Bent-ent-resht to be possessed
of a demon or spirit over which he was powerless. The Prince of Bekhten,
seeing that the priest was unable to afford relief to his daughter, sent
once again to the king, and entreated him to send a god to his help.

When the ambassador from Bekhten arrived in Egypt the king was in
Thebes, and on hearing what was asked he went into the temple of Khonsu
Nefer-hetep, and besought that god to allow his counterpart Khonsu to
depart to Bekhten and to deliver the daughter of the prince of that
country from the power of the demon that possessed her. It seems as if
the sage Tehuti-em-heb had been sent to Bekhten by the advice of the
god, for the king says, in addressing, the god, "I have come once again
into thy presence"; but in any case Khonsu Nefer-hetep agreed to his
request, and a fourfold measure of magical power was imparted to the
statue of the god which was to go to Bekhten. The god, seated in his
boat, and five other

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

boats with figures of gods in them, accompanied by chariots and horses
on the right hand and on the left, set out from Egypt, and after
travelling for seventeen months arrived in Bekhten, where they were
received with great honour. The god Khonsu went to the place where
Bent-ent-resht was, and, having performed a magical ceremony over her,
the demon departed from her and she was cured straightway. Then the
demon addressed the Egyptian god, saying, "Grateful and welcome is thy
coming unto us, O great god, thou vanquisher of the hosts of darkness!
Bekhten is thy city, the inhabitants thereof are thy slaves, and I am
thy servant; and I will depart unto the place whence I came that I may
gratify thee, for unto this end hast thou come thither. And I beseech
thy Majesty to command that the Prince of Bekhten and I may hold a
festival together." To the demon's request Khonsu agreed, and he
commanded his priest to tell the Prince of Bekhten to make a great
festival in honour of the demon; this having been done by the command of
Khonsu the demon departed to his own place.

When the Prince of Bekhten saw that Khonsu was thus powerful, he and all
his people rejoiced exceedingly, and he determined that the god should
not be allowed to return to Egypt, and as a result Khonsu remained in
Bekhten for three years, four months, and five days. On a certain day,
however, the Prince was

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

sleeping., and he dreamed a dream in which he saw the god Khonsu come
forth from his shrine in the form of a hawk of gold, and having mounted
into the air he flew away to Egypt. The Prince woke up in a state of
great perturbation, and having inquired of the Egyptian priest was told
by him that the god had departed to Egypt, and that his chariot must now
be sent back. Then the Prince gave to Khonsu great gifts, and they were
taken to Egypt and laid before the god Khonsu Nefer-hetep in his temple
at Thebes. In early Christian literatures we find a number of examples
of demoniacal possession in which the demon who has entered the body
yields it up before a demon of greater power than himself, but the demon
who is expelled is invariably hostile to him that expels him, and he
departs from before him with every sign of wrath and shame. The fact
that it was believed possible for the demon of Bekhten and the god
Khonsu to fraternize, and to be present together at a festival made by
the Prince of the country, shews that the people of Bekhten ascribed the
same attributes to spirits or demons as they did to men. The demon who
possessed the princess recognized in Khonsu a being who was mightier
than himself, and, like a vanquished king, he wished to make the best
terms he could with his conqueror, and to be on good terms with him.

The Egyptians believed that the divine powers frequently made known
their will to them by means of

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

dreams, and they attached considerable importance to them; the figures
of the gods and the scenes which they saw when dreaming seemed to them
to prove the existence of another world which was not greatly unlike
that already known to them. The knowledge of the art of procuring dreams
and the skill to interpret them were greatly prized in Egypt as
elsewhere in the East, and the priest or official who possessed such
gifts sometimes rose to places of high. honour in the state, as we may
see from the example of Joseph, <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143.md)
for it was universally believed that glimpses of the future were
revealed to man in dreams. As instances of dreams recorded in the
Egyptian texts may be quoted those of Thothmes IV., king of Egypt about
B.C. 1450, and Nut-Amen, king of the Eastern Sûdân and Egypt, about B.C.
670. A prince, according to the stele which he set up before the breast
of the Sphinx at Gizeh, was one day hunting near this emblem of
Râ-Harmachis, and he sat down to rest under its shadow and fell asleep
and dreamed a dream. In it the god appeared to him, and, having declared
that he was the god Harmachis-Khepera-Râ-Temu, promised him that if he
would clear away from the Sphinx, his own image, the drift sand in which
it was becoming buried, he would give to him the sovereignty of the
lands of the South and of the North, *i.e.*, of all Egypt. In due course
the prince became king of Egypt under the title of Thothmes IV., and the
stele

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

which is dated on the 19th day of the month Hathor of the first year of
Thothmes IV. proves that the royal dreamer carried out the wishes of the
god. <span id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144.md) Of Nut-Amen, the successor of
the great Piânkhi who came down from Gebel Barkal and conquered all
Egypt from Syene to the sea, we read that in the first year of his reign
he one night dreamed a dream wherein he saw two serpents, one on his
right hand and the other on his left; when he awoke they had
disappeared. Having asked for an interpretation of the dream he was
told:--"The land of the South is thine, and thou shalt have dominion
over the land of the North: the White Crown and the Red Crown shall
adorn thy head. The length and the breadth of the land shall be given
unto thee, and the god Amen, the only god, shall be with thee." <span
id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_145.md) The two serpents were the symbols of the
goddesses Nekhebet and Uatchet, the mistresses of the South and North
respectively. As the result of his dream Nut-Amen invaded Egypt
successfully and brought back much spoil, a portion of which he
dedicated to the service of his god Amen.

Since dreams and visions in which the future might be revealed to the
sleeper were greatly desired, the Egyptian magician set himself to
procure such for his clients by various devices, such as drawing magical
pictures and reciting magical words. The following

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

are examples of spells for procuring a vision and dreams, taken from
British Museum Papyrus, No. 122, lines 64 ff. and 359 ff. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146.md) "To obtain a vision from \[the god\]
Bes. Make a drawing of Besa, as shewn below, on your left hand, and
envelope your hand in a strip of black cloth that has been consecrated
to Isis (?) and lie down to sleep without speaking a word, even in
answer to a question. Wind the remainder of the cloth round your neck.
The ink with which you write must be composed of the blood of a cow, the
blood of a white dove, fresh (?) frankincense, myrrh, black writing-ink,
cinnabar, mulberry juice, rain-water, and the juice of wormwood and
vetch. With this write your petition before the setting sun, \[saying\],
c Send the truthful seer out of the holy shrine, I beseech thee,
Lampsuer, Sumarta, Baribas, Dardalam, Iorlex: O Lord send the sacred
deity Anuth, Anuth, Salbana, Chambré, Breïth, now, now, quickly,
quickly. Come in this very night.'" <span
id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_147.md)

"To procure dreams: Take a clean linen bag and write upon it the names
given below. Fold it up and make it into a lamp-wick, and set it alight,
pouring pure oil over it. The word to be written is this: 'Armiuth,
Lailamchoüch, Arsenophrephren, Phtha, Archentechtha.' Then in the
evening, when you are

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

going to bed, which you must do without touching food \[or, pure from
all defilement\], do thus. Approach the lamp and repeat seven times the
formula given below: then extinguish it and lie down to sleep. The
formula is this: 'Sachmu . . . epaëma Ligotereënch: the Aeon, the
Thunderer, Thou that hast swallowed the snake and dost exhaust the moon,
and dost raise up the orb of the sun in his season, Chthetho is thy
name; I require, O lords of the gods, Seth, Chreps, give me the
information that I desire.'"

The peculiar ideas which the Egyptians held about the composition of man
greatly favoured the belief in apparitions and ghosts. According to them
a man consisted of a physical body, a shadow, a double, a soul, a heart,
a spirit called the *khu*, a power, a name, and a spiritual body. When
the body died the shadow departed from it, and could only be brought
back to it by the performance of a mystical ceremony; the double lived
in the tomb with the body, and was there visited by the soul whose
habitation was in heaven. The soul was, from one aspect, a material
thing, and like the *ka*, or double, was believed to partake of the
funeral offerings which were brought to the tomb; one of the chief
objects of sepulchral offerings of meat and drink was to keep the double
in the tomb and to do away with the necessity of its wandering about
outside the tomb in search of food. It is clear from many texts that,
unless the double was supplied with sufficient food,

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

it would wander forth from the tomb and eat any kind of offal and drink
any kind of dirty water which it might find in its path. But besides the
shadow, and the double, and the soul, the spirit of the deceased, which
usually had its abode in heaven, was sometimes to be found in the tomb.
There is, however, good reason for stating that the immortal part of man
which lived in the tomb and had its special abode in the statue of the
deceased was the "double." This is proved by the fact that a special
part of the tomb was reserved for the *ka*, or double, which was called
the "house of the *ka*," and that a priest, called the "priest of the
*ka*," was specially appointed to minister therein. The double enjoyed
the smell of the incense which was offered at certain times each year in
the tomb, as well as the flowers, and herbs, and meat, and drink; and
the statue of the deceased in which the double dwelt took pleasure in
all the various scenes which were painted or sculptured on the walls of
the various chambers of the tomb, and enjoyed again all the delights
which his body had enjoyed upon earth. The *ka*, or double, then, in
very early times was, to all intents and purposes, the ghost of the
Egyptians. In later times the *khu*, or "spirit," seems to have been
identified with it, and there are frequent allusions in the texts to the
sanctity of the offerings made to the *khu*, and to their territories,
*i.e.*, the districts in which their mummified bodies lie.

Whether there was any general belief that the

ka

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

or *khu* could or did hold intercourse with his relatives or friends
whom he left alive upon earth cannot be said, but an instance is known
in which a husband complains to his wife, who has been dead for three
years, of the troubles which she has brought upon him since her death.
He describes his own merits and the good treatment which he had
vouchsafed to her when she was alive, and declares that the evil with
which she is requiting him is not to be endured. To make his complaint
to reach her he first reduced it to writing upon papyrus, then went to
her tomb and read it there, and finally tied the papyrus to a statue or
figure of his wife which was therein; since her double or spirit lived
in the tomb she would, of course, read the writing and understand
it. <span id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148.md) It is a pity that we have no
means of knowing what was the result of the husband's complaint.
Elsewhere <span id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_149.md) we have a fragment of a
conversation which a priest of Amen called Khonsu-em-heb, who was
searching for a suitable place in which to build his tomb, holds with
the. double or spirit of some person whom he has disturbed, and the
spirit of the dead tells some details of his life to the living man. The
cemeteries were regarded with awe by the ancient Egyptians because of
the spirits of the dead

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

who dwelt in them, and even the Arabic-speaking peoples of Egypt and the
Sûdân, if we exclude the "antiquity grubber," have them in great respect
for the same reason. <span id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150.md) The modern
peoples of the Sûdân firmly believe that the spirits of those slain in
battle dwell on the field where they fell, or where their bodies are
buried, and the soldiers in the tenth battalion of Lord Kitchener's army
declare that the grave of the gallant Major Sidney, who was shot while
charging at the head of his regiment, in the battle of Abû Hamed, August
7th, 1897, "is watched regularly every night by the ghosts of the native
soldiers who were killed at Abû Hamed, and who mount guard over their
dead commander's tomb, challenging, with every military detail, all
passers-by. So implicitly is this legend credited by the blacks that
none of

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

them will, after dusk, approach the grave. Any one doing so is believed
to be promptly halted by a phantom sentry, and even the words (in
Arabic), 'Guard, turn out!' are often (so the story goes) plainly heard
repeated at some distance off across the desert." <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151.md)

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

The Egyptians believed that a man's fate or destiny was decided before
he was born, and that he had no power whatever to alter it. Their sages,
however, professed to be able to declare what the fate might be,
provided that they were given certain data, that is to say, if they were
told the date of his birth, and if they were able to ascertain the
position of the planets and stars at that time. The goddess of fate or
destiny was called "Shai," and she is usually accompanied by another
goddess called "Renenet," who is commonly regarded as the lady of
fortune; they both appear in the Judgment Scene, where they seem to
watch the weighing of the heart on behalf of the deceased. But another
goddess, Meskhenet, is sometimes present, and she also seems to have had
influence over a man's future; in any case she was able to predict what
that future was to be. Thus we read that she and Isis, and Nephthys, and
Heqet, disguised as women, went to the house of Râ-user, whose wife
Râ-Tettet was in travail; when they had been taken into her room they
assisted her in giving birth to triplets, and as each child was born
Meskhenet declared, "He shall be a king who shall have dominion over the
whole land."

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And this prophecy was fulfilled, for the three
boys became three of the kings of the Vth dynasty. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152.md) The Seven Hathor goddesses also could
predict the future of a human being, for in the well-known "Tale of Two
Brothers" it is related that, when the god Khnemu, at the request of
Râ-Harmachis, had created for Bata a wife "who was more beautiful in her
person than any other woman in all the earth, for the essence of every
god was contained in her," they came to see her, and that they spake
with one voice, saying, "Her death will be caused by the knife." And
this came to pass, for, according to the story, when the king whose wife
she became heard from her first husband that she had left him and had
wrought evil against him, he entered into judgment with her in the
presence of his chiefs and nobles, and "one carried out their decree,"
*i.e.*, they sentenced her to death and she was executed. Similarly, in
another story, the Seven Hathors came to see the son who had been born
to a certain king in answer to his prayers to the gods, and when they
had seen him they said, "He shall die by means of a crocodile, or a
serpent, or a dog." The story goes on to say how be escaped from the
crocodile and the serpent, and though the end is wanting, it is quite
clear that he was wounded by an accidental bite of his dog and so
died. <span id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_153.md) The moral of all such
stories

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

is that there is no possibility of avoiding fate, and it is most
probable that the modern Egyptian has only inherited his ancestors'
views as to its immutability. <span id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154.md) A
man's life might, however, be happy or unhappy according as the hour of
the day or the day itself was lucky or unlucky, and every day of the
Egyptian year was divided into three parts, each of which was lucky or
unlucky. When Olympias was about to give birth to Alexander the Great,
Nectanebus stood by her making observations of the heavenly bodies, and
from time to time he besought her to restrain herself until the
auspicious hour had arrived; and it was not until he saw a certain
splendour in the sky and knew that all the heavenly bodies were in a
favourable position that he permitted her to brine, forth her child. And
when he had said, "O queen, now thou wilt give birth to a governor of
the world," the child fell upon the ground while the earth quaked, and
the lightnings flashed, and the thunder roared. <span
id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_155.md) Thus it is quite evident that the future
of a child depended even upon the hour in which he was born.

In magical papyri we are often told not to perform certain magical
ceremonies on such and such days, the idea being that on these days
hostile powers will make them to be powerless, and that gods mightier
than

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

those to which the petitioner would appeal will be in the ascendant.
There have come down to us, fortunately, papyri containing copies of the
Egyptian calendar, in which each third of every day for three hundred
and sixty days of the year is marked lucky or unlucky, and we know from
other papyri why certain days were lucky or unlucky, and why others were
only partly so <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156.md). Taking the month
Thoth, which was the first month of the Egyptian year, and began,
according to the Gregorian Calendar, on August 29th, we find that the
days are marked as follows:--

<span id="img_22500"></span> ![](img/22500.jpg)

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

Now the sign <span id="img_22600"></span> ![](img/22600.jpg) means
"lucky," and <span id="img_22601"></span> ![](img/22601.jpg) means
"unlucky"; thus at a glance it could be seen which third of the day is
lucky or unlucky, and the man who consulted the calendar would, of
course, act accordingly. It must be noted that the priests or magicians
who drew up the calendar had good reasons for their classification of
the days, as we may see from the following example. The 19th day of
Thoth is, in the above list, marked wholly lucky, *i.e.*, each third of
it is lucky, and the papyrus Sallier IV. <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157.md) also marks it wholly lucky, and adds the
reason:--"It is a day of festival in heaven and upon earth in the
presence of Râ. It is the day when flame was hurled upon those who
followed the boat containing the shrine of the gods; and on this day the
gods gave praises being content," etc. But in both lists the 26th day is
marked wholly unlucky, the reason being, "This was the day of the fight
between Horus and Set." They first fought in the form of men, then they
took the form of bears, and in this state did battle with each other for
three days and three nights. Isis aided Set when he was getting the
worst in the fight, and Horus thereupon cut off his mother's head, which
Thoth transformed by his words of power into that of a cow and put on
her body. On this day offerings are to be made to Osiris and Thoth, but
work of any kind is absolutely forbidden. The calendars of lucky

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

and unlucky days do not, however, always agree as to a given day. Thus
in the list given above the 20th day of Thoth is marked wholly unlucky,
but in the papyrus Sallier IV. it is wholly lucky, but the reader is
told not to do any work in it, nor to slay oxen, nor to receive a
stranger; on this day the gods who are in the following of Râ slew the
rebels. Concerning the fourth day of the next month, Paophi, the papyrus
Sallier IV. says, "Go not forth from thy house from any side of it;
whosoever is born on this day shall die of the disease *aat*."
Concerning the fifth day it says, "Go not forth from thy house from any
side of it, and hold no intercourse with women. This is the day wherein
all things were performed in the divine presence, and the majesty of the
god Menthu was satisfied therein. Whosoever is born on this day shall
die of excessive venery." Concerning the ninth day it says, "Whosoever
is born on this day shall die of old age," and concerning the fifteenth,
"Go not forth from thy dwelling at eventide, for the serpent Uatch, the
son of the god, goeth forth at this time, and misfortunes follow him;
whosoever shall see him shall lose his eye straightway." Again, the
twenty-sixth day of Paophi was a lucky day for making the plan of a
house; on the fifth day of Hathor no fire was to be kindled in the
house; on the sixteenth day it was forbidden to listen to songs of joy
because on this day Isis and Nephthys wept for Osiris at Abydos;

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

a man born on the twenty-third day would die by drowning; and so on. But
to the three hundred and sixty days given in the calendars of lucky and
unlucky days must be added the five epagomenal days which were
considered to be of great importance and had each its peculiar name. On
the first Osiris was born, on the second Heru-ur (Aroueris), on the
third Set, on the fourth Isis, and on the fifth Nephthys; the first,
third, and fifth of these days were unlucky, and no work of any kind was
to be undertaken on them. The rubric which refers to these days <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158.md) states that whosoever knoweth their
names shall never suffer from thirst, that he shall never be smitten
down by disease, and that the goddess Sekhet <span
id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_159.md) shall never take possession of him; it
also directs that figures of the five gods mentioned above shall be
drawn with unguent and *ânti* scent upon a piece of fine linen,
evidently to serve as an amulet.

From the life of Alexander the Great by Pseudo-Callisthenes <span
id="fr_160"></span>[3](#fn_160.md) we learn that the Egyptians were skilled
in the art of casting nativities, and that knowing the exact moment of
the birth of a man they proceeded to construct his horoscope. Nectanebus
employed for the purpose a tablet made of gold and silver and acacia
wood, to which were fitted three belts. Upon the

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

outer belt was Zeus with the thirty-six *decani* surrounding him; upon
the second the twelve signs of the Zodiac were represented; and upon the
third the sun and moon. <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161.md) He set the
tablet upon a tripod, and then emptied out of a small box upon it models
of the seven stars <span id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_162.md) that were in
the belts, and put into the middle belt eight precious stones; these he
arranged in the places wherein he supposed the planets which they
represented would be at the time of the birth of Olympias, and then told
her fortune from them. But the use of the horoscope is much older than
the time of Alexander the Great, for to a Greek horoscope <span
id="fr_163"></span>[3](#fn_163.md) in the British Museum is attached "an
introductory letter from some master of the art of astrology to his
pupil, named Hermon, urging him to be very exact and careful in his
application of the laws which he ancient Egyptians, with their laborious
devotion to the art, had discovered and handed down to posterity." Thus
we have good reason for assigning the birthplace of the horoscope to
Egypt. In connexion with the horoscope must be mentioned the "sphere" or
"table" of Democritus as a means of making predictions as to life and
death. In a magical

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

papyrus <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_164.md) we are told to "ascertain
in what month the sick man took to his bed, and the name he received at
his birth. Calculate the \[course of\] the moon, and see how many
periods of thirty days have elapsed; then note in the table the number
of days left over, and if the number comes in the upper part of the
table, he will live, but if in the lower part, he will die."

<span id="img_23000"></span> ![](img/23000.jpg)

Both from the religious and profane literature of Egypt we learn that
the gods and man in the future life were able at will to assume the form
of any animal, or bird, or plant, or living thing, which they pleased,
and one of the greatest delights to which a man looked forward was the
possession of that power. This is proved by the fact that no less than
twelve <span id="fr_165"></span>[2](#fn_165.md) of the chapters of the Book
of the Dead are devoted to

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

providing the deceased with the words of power, the recital of which was
necessary to enable him to transform himself into a "hawk of gold," a
"divine hawk," "the governor of the sovereign princes," "the god who
giveth light in the darkness," a lotus, the god Ptah, a *bennu* bird
(*i.e.*, phœnix), a heron, a "living soul," a swallow, the serpent Sata,
and a crocodile; and another chapter <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_166.md) enabled him to transform himself into
"whatever form he pleaseth." Armed with this power he could live in the
water in the form of a crocodile, in the form of a serpent he could
glide over the rocks and ground, in the form of the birds mentioned
above he could fly through the air, and soar up and perch himself upon
the bow of the boat of Râ, in the form of the lotus he had mastery over
the plants of the field, and in the form of Ptah he became "more
powerful than the lord of time, and shall gain the mastery over millions
of years." The *bennu* bird, it will be remembered, was said to be the
"soul of Râ," and by assuming this form the deceased identified himself
with Khepera, the great god of creation, and thus acquired the
attributes of the soul of the Sun-god. In the Elysian Fields he was able
to assume any form and to swim and fly to any distance in any direction.
It is noteworthy that no beast of the field or wild animal is mentioned
as a type of his possible transformations into animals.

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

Now the Egyptians believed that as the souls of the departed could
assume the form of any living thing or plant, so the "gods," who in many
respects closely resembled them, could and did take upon themselves the
forms of birds and beasts; this was the fundamental idea of the
so-called "Egyptian animal worship," which provoked the merriment of the
cultured Greek, and drew down upon the Egyptians the ridicule and abuse
of the early Christian writers. But if the matter be examined closely
its apparent stupidity disappears. The Egyptians paid honour to certain
birds, and animals, and reptiles, because they considered that they
possessed certain of the characteristics of the gods to whom they made
them sacred. The bull was a type of the strength and procreative power
of the god of reproduction in nature, and the cow was the type of his
female counterpart; every sacred animal and living thing possessed some
quality or attribute which was ascribed to some god, and as each god was
only a form of Râ, the quality or attribute ascribed to him was that of
the Sun-god himself. The educated Egyptian never worshipped an animal as
an animal, but only as an incarnation of a god, and the reverence paid
to animals in Egypt was in no way different from that paid to the king,
who was regarded as "divine" and as an incarnation of Râ the Sun-god,
who was the visible symbol of the Creator. The relation of the king to
Râ was identical with that of Râ to God. The

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans never understood the
logical conception which underlay the reverence with which the Egyptians
regarded certain animals, and as a result they grossly misrepresented
their religion. The ignorant people, no doubt, often mistook the symbol
for what it symbolized, but it is wrong to say that the Egyptians
worshipped animals in the ordinary sense of the word, and this fact
cannot be too strongly insisted on. Holding the views he did about
transformations there was nothing absurd in the reverence which the
Egyptian paid to animals. When a sacred animal died the god whom it
represented sought out another animal of the same species in which to
renew his incarnation, and the dead body of the animal, inasmuch as it
had once been the dwelling-place of a god, was mummified and treated in
much the same way as a human body after death, in order that it might
enjoy immortality. These views seem strange, no doubt, to us when judged
by modern ideas, but they formed an integral part of the religious
beliefs of the Egyptians, from the earliest to the latest times. What is
remarkable, however, is the fact that, in spite of invasions, and
foreign wars, and internal dissensions, and external influences of all
kinds, the Egyptians clung to their gods and the sometimes childish and
illogical methods which they adopted in serving them with a conservatism
and zeal which have earned for them the reputation of being at once the
most religious and most superstitious nation of

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

antiquity. Whatever literary treasures may be brought to light in the
future as the result of excavations in Egypt, it is most improbable that
we shall ever receive from that country any ancient Egyptian work which
can properly be classed among the literature of atheism or freethought;
the Egyptian might be more or less religious according to his nature and
temperament, but, judging, from the writings of his priests and teachers
which are now in our hands, the man who was without religion and God in
some form or other was most rare, if not unknown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_139"></span>[206:1](ema09.htm#fr_139.md) As recently as 1895
this belief existed in Ireland, for according to the *Times* of April 2,
3, 6, and 8, Michael Cleary was charged on April 1 at Clonmel with
having, on March 14, burnt his wife Bridget, aged 27, for being a witch,
thus causing her death, at Baltyvadhen, <span id="page_207">p.
207</span> county Tipperary. Johanna Burke swore that boiling herbs out
of a saucepan on the fire were forced down the throat of the deceased,
her husband asking her in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
if she was his wife. He then stripped her naked, threw her on the floor,
and pouring paraffin over her, set her on fire. Cleary, assisted by J.
Dunne, P. Kennedy, W. Kennedy, and others, next took her to the fire and
forced her to sit upon it in order to "drive out the witch" which
possessed her. She was next laid upon the bed and shaken, while her
husband recited the words "Away with you," meaning the evil spirit, or
spirits, and at six o'clock on the morning of the 15th of March the
priest was sent for to exorcise the spirits with which the house was
thought to be filled. A herbalist called Denis Ganey was present at the
time, being charged as an accessory before the fact. The prisoners were
found guilty and were sentenced to terms of imprisonment as follows:--M.
Cleary 20 years, J. Dunne 3 years, P. Kennedy 5 years, W. Kennedy 18
months, J. Kennedy 18 months, Boland Kennedy 6 months, Michael Kennedy 6
months.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[207:1](ema09.htm#fr_140.md) Originally published
by Prisse, *Monuments Égyptiens*, Paris, 1817, pl. 24.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[207:2](ema09.htm#fr_141.md) It is now preserved
in the Bibliotèque Nationale at Paris; for a full description and
translation of it see E. de Rougé, *Étude sur une stele Égyptienne*,
Paris, 1858.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[208:1](ema09.htm#fr_142.md) *Bekh khet*, "knower
of things."

<span id="fn_143"></span>[214:1](ema09.htm#fr_143.md) See Genesis, Chapters
xi., xii.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[215:1](ema09.htm#fr_144.md) See Vyse, *Appendix*,
London, 1842, vol. iii., p. 114 ff.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[215:2](ema09.htm#fr_145.md) See Brugsch, *Egypt
under the Pharaohs*, Vol. ii., p. 259.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[216:1](ema09.htm#fr_146.md) See *Catalogue of
Greek Papyri*, vol. i. p. 118.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[216:2](ema09.htm#fr_147.md) A sketch of the god
Besa is given at the end of the papyrus. See the description of the
"Metternichstele" above, [p. 147](ema06.htm#page_147.md) ff.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[219:1](ema09.htm#fr_148.md) For the text see
Leemans, Monuments Égyptiens, Partie IL, pll. 183, 184, Leyden, 1846,
fol.; for a transcript into hieroglyphics see Maspero, *Journal
Asiatique*, Sér. 7, tom. 15, May and June, 1880, pp. 365-420.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[219:2](ema09.htm#fr_149.md) See Golénischeff in
*Recueil de Travaux*, tom. iii., pp. 3-7.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[220:1](ema09.htm#fr_150.md) When I visited the
Pyramids of Meroë in 1898 1 took with me the local shêkh, and a man and
a boy to look after the donkeys. Having come to within half a mile of
the pyramids the three stopped and wished me to ride on by myself, and
when I asked them why they did not want to come up the hill to the
pyramids with me the shêkh replied that they had been built by kings
whose spirits still dwelt there, and that it would not be seemly for him
and his companions to "trouble" them. I pressed him to come, but he
answered "It is not the custom of our country to go there," so I walked
on by myself. When I had been in the pyramid field for about two hours
taking photographs and measurements, the shêkh arrived with the boy, but
nothing would persuade him to walk about there, and having seated
himself be recited prayers from the Koran in an undertone, and at
intervals urged me to return to his straw house on the river bank as
soon as possible. He was firmly convinced that the prismatic compass
which I used was a talisman, and when he reached home he thanked God
fervently that he had not been molested by the spirits of the dead.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[221:1](ema09.htm#fr_151.md) See the illustrated
paper *The Sketch*, No. 332, June 7, 1899, p. 277. The following from
the Times of July 7, 1899, is worth quoting:--

"THE GRAVE OF A BRITISH NAVAL OFFICER IN JAPAN.--Recently a report came
to the ears of the British Consul at Hiogo that the grave of a British
naval officer existed near a village on the island of Hiroshima, in the
Inland Sea of Japan-a place rarely visited by any foreigner-and that,
for some reason, it was carefully kept in order by the peasants in the
neighbourhood. The Consul accordingly communicated with the Governor of
the prefecture in which the island is situated; inquiries were made, and
the Governor was able to send to the Consul a history of the lonely
grave. The story was appended by the Governor to a formal despatch of
his own, and was obviously drawn up by the village headman or some
equally humble official, and it is worth giving in full. The Sylvia, the
vessel mentioned, was for many years engaged in surveying off the coasts
of Japan:--'In the first year of Meiji, corresponding to A.D. 1868,
H.B.M.S. *Sylvia* was proceeding on a voyage through the Inland Sea when
an officer on board, named Lake, fell ill. He was landed on the island
of Hiroshima, at the village of Hiroshima, in the district of Naka,
province of Sanuki, and prefecture of Kagawa. The *Sylvia* proceeded
along the coast of Hiroshima and cast anchor at Enoura Bay, to await the
officer's recovery. In a few days, however, he died, and Captain St.
John buried his remains in ground belonging to the temple of Ikwoji
above Enoura shrine, and, having set up a wooden cross to mark the
grave, departed. Several years afterwards, when this monument had almost
decayed from the effects of wind and rain, frost and snow, Awaburi
Tokwan, Superior of Ikwoji Temple, and others said:--"Truly it would be
too sad if the grave of our solitary guest from afar, who has become a
spirit in a strange land, were suffered to pass out of all knowledge."
Thereupon Terawaki Kaemon, head of a village guild, and other
sympathisers, such as Oka Ryohaku, set on foot a scheme for the erection
of a stone monument, and, the shore folk all with one accord <span
id="page_222">p. 222</span> lending their help, the work was finally
brought to completion. This was on the 7th day of the eleventh month of
the fourth year of Meiji--that is, 1871. Since then nearly 30 winters
have passed, during which time the islanders have not neglected to take
good care of the tomb. In particular, from the 10th to the 16th day of
the seventh month, old style, there are still persons found who every
year clean and sweep the grave, and, offering up flowers and incense,
mourn for and console the spirit of the dead.'"

<span id="fn_152"></span>[223:1](ema09.htm#fr_152.md) See Erman, *Westcar
Papyrus*, Berlin, 1890, hieroglyphic transcript, pll. 9 and 10.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[223:2](ema09.htm#fr_153.md) See Maspero, *Contes
Égyptiens*, pp. 29-46.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[224:1](ema09.htm#fr_154.md) The uneducated
Muhammadan believes that man's fate is written upon his skull, and that
the sutures are the writing. No man, however, can read them. See the
words of Zayn al-Mawasif in Burton's Alf Laylah wa Laylah, vol. viii.,
p. 237.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[224:2](ema09.htm#fr_155.md) See
Pseudo-Callisthenes, I. 12.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[225:1](ema09.htm#fr_156.md) See Brit. Mus.
Papyrus, No. 10,474.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[226:1](ema09.htm#fr_157.md) See Chabas, *Le
Calendrier*, p. 24.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[228:1](ema09.htm#fr_158.md) See Chabas, *op.
cit.*, p. 104.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[228:2](ema09.htm#fr_159.md) The Eye of Sekhet
seems to have taken the form of noxious vapours in the fields at
sunrise; see Chabas, *op. cit.*, p. 78.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[228:3](ema09.htm#fr_160.md) I. 4.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[229:1](ema09.htm#fr_161.md) quote from my
*History of Alexander the Great*, Cambridge, 1889, p. 5.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[229:2](ema09.htm#fr_162.md) *I.e.*, Sun, Moon,
Zeus, Kronos, Aphrodite, and Hermes; we must add Mars according to
Meusel's Greek text.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[229:3](ema09.htm#fr_163.md) Published for the
first time by Kenyon, *Catalogue of Greek Papyri* vol. i. p. 132 ff.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[230:1](ema09.htm#fr_164.md) *Leyden Pap. V.* (ed.
Leemans), col. xi., 1. 1 ff.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[230:2](ema09.htm#fr_165.md) *I.e.*, Chapters
LXXVII. to LXXXVIII.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[231:1](ema09.htm#fr_166.md) *I.e.*, Chapter
LXXVI.
