[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ema05)  [Next](ema07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

### MAGICAL PICTURES AND FORMULÆ, SPELLS, ETC.

FROM what has been said above it is clear that the Egyptian believed it
possible to vivify by means of formulæ and words of power any figure
made in the form of a man or animal, and to make it work either on
behalf of or against his fellow man. Besides this, he believed greatly
in the efficacy of representations or pictures of the gods, and of
divine beings and things, provided that words of power properly recited
by properly appointed people were recited over them. If this fact be
borne in mind a great many difficulties in understanding religious texts
disappear, and many apparently childish facts are seen to have an
important meaning. If we look into the tombs of the early period we see
painted on the walls numbers of scenes in which the deceased is
represented making offerings to the gods and performing religious
ceremonies, as well as numbers of others in which be is directing the
work of his estate and ruling his household. It was not altogether the
result of pride that such pictures

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

were painted on the walls of tombs, for at the bottom of his heart the
Egyptian hoped and believed that they were in reality representations of
what he would do in the next world, and he trusted that the words of his
prayers would turn pictures into realities, and drawings into
substances. The wealthy Egyptian left behind him the means for making
the offerings which his *ka*,

<span id="img_10500"></span> ![](img/10500.jpg)

The goddess Hathor giving the scribe Ani meat and drink from out of a
sycamore tree which grows by the side of a stream.  
(From the Papyrus of Ani, plate 16.)

or double, needed, and was able to provide for the maintenance of his
tomb and of the *ka* chapel and of the priest or priests who ministered
to it. It was ail article of faith among all classes that unless the
*ka* was properly fed it would be driven to wander about and pick up
filth and anything else of that nature which it

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

found in its path, as we may see from the LIInd Chapter of the Book of
the Dead, in which the deceased says, "That which is an abomination unto
me, that which is an abomination unto me let me not eat. That which is
an abomination unto me, that which is an abomination unto me is filth;
let me not eat of it instead of the cakes \[which are offered unto\] the
Doubles (*kau*). Let it not light upon my body; let me not be obliged to
take it into my hands; and let

<span id="img_10600"></span> ![](img/10600.jpg)

The scribe Ani and his wife standing in a stream drinking water.  
(From the *Papyrus of Ani*, plate 16.)

me not be obliged to walk thereon in my sandals." And in the CLXXXIXth
Chapter he prays that he may not be obliged to drink filthy water or be
defiled in any way by it. The rich man, even, was not certain that the
appointed offerings of meat and drink could or would be made in his tomb
in perpetuity: what then was the poor man to do to save his ka from the
ignominy of eating filth and drinking dirty water?

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

\[paragraph continues\] To get out of this difficulty the model of an
altar in stone was made, and models of cakes, vases of water, fruit,
meat, etc., were placed upon it; in cases where this was not possible
figures of the offerings were sculptured upon the stone itself; in
others, where even the expense of an altar could not be borne by the
relatives of the dead, an altar with offerings painted upon it was
placed in the tomb, and as long as it existed through the prayers
recited, the *ka* did not lack food. Sometimes neither altar, nor model
nor picture of an altar was placed in the tomb, and the prayer that
sepulchral meals might be given to the deceased by the gods, which was
inscribed upon some article of funeral furniture, was the only provision
made for the wants of the *ka*; but every time any one who passed by the
tomb recited that prayer, and coupled with it the name of the man who
was buried in it, his *ka* was provided with a fresh supply of meat and
drink offerings, for the models or pictures of them in the inscription
straightway became veritable substances. On the insides of the wooden
coffins of the XIIth dynasty, about B.C. 2500, are painted whole series
of objects which, in still earlier times, were actually placed in the
tombs with the mummy; but little by little men ceased to provide the
numerous articles connected with the sepulture of the dead which the old
ritual prescribed, and they trusted to the texts and formulæ which they
painted on the coffin to turn pictures into substances, and

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

besides the pillow they placed little else in the tomb.

About a thousand years later, when the religious texts which formed the
Book of the Dead were written upon papyri instead of coffins, a large
number of illustrations or vignettes were added to them; to many of
these special importance was attached, and the following are worthy of
note.

It will be remembered that the CXXVth Chapter of the Book of the Dead
contains the so-called "Negative Confession" which is recited in the
Hall of Maâti, and a number of names of gods and beings, the knowledge
of which is most important for the welfare of the deceased. At the end
of the Chapter we find the following statement:--"This chapter shall be
said by the deceased after he hath been cleansed and purified, and when
he is arrayed in apparel, and is shod with white leather sandals, and
his eyes have been painted with antimony, and his body hath been
anointed with *ânti* unguent, and when he hath made offerings of oxen,
and birds, and incense, and cakes, and ale, and garden herbs. And
behold, thou shalt paint a picture of what shall happen in the Hall of
Maâti upon a new tile moulded from earth, upon which neither a pig nor
any other animal hath trodden. And if thou writest upon it this chapter
the deceased shall flourish; and his children shall flourish; and his
name shall never fall into oblivion; and bread, and

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

cakes, and sweetmeats, and wine, and meat shall be given unto him at the
altar of the great god; and he shall not be turned back at any door in
the underworld; and he shall be brought in along with the Kings of the
North and South; and he shall be in the following of Osiris always and
for ever." Here, then, we have an excellent example of the far-reaching
effects of a picture accompanied by the proper words of power, and every
picture in the Book of the Dead was equally efficacious in producing a
certain result, that result being always connected with the welfare of
the dead.

According to several passages and chapters the deceased was terrified
lest he should lack both air and water, as well as food, in the
underworld, and, to do away with all risk of such a calamity happening,
pictures, in which he is represented holding a sail (the symbol of air
and wind and breath) in his hands, and standing up to his ankles in
water, <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) were painted on his papyrus,
and texts similar to the following were written below them. "My mouth
and my nostrils are opened in Tattu (Busiris), and I have my place of
peace in Annu (Heliopolis) which is my house; it was built for me by the
goddess Sesheta, and the god Khnemu set it upon its walls for me. . . ."
"Hail, thou god Tem, grant thou unto me the sweet breath which dwelleth
in thy nostrils! I embrace the great throne which is in Khemennu
(Hermopolis), and I

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

keep watch over the Egg of the Great Cackler; I germinate as it
germinateth; I live as it liveth; and my breath is its breath." <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) But yet another "exceeding great mystery"
had to be performed if the deceased was to be enabled to enter into
heaven by its four doors at will, and to enjoy the air which came
through each. The north wind belonged to Osiris, the south wind to Râ,
the west wind to Isis, and the east wind to Nephthys; and for the
deceased to obtain power over each and all of these it was necessary for
him to be master of the doors through which they blew. This power could
only be obtained by causing pictures of the four doors to be painted on
the coffin with a figure of Thoth opening each. Some special importance
was attached to these, for the rubric says, "Let none who is outside
know this chapter, for it is a great mystery, and those who dwell in the
swamps (*i.e.*, the ignorant) know it not. Thou shalt not do this in the
presence of any person except thy father, or thy son, or thyself alone;
for it is indeed an exceedingly great mystery which no man whatever
knoweth." <span id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77)

One of the delights coveted by the deceased was to sail over heaven in
the boat of Râ, in company with the gods of the funeral cycle of Osiris;
this happiness could be secured for him by painting certain pictures,
and by saying over them certain words of power. On

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

a piece of clean papyrus a boat is to be drawn with ink made of green
*âbut* mixed with *ânti* water, and in it are to be figures of Isis,
Thoth, Shu, and Khepera, and the deceased; when this has been done the
papyrus must be fastened to the breast of the deceased, care being taken
that it does not actually touch his body. Then shall his spirit enter
into the boat of Râ each day, and the god Thoth shall take heed to him,
and he shall sail about with Râ into any place that he wisheth. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78) Elsewhere it is ordered that the boat of
Râ be painted "in a pure place," and in the bows is to be painted a
figure of the deceased; but Râ was supposed to travel in one boat
(called "Âtet ") until noon, and another (called "Sektet") until sunset,
and provision had to be made for the deceased in both boats. How was
this to be done? On one side of the picture of the boat a figure of the
morning boat of Râ was to be drawn, and on the other a figure of the
afternoon boat; thus the one picture was capable of becoming two boats.
And, provided the proper offerings were made for the deceased on the
birthday of Osiris, his soul would live for ever, and be would not die a
second time. <span id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79) According to the rubric
to the chapter <span id="fr_80"></span>[3](#fn_80) in which these
directions are given, the text of it is as old, at least, as the time of
Hesepti, the fifth king of the Ist dynasty, who reigned about B.C. 4350,
and the custom of painting the boat upon

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

papyrus is probably contemporaneous. The two following rubrics from
Chapters CXXXIII. and CXXXIV., respectively, will explain still further
the importance of such pictures:--

1\. "This chapter shall be recited over a boat four cubits in length,
and made of green porcelain \[on which have been painted\] the divine
sovereign chiefs of the cities; and a figure of heaven with its stars
shall be made also, and this thou shalt have made ceremonially pure by
means of natron and incense. And behold, thou shalt make an image of Râ
in yellow colour upon a new plaque and set it at the bows of the boat.
And behold, thou shalt make an image of the spirit which thou dost wish
to make perfect \[and place it\] in this boat, and thou shalt make it to
travel about in the boat \[which. shall be made in the form of the
boat\] of Râ; and he shall see the form of the god Râ himself therein.
Let not the eye of any man whatsoever look upon it, with the exception
of thine own self, or thy father, or thy son, and guard \[this\] with
great care. Then shall the spirit be perfect in the heart of Râ, and it
shall give unto him power with the company of the gods; and the gods
shall look upon him as a divine being like unto themselves; and mankind
and the dead shall fall down upon their faces, and he shall be seen in
the underworld in the form of the radiance of Râ."

2\. "This chapter shall be recited over a hawk

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

standing and having the white crown upon his head, \[and over figures
of\] the gods Tem, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, Suti, and
Nephthys, painted in yellow colour upon a new plaque, which shall be
placed in \[a model of\] the boat \[of Râ\], along with a figure of the
spirit whom thou wouldst make perfect, These thou shalt anoint with
cedar oil, and incense shall he offered up to them on the fire, and
feathered fowl,

<span id="img_11300"></span> ![](img/11300.jpg)

The soul of the scribe Ani visiting his mummified body as it lies on its
bier in the tomb.  
(From the *Papyrus of Ani*, plate 17.)

shall be roasted. It is an act of praise to Râ as he journeyeth, and it
shall cause a man to have his being along with Râ day by day,
whithersoever the god voyageth; and it shall destroy the enemies of Râ
in very truth regularly and continually."

Many of the pictures or vignettes carry their own interpretations with
them, *e.g.*, the picture of the soul hovering over the dead body which
lies beneath it on the bier at once suggests the reunion of the soul
with

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the body; the picture of the deceased walking away from a "block of
slaughter" and a knife dripping with blood suggests escape from a cruel
death; the picture of a soul and spirit standing before an open door
suggests that the soul has freedom to wander about at will; and the
picture of the soul and the shadow in the act of passing out through the
door of the tomb indicates clearly that these parts of man's economy are

<span id="img_11400"></span> ![](img/11400.jpg)

Anubis holding the mummy of the scribe Ani; by the door of the tomb
stand the soul and spirit of the deceased in the form of a human-headed
hawk and *bennu* bird respectively.  
(From the *Papyrus of Ani*, plate 16.)

not shut up in the tomb for all eternity. But the ideas which prompted
the painting of other vignettes are not so clear, *e.g.*, those which
accompany Chapters CLXII.-CLXV. in the late or Säite Recension of the
Book of the Dead, although, fortunately, the rubrics to these chapters
make their object clear. Thus the picture which stands above Chapter
CLXII. is that of a cow having upon her head horns, a disk, and two
plumes,

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

and from the rubric we learn that a figure of it was to be made in gold
and fastened to the neck of the deceased, and that another, drawn upon
new papyrus, was to be placed under his head. If this be done "then
shall abundant warmth be in him throughout, even like that which was in
him when he was upon earth. And he shall become like a god in the
underworld,

<span id="img_11500"></span> ![](img/11500.jpg)

The scribe Ani passing through the door of the tomb. outside are his
shadow and his soul in the form of a human-headed bird.  
(From the Papyrus of Ani, plate 18.)

and he shall never be turned back at any of the gates thereof." The
words of the chapter have great protective power (*i.e.*, are a charm of
the greatest importance) we are told, "for it was made by the cow for
her son Râ when he was setting, and when his habitation was surrounded
by a company of beings of fire." Now the cow is, of course, Isis-Hathor,
and

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

both the words and the picture refer to some event in the life of Râ, or
Horus. It is quite evident that the words of power, or charm, uttered by
Isis-Hathor delivered the god out of some trouble, and the idea is that
as it delivered the god, and was of benefit to him, even so will it
deliver the deceased and be of benefit to him. The words of power
read:--"O Amen, O Amen, who art in heaven, turn thy face upon the dead
body of thy son, and make him sound and strong in the underworld." And
again we are warned that the words are "a great mystery" and that "the
eye of no man whatsoever must see it, for it is a thing of abomination
for \[every man\] to know it. Hide it, therefore; the Book of the lady
of the hidden temple is its name."

An examination of mummies of the late period shews that the Egyptians
did actually draw a figure of the cow upon papyrus and lay it under the
head of the deceased, and that the cow is only one figure among a number
of others which were drawn on the same papyrus. With the figures magical
texts were inscribed and in course of time, when the papyrus had been
mounted upon linen, it superseded the gold figure of the cow which was
fastened to the neck of the deceased, and became, strictly speaking an
amulet, though its usual name among archaeologists is "hypocephalus."
The figure on the opposite page well illustrates the object. It will be
noticed that the

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span id="img_11700"></span> ![](img/11700.jpg)

Hypocephalus or object placed under the head of the deceased Shai-enen
to keep warmth in the body.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

hypocephalus is round; this is due to the fact that it represents the
pupil of the Eye of Horus, which from time immemorial in Egypt was
regarded as the source of all generative power, and of reproduction and
life. The first group of gods are:--Nehebka offering to Horus his Eye, a
goddess with the Eye of Horus for a head, the cow of Isis-Hathor
described above, the four children of Horus, two lions, a member of the
human body, the pylon of heads of Khnemu the god of reproduction, and
Horus-Râ. In the second are the boat of the Sun being poled along by
Horus, and the boat of the Moon, with Harpocrates in the bow. In the
other scenes we have the god Khepera in his boat, Horus in his boat, and
Horus-Sept in his boat. The god with two faces represents the double
aspect of the sun in setting and rising, and the god with the rams'
heads, who is being adored by apes, is a mystical form of Khnemu, one of
the great gods of reproduction, who in still later times became the
being whose name under the form of Khnumis or Khnoubis occupied such an
important position among the magical names which were in use among the
Gnostics. The two following prayers from the hypocephalus will
illustrate the words of power addressed to Amen, *i.e.*, the Hidden One,
quoted above:--1. "I am the Hidden One in the hidden place. I am a
perfect spirit among the companions of Râ, and I have gone in and come
forth among the perfect souls. I am the mighty Soul of

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

saffron-coloured form. I have come forth from the underworld at
pleasure. I have come. I have come forth from the Eye of Horus. I have
come forth from the underworld with Râ from the House of the Great Aged
One in Heliopolis. I am one of the spirits who come forth from the
underworld: grant thou unto me the things which my body needeth, and
heaven for my soul, and a hidden place for my mummy." 2. "May the god,
who himself is hidden, and whose face is concealed, who shineth upon the
world in his forms of existence, and in the underworld, grant that my
soul may live for ever! May the great god in his disk give his rays in
the underworld of Heliopolis! Grant thou unto me an entrance and an exit
in the underworld without let or hindrance."

Chapter CLXIII. of the Book of the Dead was written to prevent the body
of a man mouldering away in the underworld, and to deliver him from the
souls which were so unfortunate as to be shut in the various places
thereof, but in order to make it thoroughly efficacious it was ordered
to be recited over three pictures: (1) a serpent with legs, having a
disk and two horns upon its head; (2) an *utchat*, <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) or Eye of Horus, "in the pupil of which
shall be a figure of the God of the lifted hand with the face of a
divine soul, and having plumes and a back like a hawk"; (3) an *utchat*,
or Eye of Horus, "in the pupil of which

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

there shall be a figure of the God of the lifted hand with the face of
the goddess Neith, and having plumes and a back like a hawk." If these
things be done for the deceased "he shall not be turned back at any gate
of the underworld, he shall eat, and drink, and perform the natural
functions of his body as he did when he was upon earth; and none shall
rise up to cry out against him; and he shall be protected from the hands
of the enemy for ever and ever." <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82)

The words of power which form the CLXIVth Chapter to be effectual had to
be recited over a figure of the goddess Mut which was to have three
heads. The first head was like that of the goddess Pekhat and had
plumes; the second was like that of a man and had upon it the crowns of
the South and North; the third was like that of a vulture and had upon
it plumes; the figure had a pair of wings, and the claws of a lion. This
figure was painted in black, green, and yellow colours upon a piece of
*anes* linen; in front of it and behind it was painted a dwarf who wore
plumes upon his head. One hand and arm of each dwarf were raised, and
each had two faces, one being that of a hawk and the other that of a
man; the body of each was fat. These figures having been made, we are
told that the deceased shall be "like unto a god with the gods of the
underworld; he shall never, never be turned back; his flesh and his
bones shall be like

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

those of one who hath never been dead; he shall drink water at the
source of the stream; a homestead shall be given unto him in
Sekhet-Aaru; he shall become a star of heaven; he shall set out to do
battle with the serpent fiend Nekau and with Tar, who are in the
underworld; he shall not be shut in along with the souls which are
fettered; he shall have power to deliver himself wherever he may be; and
worms shall not devour him." <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83)

Again, the words of power which form the CLXVth Chapter to be effectual
were ordered by the rubric to "be recited over a figure of the God of
the lifted hand, which shall have plumes upon its head; the legs thereof
shall be wide apart, and the middle portion of it shall be in the form
of a beetle, and it shall be painted blue with a paint made of
lapis-lazuli mixed with *qamai* water. And it shall be recited over a
figure with a head like unto that of a man, and the hands and the arms
thereof shall be stretched away from his body; above its right shoulder
shall there be the head of a ram, and above its left shoulder shall
there be the head of a ram. And thou shalt paint the figure of the God
of the lifted hand upon a piece of linen immediately over the heart of
the deceased, and thou shalt paint the other over his breast; but let
not the god Sukati who is in the underworld know it." If these things be
done, "the deceased shall

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

drink water from the source of the stream, and he shall shine like the
stars in the heavens above." It is probable that Chapters CLXIL-CLXV.
were composed at a comparatively late date.

Yet another example of the magical pictures of the Book of the Dead must
here be given. The vignette of Chapter CXLVIII. contains pictures of
seven cows "and their bull," and of four rudders; the seven cows have
reference to the seven Hathor goddesses, the bull is, of course, a form
of Râ, and the four rudders refer to the four quarters of the earth and
to the four cardinal points. The text of the Chapter contains the names
of the cows and of the bull, and of the rudders, and certain prayers for
sepulchral. offerings. Now the deceased would be provided with
"abundance of food regularly and continually for ever," if the following
things were done for him. Figures of the cows and of their bull and of
the rudders were to be painted in colours upon a board (?), and when Râ,
the Sun-god, rose upon them the friends of the deceased were to place
offerings before them; these offerings would be received mystically by
the gods and goddesses whom the figures represented, and in return they
would bestow upon the deceased all the offerings or gifts of meat and
drink which he would require. Moreover, "if this be done," we are told,
"Râ shall be a rudder for the deceased, and he shall be a strength
protecting him, and he shall make an end of all his enemies for

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

him in the underworld, and in heaven, and upon earth, and in every place
wherever he may enter."

We have seen above, in the description of the amulets which the
Egyptians used, how both the substance of the amulet and the words which
were inscribed upon it possessed magical powers, but we may learn from
several instances given in the papyri that the written words alone were
sufficient in some cases to produce remarkable effects. This is, of
course, a very natural development, and charms or words of power which
needed nothing but to be written on papyrus or linen to produce a
magical effect would be popular with all classes of men and women, and
especially among the poor and the ignorant. The written word has been
regarded in the East with reverence from time immemorial, and a copy of
a sacred writing or text is worn or carried about to this day with much
the same ideas and beliefs about its power to protect as in the earliest
times. In ancient Egypt the whole Book of the Dead, as well as the
various sections of it which are usually copied on papyri, consisted of
a series of "words of power," and the modern Egyptian looks upon the
Koran in the same light as his ancestor looked upon the older work. A
curious passage in the text inscribed on the inside of the pyramid of
Unas reads (1. 583), "The bone and flesh which possess no writing are
wretched, but, behold, the writing of Unas is under the great seal, and
behold, it is not under the little seal." It is

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

difficult to explain the passage fully, but there is no doubt that we
have here an allusion to the custom of placing writings believed to be
possessed of magical powers with the dead. Certain passages or sections
of the religious books of ancient nations have always been held to be of
more importance than others, and considering the great length of such
compositions this is not to be wondered at. Among the Egyptians two
forms of the LXIVth Chapter of the Book of the Dead were in use, and
there is no doubt whatever that the shorter form, as far back as the Ist
dynasty, about B.C. 4300, was intended to be a summary of the whole
work, and that the recital of it was held to be as efficacious as the
recital of all the rest of it. <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) It is
a remarkable fact that this form is called "The Chapter of knowing the
'Chapters of Coming Forth by Day' in a single Chapter," and that it is
declared to date from the time of Hesepti, a king of the Ist dynasty,
about B.C. 4300, whilst the "finding" of the longer form is attributed
to the reign of Men-kau-Râ (Mycerinus), a king of the IVth dynasty,
about B.C. 3600. It is interesting to note how persistently certain
chapters and formulæ occur in funeral papyri of different periods, and
the explanation seems to be that a popular selection was made at an
early date, and that this selection was

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

copied with such additions or omissions as the means of the friends of
the deceased allowed or made necessary. One thing is quite certain:
every man in Egypt died in the firm belief that in the course of his
journey into the next world he would be provided with words of power
which would enable him to make his way thither unhindered, and give him
abundance of meat and drink. We may see this view which was held
concerning words of power from the following passages:--"May Thoth, who
is filled and furnished with words of power, come and loose the
bandages, even the bandages of Set which fetter my mouth. . . . Now as
concerning the words of power and all the words which may be spoken
against me, may the gods resist them, and may each and every one of the
company of the gods withstand them." <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85)
"Behold, I gather together the word of power from wherever it is, and
from any person with whom it is, swifter than greyhounds and quicker
than light." <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86) To the crocodile which
cometh to carry off from the deceased his words of power he says, "Get
thee back, return, get thee back, thou crocodile fiend Sui! Thou shalt
not advance to me, for I live by reason of the words of power which I
have with me. . . . Heaven hath power over its seasons, and the words of
power have dominion over that which they possess; my mouth therefore
shall have power over the words of power which are

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

therein." <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87) "I am clothed (?) and am
wholly provided with thy magical words, O Râ, the which are in the
heaven above me, and in the earth beneath Me." <span
id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88) To the two Sister-Mert goddesses the
deceased says, "My message to you is my words of power. I shine from the
Sektet boat, I am Horus the son of Isis, and I have come to see my
father Osiris." <span id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_89) "I have become a
spirit in my forms, I have gained the mastery over my words of power,
and it is decreed for me to be a spirit." <span
id="fr_90"></span>[4](#fn_90) "Hail, thou that cuttest off heads, and
slittest brows, thou who puttest away the memory of evil things from the
mouth of the spirits by means of the words of power which they have
within them, . . . let not my mouth be shut fast by reason of the words
of power which thou hast within thee. . . . Get thee back, and depart
before the words which the goddess Isis uttered when thou didst come to
cast the recollection of evil things into the mouth of Osiris." <span
id="fr_91"></span>[5](#fn_91) On the amulet of the Buckle we have
inscribed the words, "May the blood of Isis, and the powers of Isis, and
the words of power of Isis be mighty to protect this mighty one," etc.,
and in the address which Thoth makes to Osiris he says, "I am Thoth, the
favoured one of Râ, the lord of might, who bringeth to a prosperous end
that which he doeth, the mighty one of words of power, who is in the
boat of

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

millions of years, the lord of laws, the subduer of the two lands,"
etc. <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92)

From the above passages we not only learn how great was the confidence
which the deceased placed in his words of power, but also that the
sources from which they sprang were the gods Thoth and Isis. It will be
remembered that Thoth is called the "scribe of the gods," the "lord of
writing," the "master of papyrus," the maker of the palette and the
ink-jar," the "lord of divine words," *i.e.*, the holy writings or
scriptures, and as he was the lord of books and master of the power of
speech, he was considered to be the possessor of all knowledge both
human and divine. At the creation of the world it was he who reduced to
words the will of the unseen and unknown creative Power, and who uttered
them in such wise that the universe came into being, and it was he who
proved himself by the exercise of his knowledge to be the protector and
friend of Osiris, and of Isis, and of their son Horus. From the evidence
of the texts we know that it was not by physical might that Thoth helped
these three gods, but by giving them words of power and instructing them
how to use them. We know that Osiris vanquished his foes, and that he
reconstituted his body, and became the king of the underworld and god of
the dead, but he was only able to do these things by means of the words
of power which Thoth had given to him,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

and which he had taught him to pronounce properly and in a proper tone
of voice. It is this belief which makes the deceased cry out, "Hail,
Thoth, who madest Osiris victorious over his enemies, make thou Ani to
be victorious over his enemies in the presence of the great and
sovereign princes who are in Tattu," or in any other place. Without the
words of power given to him by Thoth, Osiris would have been powerless
under the attacks of his foes, and similarly the dead man, who was
always identified with Osiris, would have passed out of existence at his
death but for the words of power provided by the writings that were
buried with him. In the Judgment Scene it is Thoth who reports to the
gods the result of the weighing of the heart in the balance, and who has
supplied its owner with the words which he has uttered in his
supplications, and whatever can be said in favour of the deceased he
says to the gods, and whatever can be done for him he does. But apart
from being the protector and friend of Osiris, Thoth was the refuge to
which Isis fled in her trouble. The words of a hymn declare that she
knew "how to turn aside evil hap," and that she was "strong of tongue,
and uttered the words of power which she knew with correct
pronunciation, and halted not in her speech, and was perfect both in
giving the command and in saying the word," <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93) but this description only

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

proves that she had been instructed by Thoth in the art of uttering
words of power with effect, and to him, indeed, she owed more than this.
When she found the dead body of her husband Osiris, she hovered about
over it in the form of a bird, making air by the beating of her wings,
and sending forth light from the sheen of her feathers, and at length
she roused the dead to life by her words of power; as the result of the
embrace which followed this meeting Horus was born, and his mother
suckled him and tended him in her hiding-place in the papyrus swamps.
After a time she was persecuted by Set, her husband's murderer, who, it
seems, shut her and her son Horus up in a house as prisoners. Owing,
however, to the help which Thoth gave her, she came forth by night and
was accompanied on her journey by seven scorpions, <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94) called respectively Tefen, Befen, Mestet,
Mestetef, Petet, Thetet, and Matet, the last three of which pointed out
the way. The guide of the way brought her to the swamps of
Per-sui, <span id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95) and to the town of the two
goddesses of the sandals where the swampy country of Athu begins.
Journeying on they came to Teb, <span id="fr_96"></span>[3](#fn_96)
where the chief of the district had a house for his ladies; now the
mistress of the house would not

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

admit Isis on account of the scorpions that were with her, for she had
looked out of her door and watched Isis coming. On this the scorpions
took counsel together and wished to sting her by means of the scorpion
Tefen, but at this moment a poor woman who lived in the marshes opened
the door of her cottage to Isis, and the goddess took shelter therein.
Meanwhile the scorpion had crept under the door into the house of the
governor, and stung the son of the lady of the house, and also set the
place on fire; no water could quench the fire, and there was no rain to
do it, for it was not then the rainy season. Now these things happened
to the woman who had done no active harm to Isis, and the poor creature
wandered about the streets of the city uttering loud cries of grief and
distress because she knew not whether her boy would live or die.

When Isis saw this she was sorry for the child who had been stung, and
as he was blameless in the matter of the door of his mother's house
being shut in the face of the goddess, she determined to save him.
Thereupon she cried out to the distraught mother, saying, "Come to me,
come to me! For my word is a talisman which beareth life. I am a
daughter well known in thy city also, and I will do away the evil by
means of the word of my mouth which my father hath taught me, for I am
the daughter of his own body." Then Isis laid her hands upon the body of
the boy, and

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

in order to bring back the spirit into his body said--

"Come Tefen, appear upon the ground, depart hence, come not nigh!

"Come poison of Befen, appear upon the ground. I am Isis, the goddess,
the lady of words of power, who doeth deeds of magic, the words of whose
voice are charms.

"Obey me, O every reptile that stingeth, and fall down headlong!

"O poison of \[Mestet and\] Mestetef, mount not upwards!

"O poison of Petet and Thetet, draw not nigh! O Matet, fall down
headlong!"

The goddess Isis then uttered certain words of the charm which had been
given to her by the god Seb in order to keep poison away from her, and
said, "Turn away, get away, retreat, O poison," adding the words
"Mer-Râ" in the morning and "The Egg of the Goose appeareth from out of
the sycamore" in the evening, as she turned to the scorpions. Both these
sentences were talismans. After this Isis lamented that she was more
lonely and wretched than all the people of Egypt, and that she had
become like an old man who hath ceased to look upon and to visit fair
women in their houses; and she ordered the scorpions to turn away their
looks from her and to show her the way to the marshes and to the secret
place which is in the city of

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Khebt. Then the words of the cry, "The boy
liveth, the poison dieth! As the sun liveth, so the poison dieth," were
uttered, and the fire in the house of the woman was extinguished, and
heaven rejoiced at the words of Isis. When Isis had said that the "son
of the woman had been stung because his mother had shut the door of her
house in her face, and had done nothing for her," the words of the cry,
"The boy liveth and the poison dieth," were again uttered, and the son
of the woman recovered.

Isis then continues her narrative thus:--"I Isis conceived a child, and
was great with child of Horus. I, a goddess, gave birth to Horus, the
son of Isis, upon an island (or nest) in Athu the region of swamps; and
I rejoiced greatly because of this, for I regarded Horus as a gift which
would repay me for the loss of his father. I hid him most carefully and
concealed him in my anxiety, and indeed he was well hidden, and then I
went away to the city of Am. When I had saluted the inhabitants thereof
I turned back to seek the child, so that I might give him suck and take
him in my arms again. But I found my sucking-child Horus the fair golden
one, well nigh dead! He had bedewed the ground with the water from his
eye and with the foam from his lips, his body was stiff, his heart was
still, and no muscle in any of his limbs moved. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97) Then I uttered a bitter cry

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

of grief, and the dwellers in the papyrus swamps ran to me straightway
from out of their houses, and they bewailed the greatness of my
calamity; but none of them opened his mouth to speak, for every one was
in deep sorrow for me, and no man knew how to bring back life into
Horus. Then there came to me a certain woman who was well known in her
city, for she belonged to a noble family, and she tried to rekindle the
life in Horus, but although her heart was full of her knowledge my son
remained motionless." Meanwhile the folk remarked that the son of the
divine mother Isis had been protected against his brother Set, that the
plants among which he had been hidden could not be penetrated by any
hostile being, that the words of power of Temu, the father of the gods,
"who is in heaven," should have preserved the life of Horus, that Set
his brother could not possibly have had access to where the child was,
who, in any case, had been protected against his wickedness; and at
length it was discovered that Horus had been stung by a scorpion, and
that the reptile "which destroyeth

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

the heart" had wounded him, and had probably killed him.

At this juncture Nephthys arrived, and went round about among the
papyrus swamps weeping bitterly because of the affliction of her sister
Isis; with her also was Serqet, the goddess of scorpions, who asked
continually, "What hath happened to the child Horus?" Then Nephthys said
to Isis, "Cry out in prayer unto heaven, and let the mariners in the
boat of Râ cease to row, and let not the boat of Râ move further on its
course for the sake of the child Horus"; and forthwith Isis sent forth
her cry up to heaven, and made her request come unto the "Boat of
millions of years," and the Sun stood still and his boat moved not from
its place by reason of the goddess's petition. Out from the boat came
the god Thoth provided with magical powers, and bearing with him the
great power to command in such wise that the words of his mouth must be
fulfilled straightway; and he spake to Isis, saying "O thou goddess
Isis, whose mouth knoweth how to utter charms (*or* talismans), no
suffering shall come upon thy child Horus, for his health and safety
depend upon the boat of Râ. I have come this day in the divine boat of
the Disk (Aten) to the place where it was yesterday. When darkness (or
night) ruleth, the light shall vanquish it for the health (*or* safety)
of Horus for the sake of his mother Isis and similarly shall it happen
unto every one who

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

possesseth what is \[here\] written(?)." What took place next is, of
course, evident. The child Horus was restored to life, to the great joy
of his mother Isis, who was more indebted than ever to the god Thoth for
coming to deliver her out of her trouble on the death of her son, just
as he had done on the death of her husband. Now because Isis had
revivified both her husband and her son by the words of power and
talismans which she possessed, mortal man thought it was absolutely
necessary for him to secure her favour and protection at any cost, for
eternal life and death were in her hands. As time went on the Egyptians
revered her more and more, and as she was the lady of the gods and of
heaven, power equal to that possessed by Râ himself was ascribed to her.
Indeed, according to a legend which has come down to us, and which
written upon papyrus or linen formed a magical formula against the
poison of reptiles of all kinds, she made a bold attempt to wrest the
power of Râ from him and to make herself mistress of the universe. The
way in which she did this is told in a hieratic papyrus preserved at
Turin, <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) from which the following
rendering has been made; the merit of first discovering the correct
meaning of the text belongs to M. Lefébure.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

THE LEGEND OF RÂ AND ISIS.

"The Chapter of the divine god, the self-created being) who made the
heavens and the earth, and the winds \[which give\] life, and the fire,
and the gods, and men, and beasts, and cattle, and reptiles, and the
fowl of the air and the fish of the sea; he is the king of men and of
gods, he hath one period of life (?) and with him periods of one hundred
and twenty years each are but as years; his names are manifold and
unknown, the gods even know them not.

"Now Isis was a woman who possessed words of power; her heart was
wearied with the millions of men, therefore she chose the millions of
the gods, but she esteemed more highly the millions of the spirits
(*khu*). And she meditated in her heart, saying, 'Cannot I by means of
the sacred name of God make myself mistress of the earth and become a
goddess like unto Râ in heaven and upon earth?' Now behold, each day Râ
entered at the head of his holy mariners and established himself upon
the throne of the two horizons. Now the divine one (*i.e.*, Râ) had
grown old, he dribbled at the mouth, his spittle fell upon the earth,
and his slobbering dropped upon the ground. And Isis kneaded it with
earth in her hand, and formed thereof a sacred serpent in the form of a
dart; she did not set it upright before her face, but let it lie upon
the ground in the path

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

whereby the great god went forth, according to his hearts desire, into
his double kingdom. Now the holy god arose, and the gods who followed
him as though he were Pharaoh went with him; and he came forth according
to his daily wont; and the sacred serpent bit him. The flame of life
departed from him, and he who dwelt among the cedars (?) was overcome.
The holy god opened his mouth, and the cry of his majesty reached unto
heaven; his company of gods said, 'What hath happened?' and his gods
exclaimed, 'What is it?' But Râ could not answer, for his jaws trembled
and all his members quaked; the poison spread swiftly through his flesh
just as the Nile rusheth through all his land. When the great god had
stablished his heart, he cried unto those who were in his train, saying,
'Come unto me, O ye who have come into being from my body, ye gods who
have come forth from me, make ye known unto Khepera that a dire calamity
hath fallen upon me. My heart perceiveth it, but my eyes see it not; my
hand hath not caused it, nor do I know who hath done this unto me. Never
have I felt such pain, neither can sickness cause more woe than this. I
am a prince, the son of a prince, the sacred essence which hath
proceeded from God. I am the great one, the son of the great one, and my
father planned my name; I have multitudes of names and multitudes of
forms, and my being is in every god. I have been

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

proclaimed by the heralds Temu and Horus, and my father and my mother
uttered my name; but it hath been hidden within me by him that begat me,
who would not that the words of power of any seer should have dominion
over me. I came forth to look upon that which I had made, I was passing
through the world which I had created, when lo! something stung me, but
what I know not. Is it fire? Is it water? My heart is on fire, my flesh
quaketh, and trembling hath seized all my limbs. Let there be brought
unto me my children, the gods, who possess the words of power and
magical speech, and mouths which know how to utter them, and also powers
which reach even unto the heavens. Then the children of every god came
unto him uttering cries of grief. And Isis also came, bringing with
her her words of magical power, and her mouth was full of the breath of
life; for her talismans vanquish the pains of sickness, and her words
make to live again the throats of those who are dead. And she spake,
saying, 'What hath come to pass, O holy Father? What hath happened? Is
it that a serpent hath bitten thee, and that a thing which thou hast
created hath lifted up his head against thee? Verily it shall be cast
down by my effective words of power, and I will drive it away from
before the sight of thy sunbeams.' The holy god opened his mouth and
said, I was passing along my path, and I was going

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

through the two regions of my lands according to my hearts desire, to
see that which I had created, when lo! I was bitten by a serpent which I
saw not. Is it fire? Is it water? I am colder than water, I am hotter
than fire. All my flesh sweateth, I quake, my eye hath no strength, I
cannot see the sky, and the sweat rusheth to my face even as in the time
of summer.' Then said Isis unto Râ, 'O tell me thy name, holy Father,
for whosoever shall be delivered by thy name shall live.' And Râ said,
'I have made the heavens and the earth, I have knit together the
mountains, I have created all that is above them, I have made the water,
I have made to come into being the goddess Meht-urt, and I have made the
Bull of his mother, from whom spring the delights of love. I have made
the heavens, I have stretched out the two horizons like a curtain, and I
have placed the soul of the gods within them. I am he who, if he openeth
his eyes, doth make the light, and, if he closeth them, darkness cometh
into being. At his command the Nile riseth, and the gods know not his
name. I have made the hours, I have created the days, I bring forward
the festivals of the year, I create the Nile-flood. I make the fire of
life, and I provide food in the houses. I am Khepera in the morning, I
am Râ at noon, and I am Temu at even.' Meanwhile the poison was not
taken away from his body, but it pierced deeper, and the great god could
no longer walk.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

"Then said Isis unto Râ, 'What thou hast said is not thy name. O tell it
unto me, and the poison shall depart; for he shall live whose name shall
be revealed! Now the poison burned like fire, and it was fiercer than
the flame and the furnace, and the majesty of the great god said, 'I
consent that Isis shall search into me, and that my name shall pass from
me into her.' Then the god hid himself from the gods, and his place in
the Boat of Millions of Years was empty. And when the time had arrived
for the heart of Râ to come forth, Isis spake unto her son Horus,
saying, 'The god hath bound himself by oath to deliver up his two eyes
(*i.e.*, the sun and moon).' Thus was the name of the great god taken
from him, and Isis, the lady of words of magical power, said, 'Depart,
poison, go forth from Ea. O Eye of Horus, go forth from the god, and
shine outside his mouth. It is I who work, it is I who make to fall down
upon the earth the vanquished poison, for the name of the great god hath
been taken away from him. Let Râ live, and let the poison die! Let the
poison die, and let Râ live!' These are the words of Isis, the mighty
lady, the mistress of the gods, who knew Râ by his own name."

Now from a few words of text which follow the above narrative we learn
that the object of writing it was not so much to instruct the reader as
to make a magic formula, for we are told that it was to be recited over

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

figures of Temu and Horus, and Isis and Horus, that is to say, over
figures of Temu the evening sun, Horus the Elder, Horus the son of Isis,
and Isis herself. Temu apparently takes the place of Râ, for he
represents the sun as an old man, *i.e.*, Râ, at the close of his daily
life when he has lost his strength and power. The text is a charm or
magical formula against snake bites, and it was thought that the written
letters, which represented the words of Isis, would save the life of any
one who was snake-bitten, just as they saved the life of Râ. If the full
directions as to the use of the figures of Temu, Isis, and the two Horus
gods, were known unto us we should probably find that they were to be
made to act in dumb show the scenes which took place between Râ, and
Isis when the goddess succeeded in taking from him his name. Thus we
have ample evidence that Isis possessed marvellous magical powers, and
this being so, the issues of life and death, as far as the deceased was
concerned, we know from the texts to have been in her hands. Her words
of power, too, were a priceless possession, for she obtained them from
Thoth, who was the personification of the mind and intelligence of the
Creator, and thus their origin was divine, and from this point of view
were inspired.

From a papyrus of the Ptolemaic period we obtain some interesting facts
about the great skill in working magic and about the knowledge of
magical formulæ

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

which were possessed by a prince called Setnau Khâ-em-Uast. He knew how
to use the powers of amulets and talismans, and how to compose magical
formulæ, and he was master both of religious literature and of that of
the "double house of life," or library of magical books. One day as he
was talking of such things one of the king's wise men laughed at his
remarks, and in answer Setnau said, "If thou wouldst read a book
possessed of magical powers come with me. and I will show it to thee,
the book was written by Thoth himself, and in it there are two formulæ.
The recital of the first will enchant (or bewitch) heaven, earth, hell,
sea, and mountains, and by it thou shalt see all the birds, reptiles,
and fish, for its power will bring the fish to the top of the water. The
recital of the second will enable a man if he be in the tomb to take the
form which he had upon earth," etc. When questioned as to where the book
was, Setnau said that it was in the tomb of Ptah-nefer-ka at Memphis. A
little later Setnau went there with his brother and passed three days
and three nights in seeking for the tomb of Ptah-nefer-ka, and on the
third day they found it; Setnau recited some words over it, and the
earth opened and they went down to the place where the book was. When
the two brothers came into the tomb they found it to be brilliantly lit
up by the light which came forth from the book; and when they looked
they saw not only Ptah-nefer-ka, but his wife Ahura, and Merhu their

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

son. Now Ahura and Merhu were buried at Coptos but their doubles had
come to live with Ptah-nefer-ka by means of the magical power of Thoth.
Setnau told them that he had come to take away the book, but Ahura
begged him not to do so, and related to him the misfortunes which had
already followed the possession of it. She was, it seems, the sister of
Ptah-nefer-ka whom she married, and after the birth of her son Merhu,
her husband seemed to devote himself exclusively to the study of magical
books, and one day a priest of Ptah promised to tell him where the
magical book described above might be found if he would give him a
hundred pieces of silver, and provide him with two handsome coffins.
When the money and the coffins had been given to him, the priest of Ptah
told Ptah-nefer-ka that the book was in an iron box in the middle of the
river at Coptos. "The iron box is in a bronze box, the bronze box is in
a box of palm-tree wood, the palm tree wood box is in a box of ebony and
ivory, the ebony and ivory box is in a silver box, the silver box is in
a gold box, and in the gold (*sic*) box lies the book. The box wherein
is the book is surrounded by swarms of serpents and scorpions and
reptiles of all kinds, and round it is coiled a serpent which cannot
die." Ptah-nefer-ka told his wife and the king what he had heard, and at
length set out for Coptos with Ahura and Merhu in the royal barge;
having arrived at Coptos he went to the temple of Isis and Harpocrates
and offered up

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

a sacrifice and poured out a libation to these gods. Five days later the
high priest of Coptos made for him the model of a floating stage and
figures of workmen provided with tools; he then recited words of power
over them and they became living, breathing men, and the search for the
box began. Having worked for three days and three nights they came to
the place where the box was. Ptah-nefer-ka dispersed the serpents and
scorpions which were round about the nest of boxes by his words of
power, and twice succeeded in killing the serpent coiled round the box,
but it came to life again; the third time he cut it into two pieces, and
laid sand between them, and this time it did not take its old form
again. He then opened the boxes one after the other, and taking out the
gold box with the book inside it carried it to the royal barge. He next
read one of the two formula-, in it and so enchanted or bewitched the
heavens and the earth that he learned all their secrets; he read the
second and he saw the sun rising in the heavens with his company of the
gods, etc. His wife Ahura then read the book and saw all that her
husband had seen. Ptah-nefer-ka then copied the writings on a piece of
new papyrus, and having covered the papyrus with incense dissolved it in
water and drank it; thus he acquired the knowledge which was in the
magical book. Meanwhile these acts had stirred the god Thoth to wrath,
and he told Râ what Ptah-nefer-ka had done. As a result the decree

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

went forth that Ptah-nefer-ka and his wife and child should never return
to Memphis, and on the way back to Coptos Ahura and Merhu fell into the
river and were drowned; and while returning to Memphis with the book
Ptah-nefer-ka himself was drowned also. Setnau, however, refused to be
diverted from his purpose, and he insisted on having the book which he
saw in the possession of Ptah-nefer-ka; the latter then proposed to play
a game of draughts and to let the winner have the book. The game was for
fifty-two points, and although Ptah-nefer-ka tried to cheat Setnau, he
lost the game. At this juncture Setnau sent his brother Anhaherurau up
to the earth to bring him his talismans of Ptah and his other magical
writings, and when he returned he laid them upon Setnau, who straightway
flew up to heaven grasping the wonderful book in his hand. As he went up
from the tomb light went before him, and the darkness closed in behind
him; but Ptah-nefer-ka said to his wife, "I will make him bring back
this book soon, with a knife and a rod in his hand and a vessel of fire
upon his head." Of the bewitchment of Setnau by a beautiful woman called
Tabubu and of his troubles in consequence thereof we need make no
mention here: it is sufficient to say that the king ordered him to take
the book back to its place, and that the prophecy of Ptah-nefer-ka was
fulfilled. <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99)

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

1n connexion with the subject of the magical powers of Isis must be
briefly mentioned the curious small stelæ, with rounded tops, on the
front of which are inscribed figures of the god Horus standing upon
crocodiles: they are usually known as "cippi of Horus." The largest and
finest example of this remarkable class of object is the famous
"Metternichstele," which was found in the year 1828 during the building
of a cistern in a Franciscan monastery in Alexandria, and was presented
by Muhammad Ali Pasha to Prince Metternich. We are fortunately enabled
to date the stele, for the name of Nectanebus I., the last but one of
the native kings of Egypt, who reigned from B.C. 378 to B.C. 360, occurs
on it, and we know from many sources that such a monument could have
been produced only about this period. From the two illustrations of it
here given we see that it is both sculptured and engraved with figures
of many of the gods of ancient Egypt, gods well known from the monuments
of the earlier dynasties, and also with figures of a series of demons
and monsters and animals which have both mythological and magical
importance. Many of these are accompanied by texts containing magical
formulæ,

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

magical names, and mythological allusions. In the principal scene we see
Horus, or Harpocrates, standing upon two crocodiles; on his brow is the
uraeus, and he wears on the right side of his head the lock of hair
emblematic of youth. In his hands he grasps serpents, a lion, and an
antelope, and it is clear by the look on his face that he is in no wise
afraid of them. Above his head is a bearded head, which is usually said
to represent that of Bes. On his right are:--(1) an *utchat*, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) with human hands and arms; (2) Horus-Râ,
hawk-headed, and wearing the sun's disk and uraeus, and standing on a
serpent coiled up; (3) Osiris, in the form of a hawk standing upon a
sceptre, and wearing the *atef* crown; (4) The goddess Isis standing
upon a serpent coiled up; (5) The goddess Nekhebet, in the form of a
vulture, standing upon a papyrus sceptre. On his left are:--(1) An
*utchat* with human hands and arms; (2) a papyrus standard with plumes
and *menats* <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101); (3) the god Thoth
standing upon a serpent coiled up; (4) the goddess Uatchet, in the form
of a serpent, standing upon a papyrus sceptre. Now Horus typifies youth
and strength and the rising sun, and the head above him. is probably
intended to represent that of Râ (or Bes) as an old man; the allusion
here is clearly to the god who "is old at eventide and who becomes young
again." The *utchats* and the figures of the gods symbolize the solar
powers and the deities

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span id="img_14900"></span> ![](img/14900.jpg)

Clippus of Horus. (See Metternichstele, ed. Golénischeff, plate 1.)

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

who are masters of the words of power, both in the South and in the
North, by which the young god Horus vanquishes all hostile animals,
reptiles, and creeping things which live in water and on land. Above and
about this scene are several rows of figures of gods and sketches of
mythological scenes; many of which are evidently taken from the
vignettes of the Book of the Dead, and the object of all of the latter
is to prove that light overcomes darkness, that good vanquishes evil,
and that renewed life comes after death. The texts which fill all the
spaces not occupied by figures describe certain incidents of the eternal
combat which Horus wages against his brother Set, and tell the story of
the wanderings of Isis with her son Horus and of her sufferings in the
country of the papyrus Swamps, a sketch of which we have given above
(see pp. [130](#page_130)-[136](#page_136)); besides these, prayers to
certain gods are introduced. The whole monument is nothing but a
talisman, or a gigantic amulet engraved with magical figures and words
of power, and it was, undoubtedly, placed in some conspicuous place in a
courtyard or in a house to protect the building and its inmates from the
attacks of hostile beings, visible and invisible, and its power was
believed to be invincible. There is not a god of any importance whose
figure is not on it, and there is not a demon, or evil animal or
reptile, who is not depicted upon it in a vanquished state; the
knowledge of the ancient Egyptian mythology

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

and the skill shewn by the designer of this talisman are very
remarkable. The small cippi of Horus contain nothing but extracts from
the scenes and texts which we find on the "Metternichstele," and it, or
similar objects, undoubtedly formed the source from which so many of the
figures of the strange gods which are found on Gnostic gems were
derived. Certain of the figures of the gods on the cippi were cast in
bronze in the Ptolemaic and Roman periods, or hewn in stone, and were
buried in tombs and under the foundations of houses to drive away any of
the fiends who might come to do harm either to the living or the dead.

The Arab historian Mas'ûdî has preserved <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102) a curious legend of the talismans which
were employed by Alexander the Great to protect the city of Alexandria
whilst it was being built, and as the legend is of Egyptian origin, and
dates from a period not greatly removed from that in which the
Metternich stele was made, it is worthy of mention. When the foundations
of the city had been laid, and the walls had begun to rise up, certain
savage animals came up each night from the sea, and threw down
everything which had been built during the day; watchmen were appointed
to drive them away, but in spite of this each morning saw the work done
during the previous day destroyed. After much thought Alexander devised
a plan whereby he

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

<span id="img_15300"></span> ![](img/15300.jpg)

Clippus of Horus. (See Metternichstele, ed. Golénischeff, plate 3.)

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

might thwart the sea monsters, and he proceeded to carry it into effect.
He made a box ten cubits long and five cubits wide with sides made of
sheets of glass fastened into frames by means of pitch, resin, etc. In
this box Alexander placed himself, together with two skilful
draughtsmen, and having been closed it was towed out to sea by two
vessels; and when weights of iron, lead, and stone had been attached to
the under part of it, it began to sink, being guided to the place which
Alexander wished it to reach by means of cords which were worked from
the ships. When the box touched the bottom of the sea, thanks to the
clearness of the glass sides and the water of the sea, Alexander and his
two companions were able to watch the various marine monsters which
passed by, and he saw that although they had human bodies they had the
heads of beasts; some had axes, some had saws, and some had hammers, and
they all closely resembled workmen. As they passed in front of the box
Alexander and his two draughtsmen copied their forms upon paper with
great exactness, and depicted their hideous countenances, and stature,
and shape; this done, a signal was made, and the box was drawn up to the
surface. As soon as Alexander reached the land he ordered his stone and
metal workers to make reproductions of the sea monsters according to the
drawings which he and his friends had made, and when they were finished
he caused them to be set up on pedestals along the

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

sea-shore, and continued his work of building the city. When the night
came, the sea monsters appeared as usual, but as soon as they saw that
figures of themselves had been put up on the shore they returned at once
to the water and did not shew themselves again. When, however, the city
had been built and was inhabited, the sea monsters made their appearance
again, and each morning a considerable number of people were found to be
missing; to prevent this Alexander placed talismans upon the pillars
which, according to Mas'ûdî, were there in his day. Each pillar was in
the shape of an arrow and was eighty cubits in height, and rested upon a
plinth of brass; the talismans were placed at their bases, and were in
the form of figures or statues of certain beings with suitable
inscriptions, and as they were put in position after careful
astronomical calculations had been made for the purpose we may assume
that they produced the effect desired by the king.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[109:1](ema06.htm#fr_75) See the vignettes to
Chapters LIV.-LX. of the Book of the Dead.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[110:1](ema06.htm#fr_76) See *Chapters of Coming
Forth by Day*, p. 106.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[110:2](ema06.htm#fr_77) *Ibid.*, p. 289.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[111:1](ema06.htm#fr_78) See *Chapters of Coming
Forth by Day*, p. 162.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[111:2](ema06.htm#fr_79) *Ibid.*, p. 212.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[111:3](ema06.htm#fr_80) *I.e.*, CXXX.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[120:1](ema06.htm#fr_81) See above, [p.
55](ema04.htm#page_55)

<span id="fn_82"></span>[121:1](ema06.htm#fr_82) See *Chapters of Coming
Forth by Day*, p. 292.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[122:1](ema06.htm#fr_83) See Chapters of Coming
Forth by Day, p. 294.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[125:1](ema06.htm#fr_84) In a similar way the
Arabs attach as much importance to the *Fatha*, or opening chapter, and
to the chapter which declares the Unity of God (CXII.), as to the rest
of the Koran.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[126:1](ema06.htm#fr_85) See *Chapter of Coming
Forth by Day*, p. 70.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[126:2](ema06.htm#fr_86) *Ibid.*, p. 71

<span id="fn_87"></span>[127:1](ema06.htm#fr_87) See *Chapters of Coming
Forth by Day*, p. 81.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[127:2](ema06.htm#fr_88) *Ibid.*, p. 81.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[127:3](ema06.htm#fr_89) *Ibid.*, p. 87.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[127:4](ema06.htm#fr_90) *Ibid.*, p. 129.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[127:5](ema06.htm#fr_91) *Ibid.*, p. 150.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[128:1](ema06.htm#fr_92) See *Chapters of Coming
forth by Day*, p. 340 f.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[129:1](ema06.htm#fr_93) Chabas, *Revue
Archéologique*, 1857, p. 65 ff.; Ledrain, *Monuments Égyptiens*, pl.
xxii. ff.; and for a recent translation see my *First Steps in
Egyptian*, pp. 179-188.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[130:1](ema06.htm#fr_94) The story is told on
the famous *Metternichstele*, ed. Golénischeff, Leipzig, 1877.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[130:2](ema06.htm#fr_95) *I.e.*, Crocodilopolis.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[130:3](ema06.htm#fr_96) The city of the two
sandals. The two sandals were made of leather from the skin of the god
Nehes or Set, the opponent of Horus.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[133:1](ema06.htm#fr_97) This is an exact
description of the state of an animal which has <span id="page_134">p.
134</span> been stung by the small black scorpion in Egypt and the
Sûdân. I saw Colonel W. H. Drage's dog "Shûbra" bitten at Merâwî in
September, 1897, by a black scorpion, and in about an hour she was in
the state of Horus as described above, and the whole camp was
distressed, for both master and dog were great favourites. When it was
no longer possible to administer spirit to her, Major G. R. Griffith and
others immersed her body in pails of very hot water for several hours,
and at sundown she was breathing comfortably, and she soon afterwards
recovered.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[136:1](ema06.htm#fr_98) See Pleyte and Rossi,
*Le Papyrus de Turin*, 1869-1876, pll. 31-37, and 131-138; see also
Lefébure in Ægyptische Zeitshrift, 1883, p. 27 ff.; Wiedemann, *Religion
der alien Ægypter*, 1890, p. 29 ff.; and my *Papyrus of Ani*, 1895, p.
lxxxix., and *First Steps in Egyptian*, 1895, pp. 241-256.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[146:1](ema06.htm#fr_99) For translations see
Brugsch, L*e Roman de Setnau* (in *Revue* <span id="page_147">p.
147</span> *Archéologique*, 2nd series, Vol. xvi., 1867, p. 161 ff.);
Maspero, *Contes Égyptiens*, Paris, 1882, pp. 45-82; *Records of the
Past*, vol. iv., pp. 129-148; and for the original Demotic text see
Mariette, *Les Papyrus du Musée de Boulaq*, tom. i., 1871, pll. 29-32;
Revillout, *Le Roman de Setna*, Paris, 1877; Hess, *Roman von Sfne
Ha-m-us*. Leipzig, 1888.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[148:1](ema06.htm#fr_100) See above, [p.
55](ema04.htm#page_55).

<span id="fn_101"></span>[148:2](ema06.htm#fr_101) See above, [p.
60](ema04.htm#page_60).

<span id="fn_102"></span>[152:1](ema06.htm#fr_102) See *Les Prairies
d'Or*, ed. B. de Meynard and Pavet de Courteille, Paris, 1861, tom. ii.
p. 425 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Magical Names](ema07)
