<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act012)  [Next](act014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 13:0</span></span>

We have not yet met with any things concerning the spreading of the
gospel to the Gentiles which bears any proportion to the largeness of
that commission, "Go, and disciple all nations." The door was opened in
the baptizing of Cornelius and his friends; but since then we had the
gospel preached to the Jews only, [Act
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019). It should seem as if the light
which began to shine upon the Gentile world had withdrawn itself. But
here in this chapter that work, that great good work, is revived in the
midst of the years; and though the Jews shall still have the first offer
of the gospel made to them, yet, upon their refusal, the Gentiles shall
have their share of the offer of it. Here is, I. The solemn ordination
of Barnabas and Saul, by divine direction, to the ministry, to the great
work of spreading the gospel among the nations about (and it is probable
that other apostles or apostolical men dispersed themselves by order
from Christ, upon the same errand ([Act
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)). II. Their preaching the
gospel in Cyprus, and the opposition they met with there from Elymas the
sorcerer ([Act 13:4-13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004)). III. The
heads of a sermon which Paul preached to the Jews at Antioch in Pisidia,
in their synagogue, which is given us as a specimen of what they usually
preached to the Jews, and the method they took with them (v. 14-41). IV.
The preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles at their request, and upon
the Jews' refusal of it, wherein the apostles justified themselves
against the displeasure which the Jews conceived at it, and God owned
them ([Act 13:42-49](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042)). V. The trouble
which the infidel Jews gave to the apostles, which obliged them to
remove to another place ([Act
13:50-52](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050)), so that the design of this
chapter is to show how cautiously, how gradually, and with what good
reason the apostles carried the gospel into the Gentile world, and
admitted the Gentiles into the church, which was so great an offence to
the Jews, and which Paul is so industrious to justify in his epistles.

[Acts 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 13:1</span></span>

We have here a divine warrant and commission to Barnabas and Saul to go
and preach the gospel among the Gentiles, and their ordination to that
service by the imposition of hands, with fasting and prayer.

I. Here is an account of the present state of the church at Antioch,
which was planted, [Act 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#020).

1\. How well furnished it was with good ministers; there were there
certain prophets and teachers ([Act
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)), men that were eminent for
gifts, graces, and usefulness. Christ, when he ascended on high, gave
some prophets and some teachers ([Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)); these were both. Agabus seems
to have been a prophet and not a teacher, and many were teachers who
were not prophets; but those here mentioned were at times divinely
inspired, and had instructions immediately from heaven upon special
occasions, which gave them the title of prophets; and withal they were
stated teachers of the church in their religious assemblies, expounded
the scriptures, and opened the doctrine of Christ with suitable
applications. These were the prophets, and scribes, or teachers, which
Christ promised to send ([Mat 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034)),
such as were every way qualified for the service of the Christian
church. Antioch was a great city, and the Christians there were many, so
that they could not all meet in one place; it was therefore requisite
they should have many teachers, to preside in their respective
assemblies, and to deliver God's mind to them. Barnabas is first named,
probably because he was the eldest, and Saul last, probably because he
was the youngest; but afterwards the last became first, and Saul more
eminent in the church. Three others are mentioned. (1.) Simeon, or
Simon, who for distinction-sake was called Niger, Simon the Black, from
the color of his hair; like him that with us was surnamed the Black
Prince. (2.) Lucius of Cyrene, who some think (and Dr. Lightfoot
inclines to it) was the same with this Luke that wrote the Acts,
originally a Cyrenian, and educated in the Cyrenian college or synagogue
at Jerusalem, and there first receiving the gospel. (3.) Manaen, a
person of some quality, as it should seem, for he was brought up with
Herod the tetrarch, either nursed of the same milk, or bred at the same
school, or pupil to the same tutor, or rather one that was his constant
colleague and companion - that in every part of his education was his
comrade and intimate, which gave him a fair prospect of preferment at
court, and yet for Christ's sake he quitted all the hopes of it; like
Moses, who, when he had come to years, refused to be called the son of
Pharaoh's daughter. Had he joined in with Herod, with whom he was
brought up, he might have had Blastus's place, and have been his
chamberlain; but it is better to be fellow-sufferer with a saint than
fellow-persecutor with a tetrarch.

2\. How well employed they were ([Act
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)): They ministered to the Lord,
and fasted. Observe, (1.) Diligent faithful teachers do truly minister
unto the Lord. Those that instruct Christians serve Christ; they really
do him honour, and carry on the interest of his kingdom. Those that
minister to the church in praying and preaching (both which are included
here), minister unto the Lord, for they are the church's servants for
Christ's sake; to him they must have an eye in their ministrations, and
from him they shall have their recompence. (2.) Ministering to the Lord,
in one way or other, ought to be the stated business of churches and
their teachers; to this work time ought to be set apart, nay, it is set
apart, and in this work we ought to spend some part of every day. What
have we to do as Christians and ministers but to serve the Lord Christ?
[Col 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024); [Rom
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#018). (3.) Religious fasting is of
use in our ministering to the Lord, both as a sign of our humiliation
and a means of our mortification. Though it was not so much practised by
the disciples of Christ, while the bridegroom was with them, as it was
by the disciples of John and of the Pharisees; yet, after the bridegroom
was taken away, they abounded in it, as those that had well learned to
deny themselves and to endure hardness.

II\. The orders given by the Holy Ghost for the setting apart of
Barnabas and Saul, while they were engaged in public exercises, the
ministers of the several congregations in the city joining in one solemn
fast or day of prayer: The Holy Ghost said, either by a voice from
heaven, or by a strong impulse on the minds of those of them that were
prophets, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have
called them. He does not specify the work, but refers to a former call
of which they themselves knew the meaning, whether others did or no: as
for Saul, he was particularly told that he must bear Christ's name to
the Gentiles ([Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)), that he must
be sent to the Gentiles ([Act 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021));
the matter was settled between them at Jerusalem before this, that as
Peter, James, and John laid out themselves among those of the
circumcision, so Paul and Barnabas should go to the heathen, [Gal
2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007). Barnabas, it is likely, knew
himself designed for this service as well as Paul. Yet they would not
thrust themselves into this harvest, though it appeared plenteous, till
they received their orders from the Lord of the harvest: Thrust in thy
sickle for the harvest is ripe, [Rev
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015). The orders were, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul. Observe here, 1. Christ by his Spirit has the
nomination of his ministers; for it is by the Spirit of Christ that they
are qualified in some measure for his services, inclined to it, and
taken off from other cares inconsistent with it. There are some whom the
Holy Ghost has separated for the service of Christ, has distinguished
from others as men that are offered and that willingly offer themselves
to the temple service; and concerning them directions are given to those
who are competent judges of the sufficiency of the abilities and the
sincerity of the inclination: Separate them. 2. Christ's ministers are
separated to him and to the Holy Ghost: Separate them to me; they are to
be employed in Christ's work and under the Spirit's guidance, to the
glory of God the Father. 3. All that are separated to Christ as his
ministers are separated to work; Christ keeps no servants to be idle. If
any man desires the office of a bishop, he desires a good work; that is
what he is separated to, to labour in the word and doctrine. They are
separated to take pains, not to take state. 4. The work of Christ's
ministers, to which they are to be separated, is work that is already
settled, and that which all Christ's ministers hitherto have been called
to, and which they themselves have first been, by an external call,
directed to and have chosen.

III\. Their ordination, pursuant to these orders: not to the ministry in
general (Barnabas and Saul had both of them been ministers long before
this), but to a particular service in the ministry, which had something
peculiar in it, and which required a fresh commission, which commission
God saw fit at this time to transmit by the hands of these prophets and
teachers, for the giving of this direction to the church, that teachers
should ordain teachers (for prophets we are not now any longer to
expect), and that those who have the dispensing of the oracles of Christ
committed to them should, for the benefit of posterity, commit the same
to faithful men, who shall be able also to teach others, [Ti2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#002). So here, Simeon, and Lucius, and
Manaen, faithful teachers at this time in the church of Antioch, when
they had fasted and prayed, laid their hands on Barnabas and Saul, and
sent them away ([Act 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003)), according
to the directions received. Observe, 1. They prayed for them. When good
men are going forth about good work, they ought to be solemnly and
particularly prayed for, especially by their brethren that are their
fellow-labourers and fellow-soldiers. 2. They joined fasting with their
prayers, as they did in their other ministrations, [Act
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003). Christ has taught us this by his
abstaining from sleep (a night-fast, if I may so call it) the night
before he sent forth his apostles, that he might spend it in prayer. 3.
They laid their hands on them. Hereby, (1.) They gave them their
manumission, dismission, or discharge from the present service they were
engaged in, in the church of Antioch, acknowledging that they went off
not only fairly and with consent, but honourably and with a good report.
(2.) They implored a blessing upon them in their present undertaking,
begged that God would be with them, and give them success; and, in order
to this, that they might be filled with the Holy Ghost in their work.
This very thing is explained [Act
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#026), where it is said, concerning
Paul and Barnabas, that from Antioch they had been recommended to the
grace of God for the work which they fulfilled. As it was an instance of
the humility of Barnabas and Saul that they submitted to the imposition
of the hands of those that were their equals, or rather their inferiors;
so it was of the good disposition of the other teachers that they did
not envy Barnabas and Saul the honour to which they were preferred, but
cheerfully committed it to them, with hearty prayers for them; and they
sent them away with all expedition, out of a concern for those countries
where they were to break up fallow ground.

[Acts 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 13:4</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. A general account of the coming of Barnabas and Saul to the famous
island of Cyprus; and perhaps thitherward they steered their course
because Barnabas was a native of that country ([Act
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036)), and he was willing they should
have the first-fruits of his labours, pursuant to his new commission.
Observe, 1. Their being sent forth by the Holy Ghost was the great thing
that encouraged them in this undertaking, [Act
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004). If the Holy Ghost send them
forth, he will go along with them, strengthen them, carry them on in
their work, and give them success; and then they fear no colours, but
can cheerfully venture upon a stormy sea from Antioch, which was now to
them a quiet harbour. 2. They came to Seleucia, the sea-port town
opposite to Cyprus, thence crossed the sea to Cyprus, and in that island
the first city they came to was Salamis, a city on the east side of the
island ([Act 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005)); and, when they had
sown good seed there, thence they went onward through the isle ([Act
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006)) till they came to Paphos, which
lay on the western coast. 3. They preached the word of God wherever they
came, in the synagogues of the Jews; so far were they from excluding
them that they gave them the preference, and so left those among them
who believed not inexcusable; they would have gathered them, but they
would not. They did not act clandestinely, nor preach the Messiah to
others unknown to them, but laid their doctrine open to the censure of
the rulers of their synagogues, who might, if they had any thing to say,
object against it. Nor would they have acted separately, but in concert
with them, if they had not driven them out from them, and from their
synagogues. 4. They had John for their minister; not their servant in
common things, but their assistant in the things of God, either to
prepare their way in places where they designed to come or to carry on
their work in places where they had begun it, or to converse familiarly
with those to whom they preached publicly, and explain things to them;
and such a one might be many ways of use to them, especially in a
strange country.

II\. A particular account of their encounter with Elymas the sorcerer,
whom they met with at Paphos, where the governor resided; a place famous
for a temple built to Venus there, thence called Paphian Venus; and
therefore there was more than ordinary need that the Son of God should
there be manifested to destroy the works of the devil.

1\. There the deputy, a Gentile, Sergius Paulus by name, encouraged the
apostles, and was willing to hear their message. He was governor of the
country, under the Roman emperor; proconsul or propraetor, such a one as
we should call lord lieutenant of the island. He had the character of a
prudent man, an intelligent, considerate man, that was ruled by reason,
not passion nor prejudice, which appeared by this, that, having a
character of Barnabas and Saul, he sent for them, and desired to hear
the word of God. Note, When that which we hear has a tendency to lead us
to God, it is prudence to desire to hear more of it. Those are wise
people, however they may be ranked among the foolish of this world, who
are inquisitive after the mind and will of God. Though he was a great
man, and a man in authority, and the preachers of the gospel were men
that made no figure, yet, if they have a message from God, let him know
what it is, and, if it appear to be so, he is ready to receive it.

2\. There Elymas, a Jew, a sorcerer, opposed them, and did all he could
to obstruct their progress. This justified the apostles in turning to
the Gentiles, that this Jew was so malignant against them.

(1.) This Elymas was a pretender to the gift of prophecy, a sorcerer, a
false-prophet - one that would be taken for a divine, because he was
skilled in the arts of divination; he was a conjurer, and took on him to
tell people their fortune, and to discover things lost, and probably was
in league with the devil for this purpose; his name was Barjesus - the
son of Joshua; it signifies the son of salvation; but the Syriac calls
him, Bar-shoma - the son of pride; filius inflationis - the son of
inflation.

(2.) He was hanging on at court, was with the deputy of the country. It
does not appear that the deputy called for him, as he did for Barnabas
and Saul; but he thrust himself upon him, aiming, no doubt, to make a
hand of him, and get money by him.

(3.) He made it his business to withstand Barnabas and Saul, as the
magicians of Egypt, in Pharaoh's court, withstood Moses and Aaron, [Ti2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008). He set up himself to be a
messenger from heaven, and denied that they were. And thus he sought to
turn away the deputy from the faith ([Act
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008)), to keep him from receiving the
gospel, which he saw him inclined to do. Note, Satan is in a special
manner busy with great men and men of power, to keep them from being
religious; because he knows that their example, whether good or bad,
will have an influence upon many. And those who are in any way
instrumental to prejudice people against the truths and ways of Christ
are doing the devil's work.

(4.) Saul (who is here for the first time called Paul) fell upon him for
this with a holy indignation. Saul, who is also called Paul, [Act
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009). Saul was his name as he was a
Hebrew, and of the tribe of Benjamin; Paul was his name as he was a
citizen of Rome. Hitherto we have had him mostly conversant among the
Jews, and therefore called by his Jewish name; but now, when he is sent
forth among the Gentiles, he is called by his Roman name, to put
somewhat of a reputation upon him in the Roman cities, Paulus being a
very common name among them. But some think he was never called Paul
till now that he was instrumental in the conversion of Sergius Paulus to
the faith of Christ, and that he took the name Paulus as a memorial of
this victory obtained by the gospel of Christ, as among the Romans he
that had conquered a country took his denomination from it, as
Germanicus, Britannicus, Africanus; or rather, Sergius Paulus himself
gave him the name Paulus in token of his favour and respect to him, as
Vespasian gave his name Flavius to Josephus the Jew. Now of Paul it is
said,

\[1.\] That he was filled with the Holy Ghost upon this occasion, filled
with a holy zeal against a professed enemy of Christ, which was one of
the graces of the Holy Ghost - a spirit of burning; filled with power to
denounce the wrath of God against him, which was one of the gifts of the
Holy Ghost - a spirit of judgment. He felt a more than ordinary fervour
in his mind, as the prophet did when he was full of power by the Spirit
of the Lord ([Mic 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#008)), and another
prophet when his face was made harder than flint ([Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009)), and another when his mouth was
made like a sharp sword, [Isa 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002).
What Paul said did not come from any personal resentment, but from the
strong impressions which the Holy Ghost made upon his spirit.

\[2.\] He set his eyes upon him, to face him down, and to show a holy
boldness, in opposition to his wicked impudence. He set his eyes upon
him, as an indication that the eye of the heart-searching God was upon
him, and saw through and through him; nay, that the face of the Lord was
against him, [Psa 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016). He fixed his
eyes upon him, to see if he could discern in his countenance any marks
of remorse for what he had done; for, if he could have discerned the
least sign of this, it would have prevented the ensuing doom.

\[3.\] He gave him his true character, not in passion, but by the Holy
Ghost, who knows men better than they know themselves, [Act
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#010). He describes him to be, First,
An agent for hell; and such there have been upon this earth (the seat of
the war between the seed of the woman and of the serpent) ever since
Cain who was of that wicked one, an incarnate devil, slew his brother,
for no other reason than because his own works were evil and his
brother's righteous. This Elymas, though called Bar-jesus - a son of
Jesus, was really a child of the devil, bore his image, did his lusts,
and served his interests, [Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044).
In two things he resembled the devil as a child does his father - 1. In
craftiness. The serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field
([Gen 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)), and Elymas, though void of
all wisdom, was full of all subtlety, expert in all the arts of
deceiving men and imposing upon them. 2. In malice. He was full of all
mischief - a spiteful ill-conditioned man, and a sworn implacable enemy
to God and goodness. Note, A fulness of subtlety and mischief together
make a man indeed a child of the devil. Secondly, An adversary to
heaven. If he be a child of the devil, it follows of course that he is
an enemy to all righteousness, for the devil is so. Note, Those that are
enemies to the doctrine of Christ are enemies to all righteousness, for
in it all righteousness is summed up and fulfilled.

\[4.\] He charged upon him his present crime, and expostulated with him
upon it: "Wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord, to
misrepresent them, to put false colours upon them, and so to discourage
people from entering into them, and walking in them?" Note, First, The
ways of the Lord are right: they are all so, they are perfectly so. The
ways of the Lord Jesus are right, the only right ways to heaven and
happiness. Secondly, There are those who pervert these right ways, who
not only wander out of these ways themselves (as Elihu's penitent, who
owns, I have perverted that which was right and it profited me not), but
mislead others, and suggest to them unjust prejudices against these
ways: as if the doctrine of Christ were uncertain and precarious, the
laws of Christ unreasonable and impractical, and the service of Christ
unpleasant and unprofitable, which is an unjust perverting of the right
ways of the Lord, and making them seem crooked ways. Thirdly, Those who
pervert the right ways of the Lord are commonly so hardened in it that,
though the equity of those ways be set before them by the most powerful
and commanding evidence, yet they will not cease to do it. Etsi
suaseris, non persuaseris - You may advise, but you will never persuade;
they will have it their own way; they have loved strangers, and after
them they will go.

\[5.\] He denounced the judgment of God upon him, in a present blindness
([Act 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#011)): "And now, behold, the
hand of the Lord is upon thee, a righteous hand. God is now about to lay
hands on thee, and make thee his prisoner, for thou art taken in arms
against him; thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season." This
was designed both for the proof of his crime, as it was a miracle
wrought to confirm the right ways of the Lord, and consequently to show
the wickedness of him who would not cease to pervert them, as also for
the punishment of his crime. It was a suitable punishment; he shut his
eyes, the eyes of his mind, against the light of the gospel, and
therefore justly were the eyes of his body shut against the light of the
sun; he sought to blind the deputy (as an agent for the god of this
world, who blindeth the minds of those that believe not, lest the light
of the gospel should shine unto them, [Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)), and therefore is himself struck
blind. Yet it was a moderate punishment: he was only struck blind, when
he might most justly have been struck dead; and it was only for a
season; if he will repent, and give glory to God, by making confession,
his sight shall be restored; nay, it should seem, though he do not, yet
his sight shall be restored, to try if he will be led to repentance
either by the judgments of God or by his mercies.

\[6.\] This judgment was immediately executed: There fell on him a mist
and a darkness, as on the Sodomites when they persecuted Elisha. This
silenced him presently, filled him with confusion, and was an effectual
confutation of all he said against the doctrine of Christ. Let not him
any more pretend to be a guide to the deputy's conscience who is himself
struck blind. It was also an earnest to him of a much sorer punishment
if he repent not; for he is one of those wandering stars to whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, [Jde
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#013). Elymas did himself proclaim the
truth of the miracle, when he went about seeking some to lead him by the
hand; and where now is all his skill in sorcery, upon which he had so
much valued himself, when he can neither find his way nor find a friend
that will be so kind as to lead him!

3\. Notwithstanding all the endeavours of Elymas to turn away the deputy
from the faith, he was brought to believe, and this miracle, wrought
upon the magician himself (like the boils of Egypt, which were upon the
magicians, so that they could not stand before Moses, [Exo
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#011)), contributed to it. The deputy
was a very sensible man, and observed something uncommon, and which
intimated its divine original, (1.) In Paul's preaching: he was
astonished at the doctrine of the Lord, the Lord Christ - the doctrine
that is from him, the discoveries he has made of the Father - the
doctrine that is concerning him, his person, natures, offices,
undertaking. Note, The doctrine of Christ has a great deal in it that is
astonishing; and the more we know of it the more reason we shall see to
wonder and stand amazed at it. (2.) In this miracle: When he saw what
was done, and how much Paul's power transcended that of the magician,
and how plainly Elymas was baffled and confounded, he believed. It is
not said that he was baptized, and so made a complete convert, but it is
probable that he was. Paul would not do his business by the halves; as
for God, his work is perfect. When he became a Christian, he neither
laid down his government, nor was turned out of it, but we may suppose,
as a Christian magistrate, by his influence helped very much to
propagate Christianity in that island. The tradition of the Romish
church, which has taken care to find bishoprics for all the eminent
converts we read of in the Acts, has made this Sergius Paulus bishop of
Narbon in France, left there by Paul in his journey to Spain.

III\. Their departure from the island of Cyprus. It is probable that
they did a great deal more there than is recorded, where an account is
given only of that which was extraordinary - the conversion of the
deputy. When they had done what they had to do, 1. They quitted the
country, and went to Perga. Those that went were Paul and his company,
which, it is probable, was increased in Cyprus, many being desirous to
accompany him. Anachthentes hoi peri ton Paulon - Those that were about
Paul loosed from Paphos, which supposes that he went too; but such an
affection had his new friends for him that they were always about him,
and by their good will would be never from him. 2. Then John Mark
quitted them, and returned to Jerusalem, without the consent of Paul and
Barnabas; either he did not like the work, or he wanted to go and see
his mother. It was his fault, and we shall hear of it again.

[Acts 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 13:14</span></span>

Perga in Pamphylia was a noted place, especially for a temple there
erected to the goddess Diana, yet nothing at all is related of what Paul
and Barnabas did there, only that thither they came ([Act
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013)), and thence they departed, [Act
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014). But the history of the
apostles' travels, as that of Christ's, passes by many things worthy to
have been recorded, because, if all had been written, the world could
not have contained the books. But the next place we find them in is
another Antioch, said to be in Pisidia, to distinguish it from that
Antioch in Syria from which they were sent out. Pisidia was a province
of the Lesser Asia, bordering upon Pamphylia; this Antioch, it is
likely, was the metropolis of it. Abundance of Jews lived there, and to
them the gospel was to be first preached; and Paul's sermon to them is
what we have in these verses, which, it is likely, is the substance of
what was preached by the apostles generally to the Jews in all places;
for in dealing with them the proper way was to show them how the New
Testament, which they would have them to receive, exactly agreed with
the Old Testament, which they not only received, but were zealous for.
We have here,

I. The appearance which Paul and Barnabas made in a religious assembly
of the Jews at Antioch, [Act 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014).
Though they had lately had such good success with a Roman deputy, yet,
when they came to Antioch, they did not enquire for the chief
magistrate, nor make their court to him, but they applied to the Jews,
which is a further proof of their good affection to them and their
desire of their welfare. 1. They observed their time of worship, on the
sabbath day, the Jewish sabbath. The first day of the week they observed
among themselves as a Christian sabbath; but, if they will meet the
Jews, it must be on the seventh-day sabbath, which therefore, upon such
occasions, they did as yet sometimes observe. For, though it was by the
death of Christ that the ceremonial law died, yet it was in the ruins of
Jerusalem that it was to be buried; and therefore, though the morality
of the fourth commandment was entirely transferred to the Christian
sabbath, yet it was not incongruous to join with the Jews in their
sabbath sanctification. 2. They met them in their place of worship, in
the synagogue. Note, Sabbath days should be kept holy in solemn
assemblies; they are instituted chiefly for public worship. The sabbath
day is a holy convocation, and for that reason no servile work must be
done therein. Paul and Barnabas were strangers; but, wherever we come,
we must enquire out God's faithful worshippers, and join with them (as
these apostles here did), as those that desire to keep up a communion
with all saints; though they were strangers, yet they were admitted into
the synagogue, and to sit down there. Care should be taken in places of
public worship that strangers be accommodated, even the poorest; for, of
those of whom we know nothing else, we know this, that they have
precious souls, for which our charity binds us to be concerned.

II\. The invitation given them to preach. 1. The usual service of the
synagogue was performed ([Act 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015)):
The law and the prophets were read, a portion of each, the lessons for
the day. Note, When we come together to worship God, we must do it not
only by prayer and praise, but by the reading and hearing of the word of
God; hereby we give him the glory due to his name, as our Lord and
Lawgiver. 2. When that was done, they were asked by the rulers of the
synagogue to give them a sermon ([Act
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015)): They sent a messenger to them
with the respectful message, Men and brethren, if you have any word of
exhortation for the people, say on. It is probable that the rulers of
the synagogue had met with them, and been in private conversation with
them before; and, if they had not an affection to the gospel, yet they
had at least the curiosity to hear Paul preach; and therefore not only
gave him permission, but begged the favour of him that he would speak a
word of exhortation to the people. Note, (1.) The bare reading of the
scriptures in the public assemblies is not sufficient, but they should
be expounded, and the people exhorted out of them. This is spreading the
net, and assisting people in doing that which is necessary to the making
of the word profitable to them - that is, the applying of it to
themselves. (2.) Those that preside, and have power, in public
assemblies, should provide for a word of exhortation to the people,
whenever they come together. (3.) Sometimes a word of exhortation from a
strange minister may be of great use to the people, provided he be well
approved. It is likely Paul did often preach in the synagogue, when he
was not thus invited to it by the rulers of the synagogues; for he often
preached with much contention, [Th1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#002). But these were more noble, more
generous, than the rulers of the synagogues generally were.

III\. The sermon Paul preached in the synagogue of the Jews, at the
invitation of the rulers of the synagogue. He gladly embraced the
opportunity given him to preach Christ to his countrymen the Jews. He
did not object to them that he was a stranger, and that it was none of
his business; nor object to himself, that he might get ill-will by
preaching Christ among the Jews; but stood up, as one prepared and
determined to speak, and beckoned with his hand, to excite and prepare
them to hear. He waved his hand as an orator, not only desiring silence
and attention, but endeavouring to move affection, and to show himself
in earnest. Perhaps, upon the moving of them to give an exhortation to
the people, there were those in the synagogue that were ready to mutiny
against the rulers, and opposed the toleration of Paul's preaching, and
that occasioned some tumult and commotion, which Paul endeavoured to
quiet by that decent motion of his hand; as also by his modest desire of
a patient impartial hearing: "Men of Israel, that are Jews by birth, and
you that fear God, that are proselyted to the Jewish religion, give
audience; let me beg your attention a little, for I have something to
say to you which concerns your everlasting peace, and would not say it
in vain." Now this excellent sermon is recorded, to show that those who
preached the gospel to the Gentiles did it not till they had first used
their utmost endeavours with the Jews, to persuade them to come in and
take the benefit of it; and that they had no prejudice at all against
the Jewish nation, nor any desire that they should perish, but rather
that they should turn and live. Every thing is touched in this sermon
that might be proper either to convince the judgment or insinuate into
the affections of the Jews, to prevail with them to receive and embrace
Christ as the promised Messiah.

1\. He owns them to be God's favourite people, whom he had taken into
special relation to himself, and for whom he had done great things.
Probably the Jews of the dispersion, that lived in other countries,
being more in danger of mingling with the nations, were more jealous of
their peculiarity than those that lived in their own land were; and
therefore Paul is here very careful to take notice of it, to their
honour.

(1.) That the God of the whole earth was, in a particular manner, the
God of this people Israel, a God in covenant with them, and that he had
given them a revelation of his mind and will, such as he had not given
to any other nation or people; so that hereby they were distinguished
fRom. and dignified above, all their neighbours, having peculiar
precepts to be governed by, and peculiar promises to depend upon.

(2.) That he had chosen their fathers to be his friends: Abraham was
called the friend of God; to be his prophets, by whom he would reveal
his mind to his church, and to be the trustees of his covenant with the
church. He puts them in mind of this, to let them know that the reason
why God favoured them, though undeserving, and ill deserving, was
because he would adhere to the choice he had made of their fathers, [Deu
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007), [Deu
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008). They were beloved purely for the
fathers' sakes, [Rom 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028).

(3.) That he had exalted that people, and put a great deal of honour
upon them, had advanced them into a people, and raised them from
nothing, when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, and had
nothing in them to recommend them to the divine favour. They ought to
remember this, and to infer hence that God was no debtor to them; for it
was ex mero motu - out of his mere good pleasure, and not upon a
valuable consideration, that they had the grant of the divine favour;
and therefore it was revocable at pleasure; and God did them no wrong if
he at length plucked up the hedge of their peculiarity. But they were
debtors to him, and obliged to receive such further discoveries as he
should make to his church.

(4.) That he had with a high hand brought them out of Egypt, where they
were not only strangers, but captives, had delivered them at the expense
of a great many miracles, both of mercy to them and judgment on their
oppressors (signs and wonders, [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034)), and at the expense of a great
many lives, all the first-born of Egypt, Pharaoh, and all his host, in
the Red Sea; I gave Egypt for thy ransom, gave men for thee. [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003), [Isa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004).

(5.) That he had suffered their manners forty years in the wilderness,
[Act 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#018), Etropophorēsen. Some think
it should be read, etrophophorēsen - he educated them, because this is
the word the Septuagint use concerning the fatherly care God took of
that people, [Deu 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#031). Both may be
included; for, \[1.\] God made a great deal of provision for them for
forty years in the wilderness: miracles were their daily bread, and kept
them from starving: They lacked not any thing. \[2.\] He exercised a
great deal of patience with them. They were a provoking, murmuring,
unbelieving people; and yet he bore with them, did not deal with them as
they deserved, but suffered his anger many a time to be turned away by
the prayer and intercession of Moses. So many years as we have each of
us lived in this world, we must own that God has thus been as a tender
father to us, has supplied our wants, has fed us all our life long unto
this day, has been indulgent to us, a God of pardons (as he was to
Israel, [Neh 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017)), and not extreme to
mark what we have done amiss; we have tried his patience, and yet not
tired it. Let not the Jews insist too much upon the privileges of their
peculiarity, for they have forfeited them a thousand times.

(6.) That he had put them in possession of the land of Canaan ([Act
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#019)): When he had destroyed seven
nations in the land of Canaan, that were doomed to be rooted out to make
room for them, he divided their land to them by lot, and put them in
possession of it. This was a signal favour of God to them, and he owns
that hereby a great honour was put upon them, from which he would not in
the least derogate.

(7.) That he had raised up men, inspirited from heaven, to deliver them
out of the hands of those that invaded their rights, and oppressed them
after their settlement in Canaan, [Act
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#020), [Act
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021). \[1.\] He gave them judges, men
qualified for public service, and, by an immediate impulse upon their
spirits, called to it, pro re nata - as the occasion required. Though
they were a provoking people, and were never in servitude but their sin
brought them to it, yet upon their petition a deliverer was raised up.
The critics find some difficulty in computing these four hundred and
fifty years. From the deliverance out of Egypt to David's expulsion of
the Jebusites from the stronghold of Zion, which completed the casting
out of the heathen nations, was four hundred and fifty years; and most
of that time they were under judges. Others thus: The government of the
judges, from the death of Joshua to the death of Eli, was just three
hundred and thirty-nine years, but it is said to be \[ōs\] as it were
four hundred and fifty years, because the years of their servitude to
the several nations that oppressed them, though really they were
included in the years of the judges, are yet mentioned in the history as
if they had been distinct from them. Now these, all put together, make
one hundred and eleven years, which added to the three hundred and
thirty nine, make them four hundred and fifty; as so many, though not
really so many. \[2.\] He governed them by a prophet, Samuel, a man
divinely inspired to preside in their affairs. \[3.\] He afterwards at
their request set a king over them ([Act
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021)), Saul, the son of Cis. Samuel's
government and his lasted forty years, which was a kind of transition
from the theocracy to the kingly government. \[4.\] At last, he made
David their king, [Act 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#022). When God
had removed Saul, for his mal-administration, he raised up unto them
David to be their king, and made a covenant of royalty with him, and
with his seed. When he had removed one king, he did not leave them as
sheep without a shepherd, but soon raised up another, raised him up from
a mean and low estate, raised him up on high, [Sa2
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001). He quotes the testimony God gave
concerning him, First, That his choice was divine: I have found David,
[Psa 89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020). God himself pitched upon
him. Finding implies seeking; as if God had ransacked all the families
of Israel to find a man fit for his purpose, and this was he. Secondly,
That his character was divine: A man after my own heart, such a one as I
would have, one on whom the image of God is stamped, and therefore one
in whom God is well pleased and whom he approves. This character was
given of him before he was first anointed, [Sa1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014). The Lord hath sought out a man
after his own heart, such a one as he would have. Thirdly, That his
conduct was divine, and under divine direction: He shall fulfil all my
will. He shall desire and endeavour to do the will of God, and shall be
enabled to do it, and employed in the doing of it, and go through with
it. Now all this seems to show not only the special favour of God to the
people of Israel (with the acknowledgment of which the apostle is very
willing to oblige them) but the further favours of another nature which
he designed them, and which were now, by the preaching of the gospel,
offered to them. Their deliverance out of Egypt, and settlement in
Canaan, were types and figures of good things to come. The changes of
their government showed that it made nothing perfect, and therefore must
give way to the spiritual kingdom of the Messiah, which was now in the
setting up, and which, if they would admit it and submit to it, would be
the glory of their people Israel; and therefore they needed not conceive
any jealousy at all of the preaching of the gospel, as if it tended in
the least to damage the true excellences of the Jewish church.

2\. He gives them a full account of our Lord Jesus, passing from David
to the Son of David, and shows that this Jesus is his promised Seed
([Act 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023)): Of this man's seed, from
that root of Jesse, from that man after God's own heart, hath God,
according to his promise, raised unto Israel a Saviour - Jesus, who
carries salvation in his name.

(1.) How welcome should the preaching of the gospel of Christ be to the
Jews, and how should they embrace it, as well worthy of all acceptation,
when it brought them the tidings, \[1.\] Of a Saviour, to deliver them
out of the hands of their enemies, as the judges of old, who were
therefore called saviours; but this a Saviour to do that for them which,
it appears by the history, those could not do - to save them from their
sins, their worst enemies. \[2.\] A Saviour of God's raising up, that
has his commission from heaven. \[3.\] Raised up to be a Saviour unto
Israel, to them in the first place: He was sent to bless them; so far
was the gospel from designing the gathering of them. \[4.\] Raised up of
the seed of David, that ancient royal family, which the people of Israel
gloried so much in, and which at this time, to the great disgrace of the
whole nation, was buried in obscurity. It ought to be a great
satisfaction to them that God had raised up this horn of salvation for
them in the house of his servant David, [Luk
1:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#069). \[5.\] Raised up according to
his promise, the promise to David ([Psa
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011)), the promise to the Old
Testament church in the latter times of it: I will raise unto David a
righteous branch, [Jer 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005). This
promise was it to which the twelve tribes hoped to come ([Act
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007)); why then should they entertain
it so coldly, now that it was brought to them? Now,

(2.) Concerning this Jesus, he tells them,

\[1.\] That John the Baptist was his harbinger and forerunner, that
great man whom all acknowledged to be a prophet. Let them not say that
the Messiah's coming was a surprise upon them, and that this might
excuse them if they took time to consider whether they should entertain
him or no; for they had sufficient warning by John, who preached before
his coming, [Act 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024). Two things he
did - First, He made way for his entrance, by preaching the baptism of
repentance, not to a few select disciples, but to all the people of
Israel. He showed them their sins, warned them of the wrath to come,
called them to repentance, and to bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, and bound those to this who were willing to be bound by the
solemn rite or sign of baptism; and by this he made ready a people
prepared for the Lord Jesus, to whom his grace would be acceptable when
they were thus brought to know themselves. Secondly, He gave notice of
his approach ([Act 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#025)): As he
fulfilled his course, when he was going on vigorously in his work, and
had had wonderful success in it, and an established interest: "Now,"
saith he to those that attended his ministry, "Whom think you that I am?
What notions have you of me, what expectations from me? You may be
thinking that I am the Messiah, whom you expect; but you are mistaken, I
am not he (see [Joh 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020)), but he is
at the door; behold, there cometh one immediately after me, who will so
far exceed me upon all accounts, that I am not worthy to be employed in
the meanest office about him, no, not to help him on and off with his
shoes - whose shoes of his feet I am not worthy to loose, and you may
guess who that must be."

\[2.\] That the rulers and people of the Jews, who should have welcomed
him, and been his willing, forward, faithful subjects, were his
persecutors and murderers. When the apostles preach Christ as the
Saviour, they are so far from concealing his ignominious death, and
drawing a veil over it, that they always preach Christ crucified, yea,
and (though this added much to the reproach of his sufferings) crucified
by his own people, by those that dwelt in Jerusalem, the holy city - the
royal city, and their rulers, [Act
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027). First, Their sin was that
though they found no cause of death in him, could not prove him, no, nor
had any colour to suspect him, guilty of any crime (the judge himself
that tried him, when he had heard all they could say against him,
declared he found no fault with him), yet they desired Pilate that he
might be slain ([Act 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#028)), and
presented their address against Christ with such fury and outrage that
they compelled Pilate to crucify him, not only contrary to his
inclination, but contrary to his conscience; they condemned him to so
great a death, though they could not convict him of the least sin. Paul
cannot charge this upon his hearers, as Peter did ([Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023)): You have with wicked hands
crucified and slain him; for these, though Jews, were far enough off;
but he charges it upon the Jews at Jerusalem and the rulers, to show
what little reason those Jews of the dispersion had to be so jealous for
the honour of their nation as they were, when it had brought upon itself
such a load and stain of guilt as this, and how justly they might have
been cut off from all benefit by the Messiah, who had thus abused him,
and yet they were not; but, notwithstanding all this, the preaching of
this gospel shall begin at Jerusalem. Secondly, The reason of this was
because they knew him not, [Act 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027).
They knew not who he was, nor what errand he came into the world upon;
for, if they had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
Christ owned this in extenuation of their crime: They know not what they
do; and so did Peter: I wot that through ignorance you did this, [Act
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017). It was also because they knew
not the voice of the prophets though they heard them read every sabbath
day. They did not understand nor consider that it was foretold that the
Messiah should suffer, or else they would never have been the
instruments of his suffering. Note, Many that read the prophets do not
know the voice of the prophets, do not understand the meaning of the
scriptures; they have the sound of the gospel in their ears, but not the
sense of it in their heads, nor the savour of it in their hearts. And
therefore men do not know Christ, nor know how to carry it towards him,
because they do not know the voice of the prophets, who testified
beforehand concerning Christ. Thirdly, God overruled them, for the
accomplishment of the prophecies of the Old Testament: Because they knew
not the voice of the prophets, which warned them not to touch God's
Anointed, they fulfilled them in condemning him; for so it was written
that Messiah the prince shall be cut off, but not for himself. Note, It
is possible that men may be fulfilling scripture prophecies, even when
they are breaking scripture precepts, particularly in the persecution of
the church, as in the persecution of Christ. And this justifies the
reason which is sometimes given for the obscurity of scripture
prophecies, that, if they were too plain and obvious, the accomplishment
of them would thereby be prevented. So Paul saith here, Because they
knew not the voice of the prophets, therefore they have fulfilled them,
which implies that if they had understood them they would not have
fulfilled them. Fourthly, All that was foretold concerning the
sufferings of the Messiah was fulfilled in Christ ([Act
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029)): When they had fulfilled all
the rest that was written of him, even to the giving of him vinegar to
drink in his thirst, then they fulfilled what was foretold concerning
his being buried. They took him down from the tree, and laid him in a
sepulchre. This is taken notice of here as that which made his
resurrection the more illustrious. Christ was separated from this world,
as those that are buried have nothing more to do with this world, nor
this world with them; and therefore our complete separation from sin is
represented by our being buried with Christ. And a good Christian will
be willing to be buried alive with Christ. They laid him in a sepulchre,
and thought they had him fast.

\[3.\] That he rose again from the dead, and saw no corruption. This was
the great truth that was to be preached; for it is the main pillar, by
which the whole fabric of the gospel is supported, and therefore he
insists largely upon this, and shows,

First, That he rose by consent. When he was imprisoned in the grave for
our debt, he did not break prison, but had a fair and legal discharge
from the arrest he was under ([Act
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#030)): God raised him from the dead,
sent an angel on purpose to roll away the stone from the prison-door,
returned to him the spirit which at his death he had committed into the
hands of his Father, and quickened him by the Holy Ghost. His enemies
laid him in a sepulchre, with design he should always lay there; but God
said, No; and it was soon seen whose purpose should stand, his or
theirs.

Secondly, That there was sufficient proof of his having risen ([Act
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#031)): He was seen many days, in
divers places, upon divers occasions, by those that were most intimately
acquainted with him; for they came up with him from Galilee to
Jerusalem, were his constant attendants, and they are his witnesses unto
the people. They were appointed to be so, have attested the thing many a
time, and are ready to attest it, though they were to die for the same.
Paul says nothing of his own seeing him, which was more convincing to
himself than it could be when produced to others.

Thirdly, That the resurrection of Christ was the performance of the
promise made to the partiarchs; it was not only true news, but good
news: "In declaring this, we declare unto you glad tidings ([Act
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#032), [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033)), which should be in a
particular manner acceptable to you Jews. So far are we from designing
to put any slur upon you, or do you any wrong, that the doctrine we
preach, if you receive it aright, and understand it, brings you the
greatest honour and satisfaction imaginable; for it is in the
resurrection of Christ that the promise which was made to your fathers
is fulfilled to you." He acknowledges it to be the dignity of the Jewish
nation that to them pertained the promises ([Rom
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)), that they were the heirs of the
promise, as they were the children of the patriarchs to whom the
promises were first made. The great promise of the Old Testament was
that of the Messiah, in whom all the families of the earth should be
blessed, and not the family of Abraham only; though it was to be the
peculiar honour of that family that he should be raised up of it, yet it
was to be the common benefit of all families that he should be raised up
to them. Note, 1. God hath raised up Jesus, advanced him, and exalted
him; raised him again (so we read it), meaning from the dead. We may
take in both senses. God raised up Jesus to be a prophet at his baptism,
to be a priest to make atonement at his death, and to be a king to rule
over all at his ascension; and his raising him up from the dead was the
confirmation and ratification of all these commissions, and proved him
raised of God to these offices. 2. This is the fulfilling of the
promises made to the fathers, the promise of sending the Messiah, and of
all those benefits and blessings which were to be had with him and by
him: "This is he that should come, and in him you have all that God
promised in the Messiah, though not all that you promised yourselves."
Paul puts himself into the number of the Jews to whom the promise was
fulfilled: To us their children. Now, if those who preached the gospel
brought them these glad tidings, instead of looking upon them as enemies
to their nation, they ought to caress them as their best friends, and
embrace their doctrine with both arms; for if they valued the promise so
much, and themselves by it, much more the performance. And the preaching
of the gospel to the Gentiles, which was the great thing that the Jews
found themselves aggrieved at, was so far from infringing the promise
made to them that the promise itself, that all the families of the earth
should be blessed in the Messiah, could not otherwise be accomplished.

Fourthly, That the resurrection of Christ was the great proof of his
being the Son of God, and confirms what was written in the second Psalm
(thus ancient was the order in which the Psalms are now placed), Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. That the resurrection of
Christ from the dead was designed to evidence and evince this is plain
from that of the apostle ([Rom 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)):
He was declared to be the Son of God with power, by the resurrection
from the dead. When he was first raised up out of obscurity, God
declared concerning him by a voice from heaven, This is my beloved Son
([Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)), which has a plain
reference to that in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son. Abundance of
truth there is couched in those words: that this Jesus was begotten of
the Father before all worlds - was the brightness of his glory and the
express image of his person, as the son is of the father's - that he was
the logos, the eternal thought of the eternal mind, - that he was
conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost in the womb of the virgin; for
upon this account, also, that holy thing was called the Son of God ([Luk
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)), that he was God's agent in
creating and governing the world, and in redeeming it and reconciling it
to himself, and faithful as a son in his own house, and as such was heir
of all things. Now all this, which was declared at Christ's baptism and
again at his transfiguration, was undeniably proved by his resurrection.
The decree which was so long before declared was then confirmed; and the
reason why it was impossible he should be held by the bands of death was
because he was the Son of God, and consequently had life in himself,
which he could not lay down but with a design to resume it. When his
eternal generation is spoken of, it is not improper to say, This day
have I begotten thee; for from everlasting to everlasting is with God as
it were one and the same eternal day. Yet it may also be accommodated to
his resurrection, in a subordinate sense, "This day have I made it to
appear that I have begotten thee, and this day have I begotten all that
are given to thee;" for it is said ([Pe1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003)) that the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, as our God and Father, hath begotten us again to a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Fifthly, That his being raised the third day, so as not to see
corruption, and to a heavenly life, so as no more to return to
corruption, that is, to the state of the dead, as others did who were
raised to life, further confirms his being the Messiah promised.

a\. He rose to die no more; so it is expressed, [Rom
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009) : As concerning that he raised him
up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, that is, to the
grave, which is called corruption, [Job
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#014). Lazarus came out of the grave
with his grave-clothes on, because he was to use them again; but Christ,
having no more occasion for them, left them behind. Now this was the
fulfilling of that scripture ([Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003)), I will give you the sure
mercies of David; ta hosia Dabid ta pista - the holy things of David,
the faithful things; for in the promise made to David, and in him to
Christ, great stress is laid upon the faithfulness of God ([Psa
89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001), [Psa
89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002), [Psa
89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005), [Psa
89:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#024), [Psa
89:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033)), and upon the oath God had
sworn by his holiness, [Psa 89:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035). Now
this makes them sure mercies indeed that he who is entrusted with the
dispensing of them has risen to die no more; so that he ever lives to
see his own will executed, and the blessings he hath purchased for us
given out to us. As, if Christ had died and had not risen again, so if
he had risen to die again, we had come short of the sure mercies, or at
least could not have been sure of them.

b\. He rose so soon after he was dead that his body did not see
corruption; for it is not till the third day that the body begins to
change. Now this was promised to David; it was one of the sure mercies
of David, for it was said to him in [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010), Neither wilt thou suffer thy
Holy One to see corruption, [Act
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#035). God had promised to David that
he would raise up the Messiah of his seed, who should therefore be a
man, but should not, like other men, see corruption. This promise could
not have its accomplishment in David, but looked forward to Christ.

(a.) It could not be accomplished in David himself ([Act
13:36](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#036)), for David, after he had served
his own generation, by the will of God, who raised him up to be what he
was, fell asleep, and was laid to his fathers, and saw corruption. Here
we have a short account of the life, death, and burial, of the patriarch
David, and his continuance under the power of death. \[a.\] His life: He
served his own generation, by the will of God, before he slept the sleep
of death. David was a useful good man; he did good in the world by the
will of God. He made God's precepts his rule; he served his own
generation so as therein to serve God; he so served and pleased men (as
whatever the king did pleased the people, [Sa2
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#036)), as still to keep himself the
faithful servant of God. See [Gal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010). He served the good of men, but
did not serve the will of men. Or, by the will of God's providence so
ordering it, qualifying him for, and calling him to, a public station,
he served his own generation; for every creature is that to us which God
makes it to be. David was a great blessing to the age wherein he lived;
he was the servant of his generation: many are the curse, and plague,
and burden of their generation. Even those that are in a lower and
narrower sphere must look upon it that they live to serve their
generation; and those that will do good in the world must make
themselves servants of all, [Co1 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019).
We were not born for ourselves, but are members of communities, to which
we must study to be serviceable. Yet here is the difference between
David and Christ, that David was to serve only his own generation, that
generation in which he lived, and therefore when he had done what he had
to do, and written what he had to write, he died, and continued in the
grave; but Christ (not by his writings or words upon record only as
David, but by his personal agency) was to serve all generations, must
ever live to reign over the house of Jacob, not as David, for forty
years, but for all ages, as long as the sun and moon endure, [Psa
89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029), [Psa
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036), [Psa
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037). His throne must be as the days
of heaven, and all generations must be blessed in him, [Psa
72:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#017). \[b.\] His death: He fell
asleep. Death is a sleep, a quiet rest, to those who, while they lived,
laboured in the service of God and their generation. Observe, He did not
fall asleep till he had served his generation, till he had done the work
for which God raised him up. God's servants have their work assigned
them; and, when they have accomplished as a hireling their day, then,
and not till then, they are called to rest. God's witnesses never die
till they have finished their testimony; and then the sleep, the death,
of the labouring man will be sweet. David was not permitted to build the
temple, and therefore when he had made preparation for it, which was the
service he was designed to, he fell asleep, and left the work to
Solomon. \[c.\] His burial: He was laid to his fathers. Though he was
buried in the city of David ([Kg1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#010)), and not in the sepulchre of
Jesse his father in Bethlehem, yet he might be said to be laid to his
fathers; for the grave, in general, is the habitation of our fathers, of
those that are gone before us, [Psa
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#019). \[d.\] His continuance in the
grave: He saw corruption. We are sure he did not rise again; this Peter
insists upon when he freely speaks of the patriarch David ([Act
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029)): He is both dead and buried, and
his sepulchre is with us unto this day. He saw corruption, and therefore
that promise could not have its accomplishment in him. But,

(b.) It was accomplished in the Lord Jesus ([Act
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#037)): He whom God raised again saw
no corruption; for it was in him that the sure mercies were to be
reserved for us. He rose the third day, and therefore did not see
corruption then; and he rose to die no more, and therefore never did. Of
him therefore the promise must be understood, and no other.

c\. Having given them this account of the Lord Jesus, he comes to make
application of it.

(a.) In the midst of his discourse, to engage their attention, he had
told his hearers that they were concerned in all this ([Act
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026)): "To you is the word of this
salvation sent, to you first. If you by your unbelief make it a word of
rejection to you, you may thank yourselves; but it is sent to you for a
word of salvation; if it be not so, it is your own fault." Let them not
peevishly argue that because it was sent to the Gentiles, who had no
communion with them, therefore it was not sent to them; for to them it
was sent in the first place. "To you men this is sent, and not to the
angels that sinned. To you living men, and not to the congregation of
the dead and damned, whose day of grace is over." He therefore speaks to
them with tenderness and respect: You are men and brethren; and so we
are to look upon all those that stand fair with us for the great
salvation as having the word of salvation sent to them. Those to whom he
does by warrant from heaven here bring the word of salvation are, \[a.\]
The native Jews, Hebrews of the Hebrews, as Paul himself was: "Children
of the stock of Abraham, though a degenerate race, yet to you is this
word of salvation sent; nay, it is therefore sent to you, to save you
from your sins." It is an advantage to be of a good stock; for, though
salvation does not always follow the children of godly parents, yet the
word of salvation does: Abraham will command his children and his
house-hold after him. \[b.\] The proselytes, the Gentiles by birth, that
were in some degree brought over to the Jews' religion: "Whosoever among
you that feareth God. You that have a sense of natural religion, and
have subjected yourselves to the laws of that, and taken hold of the
comforts of that, to you is the word of this salvation sent; you need
the further discoveries and directions of revealed religion, are
prepared for them, and will bid them welcome, and therefore shall
certainly be welcome to take the benefit of them."

(b.) In the close of his discourse he applies what he had said
concerning Christ to his hearers. He had told them a long story
concerning this Jesus; now they would be ready to ask, What is all this
to us? And he tells them plainly what it is to them.

\[a.\] It will be their unspeakable advantage if they embrace Jesus
Christ, and believe this word of salvation. It will relieve them where
their greatest danger lies; and that is from the guilt of their sins:
"Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren - we are warranted to
proclaim it to you, and you are called to take notice of it." He did not
stand up to preach before them, but to preach to them, and not without
hopes of prevailing with them; for they are men, reasonable creatures,
and capable of being argued with; they are brethren, spoken to, and
dealt with, by men like themselves; not only of the same nature, but of
the same nation. It is proper for the preachers of the gospel to call
their hearers brethren, as speaking familiarly to them, and with an
affectionate concern for their welfare, and as being equally interested
with them in the gospel they preach. Let all that hear the gospel of
Christ know these two things - 1st, That it is an act of indemnity
granted by the King of kings to the children of men, who stand attainted
at his bar of treason against his crown and dignity; and it is for and
in consideration of the mediation of Christ between God and man that
this act of grace is passed and proclaimed ([Act
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038)): "Through this man, who died
and rose again, is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. We have to
tell you, in God's name, that your sins, though many and great, may be
forgiven, and how it is come about that they may be so, without any
injury to God's honour, and how you may obtain the forgiveness of your
sins. We are to preach repentance for the remission of sins, and divine
grace giving both repentance and remission of sins. The remission of
sins is through this man. By his merit it was purchased, in his name it
is offered, and by his authority it is bestowed; and therefore you are
concerned to be acquainted with him, and interested in him. We preach to
you the forgiveness of sins. That is the salvation we bring you, the
word of God; and therefore you ought to bid us welcome and look upon us
as your friends, and messengers of good tidings." 2ndly, That it does
that for us which the law of Moses could not do. The Jews were jealous
for the law, and because it prescribed expiatory and pacificatory
sacrifices, and a great variety of purifications, fancied they might be
justified by it before God. "No," saith Paul, "be it known to you that
it is by Christ only that those who believe in him, and none else, are
justified from all things, from all the guilt and stain of sin, from
which you could not be justified by the law of Moses" ([Act
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039)); therefore they ought to
entertain and embrace the gospel, and not to adhere to the law in
opposition to it, because the gospel is perfective, not destructive, of
the law. Note, 1. The great concern of sinners it to be justified, to be
acquitted from guilt and accepted as righteous in God's sight. 2. Those
who are truly justified are acquitted from all their guilt; for if any
be left charged upon the sinner he is undone. 3. It was impossible for a
sinner to be justified by the law of Moses. Not by his moral law, for we
have all broken it, and are transgressing it daily, so that instead of
justifying us it condemns us. Not by his remedial law, for it was not
possible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sin, should
satisfy God's offended justice, or pacify the sinner's wounded
conscience. It was but a ritual and typical institution. See [Heb
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009); [Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001), [Heb
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#004). 4. By Jesus Christ we obtain a
complete justification; for by him a complete atonement was made for
sin. We are justified, not only by him as our Judge, but by him as our
righteousness, the Lord our righteousness. 5. All that believe in
Christ, that rely upon him and give up themselves to be ruled by him,
are justified by him, and none but they. 6. What the law could not do
for us, in that it was weak, that the gospel of Christ does; and
therefore it was folly, out of a jealousy for the law of Moses and the
honour of that institution, to conceive a jealousy of the gospel of
Christ and the designs of that more perfect institution.

[Acts 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 13:42</span></span>

The design of this story being to vindicate the apostles, especially
Paul (as he doth himself at large, Rom. 11), from the reflections of the
Jews upon him for preaching the gospel to the Gentiles, it is here
observed that he proceeded therein with all the caution imaginable, and
upon due consideration, of which we have here an instance.

I. There were some of the Jews that were so incensed against the
preaching of the gospel, not to the Gentiles, but to themselves, that
they would not bear to hear it, but went out of the synagogue while Paul
was preaching ([Act 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042)), in
contempt of him and his doctrine, and to the disturbance of the
congregation. It is probable they whispered among themselves, exciting
one another to it, and did it by consent. Now this bespoke, 1. An open
infidelity, as plain a profession of unbelief as coming to hear the
gospel is of faith. They thus publicly avowed their contempt of Christ
and of his doctrine and law, were not ashamed, neither could they blush;
and they thus endeavoured to beget prejudices in the minds of others
against the gospel; they went out to draw others to follow their
pernicious ways. 2. An obstinate infidelity. They went out of the
synagogue, not only to show that they did not believe the gospel, but
because they were resolved they would not, and therefore got out of the
hearing of those things that had a tendency to convince them. They
stopped their ears like the deaf adder. Justly therefore was the gospel
taken from them, when they first took themselves from it, and turned
themselves out of the church before they were turned out of it. For it
is certainly true that God never leaves any till they first leave him.

II\. The Gentiles were as willing to hear the gospel as those rude and
ill-conditioned Jews were to get out of the hearing of it: They besought
that these words, or words to this effect, might be preached to them the
next sabbath; in the week between, so some take it; on the second and
fifth days of the week, which in some synagogues were their lecture
days. But it appears ([Act 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#044)) that
it was the next sabbath day that they came together. They begged, 1.
That the same offer might be made to them that was made to the Jews.
Paul in this sermon had brought the word of salvation to the Jews and
proselytes, but had taken no notice of the Gentiles; and therefore they
begged that forgiveness of sins through Christ might be preached to
them, as it was to the Jews. The Jews' leavings, nay, loathings, were
their longings. This justifies Paul in his preaching to them, that he
was invited to it, as Peter was sent for to Cornelius. Who could refuse
to break the bread of life to those who begged so hard for it, and to
give that to the poor at the door which the children at the table threw
under their feet? 2. That the same instructions might be given to them.
They had heard the doctrine of Christ, but did not understand it at the
first hearing, nor could they remember all that they had heard, and
therefore they begged it might be preached to them again. Note, It is
good to have the word of Christ repeated to us. What we have heard we
should desire to hear again, that it may take deep root in us, and the
nail that is driven may be clenched and be as a nail in a sure place. To
hear the same things should not be grievous, because it is safe, [Phi
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001). It aggravates the bad disposition
of the Jews that the Gentiles desired to hear that often which they were
not willing to hear once; and commends the good disposition of the
Gentiles that they did not follow the bad example which the Jews set
them.

III\. There were some, nay, there were many, both of Jews and
proselytes, that were wrought upon by the preaching of the gospel. Those
who aggravated the matter of the Jews' rejection by the preaching of the
gospel, cried out, as is usual in such cases, "They have cast away, and
cast off, all the people of God." "Nay," says Paul, "it is not so; for
abundance of the Jews have embraced Christ, and are taken in;" himself
for one, [Rom 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001), [Rom
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005). So it was here: Many of the Jews
and religious proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, and received
further instructions and encouragement from them. 1. They submitted to
the grace of God, and were admitted to the benefit and comfort of it,
which is implied in their being exhorted to continue in it. They
followed Paul and Barnabas; they became their disciples, or rather the
disciples of Christ, whose agents they were. Those that join themselves
to Christ will join themselves to his ministers, and follow them. And
Paul and Barnabas, though they were sent to the Gentiles, yet bade those
of the Jews welcome that were willing to come under their instructions,
such hearty well-wishers were they to all the Jews and their friends, if
they pleased. 2. They were exhorted and encouraged to persevere herein:
Paul and Barnabas, speaking to them with all the freedom and friendship
imaginable, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God, to hold fast
that which they had received, to continue in their belief of the gospel
of grace, their dependence upon the Spirit of grace, and their
attendance upon the means of grace. And the grace of God shall not be
wanting to those who thus continue in it.

IV\. There was a cheerful attendance upon the preaching of the gospel
the next sabbath day ([Act 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#044)):
Almost the whole city (the generality of whom were Gentiles) came
together to hear the word of God. 1. It is probable that Paul and
Barnabas were not idle in the week-days, but took all opportunities in
the week between (as some think the Gentiles desired) to bring them
acquainted with Christ, and to raise their expectations from him. They
did a great deal of service to the gospel in private discourse and
conversation, as well as in their public sermons. Wisdom cried in the
chief places of concourse, and the opening of the gates, as well as in
the synagogues, [Pro 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020), [Pro
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#021). 2. This brought a vast concourse
of people to the synagogue on the sabbath day. Some came out of
curiosity, the thing being new; others longing to see what the Jews
would do upon the second tender of the gospel to them; and many who had
heard something of the word of God came to hear more, and to hear it,
not as the word of men but as the word of God, by which we must be ruled
and judged. Now this justified Paul in preaching to the Gentiles, that
he met with the most encouraging auditors among them. There the fields
were white to the harvest, and therefore why should he not there put in
his sickle?

V. The Jews were enraged at this; and not only would not receive the
gospel themselves, but were filled with indignation at those that
crowded after it ([Act 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045)): When
the Jews saw the multitudes, and considered what an encouragement it was
to Paul to go on in his work when he saw the people thus flying like
doves to their windows, and what probability there was that among these
multitudes some would be, without doubt, wrought upon, and probably the
greater part, to embrace Christ - this filled them with envy. 1. They
grudged the interest the apostles had in the people, were vexed to see
the synagogue so full when they were going to preach. This was the same
spirit that worked in the Pharisees towards Christ; they were cut to the
heart when they saw the whole world go after him. When the kingdom of
heaven was opened they not only would not go in themselves, but were
angry with those that did. 2. They opposed the doctrine the apostles
preached: They spoke against those things that were spoken by Paul,
cavilled at them, started objections against them, finding some fault or
other with every thing he said, contradicting and blaspheming; antelegon
antilegontes - contradicting, they contradicted. They did it with the
utmost spite and rage imaginable: they persisted in their contradiction,
and nothing would silence them, they contradicted for
contradiction-sake, and denied that which was most evident; and, when
they could find no colour of objection, they broke out into ill language
against Christ and his gospel, blaspheming him and it. From the language
of the carnal man that receives not the things of the Spirit of God, and
therefore contradicts them, they proceed to the language of incarnate
devils, and blaspheme them. Commonly those who begin with contradicting
end with blaspheming.

VI\. The apostles hereupon solemnly and openly declare themselves
discharged from their obligations to the Jews, and at liberty to bring
the word of salvation to the Gentiles, even by the tacit consent of the
Jews themselves. Never let the Jew lay the fault of the carrying of the
kingdom of God to the Gentiles upon the apostles, for that complaint of
theirs is for ever silenced by their own act and deed, for what they did
here is for ever a bar to it. "Tender and refusal (we say) are good
payment in law." The Jews had the tender of the gospel, and did refuse
it, and therefore ought not to say any thing against the Gentiles having
it. In declaring this, it is said ([Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)), Paul and Barnabas waxed bold,
more bold than they had been while they were shy of looking favourably
upon the Gentiles, for fear of giving offence to the Jews, and laying a
stumbling-block in their way. Note, There is a time for the preachers of
the gospel to show as much of the boldness of the lion as of the wisdom
of the serpent and the harmlessness of the dove. When the adversaries of
Christ's cause begin to be daring, it is not for its advocates to be
timid. While there is any hope of working upon those that oppose
themselves they must be instructed with meekness ([Ti2
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025)); but, when that method has long
been tried in vain, we must wax bold, and tell them what will be the
issue of their opposition. The impudence of the enemies of the gospel,
instead of frightening, should rather embolden its friends; for they are
sure that they have a good cause, and they know in whom they have
trusted to bear them out. Now Paul and Barnabas, having made the Jews a
fair offer of gospel grace, here give them fair notice of their bringing
it to the Gentiles, if by any means (as Paul says [Rom
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#014)) they might provoke them to
emulation. 1. They own that the Jews were entitled to the first offer:
"It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to
you, to whom the promise was made, to you of the lost sheep of the house
of Israel, to whom Christ reckoned himself first sent." And his charge
to the preachers of his gospel to begin at Jerusalem ([Luk
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)) was a tacit direction to all
that went into other countries to begin with the Jews, to whom pertained
the giving of the law, and therefore the preaching of the gospel. Let
the children first be served, [Mar
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#027). 2. They charge them with the
refusal of it: "You put it from you; you will not accept of it; nay, you
will not so much as bear the offer of it, but take it as an affront to
you." If men put the gospel from them, God justly takes it from them;
why should manna be given to those that loathe it and call it light
bread, or the privileges of the gospel forced on those that put them
away, and say, We have no part in David? Herein they judge themselves
unworthy of everlasting life. In one sense we must all judge ourselves
unworthy of everlasting life, for there is nothing in us, nor done by
us, by which we can pretend to merit it, and we must be made sensible of
this; but here the meaning is, "You discover, or make it to appear, that
you are not meet for eternal life; you throw away all your claims and
give up your pretensions to it; since you will not take it from his
hands, into whose hand the Father has given it, krinete, you do, in
effect, pass this judgment upon yourselves, and out of your own mouth
you shall be judged; you will not have it by Christ, by whom alone it is
to be had, and so shall your doom be, you shall not have it at all." 3.
Upon this they ground their preaching the gospel to the uncircumcised:
"Since you will not accept eternal life as it is offered, our way is
plain, Lo, we turn to the Gentiles. If one will not, another will. If
those that were first invited to the wedding-feast will not come, we
must invite out of the highways and hedges those that will, for the
wedding must be furnished with guests. If he that is next of kin will
not do the kinsman's part, he must not complain that another will," [Rut
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#004). 4. They justify themselves in
this by a divine warrant ([Act 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#047)):
"For so hath the Lord commanded us; the Lord Jesus gave us directions to
witness to him in Jerusalem and Judea first, and after that to the
utmost part of the earth, to preach the gospel to every creature, to
disciple all nations." This is according to what was foretold in the Old
Testament. When the Messiah, in the prospect of the Jews' infidelity,
was ready to say, I have laboured in vain, he was told, to his
satisfaction, that though Israel were not gathered, yet he should be
glorious, that his blood should not be shed in vain, nor his purchase
made in vain, nor his doctrine preached in vain, nor his Spirit sent in
vain - "For I have set thee, not only raised thee up, but established
thee, to be a light of the Gentiles, not only a shining light for a
time, but a standing light, set thee for a light, that thou shouldst be
for salvation unto the ends of the earth." Note, (1.) Christ is not only
the Saviour, but the salvation, is himself our righteousness, and life,
and strength. (2.) Wherever Christ is designed to be salvation, he is
set up to be a light; he enlightens the understanding, and so saves the
soul. (3.) He is, and is to be, light and salvation to the Gentiles, to
the ends of the earth. Those of every nation shall be welcome to him,
some of every nation have heard of him ([Rom
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)), and all nations shall at
length become his kingdom. This prophecy has had its accomplishment in
part in the setting up of the kingdom of Christ in this island of ours,
which lies, as it were, in the ends of the earth, a corner of the world,
and shall be accomplished more and more when the time comes for the
bringing in of the fulness of the Gentiles.

VII\. The Gentiles cheerfully embraced that which the Jews scornfully
rejected, [Act 13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048), [Act
13:49](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#049). Never was land lost for want of
heirs; through the fall of the Jews, salvation is come to the Gentiles:
the casting off of them was the reconciling of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; so the apostle shows at
large, [Rom 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011), [Rom
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012), [Rom
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015). The Jews, the natural branches,
were broken off, and the Gentiles, that were branches of the wild olive,
were thereupon grafted in, [Rom 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017),
[Rom 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#019). Now here we are told how
the Gentiles welcomed this happy turn in their favour.

1\. They took the comfort of it: When they heard this they were glad. It
was good news to them that they might have admission into covenant and
communion with God by a clearer, nearer, and better way than submitting
to the ceremonial law, and being proselyted to the Jewish religion -
that the partition-wall was taken down and they were as welcome to the
benefits of the Messiah's kingdom as the Jews themselves, and might
share in their promise, without coming under their yoke. This was indeed
glad tidings of great joy to all people. Note, Our being put into a
possibility of salvation, and a capacity for it, ought to be the matter
of our rejoicing; when the Gentiles did but hear that the offers of
grace should be made them, the word of grace preached to them, and the
means of grace afforded them, they were glad. "Now there is some hope
for us." Many grieve under doubts whether they have an interest in
Christ or no, when they should be rejoicing that they have an interest
in him; the golden sceptre is held out to them, and they are invited to
come and touch the top of it.

2\. They gave God the praise of it: They glorified the word of the Lord;
that is, Christ (so some), the essential Word; they entertained a
profound veneration for him, and expressed the high thoughts they had of
him. Or, rather, the gospel; the more they knew of it, the more they
admired it. Oh! what a light, what a power, what a treasure, does this
gospel bring along with it! How excellent are its truths, its precepts,
its promises! How far transcending all other institutions! How plainly
divine and heavenly is its origin! Thus they glorified the word of the
Lord, and it is this which he has himself magnified above all his name
([Psa 138:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#002)), and will magnify and
make honourable, [Isa 42:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#021). They
glorified the word of the Lord, (1.) Because now the knowledge of it was
diffused and not confined to the Jews only. Note, It is the glory of the
word of the Lord that the further it spreads the brighter it shines,
which shows it to be not like the light of the candle, but like that of
the sun when he goes forth in his strength. (2.) Because now the
knowledge of it was brought to them. Note, Those speak best of the
honour of the word of the Lord that speak experimentally, that have
themselves been subdued by its power, and comforted by its sweetness.

3\. Many of them became, not only professors of the Christian faith, but
sincerely obedient to the faith: As many as were ordained to eternal
life believed. God by his Spirit wrought true faith in those for whom he
had in his councils from everlasting designed a happiness to
everlasting. (1.) Those believed to whom God gave grace to believe, whom
by a secret and mighty operation he brought into subjection to the
gospel of Christ, and made willing in the day of his power. Those came
to Christ whom the Father drew, and to whom the Spirit made the gospel
call effectual. It is called the faith of the operation of God ([Col
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)), and is said to be wrought by
the same power that raised up Christ, [Eph
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019), [Eph
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020). (2.) God gave this grace to
believe to all those among them who were ordained to eternal life (for
whom he had predestinated, them he also called, [Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)); or, as many as were disposed to
eternal life, as many as had a concern about their eternal state, and
aimed to make sure of eternal life, believed in Christ, in whom God hath
treasured up that life ([Jo1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011)),
and who is the only way to it; and it was the grace of God that wrought
it in them. Thus all those captives, and those only, took the benefit of
Cyrus's proclamation, whose spirit God had raised up to build the house
of the Lord which is in Jerusalem, [Ezr
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005). Those will be brought to believe
in Christ that by his grace are well disposed to eternal life, and make
this their aim.

4\. When they believed they did what they could to spread the knowledge
of Christ and his gospel among their neighbours ([Act
13:49](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#049)): And the word of the Lord was
published throughout all the region. When it was received with so much
satisfaction in the chief city, it soon spread into all parts of the
country. Those new converts were themselves ready to communicate to
others that which they were so full of themselves. The Lord gave the
word, and then great was the company of those that published it, [Psa
68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011). Those that have become
acquainted with Christ themselves will do what they can to bring others
acquainted with him. Those in great and rich cities that have received
the gospel should not think to engross it, as if, like learning and
philosophy, it were only to be the entertainment of the more polite and
elevated part of mankind, but should do what they can to get it
published in the country among the ordinary sort of people, the poor and
unlearned, who have souls to be saved as well as they.

VIII\. Paul and Barnabas, having sown the seeds of a Christian church
there, quitted the place, and went to do the like else-where. We read
not any thing of their working miracles here, to confirm their doctrine,
and to convince people of the truth of it; for, though God then did
ordinarily make use of that method of conviction, yet he could, when he
pleased, do his work without it; and begetting faith by the immediate
influence of his Spirit was itself the greatest miracle to those in whom
it was wrought. Yet, it is probable that they did work miracles, for we
find they did in the next place they came to, [Act
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#003). Now here we are told,

1\. How the unbelieving Jews expelled the apostles out of that country.
They first turned their back upon them, and then lifted up the heel
against them ([Act 13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050)): They raised
persecution against Paul and Barnabas, excited the mob to persecute them
in their way by insulting their persons as they went along the streets;
excited the magistrates to persecute them in their way, by imprisoning
and punishing them. When they could not resist the wisdom and spirit
wherewith they spoke, they had recourse to these brutish methods, the
last refuge of an obstinate infidelity. Satan and his agents are most
exasperated against the preachers of the gospel when they see them go on
successfully, and therefore then will be sure to raise persecution
against them. Thus it has been the common lot of the best men in the
world to suffer ill for doing well, to be persecuted instead of being
preferred for the good services they have done to mankind. Observe, (1.)
What method the Jews took to give them trouble: They stirred up the
devout and honourable women against them. They could not make any
considerable interest themselves, but they applied to some ladies of
quality in the city, that were well affected to the Jewish religion, and
were proselytes of the gate, therefore called devout women. These,
according to the genius of their sex, were zealous in their way, and
bigoted; and it was easy, by false stories and misrepresentations, to
incense them against the gospel of Christ, as if it had been destructive
of all religion, of which really it is perfective. It is good to see
honourable women devout, and well affected to religious worship: The
less they have to do in the world, the more they should do for their
souls, and the more time they should spend in communion with God; but it
is sad when, under colour of devotion to God, they conceive an enmity to
Christ, as those here mentioned. What! women persecutors! Can they
forget the tenderness and compassion of their sex? What! honourable
women! Can they thus stain their honour, and disgrace themselves, and do
so mean a thing? But, which is strangest of all, devout women! Will they
kill Christ's servants, and think therein they do God service? Let those
therefore that have zeal see that it be according to knowledge. By these
devout and honourable women they stirred up likewise the chief men of
the city, the magistrates and the rulers, who had power in their hands
and set them against the apostles, and they had so little consideration
as to suffer themselves to be made the tools of this ill-natured party,
who would neither go into the kingdom of heaven themselves nor suffer
those who were entering to go in. (2.) How far they carried it, so far
that they expelled them out of their coasts; they banished them, ordered
them to be carried, as we say, from constable to constable, till they
were forced out of their jurisdiction; so that it was not by fear, but
downright violence, that they were driven out. This was one method which
the overruling providence of God took to keep the first planters of the
church from staying too long at a place; as [Mat
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023), When they persecute you in one
city flee to another, that thus you may the sooner go over the cities of
Israel. This was likewise a method God took to make those that were well
disposed the more warmly affected towards the apostles; for it is
natural to us to pity those that are persecuted, to think the better of
those that suffer when we know they suffer unjustly, and to be the more
ready to help them. The expelling of the apostles out of their coasts
made people inquisitive what evil they had done, and perhaps raised them
more friends than conniving at them in their coasts would have done.

2\. How the apostles abandoned and rejected the unbelieving Jews ([Act
13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051)): They shook off the dust of
their feet against them. When they went out of the city they used this
ceremony in the sight of those that sat in the gate; or, when they went
out of the borders of their country, in the sight of those that were
sent to see the country rid of them. Hereby, (1.) They declared that
they would have no more to do with them, would take nothing that was
theirs; for they sought not theirs, but them. Dust they are, and let
them keep their dust to themselves, it shall not cleave to them. (2.)
They expressed their detestation of their infidelity, and that, though
they were Jews by birth, yet, having rejected the gospel of Christ, they
were in their eyes no better than heathen and profane. As Jews and
Gentiles, if they believe, are equally acceptable to God and good men;
so, if they do not, they are equally abominable. (3.) Thus they set them
at defiance, and expressed their contempt of them and their malice,
which they looked upon as impotent. It was as much as to say, "Do your
worst, we do not fear you; we know whom we serve and whom we have
trusted." (4.) Thus they left a testimony behind them that they had had
a fair offer made them of the grace of the gospel, which shall be proved
against them in the day of judgment. This dust will prove that the
preachers of the gospel had been among them, but were expelled by them.
Thus Christ had ordered them to do, and for this reason, [Mat
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014); [Luk
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#005). When they left them, they came to
Iconium, not so much for safety, as for work.

3\. What frame they left the new converts in at Antioch ([Act
13:52](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#052)): The disciples, when they saw
with what courage and cheerfulness Paul and Barnabas not only bore the
indignities that were done them, but went on with their work
notwithstanding, they were in like manner inspirited. (1.) They were
very cheerful. One would have expected that when Paul and Barnabas were
expelled out of their coasts, and perhaps forbidden to return upon pain
of death, the disciples would have been full of grief and full of fear,
looking for no other than that, if the planters of Christianity go, the
plantation would soon come to nothing; or that it would be their turn
next to be banished the country, and to them it would be more grievous,
for it was their own. But no; they were filled with joy in Christ, had
such a satisfactory assurance of Christ's carrying on and perfecting his
own work in them and among them, and that either he would screen them
from trouble or bear them up under it, that all their fears were
swallowed up in their believing joys. (2.) They were courageous,
wonderfully animated with a holy resolution to cleave to Christ,
whatever difficulties they met with. This seems especially to be meant
by their being filled with the Holy Ghost, for the same expression is
used of Peter's boldness ([Act 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008)),
and Stephen's ([Act 7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055)), and Paul's,
[Act 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009). The more we relish the
comforts and encouragements we meet with in the power of godliness, and
the fuller our hearts are of them, the better prepared we are to face
the difficulties we meet with in the profession of godliness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 14](act014)

</div>
