<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo008)  [Next](oba000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 9:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. Judgment threatened, which the sinners shall
not escape ([Amo 9:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)), which an
almighty power shall inflict ([Amo
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#005), [Amo
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#006)), which the people of Israel have
deserved as a sinful people ([Amo 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007),
[Amo 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008)); and yet it shall not be the
utter ruin of their nation ([Amo 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008)),
for a remnant of good people shall escape ([Amo
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009)). But the wicked ones shall perish
([Amo 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#010)). II. Mercy promised, which
was to be bestowed in the latter days ([Amo
9:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)), as appears by the
application of it to the days of the Messiah, [Act
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#016). And with those comfortable
promises, after all the foregoing rebukes and threatenings, the book
concludes.

[Amos 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 9:1</span></span>

We have here the justice of God passing sentence upon a provoking
people; and observe,

I. With what solemnity the sentence is passed. The prophet saw in vision
the Lord standing upon the altar ([Amo
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)), the altar of burnt-offerings;
for the Lord has a sacrifice, and multitudes must fall as victims to his
justice. He is removed from the mercy-seat between the cherubim, and
stands upon the altar, the judgment-seat, on which the fire of God used
to fall, to devour the sacrifices. He stands upon the altar, to show
that the ground of his controversy with this people was their
profanation of his holy things; here he stands to avenge the quarrel of
his altar, as also to signify that the sin of the house of Israel, like
that of the house of Eli, shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever, [Sa1 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#014). He
stands on the altar, to prohibit sacrifice. Now the order given is,
Smite the lintel of the door of the temple, the chapiter, smite it with
such a blow that the posts may shake, and cut them, wound them in the
head, all of them; break down the doors of God's house, or of the courts
of his house, in token of this, that he is going out from it, and
forsaking it, and then all judgments are breaking in upon it. Or it
signifies the destruction of those in the first place that should be as
the door-posts to the nation for its defence, so that, they being broken
down, it becomes as a city without gates and bars. "Smite the king, who
is as the lintel of the door, that the princes, who are as the posts,
may shake; cut them in the head, cleave them down, all of them, as wood
for the fire; and I will slay the last of them, the posterity of them,
them and their families, or the least of them, them and all that are
employed under them; or, I will slay them all, them and all that remain
of them, till it comes to the last man; the slaughter shall be general."
There is no living for those on whom God has said, I will slay them, no
standing before his sword.

II\. What effectual care is taken that none shall escape the execution
of this sentence. This is enlarged upon here, and is intended for
warning to all that provoke the Lord to jealousy. Let sinners read it,
and tremble; as there is no fighting it out with God, so there is no
fleeing from him. His judgments, when they come with commission, as they
will overpower the strongest that think to outface them, so they will
overtake the swiftest that think to out-run them, [Amo
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002). Those of them that flee, and take
to their heels, shall soon be out of breath, and shall not flee away out
of the reach of danger; for, as sometimes the wicked flee when none
pursues, so he cannot flee away when God pursues, though he would fain
flee out of his hand. Nay, he that escapes of them, that thinks he has
gained his point, shall not be delivered. Evil pursues sinners, and will
arrest them. This is here enlarged upon by showing that wherever sinners
flee for shelter from God's justice, it will overtake them, and the
shelter will prove but a refuge of lies. What David says of the ubiquity
of God's presence ([Psa 139:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#007)) is
here said of the extent of God's power and justice. (1.) Hell itself,
though it has its name in English from its being hilled, or covered
over, or hidden, cannot hide them ([Amo
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002)): "Though they dig into hell, into
the centre of the earth, or the darkest recesses of it, yet thence shall
my hand take them, and bring them forth to be made public monuments of
divine justice." The grave is a hiding-place to the righteous from the
malice of the world ([Job 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017)), but
it shall be no hiding-place to the righteous from the justice of God;
thence God's hands shall take them, when they shall rise in the great
day to everlasting shame and contempt. (2.) Heaven, though it has its
name from being heaved, or lifted up, shall not put them out of reach of
God's judgments; as hell cannot hide them, so heaven will not. Though
they climb up to heaven in their conceit, yet thence will I bring them
down. Those whom God brings to heaven by his grace shall never be
brought down; but those who climb thither themselves, by their own
presumption, and confidence in themselves, will be brought down and
filled with shame. (3.) The top of Carmel, one of the highest parts of
the dust of the world in that country, shall not protect them: "Though
they hide themselves there, where they imagine nobody will look for
them, I will search, and take them out thence; neither the thickest
bushes, nor the darkest caves, in the top of Carmel, will serve to hide
them." (4.) The bottom of the sea shall not serve to conceal them;
though they think to hide themselves there, even there the judgments of
God shall find them out, and lay hold on them: Thence will I command the
serpent, and he shall bite them, the crooked serpent, even the dragon
that is in the sea, [Isa 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001). They
shall find their plague and death where they hope to find shelter and
protection; diving will stand them in no more stead than climbing. (5.)
Remote countries will not befriend them, nor shall less judgments excuse
them from greater ([Amo 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#004)): Thought
they go into captivity before their enemies, who carry them to places at
a great distance, and mingle them with their own people, among whom they
seem to be lost, yet that shall not serve their turn: Thence will I
command the sword, and it shall slay them, the sword of the enemy, or
one another's sword. When God judges he will overcome. That which binds
on all this, makes their escape impossible and their ruin inevitable, is
that God will set his eyes upon them for evil, and not for good. His
eyes are in every place, are upon all men and upon all the ways of men,
upon some for good, to show himself strong on their behalf, but upon
others for evil, to take notice of their sins ([Job
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027)) and take all opportunities of
punishing them for their sins. Their case is truly miserable who have
the providence of God: and all the dispensations of it, against them,
working for their hurt.

3\. What a great and mighty God he is that passes this sentence upon
them, and will take the executing of it into his own hands. Threatenings
are more or less formidable according to the power of him that
threatens. We laugh at impotent wrath; but the wrath of God is not so;
it is omnipotent wrath. Who knows the power of it? What he had before
said he would do ([Amo 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#008)) is here
repeated, that he would make the land melt and tremble, and all that
dwell therein mourn, that the judgment should rise up wholly like a
flood, and the country should be drowned, and laid under water, as by
the flood of Egypt, [Amo 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#005). But is
he able to make his words good? Yes, certainly he is; he does but touch
the land and it melts, touch the mountains and they smoke; he can do it
with the greatest ease, for, (1.) He is the Lord God of hosts, who
undertakes to do it, the God who has all the power in his hand, and all
creatures at his beck and call, who having made them all, and given them
their several capacities, makes what use he pleases of them and all
their powers. Very miserable is the case of those who have the Lord of
hosts against them, for they have hosts against them, the whole creation
at war with them. (2.) He is the Creator and governor of the upper
world: It is he that builds his stories in the heavens, the celestial
orbs, or spheres, one over another, as so many stories in a high and
stately palace. They are his, for he built them at first, when he said,
Let there be a firmament, and he made the firmament; and he builds them
still, is continually building them, not that they need repair, but by
his providence he still upholds them; his power is the pillars of
heaven, by which it is borne up. Now he that has the command of those
stories is certainly to be feared, for thence, as from a castle, he can
fire upon his enemies, or cast upon them great hailstones, as on the
Canaanites, or make the stars in their courses, the furniture of those
stories, to fight against them, as against Sisera. (3.) He has the
management and command of this lower world too, in which we dwell, the
terraqueous globe, both earth and sea, so that, which way soever his
enemies think to make their escape, he will meet them, or to make
opposition, he will match them. Do they think to make a land-fight of
it? He has founded his troop in the earth, his troop of guards, which he
has at command, and makes use of for the protection of his subjects and
the punishment of his enemies. All the creatures on earth make one
bundle (as the margin reads it), one bundle of arrows, out of which he
takes what he pleases to discharge against the persecutors, [Psa
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#013). They are all one army, one body,
so closely are they connected, and so harmoniously and so much in
concert do they act for the accomplishing of their Creator's purposes.
Do they think to make a sea-fight of it? He will be too hard for them
there, for he has the waters of the sea at command; even its waves, the
most tumultuous rebellious waters, do obey him. He calls for the waters
of the sea in the course of his common providence, causes vapours to
ascend out of it, and pours them out in showers, the small rain and the
great rain of his strength, upon the face of the earth; this was
mentioned before as a reason why we should seek the Lord ([Amo
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008)) and make him our friend, as it is
here made a reason why we should fear him and dread having him for our
enemy.

4\. How justly God passes this sentence upon the people of Israel. He
does not destroy them by an act of sovereignty, but by an act of
righteousness; for ([Amo 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008)), it is a
sinful kingdom, and the eyes of the Lord are upon it, discovering it to
be so; he sees the great sinfulness of it, and therefore he will destroy
it from off the face of the earth. Note, When those kingdoms that in
name and profession were holy kingdoms, and kingdoms of priests, as
Israel was, become sinful kingdoms, no other can be expected than that
they should be cut off and abandoned. Let sinful kingdoms, and sinful
families, and sinful persons too, see the eyes of the Lord upon them,
observing all their wickedness, and reserving the notice of it for the
day of reckoning and recompence. This being a sinful kingdom, see how
light God makes of it, [Amo 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007).

(1.) Of the relation wherein he stood to it: Are you not as children of
Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel? A sad change! Children of
Israel become as children of the Ethiopians! \[1.\] They were so in
themselves; that was their sin. It is a thing to be greatly lamented
that the children of Israel often become as children of the Ethiopians;
this children of godly parents degenerate, and become the reverse of
those that went before them. Those that were well-educated, and trained
up in the knowledge and fear of God, and set out well, and promised
fair, throw off their profession and become as bad as the worst. How has
the gold become dim! \[2.\] The were so in God's account, and that was
their punishment. He valued them no more, though they were children of
Israel, than if they had been children of the Ethiopians. We read of one
in the title of Ps. 7 that was Cush (an Ethiopian, as some understand
it) and yet a Benjamite. Those that by birth and profession are children
of Israel, if they degenerate, and become wicked and vile, are to God no
more than children of the Ethiopians. This is an intimation of the
rejection of the unbelieving Jews in the days of the Messiah; because
they embraced not the doctrine of Christ, the kingdom of God was taken
from them, they were unchurched, and cast out of covenant, became as
children of the Ethiopians, and are so to this day. And it is true of
those that are called Christians, but do no live up to their name and
profession, that rest in the form of piety, but live under the power of
reigning iniquity, that they are to God as children of the Ethiopians;
he rejects them, and their services.

(2.) See how light he makes of the favours he had conferred upon them;
they thought he would not, he could not, cast them off, and put them
upon a level with other nations, because he had done that for them which
he had not done for other nations, whereby they thought he was bound to
them, so as never to leave them. "No," says he, "The favours shown to
you are not so distinguishing as you think they are: Have I not brought
up Israel out of the land of Egypt?" It is true I have; but I have also
brought the Philistines from Caphtor, or Cappadocia, where they were
natives, or captives, or both; they are called the remnant of the
country of Caphtor ([Jer 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004)), and
the Philistim are joined with the Caphtorim, [Gen
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014). In like manner the Syrians were
brought up from Kir when they had been carried away thither, [Kg2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009). Note, If God's Israel lose the
peculiarity of their holiness, they lose the peculiarity of their
privileges; and what was designed as a favour of special grace shall be
set in another light, shall have its property altered, and shall become
an act of common providence; if professors liken themselves to the
world, God will level them with the world. And, if we live not up to the
obligation of God's mercies, we forfeit the honour and comfort of them.

5\. How graciously God will separate between the precious and the vile
in the day of retribution. Though the wicked Israelites shall be as the
wicked Ethiopians, and their being called Israelites shall stand them in
no stead, yet the pious Israelites shall not be as the wicked ones; no,
the Judge of all the earth will do right, more right than to slay the
righteous with the wicked, [Gen 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025).
His eyes are upon the sinful kingdom, to spy out those in it who
preserve their integrity and swim against the stream, who sigh and cry
for the abominations of their land, and they shall be marked for
preservation, so that the destruction shall not be total: I will not
utterly destroy the house of Jacob, not ruin them by wholesale and in
the gross, good and bad together, but I will distinguish, as becomes a
righteous judge. The house of Israel shall be sifted as corn is sifted;
they shall be greatly hurried, and shaken, and tossed, but still in the
hands of God, in both his hands, as the sieve in the hands of him that
sifts ([Amo 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009)): I will sift the
house of Israel among all nations. Wherever they are shaken and
scattered, God will have his eye upon them, and will take care to
separate between the corn and chaff, which was the thing he designed in
sifting them. (1.) The righteous ones among them, that are as the solid
wheat, shall none of them perish; they shall be delivered either from or
through the common calamities of the kingdom; not the least grain shall
fall on the earth, so as to be lost and forgotten - not the least stone
(so the word is), for the good corn is weighty as a stone in comparison
with that which we call light corn. Note, Whatever shakings there may be
in the world, God does and will effectually provide that none who are
truly his shall be truly miserable. (2.) The wicked ones among them who
are hardened in their sins shall all of them perish, [Amo
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#010). See what a height of impiety
they have come to: They say, The evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.
They think they are innocent, and do not deserve punishment, or that the
profession they make of relation to God will be their exemption and
security from punishment, or that they shall be able to make their part
good against the judgments of God, that they shall flee so swiftly from
them that they shall not overtake them, or guard so carefully against
them that they shall not prevent or surprise them. Note, Hope of
impunity is the deceitful refuge of the impenitent. But see what it will
come to at last: All the sinners that thus flatter themselves, and
affront God, shall die by the sword, the sword of war, which to them
shall be the sword of divine vengeance; yea, though they be the sinners
of my people, for their profession shall not be their protection. Note,
Evil is often nearest those that put it at the greatest distance from
them.

[Amos 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 9:11</span></span>

To him to whom all the prophets bear witness this prophet, here in the
close, bears his testimony, and speaks of that day, those days that
shall come, in which God will do great things for his church, by the
setting up of the kingdom of the Messiah, for the rejecting of which the
rejection of the Jews was foretold in the foregoing verses. The promise
here is said to agree to the planting of the Christian church, and in
that to be fulfilled, [Act 15:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#015).
It is promised,

I. That in the Messiah the kingdom of David shall be restored ([Amo
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)); the tabernacle of David it is
called, that is, his house and family, which, though great and fixed,
yet, in comparison with the kingdom of heaven, was mean and movable as a
tabernacle. The church militant, in its present state, dwelling as in
shepherds' tents to feed, as in soldiers' tents to fight, is the
tabernacle of David. God's tabernacle is called the tabernacle of David
because David desired and chose to dwell in God's tabernacle for ever,
[Psa 61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004). Now, 1. These tabernacles
had fallen an gone to decay, the royal family was so impoverished, its
power abridged, its honour stained, and laid in the dust; for many of
that race degenerated, and in the captivity it lost the imperial
dignity. Sore breaches were made upon it, and at length it was laid in
ruins. So it was with the church of the Jews; in the latter days of it
its glory departed; it was like a tabernacle broken down and brought to
ruin, in respect both of purity and of prosperity. 2. By Jesus Christ
these tabernacles were raised and rebuilt. In him God's covenant with
David had its accomplishment; and the glory of that house, which was not
only sullied, but quite sunk, revived again; the breaches of it were
closed and its ruins raised up, as in the days of old; nay, the
spiritual glory of the family of Christ far exceeded the temporal glory
of the family of David when it was at its height. In him also God's
covenant with Israel had its accomplishment, and in the gospel-church
the tabernacle of God was set up among men again, and raised up out of
the ruins of the Jewish state. This is quoted in the first council at
Jerusalem as referring to the calling in of the Gentiles and God's
taking out of them a people for his name. Note, While the world stands
God will have a church in it, and, if it be fallen down in one place and
among one people, it shall be raised up elsewhere.

II\. That that kingdom shall be enlarged, and the territories of it
shall extend far, by the accession of many countries to it ([Amo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012)), that the house of David may
possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen, that is, that
Christ may have them given him for his inheritance, even the uttermost
parts of the earth for his possession, Ps. ii. 8. Those that had been
strangers and enemies shall become willing faithful subjects to the Son
of David, shall be added to the church, or those of them that are called
by my name, saith the Lord, that is, that belong to the election of
grace and are ordained to eternal life ([Act
13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048)), for it is true of the Gentiles
as well as of the Jews that the election hath obtained and the rest were
blinded, [Rom 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007). Christ died to
gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad,
here said to be those that were called by his name. The promise is to
all that are afar off, even as many of them as the Lord our God shall
call, [Act 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039). St. James expounds
this as a promise that the residue of men should seek after the Lord,
even all the Gentiles upon whom my name is called. But may the promise
be depended upon? Yes, the Lord says this, who does this, who can do it,
who has determined to do it, the power of whose grace is engaged for the
doing of it, and with whom saying and doing are not two things, as they
are with us.

III\. That in the kingdom of the Messiah there shall be great plenty, an
abundance of all good things that the country produces ([Amo
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013)): The ploughman shall overtake
the reaper, that is, there shall be such a plentiful harvest every year,
and so much corn to be gathered in, that it shall last all summer, even
till autumn, when it is time to begin to plough again; and in like
manner the vintage shall continue till seed-time, and there shall be
such abundance of grapes that even the mountains shall drop new wine
into the vessels of the grape-gatherers, and the hills that were dry and
barren shall be moistened and shall melt with the fatness or mellowness
(as we call it) of the soil. Compare this with [Joe
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#024), and [Joe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018). This must certainly be
understood of the abundance of spiritual blessings in heavenly things,
which all those are, and shall be, blessed with, who are in sincerity
added to Christ and his church; they shall be abundantly replenished
with the goodness of God's house, with the graces and comforts of his
Spirit; they shall have bread, the bread of life, to strengthen their
hearts, and the wine of divine consolations to make them glad-meat
indeed and drink indeed - all the benefit that comes to the souls of men
from the word and Spirit of God. These had been long confined to the
vineyard of the Jewish church; divine revelation, and the power that
attended it, were to be found only within that enclosure; but in
gospel-times the mountains and hills of the Gentile world shall be
enriched with these privileges by the gospel of Christ preached, and
professed, and received in the power of it. When great multitudes were
converted to the faith of Christ, and nations were born at once, when
the preachers of the gospel were always caused to triumph in the success
of their preaching, then the ploughman overtook the reaper; and when,
the Gentile churches were enriched in all utterance, and in all
knowledge, and all manner of spiritual gifts ([Co1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005)), then the mountains dropped sweet
wine.

IV\. That the kingdom of the Messiah shall be well peopled; as the
country shall be replenished, so shall the cities be; there shall be
mouths for this meat, [Amo 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#014). Those
that were carried captives shall be brought back out of their captivity;
their enemies shall not be able to detain them in the land of their
captivity, nor shall they themselves incline to settle in it, but the
remnant shall return, and shall build the waste cities and inhabit them,
shall form themselves into Christian churches and set up pure doctrine,
worship, and discipline among them, according to the gospel charter, by
which Christ's cities are incorporated; and they shall enjoy the benefit
and comfort thereof; they shall plant vineyards, and make gardens.
Though the mountains and hills drop wine, and the privileges of the
gospel-church are laid in common, yet they shall enclose for themselves,
not to monopolize these privileges, to the exclusion of others, but to
appropriate and improve these privileges, in communion with others, and
they shall drink the wine, and eat the fruit, of their own vineyards and
gardens; for those that take pains in religion, as men must do about
their vineyards and gardens, shall have both the pleasure and profit of
it. The bringing again of the captivity of God's Israel, which is here
promised, may refer to the cancelling of the ceremonial law, which had
been long to God's Israel as a yoke of bondage, and the investing of
them in the liberty wherewith Christ came to make his church free, [Gal
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001).

V. That the kingdom of the Messiah shall take such deep rooting in the
world as never to be rooted out of it ([Amo
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#015)): I will plant them upon their
land. God's spiritual Israel shall be planted by the right hand of God
himself upon the land assigned them, and they shall no more be pulled up
out of it, as the old Jewish church was. God will preserve them from
throwing themselves out of it by a total apostasy, and will preserve
them from being thrown out of it by malice of their enemies; the church
may be corrupted, but shall not quite forsake God, may be persecuted,
but shall not quite be forsaken of God, so that the gates of hell,
neither with their temptations nor with their terrors, shall prevail
against it. Two things secure the perpetuity of the church: - 1. God's
grants to it: It is the land which I have given them; and God will
confirm and maintain his own grants. The part he has given to his people
is that good part which shall never be taken from them; he will not
revoke his grant, and all the powers of earth and hell shall not
invalidate it. 2. Its interest in him: He is the Lord thy God, who has
said it, and will make it good, thine, O Israel! who shall reign for
ever as thine unto all generations. And because he lives the church
shall live also.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Obadiah Introduction](oba000)

</div>
