<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1019)  [Next](ch1021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 20:0</span></span>

Here is a repetition of the story of David's wars, I. With the
Ammonites, and the taking of Rabbah ([Ch1
20:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001)). II. With the giants of the
Philistines ([Ch1 20:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#004)).

[1 Chronicles 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 20:1</span></span>

How the army of the Ammonites and their allies was routed in the field
we read in the foregoing chapters. Here we have the destruction of
Rabbah, the metropolis of their kingdom ([Ch1
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001)), the putting of their king's
crown upon David's head ([Ch1 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#002)),
and the great severity that was used towards the people, [Ch1
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#003). Of this we had a more full
account in 2 Sa. 11, 12, and cannot but remember it by this sad token,
that while Joab was besieging Rabbah David fell into that great sin in
the matter of Uriah. But it is observable that, though the rest of the
story is repeated, that is not: a hint only is given of it, in those
words which lie here in a parenthesis - But David tarried at Jerusalem.
If he had been abroad with his army, he would have been out of the way
of that temptation; but, indulging his ease, he fell into uncleanness.
Now, as the relating of the sin David fell into is an instance of the
impartiality and fidelity of the sacred writers, so the avoiding of the
repetition of it here, when there was a fair occasion given to speak of
it again, is designed to teach us that, though there may be a just
occasion to speak of the faults and miscarriages of others, yet we
should not take delight in the repetition of them. That should always be
looked upon as an unpleasing subject which, though sometimes one cannot
help falling upon, yet one would not choose to dwell upon, any more than
we should love to rake in a dunghill. The persons, or actions, we can
say no good of, we had best say nothing of.

[1 Chronicles 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch1 20:4</span></span>

The Philistines were nearly subdued ([Ch1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#001)); but, as in the destruction of
the Canaanites by Joshua the sons of Anak were last subdued ([Jos
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021)), so here in the conquest of the
Philistines the giants of Gath were last brought down. In the conflicts
between grace and corruption there are some sins which, like these
giants, keep their ground a great while and are not mastered without
much difficulty and a long struggle: but judgment will be brought forth
unto victory at last. Observe, 1. We never read of giants among the
Israelites as we do of the giants among the Philistines - giants of
Gath, but not giants of Jerusalem. The growth of God's plants is in
usefulness, not in bulk. Those who covet to have cubits added to their
stature do not consider that it will but make then more unwieldy. In the
balance of the sanctuary David far outweighs Goliath. 2. The servants of
David, though men of ordinary stature, were too hard for the giants of
Gath in every encounter, because they had God on their side, who takes
pleasure in abasing lofty looks, and mortifying the giants that are in
the earth, as he did of old by the deluge, though they were men of
renown. Never let the church's friends be disheartened by the power and
pride of the church's enemies. We need not fear great men against us
while we have the great God for us. What will a finger more on each hand
do, or a toe more on each foot, in contest with Omnipotence? 3. These
giants defied Israel ([Ch1 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#007)) and
were thus made to pay for their insolence. None are more visibly marked
for ruin that those who reproach God and his Israel. God will do great
things rather than suffer the enemy to behave themselves proudly, [Deu
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027). The victories of the Son of
David, like those of David himself, are gradual. We see not yet all
things put under him; but it will be seen shortly: and death itself, the
last enemy, like these giants, will be triumphed over.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 21](ch1021)

</div>
