<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1006)  [Next](ch1008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 7:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have some account of the genealogies, I. Of Issachar
([Ch1 7:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#001)). II. Of Benjamin ([Ch1
7:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#006)). III. Of Naphtali ([Ch1
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#013)). IV. Of Manasseh ([Ch1
7:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#014)). V. Of Ephraim ([Ch1
7:20-29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#020)). VI. Of Asher ([Ch1
7:30-40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#030)). Here is no account either of
Zebulun or Dan. Why they only should be omitted we can assign no reason;
only it is the disgrace of the tribe of Dan that idolatry began in that
colony of the Danites which fixed in Laish, and called Dan, and there
one of the golden calves was set up by Jeroboam. Dan is omitted, Rev. 7.

[1 Chronicles 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 7:1</span></span>

We have here a short view given us,

I. Of the tribe of Issachar, whom Jacob had compared to a strong ass,
couching between two burdens ([Gen
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#014)), an industrious tribe, that
minded their country business very closely and rejoiced in their tents,
[Deu 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#018). And here it appears, 1.
That they were a numerous tribe; for they had many wives. So fruitful
their country was that they saw no danger of over-stocking the pasture,
and so ingenious the people were that they could find work for all
hands. Let no people complain of their numbers, provided they suffer
none to be idle. 2. That they were a valiant tribe, men of might ([Ch1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#002), [Ch1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#005)), chief men, [Ch1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#003). Those that were inured to labour
and business were of all men the fittest to serve their country when
there was occasion, The number of the respective families, as taken in
the days of David, is here set down, amounting in the whole to above
145,000 men fit for war. The account, some think, was taken when Joab
numbered the people, 2 Sa. 24. But I rather think it refers to some
other computation that was made, perhaps among themselves, because it is
said ([Ch1 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#024)) that that account
was not inserted in the chronicles of king David, it having offended
God.

II\. Of the tribe of Benjamin. Some account is here given of this tribe,
but much larger in the next chapter. The militia of this tribe scarcely
reached to 60,000; but they are said to be mighty men of valour, [Ch1
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#007), [Ch1
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#009), [Ch1
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#011). Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf,
[Gen 49:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027). It was the honour of this
tribe that it produced Saul the first king, and more its honour that it
adhered to the rightful kings of the house of David when the other
tribes revolted. Here is mention ([Ch1
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#012)) of Hushim the sons of Aher. The
sons of Dan are said to be Hushim ([Gen
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#023)), and therefore some read Aher
appellatively, Hushim - the sons of another (that is, another of Jacob's
sons) or the sons of a stranger, which Israelites should not be, but
such the Danites were when they set up Micah's graven and molten image
among them.

III\. Of the tribe of Naphtali, [Ch1
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#013). The first fathers only of that
tribe are named, the very same that we shall find, [Gen
46:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#024), only that Shillem there is
Shallum here. None of their descendents are named, perhaps because their
genealogies were lost.

IV\. Of the tribe of Manasseh, that part of it which was seated within
Jordan; for of the other part we had some account before, [Ch1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#023), etc. Of this tribe observe, 1.
That one of them married an Aramitess, that is, a Syrian, [Ch1
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#014). This was during their bondage in
Egypt, so early did they begin to mingle with the nations. 2. That,
though the father married a Syrian, Machir, the son of that marriage,
perhaps seeing the inconvenience of it in his father's house, took to
wife a daughter of Benjamin, [Ch1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#015). It is good for the children to
take warning by their father's mistakes and not stumble at the same
stone. 3. Here is mention of Bedan ([Ch1
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#017)), who perhaps is the same with
that Bedan who is mentioned as one of Israel's deliverers, [Sa1
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#011). Jair perhaps, who was of
Manasseh ([Jdg 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#003)), was the man.

[1 Chronicles 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch1 7:20</span></span>

We have here an account,

I. Of the tribe of Ephraim. Great things we read of that tribe when it
came to maturity. Here we have an account of the disasters of its
infancy, while it was in Egypt as it should seem; for Ephraim himself
was alive when those things were done, which yet is hard to imagine if
it were, as is here computed, seven generations off. Therefore I am apt
to think that either it was another Ephraim or that those who were slain
were the immediate sons of that Ephraim that was the son of Joseph. In
this passage, which is related here only, we have, 1. The great breach
that was made upon the family of Ephraim. The men of Gath, Philistines,
giants, slew many of the sons of that family, because they came down to
take away their cattle, [Ch1 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#021). It
is uncertain who were the aggressors here. Some make the men of Gath the
aggressors, men born in the land of Egypt, but now resident in Gath,
supposing that they came down into the land of Goshen, to drive away the
Ephraimites' cattle, and slew the owners, because they stood up in the
defence of them. Many a man's life has been exposed and betrayed by his
wealth; so far is it from being a strong city. Others think that the
Ephraimites made a descent upon the men of Gath to plunder them,
presuming that the time had come when they should be put in possession
of Canaan; but they paid dearly for their rashness and precipitation.
Those that will not wait God's time cannot expect God's blessing. I
rather think that the men of Gath came down upon the Ephraimites,
because the Israelites in Egypt were shepherds, not soldiers, abounded
in cattle of their own, and therefore were not likely to venture their
lives for their neighbours' cattle: and the words may be read, The men
of Gath slew them, for they came down to take away their cattle. Zabad
the son of Ephraim, and Shuthelah, and Ezer, and Elead (his
grandchildren), were, as Dr. Lightfoot thinks, the men that were slain.
Jacob had foretold that the seed of Ephraim should become a multitude of
nations ([Gen 48:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#019)), and yet that
plant is thus nipped in the bud. God's providences often seem to
contradict his promises; but, when they do so, they really magnify the
promise, and make the performance of it, notwithstanding, so much more
illustrious. The Ephraimites were the posterity of Joseph, and yet his
power could not protect them, though some think he was yet living. The
sword devours one as well as another. 2. The great grief which oppressed
the father of the family hereupon: Ephraim mourned many days. Nothing
brings the aged to the grave with more sorrow than their following the
young that descend from them to the grave first, especially if in blood.
It is often the burden of those that live to be old that they see those
go before them of whom they said, These same shall comfort us. It was a
brotherly friendly office which his brethren did, when they came to
comfort him under this great affliction, to express their sympathy with
him and concern for him, and to suggest that to him which would support
and quiet him under this sad providence. Probably they reminded him of
the promise of increase which Jacob had blessed him when he laid his
right hand upon his head. Although his house was not so with God as he
hoped, but a house of mourning, a shattered family, yet that promise was
sure, [Sa2 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005). 3. The repair of this
breach, in some measure, by addition of another son to his family in his
old age ([Ch1 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#023)), like Seth,
another seed instead of that of Abel whom Cain slew, [Gen
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025). When God thus restores comfort
to his mourners, makes glad according to the days wherein he afflicted,
setting the mercies over against the crosses, we ought therein to take
notice of the kindness and tenderness of divine Providence; it is as if
it repented God concerning his servants, [Psa
90:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#013), [Psa
90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015). Yet joy that a man was born
into his family could not make him forget his grief; for he gives a
melancholy name to his son, Beriah - in trouble, for he was born when
the family was in mourning, when it went evil with his house. It is good
to have in remembrance the affliction and the misery, the wormwood and
the gall, that our souls may be humbled within us, [Lam
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019), [Lam
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#020). What name more proper for man
that is born of a woman than Beriah, because born into a troublesome
world? It is added, as a further honour to the house of Ephraim, (1.)
That a daughter of that tribe, Sherah by name, at the time of Israel's
setting in Canaan, built some cities, either at her own charge or by her
own care; one of them bore her name, Uzzen-sherah, [Ch1
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#024). A virtuous woman may be as great
an honour and blessing to a family as a mighty man. (2.) That a son of
that tribe was employed in the conquest of Canaan, Joshua the son of
Nun, [Ch1 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#027). In this also the
breach made on Ephraim's family was further repaired; and perhaps the
resentment of this injury formerly done by the Canaanites to the
Ephraimites might make him more vigorous in the war.

II\. Of the tribe of Asher. Some men of note of that tribe are here
named. Their militia was not numerous in comparison with some other
tribes, only 26,000 men in all; but their princes were choice and mighty
men of valour, chief of the princes ([Ch1
7:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#040)), and perhaps it was their wisdom
that they coveted not to make their trained bands numerous, but rather
to have a few, and those apt to the war and serviceable men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 8](ch1008)

</div>
