<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1007)  [Next](ch1009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 8:0</span></span>

We had some account given us of Benjamin in the foregoing chapter; here
we have a larger catalogue of the great men of that tribe. 1. Because of
that tribe Saul came, the first king of Israel, to the story of whom the
sacred writer is hastening, [Ch1 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001).
2. Because that tribe clave to Judah, inhabited much of Jerusalem, was
one of the two tribes that went into captivity, and returned back; and
that story also he has an eye to, [Ch1
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#001). Here is, I. Some of the heads of
that tribe named (v. 1-32). II. A more particular account of the family
of Saul ([Ch1 8:33-40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#033)).

[1 Chronicles 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 8:1</span></span>

There is little or nothing of history in all these verses; we have not
therefore much to observe. 1. As to the difficulties that occur in this
and the foregoing genealogies we need not perplex ourselves. I presume
Ezra took them as he found them in the books of the kings of Israel and
Judah ([Ezr 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)), according as they
were given in by the several tribes, each observing what method they
thought fit. Hence some ascend, others desecnd; some have numbers
affixed, others places; some have historical remarks intermixed, others
have not; some are shorter, others longer; some agree with other
records, others differ; some, it is likely, were torn, erased, and
blotted, others more legible. Those of Dan and Reuben were entirely
lost. This holy man wrote as he was moved by the Holy Ghost; but there
was no necessity for the making up of the defects, no, nor for the
rectifying of the mistakes, of these genealogies by inspiration. It was
sufficient that he copied them out as they came into his hand, or so
much of them as was requisite to the present purpose, which was the
directing of the returned captives to settle as nearly as they could
with those of their own family, and in the places of their former
residence. We may suppose that many things in these genealogies which to
us seem intricate, abrupt, and perplexed, were plain and easy to them
then (who knew how to fill up the deficiencies) and abundantly answered
the intention of the publishing of them. 2. Many great and mighty
nations there were now in being upon earth, and many illustrious men in
them, whose names are buried in perpetual oblivion, while the names of
multitudes of the Israel of God are here carefully preserved in
everlasting remembrance. They are Jasher, Jeshurun - just ones, and the
memory of the just is blessed. Many of these we have reason to fear,
came short of everlasting honour (for even the wicked kings of Judah
come into the genealogy), yet the perpetuating of their names here was a
figure of the writing of the names of all God's spiritual Israel in the
Lamb's book of life. 3. This tribe of Benjamin was once brought to a
very low ebb, in the time of the judges, upon the occasion of the
iniquity of Gibeah, when only 600 men escaped the sword of justice; and
yet, in these genealogies, it makes as good a figure as almost any of
the tribes: for it is the honour of God to help the weakest and raise up
those that are most diminished and abased. 4. Here is mention of one
Ehud ([Ch1 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#006)), in the preceding
verse of one Gera ([Ch1 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#005)) and ([Ch1
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#008)) of one that descended from him,
that begat children in the country of Moab, which inclines me to think
it was that Ehud who was the second of the judges of Israel; for he is
said to be the son of Gera and a Benjamite ([Jdg
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015)), and he delivered Israel from
the oppression of the Moabites by killing the king of Moab, which might
give him a greater sway in the country of Moab than we find evidence of
in his history and might occasion some of his posterity to settle there.
5. Here is mention of some of the Benjamites that drove away the
inhabitants of Gath ([Ch1 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#013)),
perhaps those that had slain the Ephraimites ([Ch1
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#021)) or their posterity, by way of
reprisal: and one of those that did this piece of justice was named
Beriah too, that name in which the memorial of that injury was
preserved. 6. Particular notice is taken of those that dwelt in
Jerusalem ([Ch1 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#028) and again [Ch1
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#032)), that those whose ancestors had
had their residence there might thereby be induced, at their return from
captivity, to settle there too, which, for aught that appears, few were
willing to do, because it was the post of danger: and therefore we find
([Neh 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#002)) the people blessed those
that willingly offered themselves to dwell at Jerusalem, the greater
part being inclined to prefer the cities of Judah. Those whose godly
parents had their conversation in the new Jerusalem should thereby be
engaged to set their faces thitherward and pursue the way thither,
whatever it cost them.

[1 Chronicles 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">ch1 8:33</span></span>

It is observable that among all the genealogies of the tribes there is
no mention of any of the kings of Israel after the defection from the
house of David, much less of their families; not a word of Jeroboam's
house or Baasha's, of Umri's or Jehu's; for they were all idolaters. But
of the family of Saul, which was the royal family before the elevation
of David, we have here a particular account. 1. Before Saul, Kish and
Ner only are named, his father and grandfather, [Ch1
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#033). His pedigree is carried higher
[Sa1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001), only there Kish is said to
be the son of Abiel, here of Ner. He was in truth the son of Ner but the
grandson of Abiel, as appears by [Sa1
14:51](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#051), where it is said that Ner was
the son of Abiel, and that Abner, who was the son of Ner, was Saul's
uncle (that is, his father's brother); therefore his father was also the
son of Ner. It is common in all languages to put sons for grandsons and
other descendents, much more in the scanty language of the Hebrews. 2.
After Saul, divers of his sons are named, but the posterity of none of
them, save Jonathan only, who was blessed with numerous issue and those
honoured with a place in the sacred genealogies for the sake of his
sincere kindness to David. The line of Jonathan is drawn down here for
about ten generations. Perhaps David was, in a particular manner,
careful to preserve that, and assigned it a page by itself, because of
the covenant made between his seed and Jonathan's seed forever, [Sa1
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#015), [Sa1
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#023), [Sa1
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#042). This genealogy ends in Ulam,
whose family became famous in the tribe of Benjamin for the number of
its valiant men. Of that one man's posterity there were, as it should
seem, at one time, 150 archers brought into the field of battle, that
were mighty men of valour, [Ch1 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#040).
That is taken notice of concerning them which is more a man's praise
than his pomp or wealth is, that they were qualified to serve their
country.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 9](ch1009)

</div>
