<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1014)  [Next](ch1016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 15:0</span></span>

The bringing in of the ark to the city of David was a very good work; it
was resolved upon ([Ch1 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#004)), and
attempted, but not perfected; it lay by the way in the house of
Obed-edom. Now this chapter gives us an account of the completing of
that good work. I. How it was done more regularly than before. 1. A
place was prepared for it ([Ch1 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#001)).
2. The priests were ordered to carry it ([Ch1
15:2-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#002)). 3. The Levites had their
offices assigned them in attending on it ([Ch1
15:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#016)). II. How it was done more
successfully than before ([Ch1 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#025)).
1. The Levites made no mistake in their work ([Ch1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#026)). 2. David and the people met
with no damp upon their joy ([Ch1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#027), [Ch1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#028)). As for Michal's despising
David, it was nothing ([Ch1 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#029)).

[1 Chronicles 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 15:1</span></span>

Preparation is here made for the bringing of the ark home to the city of
David from the house of Obed-edom. It is here owned that in the former
attempt, though it was a very good work and in it they sought God, yet
they sought him, not after the due order, [Ch1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#013). "We did not go about our work
considerately; and therefore we sped so ill." Note, It is not enough
that we do that which is good, but we must do it well - not enough that
we seek God in a due ordinance, but we must seek after him, in a due
order. Note, also, When we have suffered for our irregularities we must
learn thereby to be more regular; then we answer the end of
chastisement. Let us see how the matter was mended. 1. David now
prepared a place for the reception of the ark, before he brought it to
him; and thus he sought in the due order. He had not time to build a
house, but he pitched a tent for it ([Ch1
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#001)), probably according to the
pattern shown to Moses in the mount, or as near it as might be, of
curtains and boards. Observe, When he made houses for himself in the
city of David he prepared a place for the ark. Note, Wherever we build
for ourselves, we must be sure to make room for God's ark, for a church
in the house. 2. David now ordered that the Levites or priests should
carry the ark upon their shoulders. Now he bethought himself of that
which he could not but know before, that, none ought to carry the ark
but the Levites, [Ch1 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#002). The
Kohathites carried it in their ordinary marches, and therefore had no
wagons allotted them, because their work was to bear upon their
shoulders, [Num 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#009). But upon
extraordinary occasions, as when they passed Jordan and compassed
Jericho, the priests carried it. This rule was express, and yet David
himself forgot it, and put the ark upon a cart. Note, Even those that
are very knowing in the word of God, yet have it not always so ready to
them as were to be wished when they have occasion to use it. Wise and
good men may be guilty of an oversight, which, as soon as they are aware
of, they will correct. David did not go about to justify what had been
done amiss, nor to lay the blame on others, but owned himself guilty,
with others, of not seeking God in a due order, and now took care not
only to summon the Levites to the solemnity, as he did all Israel ([Ch1
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#003)), and had done before ([Ch1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#002)), but to see that they assembled
([Ch1 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#004)), especially the sons of
Aaron, [Ch1 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#011). To them he gives
the solemn charge ([Ch1 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#012)): You
are the chief of the fathers of the Levites, therefore do you bring up
the ark of the Lord. It is expected that those who are advanced above
others in dignity should go before others in duty. "You are the chief,
and therefore more is expected from you than from others, both by way of
service yourselves and influence on the rest. You did it not at first,
neither did your duty yourselves nor took care to instruct us, and we
smarted for it: The Lord made a breach upon us; we have all smarted for
your neglect; this has been by your means (see [Mal
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#009)): therefore sanctify yourselves,
and mind your business." When those that have suffered for doing ill
thus learn to do better the correction is well bestowed. 3. The Levites
and priests sanctified themselves ([Ch1
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#014)) and were ready to carry the ark
on their shoulders, according to the law, [Ch1
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#015). Note, Many that are very remiss
in their duty, if they were but faithfully told of it, would reform and
do better. The breach upon Uzza made the priests more careful to
sanctify themselves, that is, to cleanse themselves from all ceremonial
pollution and to compose themselves for the solemn service of God, so as
to strike a reverence upon the people. Some are made examples, that
others may be made exemplary and very cautious. 4. Officers were
appointed to be ready to bid the ark welcome, with every possible
expression of joy, [Ch1 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#016). David
ordered the chief of the Levites to nominate those that they knew to be
proficients for this service. Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were now first
appointed, [Ch1 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#017). They undertook
to sound with symbols ([Ch1 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#019)),
others with psalteries ([Ch1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#020)),
others with harps, on the Sheminith, or eighth, eight notes higher or
lower than the rest, according to the rules of the concert, [Ch1
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#021). Some that were priests blew
with the trumpet ([Ch1 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#024)), as was
usual at the removal of the ark ([Num
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#008)) and at solemn feasts, [Psa
81:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#003). And one was appointed for song
([Ch1 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#022)), for he was skilful in
it, could sing well himself and instruct others. Note, As every man has
received the gift, so he ought to minister the same, [Pe1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#010). And those that excel in any
endowment should not only use it for the common good themselves, but
teach others also, and not grudge to make others as wise as themselves.
This way of praising God by musical instruments had not hitherto been in
use. But David, being a prophet, instituted it by divine direction, and
added it to the other carnal ordinances of that dispensation, as the
apostle calls them, [Heb 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010). The New
Testament keeps up singing of psalms, but has not appointed
church-music. Some were appointed to be porters ([Ch1
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#018)), others door-keepers for the
ark ([Ch1 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#023), [Ch1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#024)), and one of these was
Obed-edom, who reckoned it no doubt a place of honour, and accepted it
as recompence for the entertainment he had given to the ark. He had been
for three months housekeeper to the ark, and indeed its landlord. But,
when he might not be so any longer, such an affection had he for it that
he was glad to be its door-keeper.

[1 Chronicles 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch1 15:25</span></span>

All things being got ready for the carrying of the ark to the city of
David, and its reception there, we have here an account of the solemnity
of this conveyance thither from the house of Obed-edom.

I. God helped the Levites that carried it. The ark was no very great
burden, that those who carried it needed any extraordinary help. But, 1.
It is good to take notice of the assistance of the divine providence
even in those things that fall within the compass of our natural powers:
if God did not help us, we could not stir a step. 2. In all our
religious exercises we must particularly derive help from heaven. See
[Act 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#022). All our sufficiency for
holy duties is from God. 3. The Levites, remembering the breach upon
Uzza, were probably ready to tremble when they took up the ark; but God
helped them, that is, he encouraged them to it, silenced their fears,
and strengthened their faith. 4. God helped them to do it decently and
well, and without making any mistake. If we perform any religious duties
so as to escape a breach, and come off with our lives, we must own it is
God that helps us; for, if left to ourselves, we should be guilty of
some fatal miscarriages. God's ministers that bear the vessels of the
Lord have special need of divine help in their ministrations, that God
in them may be glorified and his church edified. And, if God help the
Levites, the people have the benefit of it.

II\. When they experienced the tokens of God's presence with them they
offered sacrifices of praise to him, [Ch1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#026). This also he helped them to do.
They offered these bullocks and rams perhaps by way of atonement for the
former error, that it might not now be remembered against them, as well
as by way of acknowledgment for the help now received.

III\. There were great expressions of rejoicing used: the sacred music
was played, David danced, the singers sang, and the common people
shouted, [Ch1 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#027), [Ch1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#028). This we had before, [Sa2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014), [Sa2
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#015). Learn hence, 1. That we serve a
good master, who delights to have his servants sing at their work. 2.
That times of public reformation are, and should be, times of public
rejoicing. Those are unworthy of the ark that are not glad of it. 3. It
is not any disparagement to the greatest of men to show themselves
zealous in the acts of devotion. Michal indeed despised David ([Ch1
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#029)); but her despising him did not
make him at all despicable; he did not regard it himself, nor did any
that were wise and good (and why should we covet the esteem of any but
such?) think the worse of him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 16](ch1016)

</div>
