<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1015)  [Next](ch1017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 16:0</span></span>

This chapter concludes that great affair of the settlement of the ark in
the royal city, and with it the settlement of the public worship of God
during the reign of David. Here is, I. The solemnity with which the ark
was fixed ([Ch1 16:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#001)). II. The psalm
David gave to be sung on this occasion (v. 7-36). III. The settling of
the stated public worship of God in order thenceforward ([Ch1
16:37-43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#037)).

[1 Chronicles 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 16:1</span></span>

It was a glorious day when the ark of God was safely lodged in the tent
David had pitched for it. That good man had his heart much upon it,
could not sleep contentedly till it was done, [Psa
132:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#004), [Psa
132:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#005).

I. The circumstances of the ark were now, 1. Better than what they had
been. It had been obscure in a country town, in the fields of the wood;
now it was removed to a public place, to the royal city, where all might
resort to it. It had been neglected, as a despised broken vessel; now it
was attended with veneration, and God was enquired of by it. It had
borrowed a room in a private house, which it enjoyed by courtesy; now it
had a habitation of its own entirely to itself, was set in the midst of
it, and not crowded into a corner. Note, Though God's word and
ordinances may be clouded and eclipsed for a time, they shall at length
shine out of obscurity. Yet, 2. They were much short of what was
intended in the next reign, when the temple was to be built. This was
but a tent, a poor mean dwelling; yet this was the tabernacle, the
temple which David in his psalms often speaks of with so much affection.
David, who pitched a tent for the ark and continued steadfast to it, did
far better than Solomon, who built a temple for it and yet in his latter
end turned his back upon it. The church's poorest times were its purest.

II\. Now David was easy in his mind, the ark was fixed, and fixed near
him. Now see how he takes care, 1. That God shall have the glory of it.
Two ways he gives him honour upon this occasion: - (1.) By sacrifices
([Ch1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#001)), burnt-offerings in
adoration of his perfections, peace-offerings in acknowledgment of his
favours. (2.) By songs: he appointed Levites to record this story in a
song for the benefit of others, or to celebrate it themselves by
thanking and praising the God of Israel, [Ch1
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#004). All our rejoicings must express
themselves in thanksgivings to him from whom all our comforts are
received. 2. That the people shall have the joy of it. They shall fare
the better for this day's solemnity; for he gives them all what is worth
coming for, not only a royal treat in honour of the day ([Ch1
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#003)), in which David showed himself
generous to his subjects, as he had found God gracious to him (those
whose hearts are enlarged with holy joy should show it by being
open-handed); but (which is far better) he gives them also a blessing in
the name of the Lord, as a father, as a prophet, [Ch1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#002). He prayed to God for them, and
commended them to his grace. In the name of the Word of the Lord (so the
Targum), the essential eternal Word, who is Jehovah, and through whom
all blessings come to us.

[1 Chronicles 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch1 16:7</span></span>

We have here the thanksgiving psalm which David, by the Spirit,
composed, and delivered to the chief musician, to be sung upon occasion
of the public entry the ark made into the tent prepared for it. Some
think he appointed this hymn to be daily used in the temple service, as
duly as the day came; whatever other psalms they sung, they must not
omit this. David had penned many psalms before this, some in the time of
his trouble by Saul. This was composed before, but was now first
delivered into the hand of Asaph, for the use of the church. It is
gathered out of several psalms (from the beginning to [Ch1
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#023) is taken from [Psa
105:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#001), etc.; and then [Ch1
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#023) is the whole 96th psalm, with
little variation; [Ch1 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#034) is taken
from [Psa 136:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#001) and divers others; and
then the last two verses are taken from the close of Ps. 106), which
some think warrants us to do likewise, and make up hymns out of David's
psalms, a part of one and a part of another put together so as may be
most proper to express and excite the devotion of Christians. These
psalms will be best expounded in their proper places (if the Lord will);
here we take them as they are put together, with a design to thank the
Lord ([Ch1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#007)), a great duty, to
which we need to be excited and in which we need to be assisted. 1. Let
God be glorified in our praises; let his honour be the centre in which
all the lines meet. Let us glorify him by our thanksgivings (Give thanks
to the Lord), by our prayers (Call on his name, [Ch1
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#008)), by our songs (Sing psalms unto
him), by our discourse - Talk of all his wondrous works, [Ch1
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#009). Let us glorify him as a great
God, and greatly to be praised ([Ch1
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#025)), as supreme God (above all
gods), as sole God, for all others are idols, [Ch1
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#026). Let us glorify him as most
bright and blessed in himself (Glory and honour are in his presence,
[Ch1 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#027)), as creator (The Lord made
the heavens), as the ruler of the whole creation (His judgments are in
all the earth, [Ch1 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#014)), and as
ours - He is the Lord our God. Thus must we give unto the Lord the glory
due to his name ([Ch1 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#028), [Ch1
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#029)), and own it, and much more, his
due. 2. Let other be edified and instructed: Make known his deeds among
the people ([Ch1 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#008)), declare his
glory among the heathen ([Ch1 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#024)),
that those who are strangers to him may be led into acquaintance with
him, allegiance to him, and the adoration of him. Thus must we serve the
interests of his kingdom among men, that all the earth may fear before
him, [Ch1 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#030). 3. Let us be
ourselves encouraged to triumph and trust in God. Those that give glory
to God's name are allowed to glory in it ([Ch1
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#010)), to value themselves upon their
relation to God and venture themselves upon his promise to them. Let the
heart of those rejoice that seek the Lord, much more of those that have
found him. Seek him, and his strength, and his face: that is, seek him
by the ark of his strength, in which he manifests himself. 4. Let the
everlasting covenant be the great matter of our joy and praise ([Ch1
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#015)): Be mindful of his covenant. In
the parallel place it is, He will be ever mindful of it, [Psa
105:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#008). Seeing God never will forget
it, we never must. The covenant is said to be commanded, because God has
obliged us to obey the conditions of it, and because he has both
authority to make the promise and ability to make it good. This covenant
was ancient, yet never to be forgotten. It was made with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, who were long since dead ([Ch1
16:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#016)), yet still sure to the
spiritual seed, and the promises of it pleadable. 5. Let God's former
mercies to his people of old, to our ancestors and our predecessors in
profession, be commemorated by us now with thankfulness to his praise.
Let it be remembered how God protected the patriarchs in their unsettled
condition. When they came strangers to Canaan and were sojourners in it,
when they were few and might easily have been swallowed up, when they
were continually upon the remove and so exposed, when there were many
that bore them ill-will and sought to do them mischief, yet no man was
suffered to do them wrong - not the Canaanites, Philistines, Egyptians.
Kings were reproved and plagued for their sakes. Pharaoh was so, and
Abimelech. They were the anointed of the Lord, sanctified by his grace,
sanctified by his glory, and had received the unction of the Spirit.
They were his prophets, instructed in the things of God themselves and
commissioned to instruct others (and prophets are said to be anointed,
[Kg1 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016); [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)); therefore, if any touch them,
they touch the apple of God's eye; if any harm them, it is at their
peril, [Ch1 16:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#019). 6. Let the great
salvation of the Lord be especially the subject of our praises ([Ch1
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#023)): Show forth from day to day his
salvation, that is (says bishop Patrick), his promised salvation by
Christ. We have reason to celebrate that from day to day; for we daily
receive the benefits of it, and it is a subject that can never be
exhausted. 7. Let God be praised by a due and constant attendance upon
him in the ordinances he has appointed: Bring an offering, then the
fruit of the ground, now the fruit of the lips, of the heart ([Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)), and worship him in the beauty
of holiness, in the holy places and in a holy manner, [Ch1
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#029). Holiness is the beauty of the
Lord, the beauty of all sanctified souls and all religious performances.
8. Let God's universal monarchy be the fear and joy of all people. Let
us reverence it: Fear before him, all the earth. And let us rejoice in
it: Let the heavens be glad and rejoice, because the Lord reigns, and by
his providence establishes the world, so that, though it be moved, it
cannot be removed, nor the measures broken which Infinite Wisdom has
taken in the government of it, [Ch1
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#030), [Ch1
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#031). 9. Let the prospect of the
judgment to come inspire us with an awful pleasure, Let earth and sea,
fields and woods, though in the great day of the Lord they will all be
consumed, yet rejoice that he will come, doth come, to judge the earth,
[Ch1 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#032), [Ch1
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#033). 10. In the midst of our praises
we must not forget to pray for the succour and relief of those saints
and servants of God that are in distress ([Ch1
16:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#035)): Save us, gather us, deliver us
from the heathen, those of us that are scattered and oppressed. When we
are rejoicing in God's favours to us we must remember our afflicted
brethren, and pray for their salvation and deliverance as our own. We
are members one of another; and therefore when we mean, "Lord, save
them," it is not improper to say, "Lord, save us." Lastly, Let us make
God the Alpha and Omega of our praises. David begins with ([Ch1
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#008)), Give thanks to the Lord; he
concludes ([Ch1 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#036)), Blessed be the
Lord. And whereas in the place whence this doxology is taken ([Psa
106:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#048)) it is added, Let all the
people say, Amen, Hallelujah, here we find they did according to that
directory: All the people said, Amen, and praised the Lord. When the
Levites had finished this psalm or prayer and praise, then, and not till
then, the people that attended signified their consent and concurrence
by saying, Amen, And so they praised the Lord, much affected no doubt
with this newly instituted way of devotion, which had been hitherto used
in the schools of the prophets only, [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005). And, if this way of praising God
please the Lord better than an ox or a bullock that has horns and hoofs,
the humble shall see it and be glad, [Psa
69:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#031), [Psa
69:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#032).

[1 Chronicles 16:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">ch1 16:37</span></span>

The worship of God is not only to be the work of a solemn day now and
then, brought in to grace a triumph; but it ought to be the work of
every day. David therefore settles it here for a constancy, puts it into
a method, which he obliged those that officiated to observe in their
respective posts. In the tabernacle of Moses, and afterwards in the
temple of Solomon, the ark and the altar were together; but, ever since
Eli's time, they had been separated, and still continued so till the
temple was built. I cannot conceive what reason there was why David, who
knew the law and was zealous for it, did not either bring the ark to
Gibeon, where the tabernacle and the altar were, or bring them to Mount
Zion, where the ark was. Perhaps the curtains and hangings of Moses's
tabernacle were so worn with time and weather that they were not fit to
be removed, nor fit to be a shelter for the ark; and yet he would not
make all new, but only a tent for the ark, because the time was at hand
when the temple should be built. Whatever was the reason, all David's
time they were asunder, but he took care that neither of them should be
neglected. 1. At Jerusalem, where the ark was, Asaph and his brethren
were appointed to attend, to minister before the ark continually, with
songs of praise, as every day's work required, [Ch1
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#037). No sacrifices were offered
there, nor incense burnt, because the altars were not there: but David's
prayers were directed as incense, and the lifting up of his hands as the
evening sacrifice ([Psa 141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002)), so
early did spiritual worship take place of ceremonial. 2. Yet the
ceremonial worship, being of divine institution, must by no means be
omitted; and therefore at Gibeon were the altars where the priests
attended, for their work was to sacrifice and burn incense, which they
did continually, morning and evening, according to the law of Moses,
[Ch1 16:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#039), [Ch1
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#040). These must be kept up because,
however in their own nature they were inferior to the moral services of
prayer and praise, yet, as they were types of the mediation of Christ,
they had a great deal of honour put upon them, and the observance of
them was of great consequence. Here Zadok attended, to preside in the
service of the altar; as (it is probable) Abiathar settled at Jerusalem,
to attend the ark, because he had the breast-plate of judgment, which
must be consulted before the ark: this is the reason why we read in
David's time both Zadok and Abiathar were the priests ([Sa2
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#017); [Sa2
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#025)), one where the altar was and
the other where the ark was. At Gibeon, where the altars were, David
also appointed singers to give thanks to the Lord, and the burden of all
their songs must be, For his mercy endureth for ever, [Ch1
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#041). They did it with musical
instruments of God, such instruments as were appointed and appropriated
to this service, not such as they used on other occasions. Between
common mirth and holy joy there is a vast difference, and the limits and
distances between them must be carefully observed and kept up. Matters
being thus settled, and the affairs of religion put into a happy
channel, (1.) The people were satisfied, and went home pleased. (2.)
David returned to bless his house, resolving to keep up family worship
still, which public worship must not supersede.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 17](ch1017)

</div>
