<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1021)  [Next](ch1023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 22:0</span></span>

"Out of the eater comes forth meat." It was upon occasion of the
terrible judgment inflicted on Israel for the sin of David that God gave
intimation of the setting up of another altar, and of the place where he
would have the temple to be built, upon which David was excited with
great vigour to make preparation for that great work, wherein, though he
had long since designed it, it should seem, he had, of late, grown
remiss, till awakened by the alarm of that judgment. The tokens of God's
favour he received after those of his displeasure, I. Directed him to
the place ([Ch1 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001)). II. Encouraged
and quickened him to the work. 1. He set himself to prepare for the
building ([Ch1 22:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#002)). 2. He
instructed Solomon, and gave him a charge concerning this work ([Ch1
22:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#006)). 3. He commanded the princes
to assist him in it ([Ch1 22:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#017)).
There is a great deal of difference between the frame of David's spirit
in the beginning of the former chapter and in the beginning of this.
There, in the pride of his heart, he was numbering the people; here, in
his humility, preparing for the service of God. There corruption was
uppermost (but the well of living water in the soul, though it may be
muddied, will work itself clear again); grace here has recovered the
upper hand.

[1 Chronicles 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 22:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The place fixed for the building of the temple ([Ch1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001)): Then David said, by inspiration
of God, and as a declaration of his mind, This is the house of the Lord
God. If a temple must be built for God, it is fit that it be left to him
to choose the ground, for all the earth is his; and this is the ground
he makes choice of - ground that pertained to a Jebusite, and perhaps
there was not a spot of ground besides, in or about Jerusalem, that did
so - a happy presage of the setting up of the gospel temple among the
Gentiles. See [Act 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#016), [Act
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#017). The ground was a
threshing-floor; for the church of the living God is his floor, his
threshing, and the corn of his floor, [Isa
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010). Christ's fan is in his hand,
thoroughly to purge his floor. This is to be the house because this is
the altar. The temple was built for the sake of the altar. There were
altars long before there were temples.

II\. Preparation made for that building. David must not build it, but he
would do all he could towards it: He prepared abundantly before his
death, [Ch1 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#005). This intimates that
the consideration of his age and growing infirmities, which showed him
his death approaching, quickened him, towards his latter end, to be very
diligent in making this preparation. What our hands find to do for God,
and our souls, and our generation, let us do it with all our might
before our death, because, after death, there is no device nor working.
Now we are here told,

1\. What induced him to make such preparation. Two things he considered:
- (1.) That Solomon was young and tender, and not likely to apply with
any great vigour to this business at first; so that, unless he found the
wheels set a-going, he would be in danger of losing a great deal of time
at first, the rather because, being young, he would be tempted to put it
off; whereas, if he found the materials got ready to his hand, the most
difficult part of the work would be over, and this would excite and
encourage him to go about it in the beginnings of his reign. Note, Those
that are aged and experienced should consider those that are young and
tender, and provide them what help they can, that they may make the work
of God as easy to them as possible. (2.) That the house must be
exceedingly magnificent, very stately and sumptuous, strong and
beautiful, every thing about it the best in its kind, and for a good
reason, since it was intended for the honour of the great God, the Lord
of the whole earth, and was to be a type of Christ, in whom all fulness
dwells and in whom are hid all treasures. Men were then to be taught by
sensible methods. The grandeur of the house would help to affect the
worshippers with a holy awe and reverence of God, and would invite
strangers to come to see it, and the wonder of the world, who thereby
would be brought acquainted with the true God. Therefore it is here
designed to be of fame and glory throughout all countries. David
foretold this good effect of its being magnificent, [Psa
68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029) Because of thy temple at
Jerusalem shall kings bring presents unto thee.

2\. What preparation he made. In general, he prepared abundantly, as we
shall find afterwards; cedar and stones, iron and brass, are here
specified, [Ch1 22:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#002). Cedar he had
from the Tyrians and the Zidonians. The daughter of Tyre shall be there
with a gift, [Psa 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012). He also got
workmen together, the strangers that were in the land of Israel. Some
think that he employed them because they were generally better artists,
and more ingenious in manual operations, than the Israelites; or,
rather, because he would not employ the free-born Israelites in any
thing that looked mean and servile. They were delivered from the bondage
of making bricks in Egypt, and must not return to hew stone. These
strangers were proselytes to the Jewish religion, but, though not
enslaved, they were not of equal dignity with Israelites.

[1 Chronicles 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch1 22:6</span></span>

Though Solomon was young and tender, he was capable of receiving
instructions, which his father accordingly gave him, concerning the work
for which he was designed. When David came to the throne he had many
things to do, for the foundations were all out of course; but Solomon
had only one thing in charge, and that was to build a house for the Lord
God of Israel, [Ch1 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#006). Now,

I. David tells him why he did not do it himself. It was in his mind to
do it ([Ch1 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#007)), but God forbade
him, because he had shed much blood, [Ch1
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#008). Some think this refers to the
blood of Uriah, which fastened such a reproach upon him as rendered him
unworthy the honour of building the temple: but that honour was
forbidden him before he had shed that blood; therefore it must be meant,
as it is here explained, of the blood he shed in his wars (for he had
been a man of war from his youth), which, though shed very justly and
honourably in the service of God and Israel, yet made him unfit to be
employed in this service, or rather less fit than another that had never
been called to such bloody work. God, by assigning this as the reason of
laying David aside from this work, showed how precious human life is to
him, and intended a type of him who should build the gospel temple, not
by destroying men's lives, but by saving them, [Luk
9:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#056).

II\. He gives him the reason why he imposed this task upon him. 1.
Because God had designed him for it, nominated him as the man that
should do it: A son shall be born to thee, that shall be called Solomon,
and he shall build a house for my name, [Ch1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009), [Ch1
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#010). Nothing is more powerful to
engage us to any service for God, and encourage us in it, than to know
that hereunto we are appointed. 2. Because he would have leisure and
opportunity to do it. He should be a man of rest, and therefore should
not have his time, or thoughts, or wealth, diverted from this business.
He should have rest from his enemies abroad (none of them should invade
or threaten him, or give him provocation), and he should have peace and
quietness at home; and therefore let him build the house. Note, Where
God gives rest he expects work. 3. Because God had promised to establish
his kingdom. Let this encourage him to honour God, that God had honour
in store for him; let him build up God's house, and God will build up
his throne. Note, God's gracious promises should quicken and invigorate
our religious service.

III\. He delivers him an account of the vast preparations he had made
for this building ([Ch1 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#014)), not in
a way of pride and vain glory (he speaks of it as a poor thing - I have,
in my poverty, prepared, margin), but as an encouragement to Solomon to
engage cheerfully in the work, for which so solid a foundation was laid.
The treasure here mentioned of the 100,000 talents of gold, and
1,000,000 talents of silver, amounts to such an incredible sum that most
interpreters either allow an error in the copy or think the talent here
signifies no more than a plate or piece: ingots we call them. I am
inclined to suppose that a certain number is here put for an uncertain,
because it is said ([Ch1 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#016)) that
of the gold and silver, as well as of the brass and iron, there was no
number, and that David here includes all the dedicated things ([Ch1
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#011)) which he designed for the house
of the Lord, that is, not only for the building of it, but for the
treasure of it; and putting all together, it might come pretty near what
is here spoken of. Hundreds and thousands are numbers which we often use
to express that which is very much, when yet we would not be understood
strictly.

IV\. He charges them to keep God's commandments and to take heed to his
duty in every thing, [Ch1 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#013). He
must not think by building the temple to purchase a dispensation to sin;
no, on the contrary, his doing that would not be accepted, nor accounted
of, if he did not take heed to fulfil the statutes which the Lord
charged Moses with, [Ch1 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#013). Though
he was to be king of Israel, he must always remember that he was a
subject to the God of Israel.

V. He encourages him to go about this great work, and to go on in it
([Ch1 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#013)): "Be strong, and of good
courage, Though it is a vast undertaking, thou needest not fear coming
under the reproach of the foolish builder, who began to build and was
not able to finish it; it is God's work, and it shall come to
perfection. Dread not, nor be dismayed." In our spiritual work, as well
as in our spiritual warfare, we have need of courage and resolution.

VI\. He quickens him not to rest in the preparations he had made, but to
add thereto, [Ch1 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#014). Those that
enter into the labours of others, and build upon their advantages, must
still be improving.

VII\. He prays for him: The Lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and
give thee charge concerning Israel, [Ch1
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#012). Whatever charge we have, if we
see God giving us the charge and calling us to it, we may hope he will
give us wisdom for the discharge of it. Perhaps Solomon had an eye to
this prayer of his father for him, in the prayer he offered for himself:
Lord, give me a wise and understanding heart. He concludes ([Ch1
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#016)), Up, and be doing, and the Lord
be with thee. Hope of God's presence must not slacken our endeavours.
Though the Lord be with us, we must rise and be doing, and, if we do
this, we have reason to believe he is and will be with us. Work out your
salvation, and God will work in you.

[1 Chronicles 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch1 22:17</span></span>

David here engages the princes of Israel to assist Solomon in the great
work he had to do, and every one to lend him a hand towards the carrying
of it on. Those that are in the throne cannot do the good they would,
unless those about the throne set in with them. David would therefore
have the princes to advise Solomon and quicken him, and make the work as
easy to him as they could, by promoting it every one in his place. 1. He
shows them what obligations they lay under to be zealous in this matter,
in gratitude to God for the great things he had done for them. He had
given them victory, and rest, and a good land for an inheritance, [Ch1
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#018). The more God has done for us
the more we should study to do for him. 2. He presses that upon them
which should make them zealous in it ([Ch1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#019)): "Set your heart and soul to
seek God, place your happiness in his favour, and keep your eye upon his
glory. Seek him as your chief good and highest end, and this with your
heart and soul. Make religion your choice and business; and then you
will grudge no pains nor cost to promote the building of his sanctuary."
Let but the heart be sincerely engaged for God, and the head and hand,
the estate and interest, and all will be cheerfully employed for him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 23](ch1023)

</div>
