<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1018)  [Next](ch1020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 19:0</span></span>

The story is here repeated of David's war with the Ammonites and the
Syrians their allies, and the victories he obtained over them, which we
read just as it is here related, 2 Sa. 10. Here is, I. David's civility
to the king of Ammon, in sending an embassy of condolence to him on
occasion of his father's death ([Ch1
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#001), [Ch1
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#002)). II. His great incivility to
David, in the base usage he gave to his ambassadors ([Ch1
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#003), [Ch1
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#004)). III. David's just resentment of
it, and the war which broke out thereupon, in which the Ammonites acted
with policy in bringing the Syrians to their assistance ([Ch1
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#006), [Ch1
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#007)), Joab did bravely ([Ch1
19:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#008)), and Israel was once and
again victorious ([Ch1 19:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#014)).

[1 Chronicles 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 19:1</span></span>

Let us here observe, 1. That is becomes good people to be neighbourly,
and especially to be grateful. David will pay respect to Hanun because
he is his neighbour; and religion teaches us to be civil and obliging to
all, to honour all men, and to be ready to do all offices of kindness to
those we live among; nor must difference in religion be any obstruction
to this. But, besides this, David remembered the kindness which his
father showed to him. Those that have received kindness must return it
as they have ability and opportunity: those that have received it from
the parents must return it to the children when they are gone. 2. That,
as saith the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceedeth from the
wicked, [Sa1 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#013). The vile person
will speak villany, and the instruments of the churl will be evil, to
destroy those with lying words that speak right, [Isa
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006), [Isa
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#007). Those that are base, and design
ill themselves, are apt to be jealous and to suspect ill of others
without cause. Hanun's servant suggested that David's ambassadors came
as spies, as if so great and mighty a man as David needed to do so mean
a thing (if he had any design upon the Ammonites, he could effect it by
open force, and had no occasion for any fraudulent practices), or as if
a man of such virtue and honour would do so base a thing. Yet Hanun
hearkened to the suggestion, and, against the law of nations, treated
David's ambassadors villainously. 3. Masters ought to protect their
servants, and with the greatest tenderness to concern themselves for
them if they come by any loss or damage in their service. David did so
for his ambassadors, [Ch1 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#005). Christ
will do so for his ministers; and let all masters thus give unto their
servants that which is just and equal.

[1 Chronicles 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch1 19:6</span></span>

We may see here, 1. How the hearts of sinners that are marked for ruin
are hardened to their destruction. The children of Ammon saw that they
had made themselves odious to David ([Ch1
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#006)), and then it would have been
their wisdom to desire conditions of peace, to humble themselves and
offer any satisfaction for the injury they had done him, the rather
because they had made themselves not only odious to David, but obnoxious
to the justice of God, who is King of nations, and will assert the
injured rights and maintain the violated laws of nations. But, instead
of this, they prepared for war, and so brought upon themselves, by
David's hand, those desolations which he never intended them. 2. How the
courage of brave men is heightened and invigorated by difficulties. When
Joab saw that the battle was set against him before and behind ([Ch1
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#010)), instead of meditating a
retreat, he doubled his resolution; and, though he could not double, he
divided his army, and not only spoke, but acted, like a gallant man,
that had great presence of mind when he saw himself surrounded. He
engaged with his brother for mutual assistance ([Ch1
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#012)), excited himself and the rest
of the officers to act vigorously in their respective posts, with an eye
to God's glory and their country's good, not to any honour and advantage
of their own, and then left the issue to God: Let the Lord do that which
is right in his sight. 3. How vain the greatest art and strength are
against justice and equity. The Ammonites did their utmost to make the
best of their position: they brought as good a force into the field, and
disposed it with as much policy as possible; yet, having a bad cause,
and acting in defence of wrong, it would not do; they were put to the
worst. Right will prevail and triumph at last. 4. To how little purpose
it is for those to rally again, and reinforce themselves, that have not
God on their side. The Syrians, though in no way concerned in the merits
of the cause, but serving only as mercenaries to the Ammonites, when
they were beaten, thought themselves concerned to retrieve their honour,
and therefore called in the assistance of the Syrians on the other side
Euphrates; but to no purpose, for still they fled before Israel ([Ch1
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#018)); they lost 7000 men, who are
said to be the men of 700 chariots, [Sa2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#018). For, as now in a man of war for
sea-service they allot ten men to a gun, so then, in land-service, ten
men to a chariot. 5. those who have meddled with strife that belongs not
to them, and have found that they meddled to their own heart, do well to
learn wit at length and meddle no further. The Syrians, finding that
Israel was the conquering side, not only broke off their alliance with
the Ammonites and would help them no more ([Ch1
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#019)), but made peace with David and
became his servants. Let those who have in vain stood it out against God
be thus wise for themselves, and agree with him quickly, while they are
in the way. Let them become his servants; for they cannot but see
themselves undone if they be his enemies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 20](ch1020)

</div>
