<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2008)  [Next](ch2010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 9:0</span></span>

Solomon here continues to appear great both at home and abroad. We had
this account of his grandeur, 1 Kings 10. Nothing is here added; but his
defection towards his latter end, which we have there (ch. 11), is here
omitted, and the close of this chapter brings him to the grave with an
unstained reputation. Perhaps none of the chapters in the Chronicles
agree so much with a chapter in the Kings as this does with 1 Kings 10
verse for verse, only that the first two verses there are put into one
here, and [Ch2 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#025) here is taken from
[Kg1 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#026), and the last three verses
here from [Kg1 11:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#041). Here is, I.
The honour which the queen of Sheba did to Solomon, in the visit she
made him to hear his wisdom ([Ch2
9:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001)). II. Many instances given of
the riches and splendour of Solomon's court (v. 13-28). III. The
conclusion of his reign ([Ch2
9:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029)).

[2 Chronicles 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 9:1</span></span>

This passage of story had been largely considered in the Kings; yet,
because our Saviour has proposed it as an example to us in our enquiries
after him ([Mat 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042)), we must not
pass it over without observing briefly, 1. Those who honour God he will
honour, [Sa1 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030). Solomon had greatly
honoured God, in building, beautifying, and dedicating the temple; all
his wisdom and all his wealth were employed for the making of that a
consummate piece: and now God made his wisdom and wealth to redound
greatly to his reputation. The way to have both the credit and comfort
of all our endowments and all our enjoyments is to consecrate them to
God and use them for him. 2. Those who know the worth of true wisdom
will grudge no pains nor cost to obtain it. The queen of Sheba put
herself to a great deal of trouble and expense to hear the wisdom of
Solomon; and yet, learning from him to serve God and do her duty, she
thought herself well paid for her pains. Heavenly wisdom is that pearl
of great price which is a good bargain to purchase by parting with all
that we have. 3. As every man has received the gift so he ought to
minister the same for the edification of others, as he has opportunity.
Solomon was communicative of his wisdom and willing to teach others what
he knew himself. Being taught of God, freely he had received, and freely
he gave. Let those that are rich in wisdom, as well as wealth, learn to
do good and be ready to distribute. Give to every one that asketh. 4.
Good order in a family, a great family, especially in the things of God,
and a regular discharge of the duties of religious worship, are highly
expedient, and to be much admired wherever found. The queen of Sheba was
exceedingly affected to see the propriety with which Solomon's servants
attended him and with which both he and they attended in the house of
God. David's ascent to the house of the Lord was also pleasant and
interesting, [Psa 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004). 5. Those are
happy who have the opportunity of a constant converse with such as are
knowing, wise, and good. The queen of Sheba thought Solomon's servants
happy who continually heard his wisdom; for, it seems, even to them he
was communicative. And it is observable that the posterity of those who
had places in his court were willing to have the names of their
ancestors forgotten, and thought themselves sufficiently distinguished
and dignified when they were called the children of Solomon's servants
([Ezr 2:55](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#055); [Neh
7:57](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#057)); so eminent were they that it
was honour enough to be named from them. 6. We ought to rejoice and give
God thanks for the gifts, graces, and usefulness, of others. The queen
of Sheba blessed God for the honour he put upon Solomon, and the favour
he did to Israel, in advancing him to the throne, [Ch2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#008). By giving God the praise of the
prosperity of others, we share in the comfort of it; whereas, by envying
the prosperity of others, we lose the comfort even of our own. The
happiness of both king and kingdom she traces up to the fountain of all
bliss, the divine favour: it was because thy God delighted in thee and
because he loved Israel. Those mercies are doubly sweet in which we can
taste the kindness and good will of God as our God. 7. It becomes those
that are wise and good to be generous according to their place and
power. The queen of Sheba was so to Solomon, Solomon was so to her, [Ch2
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#009), [Ch2
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#012). They both knew how to value
wisdom, and therefore were neither of them covetous of their money, but
cultivated the acquaintance and confirmed the friendship they had
contracted by mutual presents. Our Lord Jesus has promised to give us
all our desire: Ask, and it shall be given you. Let us study what we
shall render to him, and not think any thing too much to do, or suffer,
or part with, for him.

[2 Chronicles 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 9:13</span></span>

We have here Solomon in his throne, and Solomon in his grave; for the
throne would not secure him from the grave. Mors sceptra ligonibus
aequat - Death wrenches from the hand the sceptre as well as the spade.

I. Here is Solomon reigning in wealth and power, in ease and fulness,
such as, for aught I know, could never since be paralleled by any king
whatsoever. In cannot pretend to be critical in comparing the grandeur
of Solomon with that of some of the great princes of the earth. But I
may observe that the most illustrious of them were famed for their wars,
whereas Solomon reigned forty years in profound peace. Some of those
that might be thought to vie with Solomon affected retirement, kept
people in awe by keeping them at a great distance; nobody must see them,
or come near him, upon pain of death: but Solomon went much abroad, and
appeared in public business. So that, all things considered, the promise
was fulfilled, that God would give him riches, and wealth, and honour,
such as no kings have had, or shall have, [Ch2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#012). 1. Never any prince appeared in
public with great splendour than Solomon did, which to those that judge
by the sight of the eye, as most people do, would very much recommend
him. He had 200 targets and 300 shields, all of beaten gold, carried
before him ([Ch2 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#015), [Ch2
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#016)), and sat upon a most stately
throne, [Ch2 9:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#017). There was not
the like in any kingdom. The lustre wherein he appeared was typical of
the spiritual glory of the kingdom of the Messiah and but a faint
representation of his throne, which is above every throne. Solomon's
pomp was all artificial; and therefore our Saviour prefers the natural
beauty of the lilies of the field before it. [Mat
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#029), Solomon, in all his glory, was
not arrayed like one of these. 2. Never any prince had greater plenty of
gold and silver, though there were no gold or silver mines in his own
kingdom. Either he made himself master of the mines in other countries,
and, having a populous country, sent hands to dig out those rich metals,
or, having a fruitful country, he exported the commodities of it and
with them fetched home all this gold that is here spoken of, [Ch2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#013), [Ch2
9:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#014). 3. Never any prince had such
presents brought him by all his neighbours as Solomon had: All the kings
of Arabia, and governors of the country, brought him gold and silver
([Ch2 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#014)), not as tribute which he
extorted from them, but as freewill offerings to procure his favour, or
in a way of exchange for some of the productions of his husbandry, corn
or cattle. All the kings of the earth brought him presents, that is, all
in those parts of the world ([Ch2
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#024), [Ch2
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#028)), because they coveted his
acquaintance and friendship. Herein he was a type of Christ, to whom, as
soon as he was born, the wise men of the east brought presents, gold,
frankincense, and myrrh ([Mat 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011)),
and to whom all that are about him must bring presents, [Psa
76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011); [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001). 4. Never any prince was so
renowned for wisdom, so courted, so consulted, so admired ([Ch2
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#023)): The kings of the earth (for it
was too great a favour for common persons to pretend to) sought to hear
his wisdom - his natural philosophy, or his skill in physic, or his
state policy, or his rules of prudence for the conduct of human life, or
perhaps the principles of his religion, and the reasons of it. The
application which they then made to Solomon to hear his wisdom will
aggravate, shame, and condemn, men's general contempt of Christ and his
gospel. Though in them are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, yet none of the princes of this world desire to know them,
for they are foolishness to them, [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008), [Co1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014).

II\. Here is Solomon dying, stripped of his pomp, and leaving all his
wealth and power, not to one concerning whom he knew not whether he
would be a wise man or a fool ([Ecc
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#019)), but who he knew would be a
fool. This was not only vanity but vexation of spirit, [Ch2
9:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029). It is very observable that no
mention is here made of Solomon's departure from God in his latter days,
not the least hint given of it, 1. Because the Holy Ghost would teach us
not to take delight in repeating the faults and follies of others. If
those that have been in reputation for wisdom and honour misbehave,
though it may be of use to take notice of their misconduct for warning
to ourselves and others, yet we must not be forward to mention it, once
the speaking of it is enough; why should that unpleasing string be again
struck upon? Why can we not do as the sacred historian here does, speak
largely of that in others which is praise-worthy, without saying any
thing of their blemishes, yea, though they have been gross and obvious?
This is but doing as we would be done by. 2. Because, though he fell,
yet he was not utterly cast down. His sin is not again recorded, because
it was repented of, and pardoned, and became as if it had never been.
Scripture-silence sometimes speaks. I am willing to believe that its
silence here concerning the sin of Solomon is an intimation that none of
the sins he committed were mentioned against him, [Eze
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#016). When God pardons sin he casts
it behind his back and remembers it no more.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 10](ch2010)

</div>
