<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2005)  [Next](ch2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 6:0</span></span>

The glory of the Lord, in the vehicle of a thick cloud, having filled
the house which Solomon built, by which God manifested his presence
there, he immediately improves the opportunity, and addresses God, as a
God now, in a peculiar manner, nigh at hand. I. He makes a solemn
declaration of his intention in building this house, to the satisfaction
of the people and the honour of God, both of whom he blessed ([Ch2
6:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001)). II. He makes a solemn prayer
to God that he would please graciously to accept and answer all the
prayers that should be made in, or towards, that house (v. 12-42). This
whole chapter we had before, with very little variation (1 Kings
8:12-53), to which it may not be amiss here to look back.

[2 Chronicles 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 6:1</span></span>

It is of great consequence, in all our religious actions, that we design
well, and that our eye be single. If Solomon had built this temple in
the pride of his heart, as Ahasuerus made his feast, only to show the
riches of his kingdom and the honour of his majesty, it would not have
turned at all to his account. But here he declares upon what inducements
he undertook it, and they are such as not only justify, but magnify, the
undertaking. 1. He did it for the glory and honour of God; this was his
highest and ultimate end in it. It was for the name of the Lord God of
Israel ([Ch2 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#010)), to be a house of
habitation for him, [Ch2 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#002). He has
indeed, as to us, made darkness his pavilion ([Ch2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001)), but let this house be the
residence of that darkness; for it is in the upper world that he dwells
in light, such as no eye can approach. 2. He did it in compliance with
the choice God had been pleased to make of Jerusalem, to be the city in
which he would record his name ([Ch2
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#006)): I have chosen Jerusalem. A great
many stately buildings there were in Jerusalem for the king, his
princes, and the royal family. If God chooses that place, it is fit that
there be a building for him which may excel all the rest. If men were
thus honoured there, let God be thus honoured. 3. He did it in pursuance
of his father's good intentions, which he never had an opportunity to
put into execution: "It was in the heart of David my father to build a
house for God;" the project was his, be it known, to his honour ([Ch2
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#007)), and God approved of it, though
he permitted him not to put it in execution ([Ch2
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#008)), Thou didst well that it was in
thy heart. Temple-work is often thus done; one sows and another reaps
([Joh 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#037), [Joh
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038)), one age begins that which the
next brings to perfection. And let not the wisest of men think it any
disparagement to them to pursue the good designs which those that went
before them have laid, and to build upon their foundation. Every good
piece is not an original. 4. He did it in performance of the word which
God had spoken. God had said, Thy son shall build the house for my name;
and now he had done it, [Ch2 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#009), [Ch2
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#010). The service was appointed him,
and the honour of it designed him, by the divine promise; so that he did
not do it of his own head, but was called of God to do it. It is fit
that he who appoints the work should have the appointing of the workmen;
and those may go on in their work with great satisfaction who see their
call to it clear.

[2 Chronicles 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 6:12</span></span>

Solomon had, in the foregoing verses, signed and sealed, as it were, the
deed of dedication, by which the temple was appropriated to the honour
and service of God. Now here he prays the consecration-prayer, by which
it was made a figure of Christ, the great Mediator, through whom we are
to offer all our prayers, and to expect all God's favours, and to whom
we are to have an eye in every thing where we have to do with God. We
have opened the particulars of this prayer (1 Kings 8) and therefore
shall now only glean up some few passages in it which may be the proper
subjects of our meditation.

I. Here are some doctrinal truths occasionally laid down. As, 1. That
the God of Israel is a being of incomparable perfection. We cannot
describe him; but this we know, there is none like him in heaven or in
earth, [Ch2 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#014). All the creatures
have their fellow-creatures, but the Creator has not his peer. He is
infinitely above all, and over all, God blessed for ever. 2. That he is,
and will be, true to every word that he has spoken; and all that serve
him in sincerity shall certainly find him both faithful and kind. Those
that set God always before them, and walk before him with all their
hearts, shall find him as good as his word and better; he will both keep
covenant with them and show mercy to them, [Ch2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#014). 3. That he is a being infinite
and immense, whom the heaven, and heaven of heavens, cannot contain, and
to whose felicity nothing is added by the utmost we can do in his
service, [Ch2 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#018). He is infinitely
beyond the bounds of the creation and infinitely above the praises of
all intelligent creatures. 4. That he, and he only, knows the hearts of
the children of men, [Ch2 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#030). All
men's thoughts, aims, and affections, are naked and open before him;
and, however the imaginations and intents of our hearts may be concealed
from men, angels, and devils, they cannot be hidden from God, who knows
not only what is in the heart, but the heart itself and all the beatings
of it. 5. That there is no such thing as a sinless perfection to be
found in this life ([Ch2 6:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#036)): There
is no man who sinneth not; nay, who doeth good and sinneth not; so he
writes, agreeable to what he here says, [Ecc
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#020).

II\. Here are some suppositions or cases put which are to be taken
notice of. 1. He supposed that if doubts and controversies arose between
man and man both sides would agree to appeal to God, and lay an oath
upon the person whose testimony must decide the matter, [Ch2
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#022). The religious reverence of an
oath, as it was ancient, so, it may be presumed, it will continue as
long as there are any remains of conscience and right reason among men.
2. He supposed that, though Israel enjoyed a profound peace and
tranquillity, yet troublesome times would come. He did not think the
mountain of their prosperity stood so strong but that it might be moved;
nay, he expected sin would move it. 3. He supposed that those who had
not called upon God at other times, yet, in their affliction, would seek
him early and earnestly. "When they are in distress they will confess
their sins, and confess thy name, and make supplication to thee."
Trouble will drive those to God who have said to him, Depart, [Ch2
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#024), [Ch2
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#026), [Ch2
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#028). 4. He supposed that strangers
would come from afar to worship the God of Israel and to pay homage to
him; and this also might reasonably be expected, considering what
worthless things the gods of the nations were, and what proofs the God
of Israel had given of his being Lord of the whole earth.

III\. Here are petitions very pertinent. 1. That God would own this
house, and have an eye to it, as the place of which he had said that he
would put his name there, [Ch2 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#020).
He could not, in faith, have asked God to show such peculiar favour to
this house above any other if he himself had not said that it should be
his rest for ever. The prayer that will speed must be warranted by the
word. We may with humble confidence pray to God to be well pleased with
us in Jesus Christ, because he had declared himself well pleased in him
- This is my beloved Son; but he says not now of any house, "This is my
beloved place." 2. That God would hear and accept the prayers which
should be made in or towards that place, [Ch2
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#021). He asked not that God should
help them whether they prayed for themselves or no, but that God would
help them in answer to their prayers. Even Christ's intercessions do not
supersede but encourage our supplications. He prayed that God would hear
from his dwelling-place, even from heaven. Heaven in his dwelling-place
still, not this temple; and thence help must come. When thou hearest
forgive. Note, The forgiveness of our sins is that which makes way for
all the other answers to our prayers, Removendo prohibens - The evil
which it drives away it keeps away. 3. That God would give judgment
according to equity upon all the appeals that should be made to him,
[Ch2 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#023), [Ch2
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#030). This we may, in faith, pray for,
for we are sure it shall be done. God sitteth on the throne judging
right. 4. That God would return in mercy to his people when they
repented, and reformed, and sought unto him, [Ch2
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#025), [Ch2
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#027), [Ch2
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#038), [Ch2
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#039). This we also may, in faith, pray
for, building upon the repeated declarations God has made of his
readiness to accepts penitents. 5. That God would bid the strangers
welcome to this house, and answer their prayers ([Ch2
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#033)); for, if there be in duty, why
should there not be in privilege one law for the stranger and for one
born in the land? [Lev 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#022). 6. That
God would, upon all occasions, own and plead the cause of his people
Israel, against all the opposers of it ([Ch2
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#035)): Maintain their cause; and
again, [Ch2 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#039). If they be the
Israel of God, their cause is the cause of God, and he would espouse it.
7. He concludes this prayer with some expressions which he had learned
of his good father, and borrowed from one of his psalms. We had then not
in the Kings, but here we have them, [Ch2
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041), [Ch2
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#042). The whole word of God is of use
to direct us in prayer; and how can we express ourselves in better
language to God than that of his own Spirit? But these words were of
use, in a special manner, to direct Solomon, because they had reference
to this very work that he was now doing. We have them, [Psa
132:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008). He prayer ([Ch2
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041)), (1.) That God would take
possession of the temple, and keep possession, that he would make it his
resting-place: Thou and the ark; what will the ark do without the God of
the ark-ordinances without the God of the ordinances? (2.) That he would
make the ministers of the temple public blessings: Clothe them with
salvation, that is, not only save them, but make them instrumental to
save others, by offering the sacrifices of righteousness. (3.) That the
service of the temple might turn abundantly to the joy and satisfaction
of all the Lord's people: Let thy saints rejoice in goodness, that is,
in the goodness of thy house, [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004). "Let all that come hither to
worship, like the eunuch, go away rejoicing." He pleads two things, [Ch2
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#042). \[1.\] His own relation to God:
"Turn not away the face of thy anointed. Lord, thou hast appointed me to
be king, and wilt not thou own me?" \[2.\] God's covenant with his
father: Remember thy mercies of David thy servant - the piety of David
towards God (so some understand it and so the word sometimes signifies),
his pious care of the ark, and concern for it (see [Psa
132:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#001), [Psa
132:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#002), etc.), or the promises of God
to David, which were mercies to him, his great support and comforts in
all his troubles. We may plead, as Solomon does here, with an eye to
Christ: - "We deserve that God should turn away our face, that he should
reject us and our prayers; but we come in the name of the Lord Jesus,
thy anointed, thy Messiah (so the word is), thy Christ, so the lxx. Him
thou hearest always, and wilt never turn away his face. We have no
righteousness of our own to plead, but, Lord, remember the mercies of
David thy servant." Christ is God's servant ([Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)), and is called David, [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005). "Lord, remember his mercies, and
accept us on the account of them. Remember his tender concern for his
Father's honour and man's salvation, and what he did and suffered from
that principle. Remember the promises of the everlasting covenant, which
free grace has made to us in Christ, and which are called the sure
mercies of David," [Isa 55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003) and [Act
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#034). This must be all our desire and
all our hope, all our prayer and all our plea; for it is all our
salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 7](ch2007)

</div>
