<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2034)  [Next](ch2036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 35:0</span></span>

We are here to attend Josiah, I. To the temple, where we see his
religious care for the due observance of the ordinance of the passover,
according to the law (v. 1-19). II. To the field of battle, where we see
his rashness in engaging with the king of Egypt, and how dearly it cost
him ([Ch2 35:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020)). III. To the
grave, where we see him bitterly lamented ([Ch2
35:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#024)). And so we must take our
leave of Josiah.

[2 Chronicles 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 35:1</span></span>

The destruction which Josiah made of idols and idolatry was more largely
related in the Kings, but just mentioned here in the foregoing chapter
(v. 33); but his solemnizing the passover, which was touched upon there
([Kg2 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#021)), is very particularly
related here. Many were the feasts of the Lord, appointed by the
ceremonial law, but the passover was the chief. It began them all in the
night wherein Israel came out of Egypt; it concluded them all in the
night wherein Christ was betrayed; and in the celebration of it Hezekiah
and Josiah, those two great reformers, revived religion in their day.
The ordinance of the Lord's supper resembles the passover more than it
does any of the Jewish festivals; and the due observance of that
ordinance, according to the rule, is an instance and means both of the
growing purity and beauty of churches and of the growing piety and
devotion of particular Christians. Religion cannot flourish where that
passover is either wholly neglected or not duly observed; return to
that, revive that, make a solemn business of that affecting binding
ordinance, and then, it is to be hoped, there will be a reformation in
other instances also.

In the account we had of Hezekiah's passover the great zeal of the
people was observable, and the transport of devout affection that they
were in; but little of the same spirit appears here. It was more in
compliance with the king that they all kept the passover ([Ch2
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#017), [Ch2
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#018)) than from any great inclination
they had to it themselves. Some pride they took in this form of
godliness, but little pleasure in the power of it. But, whatever defect
there was among the people in the spirit of the duty, both the
magistrates and the ministers did their part and took care that the
external part of the service should be performed with due solemnity.

I. The king exhorted and directed, quickened and encouraged, the priests
and Levites to do their office in this solemnity. Perhaps he saw them
remiss and indifferent, unwilling to go out of their road or mend their
pace. If ministers are so, it is not amiss for any, but most proper for
magistrates, to stir them up to their business. Say to Archippus, Take
heed to thy ministry, [Col 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017). Let
us see how this good king managed his clergy upon this occasion. 1. He
reduced them to the office they were appointed to by the law of Moses
([Ch2 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#006)) and the order they were
put into by David and Solomon, [Ch2
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#004). He set them in their charge,
[Ch2 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#002). He did not cut them out new
work, nor put them into any new method, but called them back to their
institution. Their courses were settled in writing; let them have
recourse to that writing, and marshal themselves according to the
divisions of their families, [Ch2
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#005). Our rule is settled in the
written word; let magistrates take care that ministers walk according to
that rule and they do their duty. 2. He ordered the ark to be put in its
place. It should seem, it had of late been displaced, either by the
wicked kings, to make room for their idols in the most holy place, or by
Hezekiah, to make room for the workmen that repaired the temple. However
it was, Josiah bids the Levites put the ark in the house ([Ch2
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#003)), and not carry it about from
place to place, as perhaps of late they had done, justifying themselves
therein by the practice before the temple was built. Now that the
priests were discharged from this burden of the ark they must be careful
in other services about it. 3. He charged them to serve God and his
people Israel, [Ch2 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#003). Ministers
must look upon themselves as servants both to Christ and to his church
for his sake, [Co2 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005). They must take
care, and take pains, and lay out themselves to the utmost, (1.) For the
glory and honour of God, and to advance the interests of his kingdom
among men. Paul, a servant of God, [Tit
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001). (2.) For the welfare and benefit
of his people, not as having dominion over their faith, but as helpers
of their holiness and joy; and there will be no difficulty, in the
strength of God, in honestly serving these two masters. 4. He charged
them to sanctify themselves, and prepare their brethren, [Ch2
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#006). Ministers' work must begin at
home, and they must sanctify themselves in the first place, purify
themselves from sin, sequester themselves from the world, and devote
themselves to God. But it must not end there; they must do what they can
to prepare their brethren by admonishing, instructing, exhorting,
quickening, and comforting, them. The preparation of the heart is indeed
from the Lord; but ministers must be instruments in his hand. 5. He
encouraged them to the service, [Ch2
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#002). He spoke comfortably to them, as
Hezekiah did, [Ch2 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#022). He promised
them his countenance. Note, Those whom we charge we should encourage.
Most people love to be commended, and will be wrought upon by
encouragements more than by threats.

II\. The king and the princes, influenced by his example, gave liberally
for the bearing of the charges of this passover. The ceremonial services
were expensive, which perhaps was one reason why they had been
neglected. People had not zeal enough to be at the charge of them; nor
were they now very fond of them, for that reason, and therefore, 1.
Josiah, at his own proper cost, furnished the congregation with paschal
lambs, and other sacrifices, to be offered during the seven days of the
feast. He allowed out of his own estate 30,000 lambs for passover
offerings, which the offerers were to feast upon, and 3000 bullocks
([Ch2 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#007)) to be offered during the
following seven days. Note, Those who are serious in religion should,
when they persuade others to do that which is good, make it as cheap and
easy to them as may be. And where God sows plentifully he expects to
reap accordingly. It is to be feared that the congregation generally had
not come provided; so that, if Josiah had not furnished them, the work
of God must have stood still. 2. The chief of the priests, who were men
of great estates, contributed towards the priests' charges, as Josiah
did towards the people's. The princes ([Ch2
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#008)), that is, the chief of the
priests, the princes of the holy tribe, rulers of the house of God, bore
the priests' charges. And some of the rich and great men of the Levites
furnished them also with cattle, both great and small, for offerings,
[Ch2 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#009). For, as to those that
sincerely desire to be found in the way of their duty, Providence
sometimes raises up friends to bear them out in it, beyond what they
could have expected.

III\. The priests and Levites performed their office very readily, [Ch2
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#010). They killed the paschal lambs
in the court of the temple, the priests sprinkled the blood upon the
altar, the Levites flayed them, and then gave the flesh to the people
according to their families ([Ch2
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#011), [Ch2
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#012)), not fewer than ten, nor more
than twenty, to a lamb. They took it to their several apartments,
roasted it, and ate it according to the ordinance, [Ch2
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#013). As for the other sacrifices
that were eucharistical, the flesh of them was boiled according to the
law of the peace-offerings and was divided speedily among the people,
that they might feast upon it as a token of their joy in the atonement
made and their reconciliation to God thereby. And, lastly, The priests
and Levites took care to honour God by eating of the passover
themselves, [Ch2 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#014). Let not
ministers think that the care they take for the souls of others will
excuse their neglect of their own, or that being employed so much in
public worship will supersede the religious exercises of their closets
and families. The Levites here mace ready for themselves and for the
priests, because the priests were wholly taken up all day in the service
of the altar; therefore, that they might not have their lamb to dress
when they should eat it, the Levites got it ready for them against
supper time. Let ministers learn hence to help one another, and to
forward one another's work, as brethren, and fellow-servants of the same
Master.

IV\. The singers and porters attended in their places, and did their
office, [Ch2 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#015). The singers with
their sacred songs and music expressed and excited the joy of the
congregation, and made the service very pleasant to them; and the
porters at the gates took care that there should be no breaking in of
any thing to defile or disquiet the assembly, nor going out of any from
it, that none should steal away till the service was done. While they
were thus employed their brethren the Levites prepared paschal lambs for
them.

V. The whole solemnity was performed with great exactness, according to
the law ([Ch2 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#016), [Ch2
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#017)), and, upon that account, there
was none like it since Samuel's time ([Ch2
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#018)), for in Hezekiah's passover
there were several irregularities. And bishop Patrick observes that in
this also it exceeded the other passovers which the preceding kings had
kept, that though Josiah was by no means so rich as David, and Solomon,
and Jehoshaphat, yet he furnished the whole congregation with beasts for
sacrifice, both paschal and eucharistical, at his own proper cost and
charge, which was more than any king ever did before him.

[2 Chronicles 35:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 35:20</span></span>

It was thirteen years from Josiah's famous passover to his death. During
this time, we may hope, thing went well in his kingdom, that he
prospered, and religion flourished; yet we are not entertained with the
pleasing account of those years, but they are passed over in silence,
because the people, for all this, were not turned from the love of their
sins nor God from the fierceness of his anger. The next news therefore
we hear of Josiah is that he is cut off in the midst of his days and
usefulness, before he is full forty years old. We had this sad story,
[Kg2 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029), [Kg2
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#030). Here it is somewhat more
largely related. That appears here, more than did there, which reflects
such blame on Josiah and such praise on the people as one would not have
expected.

I. Josiah was a very good prince, yet he was much to be blamed for his
rashness and presumption in going out to war against the king of Egypt
without cause or call. It was bad enough, as it appeared in the Kings,
that he meddled with strife which belonged not to him. But here it looks
worse; for, it seems, the king of Egypt sent ambassadors to him, to warn
him against this enterprise, [Ch2
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#021).

1\. The king of Egypt argued with Josiah, (1.) From principles of
justice. He professed that he had no desire to do him any hurt, and
therefore it was unfair, against common equity and the law of nations,
for Josiah to take up arms against him. If even a righteous man engage
in an unrighteous cause, let him not expect to prosper. God is no
respecter of persons. See [Pro 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#030);
[Pro 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#008). (2.) From principles of
religion: "God is with me; nay, He commanded me to make haste, and
therefore, if thou retard my motions, thou meddlest with God." It cannot
be that the king of Egypt only pretended this (as Sennacherib did in a
like case, [Kg2 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#025)), hoping thereby
to make Josiah desist, because he knew he had a veneration for the word
of God; for it is said here ([Ch2
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#022)) that the words of Necho were
from the mouth of God. We must therefore suppose that either by a dream,
or by a strong impulse upon his spirit which he had reason to think was
from God, or by Jeremiah or some other prophet, he had ordered him to
make war upon the king of Assyria. (3.) From principles of policy: "That
he destroy thee not; it is at thy peril if thou engage against one that
has not only a better army and a better cause, but God on his side."

2\. It was not in wrath to Josiah, whose heart was upright with the Lord
his God, but in wrath to a hypocritical nation, who were unworthy of so
good a king, that he was so far infatuated as not to hearken to these
fair reasonings and desist from his enterprise. He would not turn his
face from him, but went in person and fought the Egyptian army in the
valley of Megiddo, [Ch2 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#022). If
perhaps he could not believe that the king of Egypt had a command from
God to do what he did, yet, upon his pleading such a command, he ought
to have consulted the oracles of God before he went out against him. His
not doing that was his great fault, and of fatal consequence. In this
matter he walked not in the ways of David his father; for, had it been
his case, he would have enquired of the Lord, Shall I go up? Wilt thou
deliver them into my hands? How can we think to prosper in our ways if
we do not acknowledge God in them?

II\. The people were a very wicked people, yet they were much to be
commended for lamenting the death of Josiah as they did. That Jeremiah
lamented him I do not wonder; he was the weeping prophet, and plainly
foresaw the utter ruin of his country following upon the death of this
good king. But it is strange to find that all Judah and Jerusalem, that
stupid senseless people, mourned for him ([Ch2
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#024)), contrived how to have their
mourning excited by singing men and singing women, how to have it spread
through the kingdom (they made an ordinance in Israel that the mournful
ditties penned on this sad occasion should be learned and sung by all
sorts of people), and also how to have the remembrance of it
perpetuated: these elegies were inserted in the collections of state
poems; they are written in the Lamentations. Hereby it appeared, 1. That
they had some respect to their good prince, and that, though they did
not cordially comply with him in all his good designs, they could not
but greatly honour him. Pious useful men will be manifested in the
consciences even of those that will not be influenced by their example;
and many that will not submit to the rules of serious godliness
themselves yet cannot but give it their good word and esteem it in
others. Perhaps those lamented Josiah when he was dead that were not
thankful to God for him while he lived. The Israelites murmured at Moses
and Aaron while they were with them and spoke sometimes of stoning them,
and yet, when they died, they mourned for them many days. We are often
taught to value mercies by the loss of them which, when we enjoyed them,
we did not prize as we ought. 2. That they had some sense of their own
danger now that he was gone. Jeremiah told them, it is likely, of the
evil they might now expect to come upon them, from which he was taken
away; and so far they credited what he said that they lamented the death
of him that was their defence. Note, Many will more easily be persuaded
to lament the miseries that are coming upon them than to take the proper
way by universal reformation to prevent them, will shed tears for their
troubles, but will not be prevailed upon to part with their sins. But
godly sorrow worketh repentance and that repentance will be to
salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 36](ch2036)

</div>
