<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2016)  [Next](ch2018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 17:0</span></span>

Here begin the life and reign of Jehoshaphat, who was one of the first
three among the royal worthies, one of the best that ever swayed the
sceptre of Judah since David's head was laid. He was the good son of a
good father, so that, as this time, grace ran in the blood, even in the
blood-royal. Happy the son that had such a father, to lay a good
foundation in him and for him. Happy the father that had such a son, to
build so wall upon the foundation he had laid! Happy the kingdom that
was blessed with two such kings, two such reigns, together! In this
chapter we have, I. His accession to and establishment in the throne
([Ch2 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#001), [Ch2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#002), [Ch2
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#005)). II. His persona piety ([Ch2
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#003), [Ch2
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#004), [Ch2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#006)). III. The course he took to
promote religion in his kingdom ([Ch2
17:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#007)). IV. The mighty sway he bore
among the neighbours ([Ch2 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#010), [Ch2
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#011)). V. The great strength of his
kingdom, both in garrisons and standing forces ([Ch2
17:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#012)). Thus was his prosperity the
reward of his piety and his piety the brightest grace and ornament of
his prosperity.

[2 Chronicles 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 17:1</span></span>

Here we find concerning Jehoshaphat,

I. What a wise man he was. As soon as he came to the crown he
strengthened himself against Israel, [Ch2
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#001). Ahab, an active warlike prince,
had now been three years upon the throne of Israel, the vigour of his
beginning falling in with the decay of Asa's conclusion. It is probable
that the kingdom of Israel had, of late, got ground of the kingdom of
Judah and began to grow formidable to it; so that the first thing
Jehoshaphat had to do was to make his part good on that side, and to
check the growing greatness of the king of Israel, which he did so
effectually, and without bloodshed, that Ahab soon courted his alliance,
so far was he from giving him any disturbance, and proved more dangerous
as a friend than he could have been as an enemy. Jehoshaphat
strengthened himself not to act offensively against Israel or invade
them, but only to maintain his own, which he did by fortifying the
cities that were on his frontiers, and putting garrisons, stronger than
had been, in the cities of Ephraim, which he was master of, [Ch2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#002). He did not strengthen himself,
as his father did, by a league with the king of Syria, but by fair and
regular methods, on which he might expect the blessing of God and in
which he trusted God.

II\. What a good man he was. It is an excellent character that is here
given him. 1. He walked in the ways of his father David. In the
characters of the kings, David's ways are often made the standard, as
[Kg1 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#003), [Kg1
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#011); [Kg2
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#003); [Kg2
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#002); [Kg2
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#003). But the distinction is nowhere
so strongly marked as here between his first ways and his last ways; for
the last were not so good as the first. his ways, before he fell so
foully in the matter of Uriah (which is mentioned long afterwards as the
bar in his escutcheon, [Kg1 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#005)),
were good ways, and, though he happily recovered from that fall, yet
perhaps he never, while he lived, fully retrieved the spiritual strength
and comfort he lost by it. Jehoshaphat followed David as far as he
followed God and no further. Paul himself thus limits our imitation of
him ([Co1 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)): Follow me, as I
follow Christ, and not otherwise. Many good people have had their first
ways, which were their best ways, their first love, which was their
strongest love; and in every copy we propose to write after, as we must
single out that only which is good, so that chiefly which is best. The
words here will admit another reading; they run thus: He walked in the
ways of David his father (Hareshonim), those first ways, or those
ancient ways. He proposed to himself, for his example, the primitive
times of the royal family, those purest times, before the corruptions of
the late reigns came in. See [Jer
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016). The Septuagint leaves out David,
and so refers it to Asa: He walked in the first ways of his father, and
did not imitate him in what was amiss in him, towards the latter end of
his time. It is good to be cautious in following the best men, lest we
step aside after them. 2. He sought not to Baalim, but sought to the
Lord God of his father, [Ch2 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#003),
[Ch2 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#004). The neighbouring nations
had their Baalim, one had one Baal and another had another; but he
abhorred them all, had nothing to do with them. he worshipped the Lord
God of his father and him only, prayed to him only and enquired of him
only; both are included in seeking him. 3. That he walked in God's
commandments, not only worshipped the true God, but worshipped him
according to his own institution, and not after the doings of Israel,
[Ch2 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#004). Though the king of Israel
was his neighbour and ally, yet he did not learn his way. Whatever
dealings he had with him in civil matters, he would not have communion
with him, nor comply with him in his religion. In this he kept close to
the rule. 4. His heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord ([Ch2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#006)), or he lifted up his heart. He
brought his heart to his work, and lifted up his heart in it; that is,
he had a sincere regard to God in it. Unto thee, O Lord! do I lift up my
soul. His heart was enlarged in that which is good, [Psa
119:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#032). He never thought he could do
enough for God. He was lively and affectionate in his religion, fervent
in spirit, serving the Lord, cheerful and pleasant in it; he went on in
his work with alacrity, as Jacob, who, after his vision of God at
Bethel, lifted up his feet, [Gen 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001),
margin. He was bold and resolute in the ways of God and went on with
courage. His heart was lifted up above the consideration of the
difficulties that were in the way of his duty; he easily got over them
all, and was not frightened with winds and clouds from sowing and
reaping, [Ecc 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#004). Let us walk in the
same spirit.

III\. What a useful man he was, not only a good man, but a good king. He
not only was good himself, but did good in his generation, did a great
deal of good. 1. He took away the teachers of lies, so images are called
([Hab 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018)), the high places and the
groves, [Ch2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#006). It is meant of
those in which idols were worshipped; for those that were dedicated to
the true God only were not taken away, [Ch2
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#033). It was only idolatry that he
abolished. Nothing debauched the nation more than those idolatrous
groves or images which he took away. 2. He sent forth teachers of truth.
When he enquired into the state of religion in his kingdom he found his
people generally very ignorant: they knew not that they did evil. Even
in the last good reign there had been little care taken to instruct them
in their duty; and therefore Jehoshaphat resolves to begin his work at
the right end, deals with them as reasonable creatures, will not lead
them blindfold, no, not into a reformation, but endeavours to have them
well taught, knowing that that was the way to have them well cured. In
this good work he employed, (1.) His princes. Those about him he sent
forth; those in the country he sent to teach in the cities of Judah,
[Ch2 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#007). He ordered them, in the
administration of justice, not only to correct the people when they did
ill, but to teach them how to do better, and to give a reason for what
they did, that the people might be informed of the difference between
good and evil. The princes or judges upon the bench have a great
opportunity of teaching people their duty to God and man, and it is not
out of their province, for the laws of God are to be looked upon as laws
of the land. (2.) The Levites and priests went with the princes, and
taught in Judah, having the book of the law with them, [Ch2
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#008), [Ch2
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#009). They were teachers by office,
[Deu 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010). Teaching was part of the
work for which they had their maintenance. The priests and the Levites
had little else to do. But, it seems, they had neglected it, pretending
perhaps that they could not get the people to hear them. "Well," says
Jehoshaphat, "you shall go along with the princes, and they with their
authority shall oblige the people to come and hear you; and then, if
they be not well instructed, it is your fault." What an abundance of
good may be done when Moses and Aaron thus go hand in hand in the doing
of it, when princes with their power, and priests and Levites with their
scripture learning, agree to teach the people the good knowledge of God
and their duty! These itinerant judges and itinerant preachers together
were instrumental to diffuse a blessed light throughout the cities of
Judah. But it is said, They had the book of the law of the Lord with
them. \[1.\] For their own direction, that thence they might fetch all
the instructions they gave to the people, and not teach for doctrines
the commandments of men. \[2.\] For the conviction of the people, that
they might see that they had a divine warrant for what they said and
delivered to them that only which they received from the Lord. Note,
Ministers, when they go to teach the people, should have their Bibles
with them.

IV\. What a happy man he was. 1. How happy he was in the favour of his
God, who signally owned and blessed him: The Lord was with him ([Ch2
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#003)); the word of the Lord was his
helper (so the Chaldee paraphrase); the Lord established the kingdom in
his hand, [Ch2 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#005). Those stand
firmly that have the presence of God with them. If the beauty of the
Lord our God be upon us, that will establish the work of our hands and
establish us in our integrity. 2. How happy he was in the affections of
his people ([Ch2 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#005)): All Judah
brought him presents, in acknowledgment of his kindness in sending
preachers among them. The more there is of true religion among a people
the more there will be of conscientious loyalty. A government that
answers the end of government will be supported. The effect of the
favour both of God and his kingdom was that he had riches and honour in
abundance. It is undoubtedly true, though few will believe it, that
religion and piety are the best friends to outward prosperity. And,
observe, it follows immediately, His heart was lifted up in the ways of
the Lord. Riches and honour in abundance prove to many a clog and a
hindrance in the ways of the Lord, an occasion of pride, security, and
sensuality; but they had a quite contrary effect upon Jehoshaphat: his
abundance was oil to the wheels of his obedience, and the more he had of
the wealth of this world the more was his heart lifted up in the ways of
the Lord.

[2 Chronicles 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 17:10</span></span>

We have here a further account of Jehoshaphat's great prosperity and the
flourishing state of his kingdom.

I. He had good interest in the neighbouring princes and nations. Though
he was not perhaps so great a soldier as David (which might have made
him their terror), nor so great a scholar as Solomon (which might have
made him their oracle), yet the fear of the Lord fell so upon them (that
is, God so influenced and governed their spirits) that they had all a
reverence for him, [Ch2 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#010). And, 1.
None of them made war against him. God's good providence so ordered it
that, while the princes and priests were instructing and reforming the
country, none of his neighbours gave him any molestations, to take him
off from that good work. Thus when Jacob and his sons were going to
worship at Bethel the terror of God was upon the neighbouring cities,
that they did not pursue after them, [Gen
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#005), and see [Exo
34:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#024). 2. Many of them brought
presents to him ([Ch2 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#011)), to
secure his friendship. Perhaps these were a tribute imposed upon them by
Asa, who made himself master of the cities of the Philistines, and the
tents of the Arabians, [Ch2 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#014),
[Ch2 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#015). With the 7700 rams, and
the same number of he-goats, which the Arabians brought, there was
probably a proportionable number of ewes and lambs, she-goats and kids.

II\. He had a very considerable stores laid up in the cities of Judah.
He pulled down his barns, and built larger ([Ch2
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#012)), castles and cities of store,
for arms and victuals. He was a man of business, and aimed at the public
good in all his undertakings, either to preserve the peace or prepare
for war.

III\. He had the militia in good order. It was never in better since
David modelled it. Five lord-lieutenants (if I may so call them) are
here named, with the numbers of those under their command (the
serviceable men, that were fit for war in their respective districts),
three in Judah, and two in Benjamin. It is said of one of these great
commanders, Amasiah, that he willingly offered himself unto the Lord
([Ch2 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#016)), not only to the king, to
serve him in this post, but to the Lord, to glorify him in it. He was
the most eminent among them for religion, he accepted the place, not for
the honour, or power, or profit of it, but for conscience' sake towards
God, that he might serve his country,. It was usual for great generals
then to offer of their spoils to the Lord, [Ch1
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#026). But this good man offered
himself first to the Lord, and then his dedicated things. The number of
the soldiers under these five generals amounts to 1,160,000 men, a vast
number for so small a compass of ground as Judah's and Benjamin's lot to
furnish out and maintain. Abijah could bring into the field but 400,000
([Ch2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#003)), Asa not 600,000 ([Ch2
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#008)), yet Jehoshaphat has at command
almost 1,200,000. But it must be considered, 1. That God had promised to
make the seed of Abraham like the sand of the sea for number. 2. There
had now been a long peace. 3. We may suppose that the city of Jerusalem
was very much enlarged. 4. Many had come over to them from the kingdom
of Israel ([Ch2 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#019)), which would
increase the numbers of the people. 5. Jehoshaphat was under a special
blessing of God, which made his affairs to prosper greatly. The armies,
we may suppose, were dispersed all the country over, and each man
resided for the most part on his own estate; but they appeared often, to
be mustered and trained, and were ready at call whenever there was
occasion. The commanders waited on the king ([Ch2
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#019)) as officers of his court,
privy-counsellors, and ministers of state.

But, lastly, observe, It was not this formidable army that struck a
terror upon the neighbouring nations, that restrained them from
attempting any thing against Israel, or obliged them to pay tribute, but
the fear of God which fell upon them when Jehoshaphat reformed his
country and set up a preaching ministry in it, [Ch2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#010). The ordinances of God are more
the strength and safety of a kingdom than its military force - its men
of God more than its men of war.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 18](ch2018)

</div>
