<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2011)  [Next](ch2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 12:0</span></span>

This chapter gives us a more full account of the reign of Rehoboam than
we had before in Kings and it is a very melancholy account. Methinks we
are in the book of Judges again; for, I. Rehoboam and his people did
evil in the sight of the Lord ([Ch2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)). II. God thereupon sold them
into the hands of Shishak, king of Egypt, who greatly oppressed them
([Ch2 12:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#002)) III. God sent a prophet
to them, to expound to them the judgment and to call them to repentance
([Ch2 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#005)). IV. They thereupon
humbled themselves ([Ch2 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#006)). V.
God, upon their repentance, turned from his anger ([Ch2
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#007), [Ch2
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#012)) and yet left them under the
marks of his displeasure ([Ch2
12:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#008)). Lastly, Here is a general
character of Rehoboam and his reign, with the conclusion of it ([Ch2
12:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#013)).

[2 Chronicles 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 12:1</span></span>

Israel was very much disgraced and weakened by being divided into two
kingdoms; yet the kingdom of Judah, having both the temple and the royal
city, both the house of David and the house of Aaron, might have done
very well if they had continued in the way of their duty; but here we
have all out of order there.

I. Rehoboam and his people left God: He forsook the law of the Lord, and
so in effect forsook God, and all Israel with him, [Ch2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001). He had his happy triennium, when
he walked in the way of David and Solomon ([Ch2
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#017)), but it expired, and he grew
remiss in the worship of God; in what instances we are not told, but he
fell off, and Judah with him, here called Israel, because they walked in
the evil ways into which Jeroboam had drawn the kingdom of Israel. Thus
he did when he had established the kingdom and strengthened himself. As
long as he thought his throne tottered he kept to his duty, that he
might make God his friend; but, when he found it stood pretty firmly, he
thought he had no more occasion for religion; he was safe enough without
it. Thus the prosperity of fools destroys them. Jeshurun waxed fat and
kicked. When men prosper, and are in no apprehension of troubles, they
are ready to say to God, Depart from us.

II\. God quickly brought troubles upon them, to awaken them, and recover
them to repentance, before their hearts were hardened. It was but in the
fourth year of Rehoboam that they began to corrupt themselves, and in
the fifth year the king of Egypt came up against them with a vast army,
took the fenced cities of Judah, and came against Jerusalem, [Ch2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#002), [Ch2
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#003), [Ch2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#004). This great calamity coming upon
them so soon after they began to desert the worship of God, by a hand
they had little reason to suspect (having had a great deal of friendly
correspondence with Egypt in the last reign), and coming with so much
violence that all the fenced cities of Judah, which Rehoboam had lately
fortified and garrisoned and on which he relied much for the safety of
his kingdom, fell immediately into the hands of the enemy, without
making any resistance, plainly showed that it was from the Lord, because
they had transgressed against him.

III\. Lest they should not readily or not rightly understand the meaning
of this providence, God by the word explains the rod, [Ch2
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#005). When the princes of Judah had
all met at Jerusalem, probably in a great council of war, to concert
measures for their own safety in this critical juncture, he sent a
prophet to them, the same that had brought them an injunction from God
not to fight against the ten tribes ([Ch2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#002)), Shemaiah by name; he told them
plainly that the reason why Shishak prevailed against them was not
because they had been impolitic in the management of their affairs
(which perhaps the princes in this congress were at this time
scrutinizing), but because they had forsaken God. God never leaves any
till they first leave him.

IV\. The rebukes both of the word and of the rod being thus joined, the
king and princes humbled themselves before God for their iniquity,
penitently acknowledged the sin, and patiently accepted the punishment
of it, saying, The Lord is righteous, [Ch2
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#006). "We have none to blame but
ourselves; let God be clear when he judgeth." Thus it becomes us, when
we are under the rebukes of Providence, to justify God and judge
ourselves. Even kings and princes must either bend or break before God,
either be humbled or be ruined.

V. Upon the profession they made of repentance God showed them some
favour, saved them from ruin, and yet left them under some remaining
fears of the judgment, to prevent their revolt again.

1\. God, in mercy, prevented the destruction they were now upon the
brink of. Such a vast and now victorious army as Shishak had, having
made themselves masters of all the fenced cities, what could be expected
but that the whole country, and even Jerusalem itself, would in a little
time be theirs? But when God saith, Here shall the proud waves be
stayed, the most threatening force strangely dwindles and becomes
impotent. Here again the destroying angel, when he comes to Jerusalem,
is forbidden to destroy it: "My wrath shall not be poured out upon
Jerusalem; not at this time, not by this hand, not utterly to destroy
it," [Ch2 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#007), [Ch2
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#012). Note, Those that acknowledge
God righteous in afflicting them shall find him gracious. Those that
humble themselves before him shall find favour with him. So ready is the
God of mercy to take the first occasion to show mercy. If we have
humbled hearts under humbling providences, the affliction has done its
work, and it shall either be removed or the property of it altered.

2\. He granted them some deliverance, not complete, but in part; he gave
them some advantages against the enemy, so that they recruited a little;
he gave them deliverance for a little while, so some. They reformed but
partially, and for a little while, soon relapsing again; and, as their
reformation was, so was their deliverance. Yet it is said ([Ch2
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#012)), in Judah things went well, and
began to look with a better face. (1.) In respect of piety. There were
good things in Judah (so it is in the margin), good ministers, good
people, good families, who were made better by the calamities of their
country. Note, In times of great corruption and degeneracy it is some
comfort if there be a remnant among whom good things ar found; this is a
ground of hope in Israel. (2.) In respect of prosperity. In Judah things
went ill when all the fenced cities were taken ([Ch2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#004)), but when they repented the
posture of their affairs altered, and things went well. Note, If things
do not go so well as we could wish, yet we have reason to take notice of
it with thankfulness if they go better than was to have been expected,
better than formerly, and better than we deserved. We should own God's
goodness if he do but grant us some deliverance.

3\. Yet he left them to smart sorely by the hand of Shishak, both in
their liberty and in their wealth.

(1.) In their liberty ([Ch2 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#008)):
They shall be his servants (that is, they shall lie much at his mercy
and be put under contribution by him, and some of them perhaps be taken
prisoners and held in captivity by him), that they may know my service,
and the service of the kingdoms of the countries. They complained, it
may be, of the strictness of their religion, and forsook the law of the
Lord ([Ch2 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)) because they thought
it a yoke to hard, too heavy, upon them. "Well," saith God, "let them
better themselves if they can; let the neighbouring princes rule them
awhile, since they are not willing that I should rule them, and let them
try how they like that. They might have served God with joyfulness and
gladness of heart, and would not; let them serve their enemies then in
hunger and thirst ([Deu 28:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#047), [Deu
28:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#048)), till they think of returning
to their first Master, for then it was better with them," [Hos
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#007). This, some think, is the meaning
of [Eze 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#024), [Eze
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025). Because they despised my
statutes, I gave them statutes that were not good. Note, \[1.\] The more
God's service is compared with other services the more reasonable and
easy it will appear. \[2.\] Whatever difficulties or hardships we may
imagine there are in the way of obedience, it is better a thousand times
to go through them than to expose ourselves to the punishment of
disobedience. Are the laws of temperance thought hard? The effects of
intemperance will be much harder. The service of virtue is perfect
liberty; the service of lust is perfect slavery.

(2.) In their wealth. The king of Egypt plundered both the temple and
the exchequer, the treasuries of both which Solomon left very full; but
he took them away; yea, he took all, all he could lay his hands on, [Ch2
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#009). This was what he came for. David
and Solomon, who walked in the way of God, filled the treasuries, one by
war and the other by merchandise; but Rehoboam, who forsook the law of
God, emptied them. The taking away of the golden shields, and the
substituting of brazen ones in their place ([Ch2
12:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#009)), we had an account of before,
[Kg1 14:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#025).

[2 Chronicles 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 12:13</span></span>

The story of Rehoboam's reign is here concluded, much as the story of
the other reigns concludes. Two things especially are observable here: -
1. That he was at length pretty well fixed in his kingdom, [Ch2
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#013). His fenced cities in Judah did
not answer his expectation, so he now strengthened himself in Jerusalem,
which he made it his business to fortify, and there he reigned seventeen
years, in the city which the Lord had chosen to put his name there. This
intimates his honour and privilege, that he had his royal seat in the
holy city, which yet was but an aggravation of his impiety - near the
temple, but far from God. Frequent skirmishes there were between his
subjects and Jeroboam's, such as amounted to continual wars, ([Ch2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015)), but he held his own, and
reigned, and, as it should seem, did not so grossly forsake the law of
God as he had done ([Ch2 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)) in his
fourth year. 2. That he was never rightly fixed in his religion, [Ch2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#014). He never quite cast off God;
and yet in this he did evil, that he prepared not, he engaged not, his
heart to seek the Lord. See what the fault is laid upon. (1.) He did not
serve the Lord because he did not seek the Lord. He did not pray, as
Solomon did, for wisdom and grace. If we prayed better, we should be
every way better. Or he did not consult the word of God, did not seek to
that as his oracle, nor take directions from it. (2.) He made nothing of
his religion because he did not set his heart to it, never minded it
with any closeness of application, and never any hearty disposition to
it, nor ever came up to a steady resolution in it. What little goodness
he had was transient and passed away like the morning cloud. He did evil
because he was never determined for that which is good. Those are easily
drawn by Satan to any evil who are wavering and inconstant in that which
is good and are never persuaded to make religion their business.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 13](ch2013)

</div>
