<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2003)  [Next](ch2005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 4:0</span></span>

We have here a further account of the furniture of God's house. I. Those
things that were of brass. The altar for burnt-offerings ([Ch2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#001)), the sea and lavers to hold water
([Ch2 4:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#002)), the plates with which
the doors of the court were overlaid ([Ch2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#009)), the vessels of the altar, and
other things ([Ch2 4:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#010)). II. Those
that were of gold. The candlesticks and tables ([Ch2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#007), [Ch2
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#008)), the altar of incense ([Ch2
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#019)), and the appurtenances of each
of these ([Ch2 4:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#020)). All these,
except the brazen altar ([Ch2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#001)),
were accounted for more largely, [Kg1
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#023), etc.

[2 Chronicles 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 4:1</span></span>

David often speaks with much affection both of the house of the Lord and
of the courts of our God. Both without doors and within there was that
which typified the grace of the gospel and shadowed out good things to
come, of which the substance is Christ.

I. There were those things in the open court, in the view of all the
people, which were very significant.

1\. There was the brazen altar, [Ch2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#001). The making of this was not
mentioned in the Kings. On this all the sacrifices were offered, and it
sanctified the gift. This altar was much larger than that which Moses
made in the tabernacle; that was five cubits square, this was twenty
cubits square. Now that Israel had become both numerous and more rich,
and it was to be hoped more devout (for every age should aim to be wiser
and better than that which went before it), it was expected that there
would be a greater abundance of offerings brought to God's altar than
had been. It was therefore made such a capacious scaffold that it might
hold them all, and none might excuse themselves from bringing those
temptations of their devotion by alleging that there was not room to
receive them. God had greatly enlarged their borders; it was therefore
fit that they should enlarge his altars. Our returns should bear some
proportion to our receivings. It was ten cubits high, so that the people
who worshipped in the courts might see the sacrifice burnt, and their
eye might affect their heart with sorrow for sin: "It is of the Lord's
mercies that I am not thus consumed, and that this is accepted as an
expiation of my guilt." They might thus be led to consider the great
sacrifice which should be offered in the fulness of time to take away
sin and abolish death, which the blood of bulls and goats could not
possibly do. And with the smoke of the sacrifices their hearts might
ascend to heaven in holy desires towards God and his favour. In all our
devotions we must keep the eye of faith fixed upon Christ, the great
propitiation. How they went up to this altar, and carried the sacrifices
up to it, we are not told; some think by a plain ascent like a hill: if
by steps, doubtless they were so contrived as that the end of the law
(mentioned [Exo 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#026)) might be
answered.

2\. There was the molten sea, a very large brass pan, in which they put
water for the priests to wash in, [Ch2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#002), [Ch2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#006). It was put just at the entrance
into the court of the priests, like the font at the church door. If it
were filled to the brim, it would hold 3000 baths (as here, [Ch2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#005)), but ordinarily there were only
2000 baths in it, [Kg1 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#026). The Holy
Ghost by this signified, (1.) Our great gospel privilege, that the blood
of Christ cleanseth from all sin, [Jo1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007). To us there is a fountain opened
for all believers (who are spiritual priests, [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)), nay, for all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem to wash in, from sin, which is uncleanness. There is a fulness
of merit in Jesus Christ for all those that by faith apply to him for
the purifying of their consciences, that they might serve the living
God, [Heb 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014). (2.) Our great gospel
duty, which is to cleanse ourselves by true repentance from all the
pollutions of the flesh and the corruption that is in the world. Our
hearts must be sanctified, or we cannot sanctify the name of God. Those
that draw nigh to God must cleanse their hands, and purify their hearts,
[Jam 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008). If I was thee not, thou hast
no part with me; and he that is washed still needs to wash his feet, to
renew his repentance, whenever he goes in to minister, [Joh
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010).

3\. There were ten lavers of brass, in which they washed such things as
they offered for the burnt-offerings, [Ch2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#006). As the priests must be washed, so
must the sacrifices. We must not only purify ourselves in preparation
for our religious performances, but carefully put away all those vain
thoughts and corrupt aims which cleave to our performances themselves
and pollute them.

4\. The doors of the court were overlaid with brass ([Ch2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#009)), both for strength and beauty,
and that they might not be rotted with the weather, to which they were
exposed. Gates of brass we read of, [Psa
107:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#016).

II\. There were those things in the house of the Lord (into which the
priests alone went to minister) that were very significant. All was gold
there. The nearer we come to God the purer we must be, the purer we
shall be. 1. There were ten golden candlesticks, according to the form
of that one which was in the tabernacle, [Ch2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#007). The written word is a lamp and a
light, shining in a dark place. In Moses's time they had but one
candlestick, the Pentateuch; but the additions which, in process of
time, were to be made of other books of scripture might be signified by
this increase of the number of the candlesticks. Light was growing. The
candlesticks are the churches, [Rev
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020). Moses set up but one, the church
of the Jews; but, in the gospel temple, not only believers, but
churches, are multiplied. 2. There were ten golden tables ([Ch2
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#008)), tables whereon the show-bread
was set, [Ch2 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#019). Perhaps every one
of the tables had twelve loaves of show-bread on it. As the house was
enlarged, the house-keeping was. In my father's house there is bread
enough for the whole family. To those tables belonged 100 golden basins,
or dishes; for God's table is well furnished. 3. There was a golden
altar ([Ch2 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#019)), on which they burnt
incense. It is probable that this was enlarged in proportion to the
brazen altar. Christ, who once for all made atonement for sin, ever
lives, making intercession, in virtue of that atonement.

[2 Chronicles 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 4:11</span></span>

We have here such a summary both of the brass-work and the gold-work of
the temple as we had before ([Kg1
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#013), etc.), in which we have nothing
more to observe than, 1. That Huram the workman was very punctual: He
finished all that he was to make ([Ch2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#011)), and left no part of his work
undone. Huram, his father, he is called, [Ch2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#016). Probably it was a sort of
nickname by which he was commonly known, Father Huram; for the king of
Tyre called him Huram Abi, my father, in compliance with whom Solomon
called him his, he being a great artist and father of the artificers in
brass and iron. He acquitted himself well both for ingenuity and
industry. 2. Solomon was very generous. He made all the vessels in great
abundance ([Ch2 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#018)), many of a sort,
that many hands might be employed, and so the work might go on with
expedition, or that some might be laid up for use when others were worn
out. Freely he has received, and he will freely give. When he had made
vessels enough for the present he could not convert the remainder of the
brass to his own use; it is devoted to God, and it shall be used for
him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 5](ch2005)

</div>
