<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2022)  [Next](ch2024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 23:0</span></span>

Six years bloody Athaliah had tyrannised; in this chapter we have her
deposed and slain, and Joash, the rightful heir, enthroned. We had the
story before nearly as it is here related, [Kg2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004), etc. I. Jehoiada prepared the
people for the king, acquainted them with his design, armed them, and
appointed them their posts ([Ch2
23:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#001)). II. He produced the king to
the people, crowned him, and anointed him ([Ch2
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#011)). III. He slew the usurper ([Ch2
23:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#012)). IV. He reformed the
kingdom, re-established religion, and restored the civil government
([Ch2 23:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#016)).

[2 Chronicles 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 23:1</span></span>

We may well imagine the bad posture of affairs in Jerusalem during
Athaliah's six years' usurpation, and may wonder that God permitted it
and his people bore it so long; but after such a dark and tedious night
the returning day in this revolution was the brighter and the more
welcome. The continuance of David's seed and throne was what God had
sworn by his holiness ([Psa 89:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035)),
and an interruption was no defeasance; the stream of government here
runs again in the right channel. The instrument and chief manager of the
restoration is Jehoiada, who appears to have been, 1. A man of great
prudence, who reserved the young prince for so many years till he was
fit to appear in public, and till the nation had grown weary of the
usurper, who prepared his work beforehand, and then effected it with
admirable secresy and expedition. When God has work to do he will
qualify and animate men for it. 2. A man of great interest. The captains
joined with him, [Ch2 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#001). The
Levites and the chief of the fathers of Israel came at his call to
Jerusalem ([Ch2 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#002)) and were there
ready to receive his orders. See what a command wisdom and virtue will
give men. The Levites and all Judah did as Jehoiada commanded ([Ch2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#008)), and, which is strange, all that
were entrusted with the secret kept their own counsel till it was
executed. Thus the words of the wise are heard in quiet, [Ecc
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#017). 3. A man of great faith. It was
not only common equity (much less his wife's relation to the royal
family) that put him upon this undertaking, but a regard to the word of
God, and the divine entail of the crown ([Ch2
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#003)): The king's son shall reign,
must reign, as the Lord hath said. His eye to the promise, and
dependence upon that, added a great deal of glory to this undertaking.
4. A man of great religion. This matter was to be done in the temple,
which might occasion some breach of rule, and the necessity of the case
might be thought to excuse it; but he gave special order that none of
the people should come into the house of the Lord, but the priests and
Levites only, who were holy, upon pain of death, [Ch2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#006), [Ch2
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#007). Never let sacred things be
profaned, no, not for the support of civil rights. 5. A man of great
resolution. When he had undertaken this business he went through with
it, brought out the king, crowned him, and gave him the testimony, [Ch2
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#011). He ventured his head, but it
was in a good cause, and therefore he went on boldly. It is here said
that his sons joined with him in anointing the young king. One of them,
it is likely, was that Zechariah whom Joash afterwards put to death for
reproving him ([Ch2 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020)), which was
so much the more ungrateful because he bore a willing part in anointing
him.

[2 Chronicles 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 23:12</span></span>

Here we have, I. The people pleased, [Ch2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#012), [Ch2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#013). When the king stood at his
pillar, whose right it was to stand there, all the people of the land
rejoiced to see a rod sprung out of the stem of Jesse, [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). When it seemed a withered root
in a dry ground, to see what they despaired of ever seeing - a king of
the house of David, what a pleasing surprise was it to them! They ran in
transports of joy to see this sight, praised the king, and praised God,
for they had with them such as taught to sing praise.

II\. Athaliah slain. She ran upon the point of the sword of justice;
for, imagining her interest much better than it was, she ventured into
the house of the Lord at that time, and cried, Treason, treason! But
nobody seconded her, or sided with her. The pride of her heart deceived
her. She thought all her own, whereas none were cordially so. Jehoiada,
as protector in the king's minority, ordered her to be slain ([Ch2
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#014)), which was done immediately
([Ch2 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#015)), only care was taken that
she should not be slain in the house of the Lord, that sacred place must
not be so far disgraced, nor that wicked woman so far honoured.

III\. The original contract agreed to, [Ch2
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#016). In the Kings it is said that
Jehoiada made a covenant between the Lord, the people, and the king,
[Kg2 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#017). Here it is said to be
between himself, the people, and the king; for he, as God's priest, was
his representative in this transaction, or a sort of mediator, as Moses
was. The indenture was tripartite, but the true intent and meaning of
the whole was that they should be the Lord's people. God covenanted by
Jehoiada to take them for his people; the king and people covenanted
with him to be his; and then the king covenanted with the people to
govern them as the people of God, and the people with the king to be
subject to him as the Lord's people, in his fear and for his sake. Let
us look upon ourselves and one another as the Lord's people, and this
will have a powerful influence upon us in the discharge of all our duty
both to God and man.

IV\. Baal destroyed, [Ch2 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#017). They
would not have done half their work if they had only destroyed the
usurper of the king's right, and not the usurper of God's right - if
they had asserted the honour of the throne, and not that of the altar.
The greatest grievance of Athaliah's reign was the bringing in of the
worship of Baal, and supporting of that; therefore that must be
abolished in the first place. Down with Baal's house, his altars, his
images; down with them all, and let the blood of his priests be mingled
with his sacrifices; for God had commanded that seducers to idolatry
should be put to death, [Deu 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005),
[Deu 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006).

V. The temple service revived, [Ch2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#018), [Ch2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#019). This had been neglected in the
last reigns, the priest and people wanting either power or zeal to keep
it up when they had princes that were disaffected to it. But Jehoiada
restored the offices of the house of the Lord, which in the late times
had been disturbed and invaded, to the proper course and proper hands.
1. He appointed the priests to their courses, for the due offering of
sacrifices, according to the law of Moses. 2. The singers to theirs,
according to the appointment of David. The sacrifices (it should seem)
were offered with rejoicing and singing, and with good reason. We joy in
God when we receive the atonement, [Rom
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011). 3. The porters were put in their
respective posts as David ordered ([Ch2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#019)), and their office was to take
care that none who were upon any account ceremonially unclean should be
admitted into the courts of the temple.

VI\. The civil government re-established, [Ch2
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#020). They brought the king in state
to his own palace, and set him upon the throne of the kingdom, to give
law, and give judgment, either in his own person or by Jehoiada his
tutor. Thus was this happy revolution perfected. The generality of the
people rejoiced in it, and the rest were quiet and made no opposition,
[Ch2 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#021). When the Son of David is
enthroned in the soul all is quiet and springs of joy are opened.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 24](ch2024)

</div>
