<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1005)  [Next](co1007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 6:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle, I. Reproves them for going to law with one
another about small matters, and bringing the cause before heathen
judges ([Co1 6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)). II. He takes
occasion hence to warn them against many gross sins, to which they had
been formerly addicted ([Co1 6:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)).
III. And, having cautioned them against the abuse of their liberty, he
vehemently dehorts them from fornication, by various arguments ([Co1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012) to the end).

[1 Corinthians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 6:1</span></span>

Here the apostle reproves them for going to law with one another before
heathen judges for little matters; and therein blames all vexatious
law-suits. In the previous chapter he had directed them to punish
heinous sins among themselves by church-censures. Here he directs them
to determine controversies with one another by church-counsel and
advice, concerning which observe,

I. The fault he blames them for: it was going to law. Not but that the
law is good, if a man use it lawfully. But, 1. Brother went to law with
brother ([Co1 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#006)), one member of the
church with another. The near relation could not preserve peace and good
understanding. The bonds of fraternal love were broken through. And a
brother offended, as Solomon says, is harder to be won than a strong
city; their contentions are like the bars of a castle, [Pro
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019). Note, Christians should not
contend with one another, for they are brethren. This, duly attended to,
would prevent law-suits, and put an end to quarrels and litigations. 2.
They brought the matter before the heathen magistrates: they went to law
before the unjust, not before the saints ([Co1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)), brought the controversy before
unbelievers ([Co1 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#006)), and did not
compose it among themselves, Christians and saints, at least in
profession. This tended much to the reproach of Christianity. It
published at once their folly and unpeaceableness; whereas they
pretended to be the children of wisdom, and the followers of the Lamb,
the meek and lowly Jesus, the prince of peace. And therefore, says the
apostle, "Dare any of you, having a controversy with another, go to law,
implead him, bring the matter to a hearing before the unjust?" Note,
Christians should not dare to do any thing that tends to the reproach of
their Christian name and profession. 3. Here is at least an intimation
that they went to law for trivial matters, things of little value; for
the apostle blames them that they did not suffer wrong rather than go to
law ([Co1 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007)), which must be
understood of matters not very important. In matters of great damage to
ourselves or families, we may use lawful means to right ourselves. We
are not bound to sit down and suffer the injury tamely, without stirring
for our own relief; but, in matters of small consequence, it is better
to put up with the wrong. Christians should be of a forgiving temper.
And it is more for their ease and honour to suffer small injuries and
inconveniences than seem to be contentious.

II\. He lays before them the aggravations of their fault: Do you not
know that the saints shall judge the world ([Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002)), shall judge angels? [Co1
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003). And are they unworthy to judge
the smallest matters, the things of this life? It was a dishonour to
their Christian character, a forgetting of their real dignity, as
saints, for them to carry little matters, about the things of life,
before heathen magistrates. When they were to judge the world, nay, to
judge, it is unaccountable that they could not determine little
controversies among one another. By judging the world and angels, some
think, is to be understood, their being assessors to Christ in the great
judgment-day; it being said of our Saviour's disciples that they should
at that day sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel,
[Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028). And elsewhere we read of
our Lord's coming with ten thousand of his saints to execute judgment on
all, etc., [Jde 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014), [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015). He will come to judgment with
all his saints, [Th1 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#013). They
themselves are indeed to be judged (see [Mat
25:31-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031)), but they may first be
acquitted, and then advanced to the bench, to approve and applaud the
righteous judgment of Christ both on men and angels. In no other sense
can they be judges. They are not partners in their Lord's commission,
but they have the honour to sit by, and see his proceeding against the
wicked world, and approve it. Others understand this judging of the
world to be meant when the empire should become Christian. But it does
not appear that the Corinthians had knowledge of the empire's becoming
Christian; and, if they had, in what sense could Christian emperors be
said to judge angels? Others understand it of their condemning the world
by their faith and practice, and casting out evil angels by miraculous
power, which was not confined to the first ages, nor to the apostles.
The first sense seems to be most natural; and at the same time it gives
the utmost force to the argument. "Shall Christians have the honour to
sit with the sovereign Judge at the last day, whilst he passes judgment
on sinful men and evil angels, and are they not worthy to judge of the
trifles about which you contend before heathen magistrates? Cannot they
make up your mutual differences? Why must you bring them before heathen
judges? When you are to judge them, as it fit to appeal to their
judicature? Must you, about the affairs of this life, set those to judge
who are of no esteem in the church?" (so some read, and perhaps most
properly, [Co1 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#004)), heathen
magistrates, exouthenēmenous, the things that are not, [Co1
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028). "Must those be called in to
judge in your controversies of whom you ought to entertain so low an
opinion? Is this not shameful?" [Co1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#005). Some who read it as our
translators make it an ironical speech: "If you have such controversies
depending, set those to judge who are of least esteem among yourselves.
The meanest of your own members are able surely to determine these
disputes. Refer the matters in variance to any, rather than go to law
about them before heathen judges. They are trifles not worth contending
about, and may easily be decided, if you have first conquered your own
spirits, and brought them into a truly Christian temper. Bear and
forbear, and the men of meanest skill among you may end your quarrels. I
speak it to your shame," [Co1 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#005).
Note, It is a shame that little quarrels should grow to such a head
among Christians, that they cannot be determined by arbitration of the
brethren.

III\. He puts them on a method to remedy this fault. And this twofold: -
1. By referring it to some to make it up: "Is it so that there is no
wise man among you, no one able to judge between his brethren? [Co1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#005). You who value yourselves so much
upon your wisdom and knowledge, who are so puffed up upon your
extraordinary gifts and endowments, is there none among you fit for this
office, none that has wisdom enough to judge in these differences? Must
brethren quarrel, and the heathen magistrate judge, in a church so
famous as yours for knowledge and wisdom? It is a reproach to you that
quarrels should run so high, and none of your wise men interpose to
prevent them." Note, Christians should never engage in law-suits till
all other remedies have been tried in vain. Prudent Christians should
prevent, if possible, their disputes, and not courts of judicature
decide them, especially in matters of no great importance. 2. By
suffering wrong rather than taking this method to right themselves: It
is utterly a fault among you to go to law in this matter: it is always a
fault of one side to go to law, except in a case where the title is
indeed dubious, and there is a friendly agreement of both parties to
refer it to the judgment of those learned in the law to decide it. And
this is referring it, rather than contending about it, which is the
thing the apostle here seems chiefly to condemn: Should you not rather
take wrong, rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded? Note, A Christian
should rather put up with a little injury than tease himself, and
provoke others, by a litigious contest. The peace of his own mind, and
the calm of his neighbourhood, are more worth than victory in such a
contest, or reclaiming his own right, especially when the quarrel must
be decided by those who are enemies to religion. But the apostle tells
them they were so far from bearing injuries that they actually did
wrong, and defrauded, and that their brethren. Note, It is utterly a
fault to wrong and defraud any; but it is an aggravation of this fault
to defraud our Christian brethren. The ties of mutual love ought to be
stronger between them than between others. And love worketh no ill to
his neighbour, [Rom 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010). Those who
love the brotherhood can never, under the influence of this principle,
hurt or injure them.

[1 Corinthians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 6:9</span></span>

Here he takes occasion to warn them against many heinous evils, to which
they had been formerly addicted.

I. He puts it to them as a plain truth, of which they could not be
ignorant, that such sinners should not inherit the kingdom of God. The
meanest among them must know thus much, that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of God ([Co1 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)),
shall not be owned as true members of his church on earth, nor admitted
as glorious members of the church in heaven. All unrighteousness is sin;
and all reigning sin, nay, every actual sin committed deliberately, and
not repented of, shuts out of the kingdom of heaven. He specifies
several sorts of sins: against the first and second commandments, as
idolaters; against the seventh, as adulterers, fornicators, effeminate,
and Sodomites; against the eighth, as thieves and extortioners, that by
force or fraud wrong their neighbours; against the ninth, as revilers;
and against the tenth, as covetous and drunkards, as those who are in a
fair way to break all the rest. Those who knew any thing of religion
must know that heaven could never be intended for these. The scum of the
earth are no ways fit to fill the heavenly mansions. Those who do the
devil's work can never receive God's wages, at least no other than
death, the just wages of sin, [Rom
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023).

II\. Yet he warns them against deceiving themselves: Be not deceived.
Those who cannot but know the fore-mentioned truth are but too apt not
to attend to it. Men are very much inclined to flatter themselves that
God is such a one as themselves, and that they may live in sin and yet
die in Christ, may lead the life of the devil's children and yet go to
heaven with the children of God. But this is all a gross cheat. Note, It
is very much the concern of mankind that they do not cheat themselves in
the matters of their souls. We cannot hope to sow to the flesh and yet
reap everlasting life.

III\. He puts them in mind what a change the gospel and grace of God had
made in them: Such were some of you ([Co1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)), such notorious sinners as he
had been reckoning up. The Greek word is tauta - such things were some
of you, very monsters rather than men. Note, Some that are eminently
good after their conversion have been as remarkably wicked before.
Quantum mutatus ab illo! How glorious a change does grace make! It
changes the vilest of men into saints and the children of God. Such were
some of you, but you are not what you were. You are washed, you are
sanctified, you are justified in the name of Christ, and by the Spirit
of our God. Note, The wickedness of men before conversion is no bar to
their regeneration and reconciliation to God. The blood of Christ, and
the washing of regeneration, can purge away all guilt and defilement.
Here is a rhetorical change of the natural order: You are sanctified,
you are justified. Sanctification is mentioned before justification: and
yet the name of Christ, by which we are justified, is placed before the
Spirit of God, by whom we are sanctified. Our justification is owing to
the merit of Christ; our sanctification to the operation of the Spirit:
but both go together. Note, None are cleansed from the guilt of sin, and
reconciled to God through Christ, but those who are also sanctified by
his Spirit. All who are made righteous in the sight of God are made holy
by the grace of God.

[1 Corinthians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 6:12</span></span>

The twelfth verse and former part of the thirteenth seem to relate to
that early dispute among Christians about the distinction of meats, and
yet to be prefatory to the caution that follows against fornication. The
connection seems plain enough if we attend to the famous determination
of the apostles, Acts 15, where the prohibition of certain foods was
joined with that of fornication. Now some among the Corinthians seem to
have imagined that they were as much at liberty in the point of
fornication as of meats, especially because it was not a sin condemned
by the laws of their country. They were ready to say, even in the case
of fornication, All things are lawful for me. This pernicious conceit
Paul here sets himself to oppose: he tells them that many things lawful
in themselves were not expedient at certain times, and under particular
circumstances; and Christians should not barely consider what is in
itself lawful to be done, but what is fit for them to do, considering
their profession, character, relations, and hopes: they should be very
careful that by carrying this maxim too far they be not brought into
bondage, either to a crafty deceiver or a carnal inclination. All things
are lawful for me, says he, but I will not be brought under the power of
any, [Co1 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012). Even in lawful things,
he would not be subject to the impositions of a usurped authority: so
far was he from apprehending that in the things of God it was lawful for
any power on earth to impose its own sentiments. Note, There is a
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, in which we must stand fast.
But surely he would never carry this liberty so far as to put himself
into the power of any bodily appetite. Though all meats were supposed
lawful, he would not become a glutton nor a drunkard. And much less
would he abuse the maxim of lawful liberty to countenance the sin of
fornication, which, though it might be allowed by the Corinthian laws,
was a trespass upon the law of nature, and utterly unbecoming a
Christian. He would not abuse this maxim about eating and drinking to
encourage any intemperance, nor indulge a carnal appetite: "Though meats
are for the belly and the belly for meats ([Co1
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)), though the belly was made to
receive food, and food was originally ordained to fill the belly, yet if
it be not convenient for me, and much more if it be inconvenient, and
likely to enslave me, if I am in danger of being subjected to my belly
and appetite, I will abstain. But God shall destroy both it and them, at
least as to their mutual relation. There is a time coming when the human
body will need no further recruits of food." Some of the ancients
suppose that this is to be understood of abolishing the belly as well as
the food; and that though the same body will be raised at the great day,
yet not with all the same members, some being utterly unnecessary in a
future state, as the belly for instance, when the man is never to
hunger, nor thirst, nor eat, nor drink more. But, whether this be true
or no, there is a time coming when the need and use of food shall be
abolished. Note, The expectation we have of being without bodily
appetites in a future life is a very good argument against being under
their power in the present life. This seems to me the sense of the
apostle's argument; and that this passage is plainly to be connected
with his caution against fornication, though some make it a part of the
former argument against litigious law-suits, especially before heathen
magistrates and the enemies of true religion. These suppose that the
apostle argues that though it may be lawful to claim our rights yet it
is not always expedient, and it is utterly unfit for Christians to put
themselves into the power of infidel judges, lawyers, and solicitors, on
these accounts. But this connection seems not so natural. The transition
to his arguments against fornication, as I have laid it, seems very
natural: But the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the
Lord for the body, [Co1 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013). Meats
and the belly are for one another; not so fornication and the body.

I. The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord. This is the first
argument he uses against this sin, for which the heathen inhabitants of
Corinth were infamous, and the converts to Christianity retained too
favourable an opinion of it. It is making things to cross their
intention and use. The body is not for fornication; it was never formed
for any such purpose, but for the Lord, for the service and honour of
God. It is to be an instrument of righteousness to holiness ([Rom
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)), and therefore is never to be
made an instrument of uncleanness. It is to be a member of Christ, and
therefore must not be made the member of a harlot, [Co1
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015). And the Lord is for the body,
that is, as some think, Christ is to be Lord of the body, to have
property in it and dominion over it, having assumed a body and been made
to partake of our nature, that he might be head of his church, and head
over all things, [Heb 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005), [Heb
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#018). Note, We must take care that we
do not use what belongs to Christ as if it were our own, and much less
to his dishonour.

II\. Some understand this last passage, The Lord is for the body, thus:
He is for its resurrection and glorification, according to what follows,
[Co1 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#014), which is a second argument
against this sin, the honour intended to be put on our bodies: God hath
both raised up our Lord, and will raise us up by his power ([Co1
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#014)), by the power of him who shall
change our vile body, and make it like to his glorious body by that
power whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, [Phi
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021). It is an honour done to the body
that Jesus Christ was raised from the dead: and it will be an honour to
our bodies that they will be raised. Let us not abuse those bodies by
sin, and make them vile, which, if they be kept pure, shall,
notwithstanding their present vileness, be made like to Christ's
glorious body. Note, The hopes of a resurrection to glory should
restrain Christians from dishonouring their bodies by fleshly lusts.

III\. A third argument is the honour already put on them: Know you not
that your bodies are the members of Christ? [Co1
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015). If the soul be united to Christ
by faith, the whole man is become a member of his mystical body. The
body is in union with Christ as well as the soul. How honourable is this
to the Christian! His very flesh is a part of the mystical body of
Christ. Note, It is good to know in what honourable relations we stand,
that we may endeavour to become them. But now, says the apostle, shall I
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of a harlot? God
forbid. Or, take away the members of Christ? Would not this be a gross
abuse, and the most notorious injury? Would it not be dishonouring
Christ, and dishonouring ourselves to the very last degree? What, make a
Christ's members the members of a harlot, prostitute them to so vile a
purpose! The thought is to be abhorred. God forbid. Know you not that he
who is joined to a harlot is one body with hers? For two, says he, shall
be one flesh. But he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit, [Co1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#016), [Co1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#017). Nothing can stand in greater
opposition to the honourable relations and alliances of a Christian man
than this sin. He is joined to the Lord in union with Christ, and made
partaker by faith of his Spirit. One spirit lives and breathes and moves
in the head and members. Christ and his faithful disciples are one, [Joh
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021), [Joh
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#022). But he that is joined to a
harlot is one body, for two shall be one flesh, by carnal conjunction,
which was ordained of God only to be in a married state. Now shall one
in so close a union with Christ as to be one spirit with him yet be so
united to a harlot as to become one flesh with her? Were not this a vile
attempt to make a union between Christ and harlots? And can a greater
indignity he offered to him or ourselves? Can any thing be more
inconsistent with our profession or relation? Note, The sin of
fornication is a great injury in a Christian to his head and lord, and a
great reproach and blot on his profession. It is no wonder therefore
that the apostle should say, "Flee fornication ([Co1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#018)), avoid it, keep out of the reach
of temptations to it, of provoking objects. Direct the eyes and mind to
other things and thoughts." Alia vitia pugnando, sola libido fugiendo
vincitur - Other vices may be conquered in fight, this only by flight;
so speak many of the fathers.

IV\. A fourth argument is that it is a sin against our own bodies. Every
sin that a man does is without the body; he that committeth fornication
sinneth against his own body ([Co1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#018)); every sin, that is, every other
sin, every external act of sin besides, is without the body. It is not
so much an abuse of the body as of somewhat else, as of wine by the
drunkard, food by the glutton, etc. Nor does it give the power of the
body to another person. Nor does it so much tend to the reproach of the
body and render it vile. This sin is in a peculiar manner styled
uncleanness, pollution, because no sin has so much external turpitude in
it, especially in a Christian. He sins against his own body; he defiles
it, he degrades it, making it one with the body of that vile creature
with whom he sins. He casts vile reproach on what he Redeemer has
dignifies to the last degree by taking it into union with himself. Note,
We should not make our present vile bodies more vile by sinning against
them.

V. The fifth argument against this sin is that the bodies of Christians
are the temples of the Holy Ghost which is in them, and which they have
of God, [Co1 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019). He that is joined
to Christ is one spirit. He is yielded up to him, is consecrated
thereby, and set apart for his use, and is hereupon possessed, and
occupied, and inhabited, by his Holy Spirit. This is the proper notion
of a temple - a place where God dwells, and sacred to his use, by his
own claim and his creature's surrender. Such temples real Christians are
of the Holy Ghost. Must he not therefore be God? But the inference is
plain that hence we are not our own. We are yielded up to God, and
possessed by and for God; nay, and this is virtue of a purchase made of
us: You are bought with a price. In short, our bodies were made for God,
they were purchased for him. If we are Christians indeed they are
yielded to him, and he inhabits and occupies them by his Spirit: so that
our bodies are not our own, but his. And shall we desecrate his temple,
defile it, prostitute it, and offer it up to the use and service of a
harlot? Horrid sacrilege! This is robbing God in the worst sense. Note,
The temple of the Holy Ghost must be kept holy. Our bodies must be kept
as his whose they are, and fit for his use and residence.

VI\. The apostle argues from the obligation we are under to glorify God
both with our body and spirit, which are his, [Co1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020). He made both, he bought both,
and therefore both belong to him and should be used and employed for
him, and therefore should not be defiled, alienated from him, and
prostituted by us. No, they must be kept as vessels fitted for our
Master's use. We must look upon our whole selves as holy to the Lord,
and must use our bodies as property which belongs to him and is sacred
to his use and service. We are to honour him with our bodies and
spirits, which are his; and therefore, surely, must abstain from
fornication; and not only from the outward act, but from the adultery of
the heart, as our Lord calls it, [Mat
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028). Body and spirit are to be kept
clean, that God may be honoured by both. But God is dishonoured when
either is defiled by so beastly a sin. Therefore flee fornication, nay,
and every sin. Use your bodies for the glory and service of their Lord
and Maker. Note, We are not proprietors of ourselves, nor have power
over ourselves, and therefore should not use ourselves according to our
own pleasure, but according to his will, and for his glory, whose we
are, and whom we should serve, [Act
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#023).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 7](co1007)

</div>
