<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1008)  [Next](co1010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 9:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle seems to answer some cavils against himself.
I. He asserts his apostolical mission and authority, and gives in his
success among them as a testimony to it ([Co1
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001), [Co1
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)). II. He claims a right to subsist
by his ministry, and defends it by several arguments from natural reason
and the Mosaical law, and asserts it also to be a constitution of Christ
([Co1 9:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#003)). III. He shows that he
had willingly waived this privilege and power for their benefit ([Co1
9:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015)). IV. He specifies several
other things, in which he had denied himself for the sake of other men's
spiritual interest and salvation ([Co1
9:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019)). And, V. Concludes his
argument by showing what animated him to this course, even the prospect
of an incorruptible crown ([Co1 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)
to the end.)

[1 Corinthians 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 9:1</span></span>

Blessed Paul, in the work of his ministry, not only met with opposition
from those without, but discouragement from those within. He was under
reproach; false brethren questioned his apostleship, and were very
industrious to lessen his character and sink his reputation;
particularly here at Corinth, a place to which he had been instrumental
in doing much good, and from which he had deserved well; and yet there
were those among them who upon these heads created him great uneasiness.
Note, It is no strange nor new thing for a minister to meet with very
unkind returns for great good-will to a people, and diligent and
successful services among them. Some among the Corinthians questioned,
if they did not disown, his apostolical character. To their cavils he
here answers, and in such a manner as to set forth himself as a
remarkable example of that self-denial, for the good of others, which he
had been recommending in the former chapter. And, 1. He asserts his
apostolical mission and character: Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen
Jesus Christ our Lord? To be a witness of his resurrection was one great
branch of the apostolical charge. "Now," says Paul, "have not I seen the
Lord, though not immediately after his resurrection, yet since his
ascent?" See [Co1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008). "Am I not free?
Have I not the same commission, and charge, and powers, with the other
apostles? What respect, or honour, or subsistence, can they challenge,
which I am not at liberty to demand as well as they?" It was not because
he had no right to live of the gospel that he maintained himself with
his own hands, but for other reasons. 2. He offers the success of his
ministry among them, and the good he had done to them, as a proof of his
apostleship: "Are not you my work in the Lord? Through the blessing of
Christ on my labours, have not I raised a church among you? The seal of
my apostleship are you in the Lord. Your conversion by my means is a
confirmation from God of my mission." Note, The ministers of Christ
should not think it strange to be put upon the proof of their ministry
by some who have had experimental evidence of the power of it and the
presence of God with it. 3. He justly upbraids the Corinthians with
their disrespect: "Doubtless, if I am not an apostle to others, I am so
to you, [Co1 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002). I have laboured so
long, and with so much success, among you, that you, above all others,
should own and honour my character, and not call it in question." Note,
It is no new thing for faithful ministers to meet with the worst
treatment where they might expect the best. This church at Corinth had
as much reason to believe, and as little reason to question, his
apostolical mission, as any; they had as much reason, perhaps more than
any church, to pay him respect. He had been instrumental in bringing
them to the knowledge and faith of Christ; he laboured long among them,
nearly two years, and he laboured to good purpose, God having much
people among them. See [Act 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010),
[Act 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011). It was aggravated
ingratitude for this people to call in question his authority.

[1 Corinthians 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 9:3</span></span>

Having asserted his apostolical authority, he proceeds to claim the
rights belonging to his office, especially that of being maintained by
it.

I. These he states, [Co1 9:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#003). "My
answer to those that do examine me (that is, enquire into my authority,
or the reasons of my conduct, if I am an apostle) is this: Have we not
power to eat and drink ([Co1 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#004)), or
a right to maintenance? Have we not power to lead about a sister, a
wife, as well as other apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, and
Cephas; and, not only to be maintained ourselves, but have them
maintained also?" Though Paul was at that time single, he had a right to
take a wife when he pleased, and to lead her about with him, and expect
a maintenance for her, as well as himself, from the churches. Perhaps
Barnabas had a wife, as the other apostles certainly had, and led them
about with them. For that a wife is here to be understood by the sister
- woman - adelphēn gunaika, is plain from this, that it would have been
utterly unfit for the apostles to have carried about women with them
unless they were wives. The word implies that they had power over them,
and could require their attendance on them, which none could have over
any but wives or servants. Now the apostles, who worked for their bread,
do not seem to have been in a capacity to buy or have servants to carry
with them. Not to observe that it would have raised suspicion to have
carried about even women-servants, and much more other women to whom
they were not married, for which the apostles would never give any
occasion. The apostle therefore plainly asserts he had a right to marry
as well as other apostles, and claim a maintenance for his wife, nay,
and his children too, if he had any, from the churches, without
labouring with his own hands to procure it. Or I only and Barnabas, have
not we power to for bear working? [Co1
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#006). In short, the apostle here claims
a maintenance from the churches, both for him and his. This was due from
them, and what he might claim.

II\. He proceeds, by several arguments, to prove his claim. 1. From the
common practice and expectations of mankind. Those who addict and give
themselves up to any way of business in the world expect to live out of
it. Soldiers expect to be paid for their service. Husbandmen and
shepherds expect to get a livelihood out of their labours. If they plant
vineyards, and dress and cultivate them, it is with expectation of
fruit; if they feed a flock, it is with the expectation of being fed and
clothed by it! Who goeth a warfare at any time at his own charge? Who
planteth a vineyard, and eateth not the fruit thereof? Who feedeth a
flock, and eateth not the milk thereof? [Co1
9:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007). Note, It is very natural, and
very reasonable, for ministers to expect a livelihood out of their
labours. 2. He argues it out of the Jewish law: Say I these things as a
man? Or saith not the law the same also? [Co1
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#008). Is this merely a dictate of
common reason and according to common usage only? No, it is also
consonant to the old law. God had therein ordered that the ox should not
be muzzled while he was treading out the corn, nor hindered from eating
while he was preparing the corn for man's use, and treading it out of
the ear. But this law was not chiefly given out of God's regard to oxen,
or concern for them, but to teach mankind that all due encouragement
should be given to those who are employed by us, or labouring for our
good - that the labourers should taste of the fruit of their labours.
Those who plough should plough in hope; and those who thresh in hope
should be partakers of their hope, [Co1
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010). The law saith this about oxen
for our sakes. Note, Those that lay themselves out to do our souls good
should not have their mouths muzzled, but have food provided for them.
3. He argues from common equity: If we have sown unto you spiritual
things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? What
they had sown was much better than they expected to reap. They had
taught them the way to eternal life, and laboured heartily to put them
in possession of it. It was no great matter, surely, while they were
giving themselves up to this work, to expect a support of their own
temporal life. They had been instruments of conveying to them the
greater spiritual blessings; and had they no claim to as great a share
in their carnal things as was necessary to subsist them? Note, Those who
enjoy spiritual benefits by the ministry of the word should not grudge a
maintenance to such as are employed in this work. If they have received
a real benefit, one would think they could not grudge them this. What,
get so much good by them, and yet grudge to do so little good to them!
Is this grateful or equitable? 4. He argues from the maintenance they
afforded others: "If others are partakers of this power over you, are
not we rather? You allow others this maintenance, and confess their
claim just; but who has so just a claim as I from the church of Corinth?
Who has given greater evidence of the apostolic mission? Who had
laboured so much for your good, or done like service among you?" Note,
Ministers should be valued and provided for according to their worth.
"Nevertheless," says the apostle, "we have not used this power; but
suffer all things, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ. We have
not insisted on our right, but have rather been in straits to serve the
interests of the gospel, and promote the salvation of souls." He
renounced his right, rather than by claiming it he would hinder his
success. He denied himself, for fear of giving offence; but asserted his
right lest his self-denial should prove prejudicial to the ministry.
Note, He is likely to plead most effectually for the rights of others
who shows a generous disregard to his own. It is plain, in this case,
that justice, and not self-love, is the principle by which he is
actuated. 5. He argues from the old Jewish establishment: "Do you not
know that those who minister about holy things live of the things of the
temple, and those who wait at the altar are partakers with the altar?
[Co1 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#013). And, if the Jewish
priesthood was maintained out of the holy things that were then offered,
shall not Christ's ministers have a maintenance out of their ministry?
Is there not as much reason that we should be maintained as they?" He
asserts it to be the institution of Christ: "Even so hath the Lord
ordained that those who preach the gospel should live of the gospel
([Co1 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014)), should have a right to a
maintenance, though not bound to demand it, and insist upon it." It is
the people's duty to maintain their minister, by Christ's appointment,
though it be not a duty bound on every minister to call for or accept
it. He may waive his right, as Paul did, without being a sinner; but
those transgress an appointment of Christ who deny or withhold it. Those
who preach the gospel have a right to live by it; and those who attend
on their ministry, and yet take no thought about their subsistence, fail
very much in their duty to Christ, and respect owing to them.

[1 Corinthians 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 9:15</span></span>

Here he tells them that he had, notwithstanding, waived his privilege,
and lays down his reason for doing it.

I. He tells them that he had neglected to claim his right in times past:
I have used none of these things, [Co1
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015). He neither ate nor drank himself
at their cost, nor led about a wife to be maintained by them, nor
forbore working to maintain himself. From others he received a
maintenance, but not from them, for some special reasons. Nor did he
write this to make his claim now. Though he here asserts his right, yet
he does not claim his due; but denies himself for their sakes, and the
gospel.

II\. We have the reason assigned of his exercising this self-denial. He
would not have his glorying made void: It were better for his to die
than that any man should make his glorying void, [Co1
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015). This glorying did imply nothing
in it of boasting, or self-conceit, or catching at applause, but a high
degree of satisfaction and comfort. It was a singular pleasure to him to
preach the gospel without making it burdensome; and he was resolved that
among them he would not lose this satisfaction. His advantages for
promoting the gospel were his glory, and he valued them above his
rights, or his very life: Better were it for him to die than to have his
glorying made void, than to have it justly said that he preferred his
wages to his work. No, he was ready to deny himself for the sake of the
gospel. Note, It is the glory of a minister to prefer the success of his
ministry to his interest, and deny himself, that he may serve Christ,
and save souls. Not that in so doing he does more than he ought; he is
still acting within the bounds of the law of charity. But he acts upon
truly noble principles, he brings much honour to God in so doing; and
those that honour him he will honour. It is what God will approve and
commend, what a man may value himself for and take comfort in, though he
cannot make a merit of it before God.

III\. He shows that this self-denial was more honourable in itself, and
yielded him much more content and comfort, than his preaching did:
"Though I preach the gospel, I have nothing whereof to glory; for
necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the
gospel, [Co1 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016). It is my charge, my
business; it is the work for which I am constituted an apostle, [Co1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017). This is a duty expressly bound
upon me. It is not in any degree a matter of liberty. Necessity is upon
me. I am false and unfaithful to my trust, I break a plain and express
command, and woe be to me, if I do not preach the gospel." Those who are
set apart to the office of the ministry have it in charge to preach the
gospel. Woe be to them if they do not. From this none is excepted. But
it is not given in charge to all, nor any preacher of the gospel, to do
his work gratis, to preach and have no maintenance out of it. It is not
said, "Woe be to him if he do not preach the gospel, and yet maintain
himself." In this point he is more at liberty. It may be his duty to
preach at some seasons, and under some circumstances, without receiving
a maintenance for it; but he has, in the general, a right to it, and may
expect it from those among whom he labours. When he renounces this right
for the sake of the gospel and the souls of men, though he does not
supererogate, yet he denies himself, waives his privilege and right; he
does more than his charge and office in general, and at all times,
obliges him to. Woe be to him if he do not preach the gospel; but it may
sometimes be his duty to insist on his maintenance for so doing, and
whenever he forbears to claim it he parts with his right, though a man
may sometimes be bound to do so by the general duties of love to God and
charity to men. Note, It is a high attainment in religion to renounce
our own rights for the good of others; this will entitle to a peculiar
reward from God. For,

IV\. The apostle here informs us that doing our duty with a willing mind
will meet with a gracious recompence from God: If I do this thing, that
is, either preach the gospel or take no maintenance, willingly, I have a
reward. Indeed, it is willing service only that is capable of reward
from God. It is not the bare doing of any duty, but the doing of it
heartily (that is, willingly and cheerfully) that God has promised to
reward. Leave the heart out of our duties, and God abhors them: they are
but the carcasses, without the life and spirit, of religion. Those must
preach willingly who would be accepted of God in this duty. They must
make their business a pleasure, and not esteem it a drudgery. And those
who, out of regard to the honour of God or good of souls, give up their
claim to a maintenance, should do this duty willingly, if they would be
accepted in it or rewarded for it. But whether the duty of the office be
done willingly or with reluctance, whether the heart be in it or averse
from it, all in office have a trust and charge from God, for which they
must be accountable. Ministers have a dispensation of the gospel, or
stewardship - oikonomia ([Luk 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#002)),
committed to them. Note, Christ's willing servants shall not fail of a
recompence, and that proportioned to their fidelity, zeal, and
diligence; and his slothful and unwilling servants shall all be called
to an account. Taking his name, and professing to do his business, will
make men accountable at his bar. And how sad an account have slothful
servants to give!

V. The apostle sums up the argument, by laying before them the
encouraging hope he had of a large recompence for his remarkable
self-denial: What is my reward then? [Co1
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#018). What is it I expect a recompence
from God for? That when I preach the gospel I may make it without
charge, that I abuse not my power in the gospel. Or, "not so to claim my
rights as to make them destroy the great intentions and ends of my
office, but renounce them for the sake of these." It is an abuse of
power to employ it against the very ends for which it is given. And the
apostle would never use his power, or privilege of being maintained by
his ministry, so as to frustrate the ends of it, but would willingly and
cheerfully deny himself for the honour of Christ and the interest of
souls. That ministers who follows his example may have cheerful
expectations of a full recompence.

[1 Corinthians 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 9:19</span></span>

The apostle takes occasion from what he had before discoursed to mention
some other instances of his self-denial and parting with his liberty for
the benefit of others.

I. He asserts his liberty ([Co1 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019)):
Though I be free from all men. He was free-born, a citizen of Rome. He
was in bondage to none, nor depended upon any for his subsistence; yet
he made himself a servant to all, that he might gain the more. He
behaved as a servant; he laboured for their good as a servant; he was
careful to please, as a servant to his master; he acted in many cases as
if he had no privileges; and this that he might gain the more, or make
the more converts to Christianity. He made himself a servant, that they
might be made free.

II\. He specifies some particulars wherein he made himself a servant to
all. He accommodated himself to all sorts of people. 1. To the Jews, and
those under the law, he became a Jew, and as under the law, to gain
them. Though he looked on the ceremonial law as a yoke taken off by
Christ, yet in many instances he submitted to it, that he might work
upon the Jews, remove their prejudices, prevail with them to hear the
gospel, and win them over to Christ. 2. To those that are without the
law as without law that is, to the Gentiles, whether converted to the
Christian faith or not. In innocent things he could comply with people's
usages or humours for their advantage. He would reason with the
philosophers in their own way. And, as to converted Gentiles, he behaved
among them as one that was not under the bondage of the Jewish laws, as
he had asserted and maintained concerning them, though he did not act as
a lawless person, but as one who was bound by the laws of Christ. He
would transgress no laws of Christ to please or humour any man; but he
would accommodate himself to all men, where he might do it lawfully, to
gain some. Paul was the apostle of the Gentiles, and so, one would have
thought, might have excused himself from complying with the Jews; and
yet, to do them good, and win them over to Christ, he did, in innocent
things, neglect the power he had to do otherwise, and conformed to some
of their usages and laws. And though he might, by virtue of that
character, have challenged authority over the Gentiles, yet he
accommodated himself, as much as he innocently might, to their
prejudices and ways of thinking. Doing good was the study and business
of his life; and, so that he might reach this end, he did not stand on
privileges and punctilios. 3. To the weak he became as weak, that he
might gain the weak, [Co1 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022). He was
willing to make the best of them. He did not despise nor judge them, but
became as one of them, forbore to use his liberty for their sake, and
was careful to lay no stumbling-block in their way. Where any, through
the weakness of their understanding, or the strength of their
prejudices, were likely to fall into sin, or fall off from the gospel
into heathen idolatry, through his use of his liberty, he refrained
himself. He denied himself for their sakes, that he might insinuate into
their affections, and gain their souls. In short, he became all things
to all men, that he might by all means (all lawful means) gain some. He
would not sin against God to save the soul of his neighbour, but he
would very cheerfully and readily deny himself. The rights of God he
could not give up, but he might resign his own, and he very often did so
for the good of others.

III\. He assigns his reason for acting in this manner ([Co1
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#023)): This I do for the gospel's
sake, and that I may be partaker thereof with you; that is, for the
honour of Christ, whose the gospel is, and for the salvation of souls,
for which it was designed, and that he and they might communicate in the
privileges of it, or partake together of them. For these ends did he
thus condescend, deny himself as to his liberty, and accommodate himself
to the capacities and usages of those with whom he had to do, where he
lawfully might. Note, A heart warmed with zeal for God, and breathing
after the salvation of men, will not plead and insist upon rights and
privileges in bar to this design. Those manifestly abuse their power in
the gospel who employ it not to edification but destruction, and
therefore breathe nothing of its spirit.

[1 Corinthians 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 9:24</span></span>

In these verses the apostle hints at the great encouragement he had to
act in this manner. He had a glorious prize, an incorruptible crown, in
view. Upon this head he compares himself to the racers and combatants in
the Isthmian games, an allusion well known to the Corinthians, because
they were celebrated in their neighbourhood: "Know you not that those
who run in a race run all, but one obtaineth the prize? [Co1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024). All run at your games, but only
one gets the race and wins the crown." And here,

I. He excites them to their duty: "So run that you may obtain. It is
quite otherwise in the Christian race than in your races; only one wins
the prize in them. You may all run so as to obtain. You have great
encouragement, therefore, to persist constantly, and diligently, and
vigorously, in your course. There is room for all to get the prize. You
cannot fail if you run well. Yet there should be a noble emulation; you
should endeavour to outdo one another. And it is a glorious contest who
shall get first to heaven, or have the best rewards in that blessed
world. I make it my endeavour to run; so do you, as you see me go before
you." Note, It is the duty of Christians to follow their ministers
closely in the chase of eternal glory, and the honour and duty of
ministers to lead them in the way.

II\. He directs them in their course, by setting more fully to view his
own example, still carrying on the allusion. 1. Those that ran in their
games were kept to a set diet: "Every man that strives for the mastery
is temperate in all things, [Co1 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#023).
The fighters and wrestlers in your exercises are kept to strict diet and
discipline; nay, they keep themselves to it. They do not indulge
themselves, but restrain themselves from the food they eat and so from
the liberties they use on other occasions. And should not Christians
much more abridge themselves of their liberty, for so glorious an end as
winning the race, and obtaining the prize set before them? They used a
very spare diet, and course food, and denied themselves much, to prepare
for their race and combat; so do I; so should you, after my example. It
is hard if, for the heavenly crown, you cannot abstain from heathen
sacrifices." 2. They were not only temperate, but inured themselves to
hardships. Those who fought with one another in these exercises prepared
themselves by beating the air, as the apostle calls it, or by throwing
out their arms, and thereby inuring themselves, beforehand, to deal
about their blows in close combat, or brandish them by way of flourish.
There is no room for any such exercise in the Christian warfare.
Christians are ever in close combat. There enemies make fierce and
hearty opposition, and are ever at hand; and for this reason they must
lay about them in earnest, and never drop the contest, nor flag and
faint in it. They must fight, not as those that beat the air, but must
strive against their enemies with all their might. One enemy the apostle
here mentions, namely, the body; this must be kept under, beaten black
and blue, as the combatants were in these Grecian games, and thereby
brought into subjection. By the body we are to understand fleshly
appetites and inclinations. These the apostle set himself to curb and
conquer, and in this the Corinthians were bound to imitate him. Note,
Those who would aright pursue the interests of their souls must beat
down their bodies, and keep them under. They must combat hard with
fleshly lusts, and not indulge a wanton appetite, and long for
heathenish sacrifices, nor eat them, to please their flesh, at the
hazard of their brethren's souls. The body must be made to serve the
mind, not suffered to lord over it.

III\. The apostle presses this advice on the Corinthians by proper
arguments drawn from the same contenders. 1. They take pains, and
undergo all those hardships, to obtain a corruptible crown ([Co1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025)), but we an incorruptible. Those
who conquered in these games were crowned only with the withering leaves
or boughs of trees, of olive, bays, or laurel. But Christians have an
incorruptible crown in view, a crown of glory that never fadeth away, an
inheritance incorruptible, reserved in heaven for them. And would they
yet suffer themselves to be outdone by these racers or wrestlers? Can
they use abstinence in diet, exert themselves in racing, expose their
bodies to so much hardship in a combat, who have no more in view than
the trifling huzzas of a giddy multitude, or a crown of leaves? And
shall not Christians, who hope for the approbation of the sovereign
Judge, and a crown of glory from his hands, stretch forward in the
heavenly race, and exert themselves in beating down their fleshly
inclinations, and the strong-holds of sin? 2. The racers in these games
run at uncertainty. All run, but one receives the prize, [Co1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024). Every racer, therefore, is at a
great uncertainty whether he shall win it or no. But the Christian racer
is at no such uncertainty. Every one may run here so as to obtain; but
then he must run within the lines, he must keep to the path of duty
prescribed, which, some think, is the meaning of running not as
uncertainly, [Co1 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026). He who keeps
within the limits prescribed, and keeps on in his race, will never miss
his crown, though others may get theirs before him. And would the
Grecian racers keep within their bounds, and exert themselves to the
very last, when one only could win, and all must be uncertain which that
one would be? And shall not Christians be much more exact and vigorous
when all are sure of a crown when they come to the end of their race? 3.
He sets before himself and them the danger of yielding to fleshly
inclinations, and pampering the body and its lusts and appetites: I keep
my body under, lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I
myself should be a cast-away ([Co1
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)), rejected, disapproved,
adokimos, one to whom the brabeutēs - the judge or umpire of the race,
will not decree the crown. The allusion to the games runs through the
whole sentence. Note, A preacher of salvation may yet miss it. He may
show others the way to heaven, and never get thither himself. To prevent
this, Paul took so much pains in subduing and keeping under bodily
inclinations, lest by any means he himself, who had preached to others,
should yet miss the crown, be disapproved and rejected by his sovereign
Judge. A holy fear of himself was necessary to preserve the fidelity of
an apostle; and how much more necessary is it to our preservation? Note,
Holy fear of ourselves, and not presumptuous confidence, is the best
security against apostasy from God, and final rejection by him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 10](co1010)

</div>
