<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1014)  [Next](co1016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 15:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle treats of that great article of Christianity
- the resurrection of the dead. I. He establishes the certainty of our
Saviour's resurrection ([Co1 15:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)).
II. He, from this truth, sets himself to refute those who said, There is
no resurrection of the dead ([Co1
15:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)). III. From our Saviour's
resurrection he establishes the resurrection of the dead and confirms
the Corinthians in the belief of it by some other considerations ([Co1
15:20-34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)). IV. He answers an objection
against this truth, and takes occasion thence to show what a vast change
will be made in the bodies of believers at the resurrection (v. 35-50).
V. He informs us what a change will be made in those who shall be living
at the sound of the last trumpet, and the complete conquest the just
shall then obtain over death and the grave ([Co1
15:51-57](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)). And, VI. He sums up the
argument with a very serious exhortation to Christians, to be resolved
and diligent in their Lord's service, because they know they shall be so
gloriously rewarded by him ([Co1
15:58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058)).

[1 Corinthians 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 15:1</span></span>

It is the apostle's business in this chapter to assert and establish the
doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, which some of the Corinthians
flatly denied, [Co1 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012). Whether
they turned this doctrine into allegory, as did Hymeneus and Philetus,
by saying it was already past ([Ti2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017), [Ti2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018)), and several of the ancient
heretics, by making it mean no more than a changing of their course of
life; or whether they rejected it as absurd, upon principles of reason
and science; it seems they denied it in the proper sense. And they
disowned a future state of recompences, by denying the resurrection of
the dead. Now that heathens and infidels should deny this truth does not
seem so strange; but that Christians, who had their religion by
revelation, should deny a truth so plainly discovered is surprising,
especially when it is a truth of such importance. It was time for the
apostle to confirm them in this truth, when the staggering of their
faith in this point was likely to shake their Christianity; and they
were yet in great danger of having their faith staggered. He begins with
an epitome or summary of the gospel, what he had preached among them,
namely, the death and resurrection of Christ. Upon this foundation the
doctrine of the resurrection of the dead is built. Note, Divine truths
appear with greatest evidence when they are looked upon in their mutual
connection. The foundation may be strengthened, that the superstructure
may be secured. Now concerning the gospel observe,

I. What a stress he lays upon it ([Co1
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001), [Co1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#002)): Moreover, brethren, I declare
unto you the gospel which I preached to you. 1. It was what he
constantly preached. His word was not yea and nay: he always preached
the same gospel, and taught the same truth. He could appeal to his
hearers for this. Truth is in its own nature invariable; and the
infallible teachers of divine truth could never be at variance with
themselves or one another. The doctrine which Paul had heretofore
taught, he still taught. 2. It was what they had received; they had been
convinced of the faith, believed it in their hearts, or at least made
profession of doing so with their mouths. It was no strange doctrine. It
was that very gospel in which, or by which, they had hitherto stood, and
must continue to stand. If they gave up this truth, they left themselves
no ground to stand upon, no footing in religion. Note, The doctrine of
Christ's death and resurrection is at the foundation of Christianity.
Remove this foundation, and the whole fabric falls, all our hopes for
eternity sink at once. And it is by holding this truth firmly that
Christians are made to stand in a day of trial, and kept faithful to
God. 3. It was that alone by which they could hope for salvation ([Co1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#002)), for there is no salvation in
any other name; no name given under heaven by which we may be saved, but
by the name of Christ. And there is no salvation in his name, but upon
supposition of his death and resurrection. These are the saving truths
of our holy religion. The crucifixion of our Redeemer and his conquest
over death are the very source of our spiritual life and hopes. Now
concerning these saving truths observe, (1.) They must be retained in
mind, they must be held fast (so the word is translated, [Heb
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#023)): Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith. Note, The saving truths of the gospel must be
fixed in our mind, revolved much in our thoughts, and maintained and
held fast to the end, if we would be saved. They will not save us, if we
do not attend to them, and yield to their power, and continue to do so
to the end. He only that endureth to the end shall be saved, [Mat
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022). (2.) We believe in vain, unless
we continue and persevere in the faith of the gospel. We shall be never
the better for a temporary faith; nay, we shall aggravate our guilt by
relapsing into infidelity. And in vain is it to profess Christianity, or
our faith in Christ, if we deny the resurrection; for this must imply
and involve the denial of his resurrection; and, take away this, you
make nothing of Christianity, you leave nothing for faith or hope to fix
upon.

II\. Observe what this gospel is, on which the apostle lays such stress.
It was that doctrine which he had received, and delivered to them, en
prōtois - among the first, the principal. It was a doctrine of the first
rank, a most necessary truth, That Christ died for our sins, and was
buried, and rose again: or, in other words, that he was delivered for
our offences and rose again for our justification ([Rom
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)), that he was offered in
sacrifice for our sins, and rose again, to show that he had procured
forgiveness for them, and was accepted of God in this offering. Note,
Christ's death and resurrection are the very sum and substance of
evangelical truth. Hence we derive our spiritual life now, and here we
must found our hopes of everlasting life hereafter.

III\. Observe how this truth is confirmed,

1\. By Old Testament predictions. He died for our sins, according to the
scriptures; he was buried, and rose from the dead, according to the
scriptures, according to the scripture-prophecies, and scripture-types.
Such prophecies as [Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010); [Isa
53:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004); [Dan
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026), [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027); [Hos
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002). Such scripture-types as Jonah
([Mat 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#004)), as Isaac, who is
expressly said by the apostle to have been received from the dead in a
figure, [Heb 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019). Note, It is a
great confirmation of our faith of the gospel to see how it corresponds
with ancient types and prophecies.

2\. By the testimony of many eye-witnesses, who saw Christ after he had
risen from the dead. He reckons up five several appearances, beside that
to himself. He was seen of Cephas, or Peter, then of the twelve, called
so, though Judas was no longer among them, because this was their usual
number; then he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once, many of
whom were living when the apostle wrote this epistle, though some had
fallen asleep. This was in Galilee, [Mat
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#010). After that, he was seen of
James singly, and then by all the apostles when he was taken up into
heaven. This was on mount Olivet, [Luk
24:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050). Compare [Act
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#002), [Act
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#005). Note, How uncontrollably
evident was Christ's resurrection from the dead, when so many eyes saw
him at so many different times alive, and when he indulged the weakness
of one disciple so far as to let him handle him, to put his resurrection
out of doubt! And what reason have we to believe those who were so
steady in maintaining this truth, though they hazarded all that was dear
to them in this world, by endeavouring to assert and propagate it! Even
Paul himself was last of all favoured with the sight of him. It was one
of the peculiar offices of an apostle to be a witness of our Saviour's
resurrection ([Luk 24:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#048)); and, when
Paul was called to the apostolical office, he was made an evidence of
this sort; the Lord Jesus appeared to him by the way to Damascus, [Act
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017). Having mentioned this favour,
Paul takes occasion from it to make a humble digression concerning
himself. He was highly favoured of God, but he always endeavoured to
keep up a mean opinion of himself, and to express it. So he does here,
by observing, (1.) That he was one born out of due time ([Co1
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008)), an abortive, ektrōma, a child
dead born, and out of time. Paul resembled such a birth, in the
suddenness of his new birth, in that he was not matured for the
apostolic function, as the others were, who had personal converse with
our Lord. He was called to the office when such conversation was not to
be had, he was out of time for it. He had not known nor followed the
Lord, nor been formed in his family, as the others were, for this high
and honourable function. This was in Paul's account a very humbling
circumstance. (2.) By owning himself inferior to the other apostles: Not
meet to be called an apostle. The least, because the last of them;
called latest to the office, and not worthy to be called an apostle, to
have either the office or the title, because he had been a persecutor of
the church of God, [Co1 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009). Indeed,
he tells us elsewhere that he was not a whit behind the very chief
apostles ([Co2 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#005)) - for gifts,
graces, service, and sufferings, inferior to none of them. Yet some
circumstances in his case made him think more meanly of himself than of
any of them. Note, A humble spirit, in the midst of high attainments, is
a great ornament to any man; it sets his good qualities off to much
greater advantage. What kept Paul low in an especial manner was the
remembrance of his former wickedness, his raging and destructive zeal
against Christ and him members. Note, How easily God can bring a good
out of the greatest evil! When sinners are by divine grace turned into
saints, he makes the remembrance of their former sins very serviceable,
to make them humble, and diligent, and faithful. (3.) By ascribing all
that was valuable in him to divine grace: But by the grace of God I am
what I am, [Co1 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010). It is God's
prerogative to say, I am that I am; it is our privilege to be able to
say, "By God's grace we are what we are." We are nothing but what God
makes us, nothing in religion but what his grace makes us. All that is
good in us is a stream from this fountain. Paul was sensible of this,
and kept humble and thankful by this conviction; so should we. Nay,
though he was conscious of his own diligence, and zeal, and service, so
that he could say of himself, the grace of God was not given him in
vain, but he laboured more abundantly than they all: he thought himself
so much more the debtor to divine grace. Yet not I, but the grace of God
which was with me. Note, Those who have the grace of God bestowed on
them should take care that it be not in vain. They should cherish, and
exercise, and exert, this heavenly principle. So did Paul, and therefore
laboured with so much heart and so much success. And yet the more he
laboured, and the more good he did, the more humble he was in his
opinion of himself, and the more disposed to own and magnify the favour
of God towards him, his free and unmerited favour. Note, A humble spirit
will be very apt to own and magnify the grace of God. A humble spirit is
commonly a gracious one. Where pride is subdued there it is reasonable
to believe grace reigns.

After this digression, the apostle returns to his argument, and tells
them ([Co1 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#011)) that he not only
preached the same gospel himself at all times, and in all places, but
that all the apostles preached the same: Whether it were they or I, so
we preached, and so you believed. Whether Peter, or Paul, or any other
apostle, had converted them to Christianity, all maintained the same
truth, told the same story, preached the same doctrine, and confirmed it
by the same evidence. All agreed in this that Jesus Christ, and him
crucified and slain, and then rising from the dead, was the very sum and
substance of Christianity; and this all true Christians believe. All the
apostles agreed in this testimony; all Christians agree in the belief of
it. By this faith they live. In this faith they die.

[1 Corinthians 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 15:12</span></span>

Having confirmed the truth of our Saviour's resurrection, the apostle
goes on to refute those among the Corinthians who said there would be
none: If Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some
among you that there is no resurrection of the dead? [Co1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012). It seems from this passage, and
the course of the argument, there were some among the Corinthians who
thought the resurrection an impossibility. This was a common sentiment
among the heathens. But against this the apostle produces an
incontestable fact, namely, the resurrection of Christ; and he goes on
to argue against them from the absurdities that must follow from their
principle. As,

I. If there be (can be) no resurrection of the dead, then Christ has not
risen ([Co1 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013)); and again, "If the
dead rise not, cannot be raised or recovered to life, then is Christ not
raised, [Co1 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#016). And yet it was
foretold in ancient prophecies that he should rise; and it has been
proved by multitudes of eye-witnesses that he had risen. And will you
say, will any among you dare to say, that is not, cannot be, which God
long ago said should be, and which is now undoubted matter of fact?"

II\. It would follow hereupon that the preaching and faith of the gospel
would be vain: If Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and
your faith vain, [Co1 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#014). This
supposition admitted, would destroy the principal evidence of
Christianity; and so, 1. Make preaching vain. "We apostles should be
found false witnesses of God; we pretend to be God's witnesses for
truth, and to work miracles by his power in confirmation of it, and are
all the while deceivers, liars for God, if in his name, and by power
received from him, we go forth, and publish and assert a thing false in
fact, and impossible to be true. And does not this make us the vainest
men in the world, and our office and ministry the vainest and most
useless thing in the world? What end could we propose to ourselves in
undertaking this hard and hazardous service, if we knew our religion
stood on no better foundation, nay, if we were not well assured of the
contrary? What should we preach for? Would not our labour be wholly in
vain? We can have no very favourable expectations in this life; and we
could have none beyond it. If Christ be not raised, the gospel is a
jest; it is chaff and emptiness." 2. This supposition would make the
faith of Christians vain, as well as the labours of ministers: If Christ
be not raised, your faith is vain; you are yet in your sins ([Co1
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#017)), yet under the guilt and
condemnation of sin, because it is through his death and sacrifice for
sin alone that forgiveness is to be had. We have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins, [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007). No remission of sins is to be had
but through the shedding of his blood. And had his blood been shed, and
his life taken away, without ever being restored, what evidence could we
have had that through him we should have justification and eternal life?
Had he remained under the power of death, how could he have delivered us
from its power? And how vain a thing is faith in him, upon this
supposition! He must rise for our justification who was delivered for
our sins, or in vain we look for any such benefit by him. There had been
no justification nor salvation if Christ had not risen. And must not
faith in Christ be vain, and of no signification, if he be still among
the dead?

III\. Another absurdity following from this supposition is that those
who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. if there be no
resurrection, they cannot rise, and therefore are lost, even those who
have died in the Christian faith, and for it. It is plain from this that
those among the Corinthians who denied the resurrection meant thereby a
state of future retribution, and not merely the revival of the flesh;
they took death to be the destruction and extinction of the man, and not
merely of the bodily life; for otherwise the apostle could not infer the
utter loss of those who slept in Jesus, from the supposition that they
would never rise more or that they had no hopes in Christ after life;
for they might have hope of happiness for their minds if these survived
their bodies, and this would prevent the limiting of their hopes in
Christ to this life only. "Upon supposition there is no resurrection in
your sense, no after-state and life, then dead Christians are quite
lost. How vain a thing were our faith and religion upon this
supposition!" And this,

IV\. Would infer that Christ's ministers and servants were of all men
most miserable, as having hope in him in this life only ([Co1
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019)), which is another absurdity
that would follow from asserting no resurrection. Their condition who
hope in Christ would be worse than that of other men. Who hope in
Christ. Note, All who believe in Christ have hope in him; all who
believe in him as a Redeemer hope for redemption and salvation by him;
but if there be no resurrection, or state of future recompence (which
was intended by those who denied the resurrection at Corinth), their
hope in him must be limited to this life: and, if all their hopes in
Christ lie within the compass of this life, they are in a much worse
condition than the rest of mankind, especially at that time, and under
those circumstances, in which the apostles wrote; for then they had no
countenance nor protection from the rulers of the world, but were hated
and persecuted by all men. Preachers and private Christians therefore
had a hard lot if in this life only they had hope in Christ. Better be
any thing than a Christian upon these terms; for in this world they are
hated, and hunted, and abused, stripped of all worldly comforts and
exposed to all manner of sufferings: they fare much harder than other
men in this life, and yet have no further nor better hopes. And is it
not absurd for one who believes in Christ to admit a principle that
involves so absurd an inference? Can that man have faith in Christ who
can believe concerning him that he will leave his faithful servants,
whether ministers or others, in a worse state than his enemies? Note, It
were a gross absurdity in a Christian to admit the supposition of no
resurrection or future state. It would leave no hope beyond this world,
and would frequently make his condition the worst in the world. Indeed,
the Christian is by his religion crucified to this world, and taught to
live upon the hope of another. Carnal pleasures are insipid to him in a
great degree; and spiritual and heavenly pleasures are those which he
affects and pants after. How sad is his case indeed, if he must be dead
to worldly pleasures and yet never hope for any better!

[1 Corinthians 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 15:20</span></span>

In this passage the apostle establishes the truth of the resurrection of
the dead, the holy dead, the dead in Christ,

I. On the resurrection of Christ. 1. Because he is indeed the
first-fruits of those that slept, [Co1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020). He has truly risen himself, and
he has risen in this very quality and character, as the first-fruits of
those who sleep in him. As he has assuredly risen, so in his
resurrection there is as much an earnest given that the dead in him
shall rise as there was that the Jewish harvest in general should be
accepted and blessed by the offering and acceptance of the first-fruits.
The whole lump was made holy by the consecration of the first-fruits
([Rom 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)), and the whole body of
Christ, all that are by faith united to him, are by his resurrection
assured of their own. As he has risen, they shall rise; just as the lump
is holy because the first fruits are so. He has not risen merely for
himself, but as head of the body, the church; and those that sleep in
him God will bring with him, [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014). Note, Christ's resurrection is a
pledge and earnest of ours, if we are true believers in him; because he
has risen, we shall rise. We are a part of the consecrated lump, and
shall partake of the acceptance and favour vouchsafed the first-fruits.
This is the first argument used by the apostle in confirmation of the
truth; and it is, 2. Illustrated by a parallel between the first and
second Adam. For, since by man came death, it was every way proper that
by man should come deliverance from it, or, which is all one, a
resurrection, [Co1 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021). And so, as
in Adam all die, in Christ shall all be made alive; as through the sin
of the first Adam all men became mortal, because all derived from him
the same sinful nature, so through the merit and resurrection of Christ
shall all who are made to partake of the Spirit, and the spiritual
nature, revive, and become immortal. All who die die through the sin of
Adam; all who are raised, in the sense of the apostle, rise through the
merit and power of Christ. But the meaning is not that, as all men died
in Adam, so all men, without exception, shall be made alive in Christ;
for the scope of the apostle's argument restrains the general meaning.
Christ rose as the first-fruits; therefore those that are Christ's ([Co1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023)) shall rise too. Hence it will
not follow that all men without exception shall rise too; but it will
fitly follow that all who thus rise, rise in virtue of Christ's
resurrection, and so that their revival is owing to the man Christ
Jesus, as the mortality of all mankind was owing to the first man; and
so, as by man came death, by man came deliverance. Thus it seemed fit to
the divine wisdom that, as the first Adam ruined his posterity by sin,
the second Adam should raise his seed to a glorious immortality. 3.
Before he leaves the argument he states that there will be an order
observed in their resurrection. What that precisely will be we are
nowhere told, but in the general only here that there will be order
observed. Possibly those may rise first who have held the highest rank,
and done the most eminent service, or suffered the most grievous evils,
or cruel deaths, for Christ's sake. It is only here said that the
first-fruits are supposed to rise first, and afterwards all who are
Christ's, when he shall come again. Not that Christ's resurrection must
in fact go before the resurrection of any of his, but it must be laid as
the foundation: as it was not necessary that those who lived remote from
Jerusalem must go thither and offer the first-fruits before they could
account the lump holy, yet they must be set apart for this purpose, till
they could be offered, which might be done at any time from pentecost
till the feast of dedication. See Bishop Patrick on [Num
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#002). The offering of the first-fruits
was what made the lump holy; and the lump was made holy by this
offering, though it was not made before the harvest was gathered in, so
it were set apart for that end, and duly offered afterwards. So Christ's
resurrection must, in order of nature, precede that of his saints,
though some of these might rise in order of time before him. It is
because he has risen that they rise. Note, Those that are Christ's must
rise, because of their relation to him.

II\. He argues from the continuance of the mediatorial kingdom till all
Christ's enemies are destroyed, the last of which is death, [Co1
15:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024). He has risen, and, upon his
resurrection, was invested with sovereign empire, had all power in
heaven and earth put into his hands ([Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)), had a name given him above
every name, that every knee might bow to him, and every tongue confess
him Lord. [Phi 2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009). And the
administration of this kingdom must continue in his hands till all
opposing power, and rule, and authority, be put down ([Co1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)), till all enemies are put under
his feet ([Co1 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)), and till the
last enemy is destroyed, which is death, [Co1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026).

1\. This argument implies in it all these particulars: - (1.) That our
Saviour rose from the dead to have all power put into his hands, and
have and administer a kingdom, as Mediator: For this end he died, and
rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living,
[Rom 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009). (2.) That this mediatorial
kingdom is to have an end, at least as far as it is concerned in
bringing his people safely to glory, and subduing all his and their
enemies: Then cometh the end, [Co1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024). (3.) That it is not to have an
end till all opposing power be put down, and all enemies brought to his
feet, [Co1 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024), [Co1
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025). (4.) That, among other enemies,
death must be destroyed ([Co1 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026))
or abolished; its powers over its members must be disannulled. Thus far
the apostle is express; but he leaves us to make the inference that
therefore the saints must rise, else death and the grave would have
power over them, nor would our Saviour's kingly power prevail against
the last enemy of his people and annul its power. When saints shall live
again, and die no more, then, and not till then, will death be
abolished, which must be brought about before our Saviour's mediatorial
kingdom is delivered up, which yet must be in due time. The saints
therefore shall live again and die no more. This is the scope of the
argument; but,

2\. The apostle drops several hints in the course of it which it will be
proper to notice: as, (1.) That our Saviour, as man and mediator between
God and man, has a delegated royalty, a kingdom given: All things are
put under him, he excepted that did put all things under him, [Co1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027). As man, all his authority must
be delegated. And, though his mediation supposes his divine nature, yet
as Mediator he does not so explicitly sustain the character of God, but
a middle person between God and man, partaking of both natures, human
and divine, as he was to reconcile both parties, God and man, and
receiving commission and authority from God the Father to act in this
office. The Father appears, in this whole dispensation, in the majesty
and with the authority of God: the Son, made man, appears as the
minister of the Father, though he is God as well as the Father. Nor is
this passage to be understood of the eternal dominion over all his
creatures which belongs to him as God, but of a kingdom committed to him
as Mediator and God-man, and that chiefly after his resurrection, when,
having overcome, he sat down with his Father on his throne, [Rev
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021). Then was the prediction
verified, I have set my king upon my holy hill of Zion ([Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)), placed him on his throne. This
is meant by the phrase so frequent in the writings of the New Testament,
of sitting at the right hand of God ([Mar
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019); [Rom
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034); [Col
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001) etc.), on the right hand of power
([Mar 14:62](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#062); [Luk
22:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#069)), on the right hand of the
throne of God ([Heb 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002)), on the
right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, [Heb
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001). Sitting down in this seat is
taking upon him the exercise of his mediatorial power and royalty, which
was done upon his ascension into heaven, [Mar
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019). And it is spoken of in
scripture as a recompence made him for his deep humiliation and
self-abasement, in becoming man, and dying for man the accursed death of
the cross, [Phi 2:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006). Upon his
ascension, he was made head over all things to the church, had power
given him to govern and protect it against all its enemies, and in the
end destroy them and complete the salvation of all that believe in him.
This is not a power appertaining to Godhead as such; it is not original
and unlimited power, but power given and limited to special purposes.
And though he who has it is God, yet, inasmuch as he is somewhat else
besides God, and in this whole dispensation acts not as God, but as
Mediator, not as the offended Majesty, but as one interposing in favour
of his offending creatures, and this by virtue of his consent and
commission who acts and appears always in that character, he may
properly be said to have this power given him; he may reign as God, with
power unlimited, and yet may reign as Mediator, with a power delegated,
and limited to these particular purposes. (2.) That this delegated
royalty must at length be delivered up to the Father, from whom it was
received ([Co1 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)); for it is a
power received for particular ends and purposes, a power to govern and
protect his church till all the members of it be gathered in, and the
enemies of it for ever subdued and destroyed ([Co1
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025), [Co1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026)), and when these ends shall be
obtained the power and authority will not need to be continued. The
Redeemer must reign till his enemies be destroyed, and the salvation of
his church and people accomplished; and, when this end is attained, then
will he deliver up the power which he had only for this purpose, though
he may continue to reign over his glorified church and body in heaven;
and in this sense it may notwithstanding be said that he shall reign for
ever and ever ([Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)), that he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there
shall be no end ([Luk 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033)), that his
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014). See also [Mic
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007). (3.) The Redeemer shall certainly
reign till the last enemy of his people be destroyed, till death itself
be abolished, till his saints revive and recover perfect life, never to
be in fear and danger of dying any more. He shall have all power in
heaven and earth till then - he who loved us, and gave himself for us,
and washed us from our sins in his own blood - he who is so nearly
related to us, and so much concerned for us. What support should this be
to his saints in every hour of distress and temptation! He is alive who
was dead, and liveth for ever, and doth reign, and will continue to
reign, till the redemption of his people be completed, and the utter
ruin of their enemies effected. (4.) When this is done, and all things
are put under his feet, then shall the Son become subject to him that
put all things under him, that God may be all in all, [Co1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028). The meaning of this I take to
be that then the man Christ Jesus, who hath appeared in so much majesty
during the whole administration of his kingdom, shall appear upon giving
it up to be a subject of the Father. Things are in scripture many times
said to be when they are manifested and made to appear; and this
delivering up of the kingdom will make it manifest that he who appeared
in the majesty of the sovereign king was, during this administration, a
subject of God. The glorified humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
all the dignity and power conferred on it, was no more than a glorious
creature. This will appear when the kingdom shall be delivered up; and
it will appear to the divine glory, that God may be all in all, that the
accomplishment of our salvation may appear altogether divine, and God
alone may have the honour of it. Note, Though the human nature must be
employed in the work of our redemption, yet God was all in all in it. It
was the Lord's doing and should be marvellous in our eyes.

III\. He argues for the resurrection, from the case of those who were
baptized for the dead ([Co1 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#029)):
What shall those do who are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not
at all? Why are they baptized for the dead? What shall they do if the
dead rise not? What have they done? How vain a thing hath their baptism
been! Must they stand by it, or renounce it? why are they baptized for
huper the dead, if the dead rise not? tō nekrōn. But what is this
baptism for the dead? It is necessary to be known, that the apostle's
argument may be understood; whether it be only argumentum ad hominem, or
ad rem; that is, whether it conclude for the thing in dispute
universally, or only against the particular persons who were baptized
for the dead. But who shall interpret this very obscure passage, which,
though it consists of no more than three words, besides the articles,
has had more than three times three senses put on it by interpreters? It
is not agreed what is meant by baptism, whether it is to be taken in a
proper or figurative sense, and, if in a proper sense, whether it is to
be understood or Christian baptism properly so called, or some other
ablution. And as little is it agreed who are the dead, or in what sense
the preposition huper is to be taken. Some understand the dead of our
Saviour himself; vide Whitby in loc. Why are persons baptized in the
name of a dead Saviour, a Saviour who remains among the dead, if the
dead rise not? But it is, I believe, and instance perfectly singular for
hoi nekroi to mean no more than one dead person; it is a signification
which the words have nowhere else. And the hoi baptizomenoi (the
baptized) seem plainly to mean some particular persons, not Christians
in general, which yet must be the signification if the hoi nekroi (the
dead) be understood of our Saviour. Some understand the passage of the
martyrs: Why do they suffer martyrdom for their religion? This is
sometimes called the baptism of blood by ancients, and, by our Saviour
himself, baptism indefinitely, [Mat
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022); [Luk
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#050). But in what sense can those who
die martyrs for their religion be said to be baptized (that is, die
martyrs) for the dead? Some understand it of a custom that was observed,
as some of the ancients tell us, among many who professed the Christian
name in the first ages, of baptizing some in the name and stead of
catechumens dying without baptism. But this savoured of such
superstition that, if the custom had prevailed in the church so soon,
the apostle would hardly have mentioned it without signifying a dislike
of it. Some understand it of baptizing over the dead, which was a
custom, they tell us, that early obtained; and this to testify their
hope of the resurrection. This sense is pertinent to the apostle's
argument, but it appears not that any such practice was in use in the
apostle's time. Others understand it of those who have been baptized for
the sake, or on occasion, of the martyrs, that is, the constancy with
which they died for their religion. Some were doubtless converted to
Christianity by observing this: and it would have been a vain thing for
persons to have become Christians upon this motive, if the martyrs, by
losing their lives for religion, became utterly extinct, and were to
live no more. But the church at Corinth had not, in all probability,
suffered much persecution at this time, or seem many instances of
martyrdom among them, nor had many converts been made by the constancy
and firmness which the martyrs discovered. Not to observe that hoi
nekroi seems to be too general an expression to mean only the martyred
dead. It is as easy an explication of the phrase as any I have met with,
and as pertinent to the argument, to suppose the hoi nekroi to mean some
among the Corinthians, who had been taken off by the hand of God. We
read that many were sickly among them, and many slept ([Co1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030)), because of their disorderly
behaviour at the Lord's table. These executions might terrify some into
Christianity; as the miraculous earthquake did the jailer, [Act
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#029), [Act
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#030), etc. Persons baptized on such
an occasion might be properly said to be baptized for the dead, that is,
on their account. And the hoi baptizomenoi (the baptized) and the hoi
nekroi (the dead) answer to one another; and upon this supposition the
Corinthians could not mistake the apostle's meaning. "Now," says he,
"what shall they do, and why were they baptized, if the dead rise not?
You have a general persuasion that these men have done right, and acted
wisely, and as they ought, on this occasion; but why, if the dead rise
not, seeing they may perhaps hasten their death, by provoking a jealous
God, and have no hopes beyond it?" But whether this be the meaning, or
whatever else be, doubtless the apostle's argument was good and
intelligible to the Corinthians. And his next is as plain to us.

IV\. He argues from the absurdity of his own conduct and that of other
Christians upon this supposition,

1\. It would be a foolish thing for them to run so many hazards ([Co1
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#030)): "Why stand we in jeopardy
every hour? Why do we expose ourselves to continual peril - we
Christians, especially we apostles?" Every one knows that it was
dangerous being a Christian, and much more a preacher and an apostle, at
that time. "Now," says the apostle, "what fools are we to run these
hazards, if we have no better hopes beyond death, if when we die we die
wholly, and revive no more!" Note, Christianity were a foolish
profession if it proposed no hopes beyond this life, at least in such
hazardous times as attended the first profession of it; it required men
to risk all the blessings and comforts of this life, and to face and
endure all the evils of it, without any future prospects. And is this a
character of his religion fit for a Christian to endure? And must he not
fix this character on it if he give up his future hopes, and deny the
resurrection of the dead? This argument the apostle brings home to
himself: "I protest," says he, "by your rejoicing in Jesus Christ, by
all the comforts of Christianity, and all the peculiar succours and
supports of our holy faith, that I die daily," [Co1
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031). He was in continual danger of
death, and carried his life, as we say, in his hand. And why should he
thus expose himself, if he had no hopes after life? To live in daily
view and expectation of death, and yet have no prospect beyond it, must
be very heartless and uncomfortable, and his case, upon this account, a
very melancholy one. He had need be very well assured of the
resurrection of the dead, or he was guilty of extreme weakness, in
hazarding all that was dear to him in this world, and his life into the
bargain. He had encountered very great difficulties and fierce enemies;
he had fought with beasts at Ephesus ([Co1
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032)), and was in danger of being
pulled to pieces by an enraged multitude, stirred up by Demetrius and
the other craftsmen ([Act 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#024),
etc.), though some understand this literally of Paul's being exposed to
fight with wild beasts in the amphitheatre, at a Roman show in that
city. And Nicephorus tells a formal story to this purport, and of the
miraculous complaisance of the lions to him when they came near him. But
so remarkable a trial and circumstance of his life, methinks, would not
have been passed over by Luke, and much less by himself, when he gives
us so large and particular a detail of his sufferings, [Co2
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024), ad fin. When he mentioned that
he was five times scourged of the Jews, thrice beaten with rods, once
stoned, thrice shipwrecked, it is strange that he should not have said
that he was once exposed to fight with the beasts. I take it, therefore,
that this fighting with beasts is a figurative expression, that the
beasts intended were men of a fierce and ferine disposition, and that
this refers to the passage above cited. "Now," says he, "what advantage
have I from such contests, if the dead rise not? Why should I die daily,
expose myself daily to the danger of dying by violent hands, if the dead
rise not? And if post mortem nihil - if I am to perish by death, and
expect nothing after it, could any thing be more weak?" Was Paul so
senseless? Had he given the Corinthians any ground to entertain such a
thought of him? If he had not been well assured that death would have
been to his advantage, would he, in this stupid manner, have thrown away
his life? Could any thing but the sure hopes of a better life after
death have extinguished the love of life in him to this degree? "What
advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? What can I propose to myself?"
Note, It is very lawful and fit for a Christian to propose advantage to
himself by his fidelity to God. Thus did Paul. Thus did our blessed Lord
himself, [Heb 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002). And thus we are
bidden to do after his example, and have our fruit to holiness, that our
end may be everlasting life. This is the very end of our faith, even the
salvation of our souls ([Pe1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009)), not
only what it will issue in, but what we should aim at.

2\. It would be a much wiser thing to take the comforts of this life:
Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die ([Co1
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032)); let us turn epicures. Thus
this sentence means in the prophet, [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013). Let us even live like beasts,
if we must die like them. This would be a wiser course, if there were no
resurrection, no after-life or state, than to abandon all the pleasures
of life, and offer and expose ourselves to all the miseries of life, and
live in continual peril of perishing by savage rage and cruelty. This
passage also plainly implies, as I have hinted above, that those who
denied the resurrection among the Corinthians were perfect Sadducees, of
whose principles we have this account in the holy writings, that they
say, There is no resurrection, neither angel nor spirit ([Act
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#008)), that is, "Man is all body,
there is nothing in him to survive the body, nor will that, when once he
is dead, ever revive again." Such Sadducees were the men against whom
the apostle argued; otherwise his arguments had no force in them; for,
though the body should never revive, yet, as long as the mind survived
it, he might have much advantage from all the hazards he ran for
Christ's sake. Nay, it is certain that the mind is to be the principal
seat and subject of the heavenly glory and happiness. But, if there were
no hopes after death, would not every wise man prefer an easy
comfortable life before such a wretched one as the apostle led; nay, and
endeavour to enjoy the comforts of life as fast as possible, because the
continuance of it is short? Note, Nothing but the hopes of better things
hereafter can enable a man to forego all the comforts and pleasures
here, and embrace poverty, contempt, misery, and death. Thus did the
apostles and primitive Christians; but how wretched was their case, and
how foolish their conduct, if they deceived themselves, and abused the
world with vain and false hopes!

V. The apostle closes his argument with a caution, exhortation, and
reproof. 1. A caution against the dangerous conversation of bad men, men
of loose lives and principles: Be not deceived, says he; evil
communications corrupt good manners, [Co1
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033). Possibly, some of those who
said that there was no resurrection of the dead were men of loose lives,
and endeavoured to countenance their vicious practices by so corrupt a
principle; and had that speech often in their mouths Let us eat and
drink, for tomorrow we die. Now, the apostle grants that their talk was
to the purpose if there was no future state. But, having confuted their
principle, he now warns the Corinthians how dangerous such men's
conversation must prove. He tells them that they would probably be
corrupted by them, and fall in with their course of life, if they gave
into their evil principles. Note, Bad company and conversation are
likely to make bad men. Those who would keep their innocence must keep
good company. Error and vice are infectious: and, if we would avoid the
contagion, we must keep clear of those who have taken it. He that
walketh with wise men shall be wise; but a companion of fools shall be
destroyed, [Pro 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#020). 2. Here is an
exhortation to break off their sins, and rouse themselves, and lead a
more holy and righteous life ([Co1
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#034)): Awake to righteousness, or
awake righteously, eknēpsate dikaiōs, and sin not, or sin no more.
"Rouse yourselves, break off your sins by repentance: renounce and
forsake every evil way, correct whatever is amiss, and do not, by sloth
and stupidity, be led away into such conversation and principles as will
sap your Christian hopes, and corrupt your practice." The disbelief of a
future state destroys all virtue and piety. But the best improvement to
be made of the truth is to cease from sin, and set ourselves to the
business of religion, and that in good earnest. If there will be a
resurrection and a future life, we should live and act as those who
believe it, and should not give into such senseless and sottish notions
as will debauch our morals, and render us loose and sensual in our
lives. 3. Here is a reproof, and a sharp one, to some at least among
them: Some of you have not the knowledge of God; I speak this to your
shame. Note, It is a shame in Christians not to have the knowledge of
God. The Christian religion gives the best information that can be had
about God, his nature, and grace, and government. Those who profess this
religion reproach themselves, by remaining without the knowledge of God;
for it must be owing to their own sloth, and slight of God, that they
are ignorant of him. And is it not a horrid shame for a Christian to
slight God, and be so wretchedly ignorant in matters that so nearly and
highly concern him? Note, also, It must be ignorance of God that leads
men into the disbelief of a resurrection and future life. Those who know
God know that he will not abandon his faithful servants, nor leave them
exposed to such hardships and sufferings without any recompence or
reward. They know he is not unfaithful nor unkind, to forget their
labour and patience, their faithful services and cheerful sufferings, or
let their labour be in vain. But I am apt to think that the expression
has a much stronger meaning; that there were atheistical people among
them who hardly owned a God, or one who had any concern with or took
cognizance of human affairs. These were indeed a scandal and shame to
any Christian church. Note, Real atheism lies at the bottom of men's
disbelief of a future state. Those who own a God and a providence, and
observe how unequal the distributions of the present life are, and how
frequently the best men fare worst, can hardly doubt an after state,
where every thing will be set to rights.

[1 Corinthians 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">co1 15:35</span></span>

The apostle comes now to answer a plausible and principal objection
against the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, concerning which
observe the proposal of the objection: Some man will say, How are the
dead raised up? And with what body do they come? [Co1
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035). The objection is plainly
two-fold. How are they raised up? that is, "By what means? How can they
be raised? What power is equal to this effect?" It was an opinion that
prevailed much among the heathens, and the Sadducees seem to have been
in the same sentiment, that it was not within the compass of divine
power, mortales aeternitate donare, aut revocare defunctos - to make
mortal men immortal, or revive and restore the dead. Such sort of men
those seem to have been who among the Corinthians denied the
resurrection of the dead, and object here, "How are they raised? How
should they be raised? Is it not utterly impossible?" The other part of
the objection is about the quality of their bodies, who shall rise:
"With what body will they come? Will it be with the same body, with like
shape, and form, and stature, and members, and qualities, or various?"
The former objection is that of those who opposed the doctrine, the
latter the enquiry of curious doubters.

I. To the former the apostle replies by telling them this was to be
brought about by divine power, that very power which they had all
observed to do something very like it, year after year, in the death and
revival of the corn; and therefore it was an argument of great weakness
and stupidity to doubt whether the resurrection of the dead might not be
effected by the same power: Thou fool! that which thou sowest is not
quickened unless it die, [Co1 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036).
It must first corrupt, before it will quicken and spring up. It not only
sprouts after it is dead, but it must die that it may live. And why
should any be so foolish as to imagine that the man once dead cannot be
made to live again, by the same power which every year brings the dead
grain to life? This is the substance of the apostle's answer to the
first question. Note, It is a foolish thing to question the divine power
to raise the dead, when we see it every day quickening and reviving
things that are dead.

II\. But he is longer in replying to the second enquiry.

1\. He begins by observing that there is a change made in the grain that
is sown: It is not that body which shall be that is sown, but bare
grain, of wheat or barley, etc.; but God gives it such a body as he
will, and in such way as he will, only so as to distinguish the kinds
from each other. Every seed sown has its proper body, is constituted of
such materials, and figured in such a manner, as are proper to it,
proper to that kind. This is plainly in the divine power, though we no
more know how it is done than we know how a dead man is raised to life
again. It is certain the grain undergoes a great change, and it is
intimated in this passage that so will the dead, when they rise again,
and live again, in their bodies, after death.

2\. He proceeds hence to observe that there is a great deal of variety
among others bodies, as there is among plants: as, (1.) In bodies of
flesh: All flesh is not the same; that of men is of one kind, that of
beasts another, another that of fishes, and that of birds another, [Co1
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#039). There is a variety in all the
kinds, and somewhat peculiar in every kind, to distinguish it from the
other. (2.) In bodies celestial and terrestrial there is also a
difference; and what is for the glory of one is not for the other; for
the true glory of every being consists in its fitness for its rank and
state. Earthly bodies are not adapted to the heavenly regions, nor
heavenly bodies fitted to the condition of earthly beings. Nay, (3.)
There is a variety of glory among heavenly bodies themselves: There is
one glory of the sun, and another of the moon, and another of the stars;
for one star differs from another star in glory, [Co1
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041). All this is to intimate to us
that the bodies of the dead, when they rise, will be so far changed,
that they will be fitted for the heavenly regions, and that there will
be a variety of glories among the bodies of the dead, when they shall be
raised, as there is among the sun, and moon, and stars, nay among the
stars themselves. All this carries an intimation along with it that it
must be as easy to divine power to raise the dead, and recover their
mouldered bodies, as out of the same materials to form so many different
kinds of flesh and plants, and, for aught we know, celestial bodies as
well as terrestrial ones. The sun and stars may, for aught we know, be
composed of the same materials as the earth we tread on, though as much
refined and changed by the divine skill and power. And can he, out of
the same materials, form such various beings, and yet not be able to
raise the dead? Having thus prepared the way, he comes,

3\. To speak directly to the point: So also, says he, is the
resurrection of the dead; so (as the plant growing out of the putrefied
grain), so as no longer to be a terrestrial but a celestial body, and
varying in glory from the other dead, who are raised, as one star does
from another. But he specifies some particulars: as, (1.) It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption. It is sown. Burying the dead
is like sowing them; it is like committing the seed to the earth, that
it may spring out of it again. And our bodies, which are sown, are
corruptible, liable to putrefy and moulder, and crumble to dust; but,
when we rise, they will be out of the power of the grave, and never more
be liable to corruption. (2.) It is sown in dishonour, it is raised in
glory. Ours is at present a vile body, [Phi
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021). Nothing is more loathsome than a
dead body; it is thrown into the grave as a despised and broken vessel,
in which there is no pleasure. But at the resurrection a glory will be
put upon it; it will be made like the glorious body of our Saviour; it
will be purged from all the dregs of earth, and refined into an ethereal
substance, and shine out with a splendour resembling his. (3.) It is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is laid in the earth, a poor
helpless thing, wholly in the power of death, deprived of all vital
capacities and powers, of life and strength: it is utterly unable to
move or stir. But when we arise our bodies will have heavenly life and
vigour infused into them; they will be hale, and firm, and durable, and
lively, and liable no more to any infirmity, weakness, or decay. (4.) It
is sown a natural, or animal body, sōma psuchikon, a body fitted to the
low condition and sensitive pleasures and enjoyments of this life, which
are all gross in comparison of the heavenly state and enjoyments. But
when we rise it will be quire otherwise; our body will rise spiritual.
Not that body would be changed into spirit: this would be a
contradiction in our common conceptions; it would be as much as to say,
Body changed into what is not body, matter made immaterial. The
expression is to be understood comparatively. We shall at the
resurrection have bodies purified and refined to the last degree, made
light and agile; and, though they are not changed into spirit, yet made
fit to be perpetual associates of spirits made perfect. And why should
it not be as much in the power of God to raise incorruptible, glorious,
lively, spiritual bodies, out of the ruins of those vile, corruptible,
lifeless, and animal ones, as first to make matter out of nothing, and
then, out of the same mass of matter, produce such variety of beings,
both in earth and heaven? To God all things are possible; and this
cannot be impossible.

4\. He illustrates this by a comparison of the first and second Adam:
There is an animal body, says he, and there is a spiritual body; and
then goes into the comparison in several instances. (1.) As we have our
natural body, the animal body we have in this world, from the first
Adam, we expect our spiritual body from the second. This is implied in
the whole comparison. (2.) This is but consonant to the different
characters these two persons bear: The first Adam was made a living
soul, such a being as ourselves, and with a power of propagating such
beings as himself, and conveying to them a nature and animal body like
his own, but none other, nor better. The second Adam is a quickening
Spirit; he is the resurrection and the life, [Joh
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025). He hath life in himself, and
quickeneth whom he will, [Joh 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020),
[Joh 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021). The first man was of the
earth, made out of the earth, and was earthy; his body was fitted to the
region of his abode: but the second Adam is the Lord from heaven; he who
came down from heaven, and giveth life to the world ([Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033)); he who came down from heaven
and was in heaven at the same time ([Joh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)); the Lord of heaven and earth.
If the first Adam could communicate to us natural and animal bodies,
cannot the second Adam make our bodies spiritual ones? If the deputed
lord of this lower creation could do the one, cannot the Lord from
heaven, the Lord of heaven and earth, do the other? (3.) We must first
have natural bodies from the first Adam before we can have spiritual
bodies from the second ([Co1 15:49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049));
we must bear the image of the earthy before we can bear the image of the
heavenly. Such is the established order of Providence. We must have
weak, frail, mortal bodies by descent from the first Adam, before we can
have lively, spiritual, and immortal ones by the quickening power of the
second. We must die before we can live to die no more. (4.) Yet if we
are Christ's, true believers in him (for this whole discourse relates to
the resurrection of the saints), it is as certain that we shall have
spiritual bodies as it is now that we have natural or animal ones. By
these we are as the first Adam, earthy, we bear his image; by those we
shall be as the second Adam, have bodies like his own, heavenly, and so
bear him image. And we are as certainly intended to bear the one as we
have borne the other. As surely therefore as we have had natural bodies,
we shall have spiritual ones. The dead in Christ shall not only rise,
but shall rise thus gloriously changed.

5\. He sums up this argument by assigning the reason of this change
([Co1 15:50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050)): Now this I say that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; nor doth corruption
inherit incorruption. The natural body is flesh and blood, consisting of
bones, muscles, nerves, veins, arteries, and their several fluids; and,
as such, it is of a corruptible frame and form, liable to dissolution,
to rot and moulder. But no such thing shall inherit the heavenly
regions; for this were for corruption to inherit incorruption, which is
little better than a contradiction in terms. The heavenly inheritance is
incorruptible, and never fadeth away, [Pe1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004). How can this be possessed by
flesh and blood, which is corruptible and will fade away? It must be
changed into ever-during substance, before it can be capable of
possessing the heavenly inheritance. The sum is that the bodies of the
saints, when they shall rise again, will be greatly changed from what
they are now, and much for the better. They are now corruptible, flesh
and blood; they will be then incorruptible, glorious, and spiritual
bodies, fitted to the celestial world and state, where they are ever
afterwards to dwell, and have their eternal inheritance.

[1 Corinthians 15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">co1 15:51</span></span>

To confirm what he had said of this change,

I. He here tells them what had been concealed from or unknown to them
till then - that all the saints would not die, but all would be changed.
Those that are alive at our Lord's coming will be caught up into the
clouds, without dying, [Th1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#011). But
it is plain from this passage that it will not be without changing from
corruption to incorruption. The frame of their living bodies shall be
thus altered, as well as those that are dead; and this in a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye, [Co1 15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052).
What cannot almighty power effect? That power that calls the dead into
life can surely thus soon and suddenly change the living; for changed
they must be as well as the dead, because flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God. This is the mystery which the apostle shows the
Corinthians: Behold, I show you a mystery; or bring into open light a
truth dark and unknown before. Note, There are many mysteries shown to
us in the gospel; many truths that before were utterly unknown are there
made known; many truths that were but dark and obscure before are there
brought into open day, and plainly revealed; and many things are in part
revealed that will never be fully known, nor perhaps clearly understood.
The apostle here makes known a truth unknown before, which is that the
saints living at our Lord's second coming will not die, but be changed,
that this change will be made in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
and at the sound of the last trump; for, as he tells us elsewhere, the
Lord himself shall descend with a shout, with a voice of the archangel,
and with the trump of God ([Th1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016)),
so here, the trumpet must sound. It is the loud summons of all the
living and all the dead, to come and appear at the tribunal of Christ.
At this summons the graves shall open, the dead saints shall rise
incorruptible, and the living saints be changed to the same
incorruptible state, [Co1 15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052).

II\. He assigns the reason of this change ([Co1
15:53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)): For this corruptible must put
on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. How otherwise
could the man be a fit inhabitant of the incorruptible regions, or be
fitted to possess the eternal inheritance? How can that which is
corruptible and mortal enjoy what is incorruptible, permanent, and
immortal? This corruptible body must be made incorruptible, this mortal
body must be changed into immortal, that the man may be capable of
enjoying the happiness designed for him. Note, It is this corruptible
that must put on incorruption; the demolished fabric that must be reared
again. What is sown must be quickened. Saints will come in their own
bodies ([Co1 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#038)), not in other
bodies.

III\. He lets us know what will follow upon this change of the living
and dead in Christ: Then shall be brought to pass that saying, Death is
swallowed up in victory; or, He will swallow up death in victory. [Isa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008). For mortality shall be then
swallowed up of life ([Co2 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)), and
death perfectly subdued and conquered, and saints for ever delivered
from its power. Such a conquest shall be obtained over it that it shall
for ever disappear in those regions to which our Lord will bear his
risen saints. And therefore will the saints hereupon sing their
epinikion, their song of triumph. Then, when this mortal shall have put
on immortality, will death be swallowed up, for ever swallowed up, eis
nikos. Christ hinders it from swallowing his saints when they die; but,
when they rise again, death shall, as to them, be swallowed for ever.
And upon this destruction of death will they break out into a song of
triumph.

1\. They will glory over death as a vanquished enemy, and insult this
great and terrible destroyer: "O death! where is thy sting? Where is now
thy sting, thy power to hurt? What mischief hast thou done us? We are
dead; but behold we live again, and shall die no more. Thou art
vanquished and disarmed, and we are out of the reach of thy deadly dart.
Where now is thy fatal artillery? Where are thy stores of death? We fear
no further mischiefs from thee, nor heed thy weapons, but defy thy
power, and despise thy wrath. And, O grave! where is thy victory? Where
now is thy victory? What has become of it? Where are the spoils and
trophies of it? Once we were thy prisoners, but the prison-doors are
burst open, the locks and bolts have been forced to give way, our
shackles are knocked off, and we are for ever released. Captivity is
taken captive. The imaginary victor is conquered, and forced to resign
his conquest and release his captives. Thy triumphs, grave, are at an
end. The bonds of death are loosed, and we are at liberty, and are never
more to be hurt by death, nor imprisoned in the grave." In a moment, the
power of death, and the conquests and spoils of the grave, are gone;
and, as to the saints, the very signs of them will not remain. Where are
they? Thus will they raise themselves, when they become immortal, to the
honour of their Saviour and the praise of divine grace: they shall glory
over vanquished death.

2\. The foundation for this triumph is here intimated, (1.) In the
account given whence death had its power to hurt: The sting of death is
sin. This gives venom to his dart: this alone puts it into the power of
death to hurt and kill. Sin unpardoned, and nothing else, can keep any
under his power. And the strength of sin is the law; it is the divine
threatening against the transgressors of the law, the curse there
denounced, that gives power to sin. Note, Sin is the parent of death,
and gives it all its hurtful power. By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, [Rom 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012). It
is its cursed progeny and offspring. (2.) In the account given of the
victory saints obtain over it through Jesus Christ, [Co1
15:56](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#056). The sting of death is sin; but
Christ, by dying, has taken out this sting. He has made atonement for
sin; he has obtained remission of it. It may hiss therefore, but it
cannot hurt. The strength of sin is the law; but the curse of the law is
removed by our Redeemer's becoming a curse for us. So that sin is
deprived of its strength and sting, through Christ, that is, by his
incarnation, suffering, and death. Death may seize a believer, but
cannot sting him, cannot hold him in his power. There is a day coming
when the grave shall open, the bands of death be loosed, the dead saints
revive, and become incorruptible and immortal, and put out of the reach
of death for ever. And then will it plainly appear that, as to them,
death will have lost its strength and sting; and all by the mediation of
Christ, by his dying in their room. By dying, he conquered death, and
spoiled the grave; and, through faith in him, believers become sharers
in his conquests. They often rejoice beforehand, in the hope of this
victory; and, when they arise glorious from the grave, they will boldly
triumph over death. Note, It is altogether owing to the grace of God in
Christ that sin is pardoned and death disarmed. The law puts arms into
the hand of death, to destroy the sinner; but pardon of sin takes away
this power from the law, and deprives death of its strength and sting.
It is by the grace of God, through the redemption which is in Christ
Jesus, that we are freely justified, [Rom
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024). It is no wonder, therefore, (3.)
If this triumph of the saints over death should issue in thanksgiving to
God: Thanks be to God, who giveth us the victory through Christ Jesus,
our Lord, [Co1 15:57](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#057). The way to
sanctify all our joy is to make it tributary to the praise of God. Then
only do we enjoy our blessings and honours in a holy manner when God has
his revenue of glory out of it, and we are free to pay it to him. And
this really improves and exalts our satisfaction. We are conscious at
once of having done our duty and enjoyed our pleasure. And what can be
more joyous in itself than the saints' triumph over death, when they
shall rise again? And shall they not then rejoice in the Lord, and be
glad in the God of their salvation? Shall not their souls magnify the
Lord? When he shows such wonders to the dead, shall they not arise and
praise him? [Psa 88:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010). Those who
remain under the power of death can have no heart to praise; but such
conquests and triumphs will certainly tune the tongues of the saints to
thankfulness and praise - praise for the victory (it is great and
glorious in itself), and for the means whereby it is obtained (it is
given of God through Christ Jesus), a victory obtained not by our power,
but the power of God; not given because we are worthy, but because
Christ is so, and has by dying obtained this conquest for us. Must not
this circumstance endear the victory to us, and heighten our praise to
God? Note, How many springs of joy to the saints and thanksgiving to God
are opened by the death and resurrection, the sufferings and conquests,
of our Redeemer! With what acclamations will saints rising from the dead
applaud him! How will the heaven of heavens resound his praises for
ever! Thanks be to God will be the burden of their song; and angels will
join the chorus, and declare their consent with a loud Amen, Hallelujah.

[1 Corinthians 15:58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">co1 15:58</span></span>

In this verse we have the improvement of the whole argument, in an
exhortation, enforced by a motive resulting plainly from it.

I. An exhortation, and this threefold: - 1. That they should be stedfast
- hedraioi, firm, fixed in the faith of the gospel, that gospel which he
had preached and they had received, namely, That Christ died for our
sins, and arose again the third day, according to the scriptures ([Co1
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#003), [Co1
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#004)), and fixed in the faith of the
glorious resurrection of the dead, which, as he had shown, had so near
and necessary a connection with the former. "Do not let your belief of
these truths be shaken or staggered. They are most certain, and of the
last importance." Note, Christians should be stedfast believers of this
great article of the resurrection of the dead. It is evidently founded
on the death of Christ. Because he lives, his servants shall live also,
[Joh 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019). And it is of the last
importance; a disbelief of a future life will open a way to all manner
of licentiousness, and corrupt men's morals to the last degree. It will
be easy and natural to infer hence that we may live like beasts, and eat
and drink, for tomorrow we die. 2. He exhorts them to be immovable,
namely, in their expectation of this great privilege of being raised
incorruptible and immortal. Christians should not be moved away from
this hope of this gospel ([Col 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023)),
this glorious and blessed hope; they should not renounce nor resign
their comfortable expectations. They are not vain, but solid hopes,
built upon sure foundations, the purchase and power of their risen
Saviour, and the promise of God, to whom it is impossible to lie - hopes
that shall be their most powerful supports under all the pressures of
life, the most effectual antidotes against the fears of death, and the
most quickening motives to diligence and perseverance in Christian duty.
Should they part with these hopes? Should they suffer them to be shaken?
Note, Christians should live in the most firm expectation of a blessed
resurrection. This hope should be an anchor to their souls, firm and
sure, [Heb 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#019). 3. He exhorts them to
abound in the work of the Lord, and that always, in the Lord's service,
in obeying the Lord's commands. They should be diligent and persevering
herein, and going on towards perfection; they should be continually
making advances in true piety, and ready and apt for every good work.
The most cheerful duty, the greatest diligence, the most constant
perseverance, become those who have such glorious hopes. Can we too much
abound in zeal and diligence in the Lord's work, when we are assured of
such abundant recompences in a future life? What vigour and resolution,
what constancy and patience, should those hopes inspire! Note,
Christians should not stint themselves as to their growth in holiness,
but be always improving in sound religion, and abounding in the work of
the Lord.

II\. The motive resulting from the former discourse is that their labour
shall not be in vain in the Lord; nay, they know it shall not. They have
the best grounds in the world to build upon: they have all the assurance
that can rationally be expected: as surely as Christ is risen, they
shall rise; and Christ is as surely risen as the scriptures are true,
and the word of God. The apostles saw him after his death, testified
this truth to the world in the face of a thousand deaths and dangers,
and confirmed it by miraculous powers received from him. Is there any
room to doubt a fact so well attested? Note, True Christians have
undoubted evidence that their labour will not be in vain in the Lord;
not their most diligent services, nor their most painful sufferings;
they will not be in vain, not be vain and unprofitable. Note, The labour
of Christians will not be lost labour; they may lose for God, but they
will lose nothing by him; nay, there is more implied than is expressed
in this phrase: it means that they shall be abundantly rewarded. He will
never be found unjust to forget their labour of love, [Heb
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#010). Nay, he will do exceedingly
abundantly above what they can now ask or think. Neither the services
they do for him, nor the sufferings they endure for him here, are worthy
to be compared with the joy hereafter to be revealed in them, [Rom
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018). Note, Those who serve God have
good wages; they cannot do too much nor suffer too much for so good a
Master. If they serve him now, they shall see him hereafter; if they
suffer for him on earth, they shall reign with him in heaven; if they
die for his sake, they shall rise again from the dead, be crowned with
glory, honour, and immortality, and inherit eternal life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 16](co1016)

</div>
