<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1010)  [Next](co1012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 11:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle blames, and endeavours to rectify, some
great indecencies and manifest disorders in the church of Corinth; as,
I. The misconduct of their women (some of whom seem to have been
inspired) in the public assembly, who laid by their veils, the common
token of subjection to their husbands in that part of the world. This
behaviour he reprehends, requires them to keep veiled, asserts the
superiority of the husband, yet so as to remind the husband that both
were made for mutual help and comfort (v. 1-16). II. He blames them for
their discord and neglect and contempt of the poor, at the Lord's supper
([Co1 11:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017)). III. To rectify these
scandalous disorders, he sets before them the nature and intentions of
this holy institution, directs them how they should attend on it, and
warns them of the danger of a conduct to indecent as theirs, and of all
unworthy receiving ([Co1 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023) to the
end).

[1 Corinthians 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 11:1</span></span>

Paul, having answered the cases put to him, proceeds in this chapter to
the redress of grievances. The first verse of the chapter is put, by
those who divided the epistle into chapters, as a preface to the rest of
the epistle, but seems to have been a more proper close to the last, in
which he had enforced the cautions he had given against the abuse of
liberty, by his own example: Be ye followers of me, as I also am of
Christ ([Co1 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)), fitly closes his
argument; and the way of speaking in the next verse looks like a
transition to another. But, whether it more properly belong to this or
the last chapter, it is plain from it that Paul not only preached such
doctrine as they ought to believe, but led such a life as they ought to
imitate. "Be ye followers of me," that is, "Be imitators of me; live as
you see me live." Note, Ministers are likely to preach most to the
purpose when they can press their hearers to follow their example. Yet
would not Paul be followed blindly neither. He encourages neither
implicit faith nor obedience. He would be followed himself no further
than he followed Christ. Christ's pattern is a copy without a blot; so
is no man's else. Note, We should follow no leader further than he
follows Christ. Apostles should be left by us when they deviate from the
example of their Master. He passes next to reprehend and reform an
indecency among them, of which the women were more especially guilty,
concerning which observe,

I. How he prefaces it. He begins with a commendation of what was
praiseworthy in them ([Co1 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002)): I
praise you, that you remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances
as I delivered them to you. Many of them, it is probable, did this in
the strictest sense of the expression: and he takes occasion thence to
address the body of the church under this good character; and the body
might, in the main, have continued to observe the ordinances and
institutions of Christ, though in some things they deviated fRom. and
corrupted, them. Note, When we reprove what is amiss in any, it is very
prudent and fit to commend what is good in them; it will show that the
reproof is not from ill-will, and a humour of censuring and finding
fault; and it will therefore procure the more regard to it.

II\. How he lays the foundation for his reprehension by asserting the
superiority of the man over the woman: I would have you know that the
head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and
the head of Christ is God. Christ, in his mediatorial character and
glorified humanity, is at the head of mankind. He is not only first of
the kind, but Lord and Sovereign. He has a name above every name: though
in this high office and authority he has a superior, God being his head.
And as God is the head of Christ, and Christ the head of the whole human
kind, so the man is the head of the tow sexes: not indeed with such
dominion as Christ has over the kind or God has over the man Christ
Jesus; but a superiority and headship he has, and the woman should be in
subjection and not assume or usurp the man's place. This is the
situation in which God has placed her; and for that reason she should
have a mind suited to her rank, and not do any thing that looks like an
affectation of changing places. Something like this the women of the
church of Corinth seem to have been guilty of, who were under
inspiration, and prayed and prophesied even in their assemblies, [Co1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005). It is indeed an apostolical
canon, that the women should keep silence in the churches ([Co1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034); [Ti1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012)), which some understand without
limitation, as if a woman under inspiration also must keep silence,
which seems very well to agree with the connection of the apostle's
discourse, ch. 14. Others with a limitation: though a woman might not
from her own abilities pretend to teach, or so much as question and
debate any thing in the church yet when under inspiration the case was
altered, she had liberty to speak. Or, though she might not preach even
by inspiration (because teaching is the business of a superior), yet she
might pray or utter hymns by inspiration, even in the public assembly.
She did not show any affectation of superiority over the man by such
acts of public worship. It is plain the apostle does not in this place
prohibit the thing, but reprehend the manner of doing it. And yet he
might utterly disallow the thing and lay an unlimited restraint on the
woman in another part of the epistle. These things are not
contradictory. It is to his present purpose to reprehend the manner
wherein the women prayed and prophesied in the church, without
determining in this place whether they did well or ill in praying or
prophesying. Note, The manner of doing a thing enters into the morality
of it. We must not only be concerned to do good, but that the good we do
be well done.

III\. The thing he reprehends is the woman's praying or prophesying
uncovered, or the man's doing either covered, [Co1
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004), [Co1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005). To understand this, it must be
observed that it was a signification either of shame or subjection for
persons to be veiled, or covered, in the eastern countries, contrary to
the custom of ours, where the being bare-headed betokens subjection, and
being covered superiority and dominion. And this will help us the better
to understand,

IV\. The reasons on which he grounds his reprehension. 1. The man that
prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonoureth his head, namely,
Christ, the head of every man ([Co1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)), by appearing in a habit
unsuitable to the rank in which God has placed him. Note, We should,
even in our dress and habits, avoid every thing that may dishonour
Christ. The woman, on the other hand, who prays or prophesies with her
head uncovered dishonoureth her head, namely, the man, [Co1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003). She appears in the dress of her
superior, and throws off the token of her subjection. She might, with
equal decency, cut her hair short, or cut it close, which was the custom
of the man in that age. This would be in a manner to declare that she
was desirous of changing sexes, a manifest affectation of that
superiority which God had conferred on the other sex. And this was
probably the fault of these prophetesses in the church of Corinth. It
was doing a thing which, in that age of the world, betokened
superiority, and therefore a tacit claim of what did not belong to them
but the other sex. Note, The sexes should not affect to change places.
The order in which divine wisdom has placed persons and things is best
and fittest: to endeavour to amend it is to destroy all order, and
introduce confusion. The woman should keep to the rank God has chosen
for her, and not dishonour her head; for this, in the result, is to
dishonour God. If she was made out of the man, and for the man, and made
to be the glory of the man, she should do nothing, especially in public,
that looks like a wish of having this order inverted. 2. Another reason
against this conduct is that the man is the image and glory of God, the
representative of that glorious dominion and headship which God has over
the world. It is the man who is set at the head of this lower creation,
and therein he bears the resemblance of God. The woman, on the other
hand, is the glory of the man ([Co1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)): she is his representative. Not
but she has dominion over the inferior creatures, as she is a partaker
of human nature, and so far is God's representative too, but it is at
second-hand. She is the image of God, inasmuch as she is the image of
the man: For the man was not made out of the woman, but the woman out of
the man, [Co1 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#008). The man was first
made, and made head of the creation here below, and therein the image of
the divine dominion; and the woman was made out of the man, and shone
with a reflection of his glory, being made superior to the other
creatures here below, but in subjection to her husband, and deriving
that honour from him out of whom she was made. 3. The woman was made for
the man, to be his help-meet, and not the man for the woman. She was
naturally, therefore, made subject to him, because made for him, for his
use, and help, and comfort. And she who was intended to be always in
subjection to the man should do nothing, in Christian assemblies, that
looks like an affectation of equality. 4. She ought to have power on her
head, because of the angels. Power, that is, a veil, the token, not of
her having the power or superiority, but being under the power of her
husband, subjected to him, and inferior to the other sex. Rebekah, when
she met Isaac, and was delivering herself into his possession, put on
her veil, in token of her subjection, [Gen
24:65](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#065). Thus would the apostle have the
women appear In Christian assemblies, even though they spoke there by
inspiration, because of the angels, that is, say some, because of the
evil angels. The woman was first in the transgression, being deceived by
the devil ([Ti1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014)), which increased
her subjection to man, [Gen 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016). Now,
believe evil angels will be sure to mix in all Christian assemblies,
therefore should women wear the token of their shamefacedness and
subjection, which in that age and country, was a veil. Others say
because of the good angels. Jews and Christians have had an opinion that
these ministering spirits are many of them present in their assemblies.
Their presence should restrain Christians from all indecencies in the
worship of God. Note, We should learn from all to behave in the public
assemblies of divine worship so as to express a reverence for God, and a
content and satisfaction with that rank in which he has placed us.

V. He thinks fit to guard his argument with a caution lest the inference
be carried too far ([Co1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#011), [Co1
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012)): Nevertheless, neither is the
man without the woman, nor the woman without the man in the Lord. They
were made for one another. It is not good for him to be alone ([Gen
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018)), and therefore was a woman made,
and made for the man; and the man was intended to be a comfort, and
help, and defence, to the woman, though not so directly and immediately
made for her. They were made to be a mutual comfort and blessing, not
one a slave and the other a tyrant. Both were to be one flesh ([Gen
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)), and this for the propagation of
a race of mankind. They are reciprocal instruments of each other's
production. As the woman was first formed out of the man, the man is
ever since propagated by the woman ([Co1
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012)), all by the divine wisdom and
power of the First Cause so ordaining it. The authority and subjection
should be no greater than are suitable to two in such near relation and
close union to each other. Note, As it is the will of God that the woman
know her place, so it is his will also that the man abuse not his power.

VI\. He enforces his argument from the natural covering provided for the
woman ([Co1 11:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#013)): "Judge in
yourselves - consult your own reason, hearken to what nature suggests -
is it comely for a woman to pray to God uncovered? Should there not be a
distinction kept up between the sexes in wearing their hair, since
nature has made one? Is it not a distinction which nature has kept up
among all civilized nations? The woman's hair is a natural covering; to
wear it long is a glory to her; but for a man to have long hair, or
cherish it, is a token of softness and effeminacy." Note, It should be
our concern, especially in Christian and religious assemblies, to make
no breach upon the rules of natural decency.

VII\. He sums up all by referring those who were contentious to the
usages and customs of the churches, [Co1
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016). Custom is in a great measure
the rule of decency. And the common practice of the churches is what
would have them govern themselves by. He does not silence the
contentious by mere authority, but lets them know that they would appear
to the world as very odd and singular in their humour if they would
quarrel for a custom to which all the churches of Christ were at that
time utter strangers, or against a custom in which they all concurred,
and that upon the ground of natural decency. It was the common usage of
the churches for women to appear in public assemblies, and join in
public worship, veiled; and it was manifestly decent that they should do
so. Those must be very contentious indeed who would quarrel with this,
or lay it aside.

[1 Corinthians 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 11:17</span></span>

In this passage the apostle sharply rebukes them for much greater
disorders than the former, in their partaking of the Lord's supper,
which was commonly done in the first ages, as the ancients tell us, with
a love-feast annexed, which gave occasion to the scandalous disorders
which the apostle here reprehends, concerning which observe,

I. The manner in which he introduces his charge: "Now in this that I
declare to you I praise you not, [Co1
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017). I cannot commend, but must
blame and condemn you." It is plain, from the beginning of the chapter,
that he was willing and pleased to commend as far as he could. But such
scandalous disorders, in so sacred an institution, as they were guilty
of, called for a sharp reprehension. They quite turned the institution
against itself. It was intended to make them better, to promote their
spiritual interests; but it really made them worse. They came together,
not for the better, but for the worse. Note, The ordinances of Christ,
if they do not make us better, will be very apt to make us worse; if
they do not do our souls good, they do us harm; if they do not melt and
mend, they will harden. Corruptions will be confirmed in us, if the
proper means do not work a cure of them.

II\. He enters upon his charge against them in more particulars than
one. 1. He tells them that, upon coming together, they fell into
divisions, schisms - schismata. Instead of concurring unanimously in
celebrating the ordinance, they fell a quarrelling with one another.
Note, There may be schism where there is no separation of communion.
Persons may come together in the same church, and sit down at the same
table of the Lord, and yet be schismatics. Uncharitableness, alienation
of affection, especially if it grows up to discord, and feuds, and
contentions, constitute schism. Christians may separate from each
other's communion, and yet be uncharitable one towards another; they may
continue in the same communion, and yet be uncharitable. This latter is
schism, rather than the former. The apostle had heard a report of the
Corinthians' divisions, and he tells them he had too much reason to
believe it. For, adds he, there must be heresies also; not only
quarrels, but factions, and perhaps such corrupt opinions as strike at
the foundation of Christianity, and all sound religion. Note, No marvel
there should be breaches of Christian love in the churches, when such
offences will come as shall make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience. Such offences must come. Note that men are necessitated to
be guilty of them; but the event is certain, and God permits them, that
those who are approved (such honest hearts as will bear the trial) may
be set to view, and appear faithful by their constant adherence to the
truths and ways of God, notwithstanding the temptations of seducers.
Note, The wisdom of God can make the wickedness and errors of others a
foil to the piety and integrity of the saints. 2. He charges them not
only with discord and division, but with scandalous disorder: For in
eating every one taketh before the other his own supper; and one is
hungry, and another is drunken, [Co1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021). Heathens used to drink
plentifully at their feasts upon their sacrifices. Many of the wealthier
Corinthians seem to have taken the same liberty at the Lord's table, or
at least at their Agapai, or love-feasts, that were annexed to the
supper. They would not stay for one another; the rich despised the poor,
and ate and drank up the provisions they themselves brought, before the
poor were allowed to partake; and thus some wanted, while others had
more than enough. This was profaning a sacred institution, and
corrupting a divine ordinance, to the last degree. What was appointed to
feed the soul was employed to feed their lusts and passions. What should
have been a bond of mutual amity and affection was made an instrument of
discord and disunion. The poor were deprived of the food prepared for
them, and the rich turned a feast of charity into a debauch. This was
scandalous irregularity.

III\. The apostle lays the blame of this conduct closely on them, 1. By
telling them that their conduct perfectly destroyed the purpose and use
of such an institution: This is not to eat the Lord's supper, [Co1
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020). It was coming to the Lord's
table, and not coming. They might as well have staid away. Thus to eat
the outward elements was not to eat Christ's body. Note, There is a
careless and irregular eating of the Lord's supper which is as none at
all; it will turn to no account, but to increase guilt. Such an eating
was that of the Corinthians; their practices were a direct contradiction
to the purposes of this sacred institution. 2. Their conduct carried in
it a contempt of God's house, or of the church, [Co1
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#022). If they had a mind to feast,
they might do it at home in their own houses; but to come to the Lord's
table, and cabal and quarrel, and keep the poor from their share of the
provision there made for them as well as rich, was such an abuse of the
ordinance, and such a contempt of the poorer members of the church more
especially, as merited a very sharp rebuke. Such a behaviour tended much
to the shame and discouragement of the poor, whose souls were as dear to
Christ, and cost him as much, as those of the rich. Note, Common meals
may be managed after a common manner, but religious feasts should be
attended religiously. Note, also, It is a heinous evil, and severely to
be censured, for Christians to treat their fellow-christians with
contempt and insolence, but especially at the Lord's table. This is
doing what they can to pour contempt on divine ordinances. And we should
look carefully to it that nothing in our behaviour at the Lord's table
have the appearance of contemning so sacred an institution.

[1 Corinthians 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 11:23</span></span>

To rectify these gross corruptions and irregularities, the apostle sets
the sacred institution here to view. This should be the rule in the
reformation of all abuses.

I. He tells us how he came by the knowledge of it. He was not among the
apostles at the first institution; but he had received from the Lord
what he delivered to them, [Co1 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023).
He had the knowledge of this matter by revelation from Christ: and what
he had received he communicated, without varying from the truth a
tittle, without adding or diminishing.

II\. He gives us a more particular account of the institution than we
meet with elsewhere. We have here an account,

1\. Of the author - our Lord Jesus Christ. The king of the church only
has power to institute sacraments.

2\. The time of the institution: It was the very night wherein he was
betrayed; just as he was entering on his sufferings which are therein to
be commemorated.

3\. The institution itself. Our Saviour took bread, and when he had
given thanks, or blessed (as it is in [Mat
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)), he broke, and said, Take, eat;
this is my body, broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. And in
like manner he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the
New Testament in my blood; this do, as oft as you drink it, in
remembrance of me, [Co1 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024), [Co1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025). Here observe,

(1.) The materials of this sacrament; both, \[1.\] As to the visible
signs; these are bread and the cup, the former of which is called bread
many times over in this passage, even after what the papists call
consecration. What is eaten is called bread, though it be at the same
time said to be the body of the Lord, a plain argument that the apostle
knew nothing of their monstrous and absurd doctrine of
transubstantiation. The latter is as plainly a part of this institution
as words can make it. St. Matthew tells us, our Lord bade them all drink
of it ([Mat 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#027)), as if he would, by
this expression, lay in a caveat against the papists' depriving the
laity of the cup. Bread and the cup are both made use of, because it is
a holy feast. Nor is it here, or any where, made necessary, that any
particular liquor should be in the cup. In one evangelist, indeed, it is
plain that wine was the liquor used by our Saviour, though it was,
perhaps, mingled with water, according to the Jewish custom; vide
Lightfoot on Mt. 26. But this by no means renders it unlawful to have a
sacrament where persons cannot come at wine. In every place of scripture
in which we have an account of this part of the institution it is always
expressed by a figure. The cup is put for what was in it, without once
specifying what the liquor was, in the words of the institution. \[2.\]
The things signified by these outward signs; they are Christ's body and
blood, his body broken, his blood shed, together with all the benefits
which flow from his death and sacrifice: it is the New Testament in his
blood. His blood is the seal and sanction of all the privileges of the
new covenant; and worthy receivers take it as such, at this holy
ordinance. They have the New Testament, and their own title to all the
blessings of the new covenant, confirmed to them by his blood.

(2.) We have here the sacramental actions, the manner in which the
materials of the sacrament are to be used. \[1.\] Our Saviour's actions,
which are taking the bread and cup, giving thanks, breaking the bread,
and giving about both the one and the other. \[2.\] The actions of the
communicants, which were to take the bread and eat, to take the cup and
drink, and both in remembrance of Christ. But the external acts are not
the whole nor the principal part of what is to be done at this holy
ordinance; each of them has a significancy. Our Saviour, having
undertaken to make an offering of himself to God, and procure, by his
death, the remission of sins, with all other gospel benefits, for true
believers, did, at the institution, deliver his body and blood, with all
the benefits procured by his death, to his disciples, and continues to
do the same every time the ordinance is administered to the true
believers. This is here exhibited, or set forth, as the food of souls.
And as food, though ever so wholesome or rich, will yield no nourishment
without being eaten, here the communicants are to take and eat, or to
receive Christ and feed upon him, his grace and benefits, and by faith
convert them into nourishment to their souls. They are to take him as
their Lord and life, yield themselves up to him, and live upon him. He
is our life, [Col 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004).

(3.) We have here an account of the ends of this institution. \[1.\] It
was appointed to be done in remembrance of Christ, to keep fresh in our
minds an ancient favour, his dying for us, as well as to remember an
absent friend, even Christ interceding for us, in virtue of his death,
at God's right hand. The best of friends, and the greatest acts of
kindness, are here to be remembered, with the exercise of suitable
affections and graces. The motto on this ordinance, and the very meaning
of it, is, When this you see, remember me. \[2.\] It was to show forth
Christ's death, to declare and publish it. It is not barely in
remembrance of Christ, of what he has done and suffered, that this
ordinance was instituted; but to commemorate, to celebrate, his glorious
condescension and grace in our redemption. We declare his death to be
our life, the spring of all our comforts and hopes. And we glory in such
a declaration; we show forth his death, and spread it before God, as our
accepted sacrifice and ransom. We set it in view of our own faith, for
our own comfort and quickening; and we own before the world, by this
very service, that we are the disciples of Christ, who trust in him
alone for salvation and acceptance with God.

(4.) It is moreover hinted here, concerning this ordinance, \[1.\] That
it should be frequent: As often as you eat this bread, etc. Our bodily
meals return often; we cannot maintain life and health without this. And
it is fit that this spiritual diet should be taken often tool The
ancient churches celebrated this ordinance every Lord's day, if not
every day when they assembled for worship. \[2.\] That it must be
perpetual. It is to be celebrated till the Lord shall come; till he
shall come the second time, without sin, for the salvation of those that
believe, and to judge the world. This is our warrant for keeping this
feast. It was our Lord's will that we should thus celebrate the
memorials of his death and passion, till he come in his own glory, and
the Father's glory, with his holy angels, and put an end to the present
state of things, and his own mediatorial administration, by passing the
final sentence. Note, The Lord's supper is not a temporary, but a
standing and perpetual ordinance.

III\. He lays before the Corinthians the danger of receiving unworthily,
of prostituting this institution as they did, and using it to the
purposes of feasting and faction, with intentions opposite to its
design, or a temper of mind altogether unsuitable to it; or keeping up
the covenant with sin and death, while they are there professedly
renewing and confirming their covenant with God. 1. It is great guilt
which such contract. They shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord ([Co1 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027)), of violating this
sacred institution, of despising his body and blood. They act as if they
counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith they are sanctified, an
unholy thing, [Heb 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029). They profane
the institution, and in a manner crucify their Saviour over again.
Instead of being cleansed by his blood, they are guilty of his blood. 2.
It is a great hazard which they run: They eat and drink judgment to
themselves, [Co1 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029). They provoke
God, and are likely to bring down punishment on themselves. No doubt but
they incur great guilt, and so render themselves liable to damnation, to
spiritual judgments and eternal misery. Every sin is in its own nature
damning; and therefore surely so heinous a sin as profaning such a holy
ordinance is so. And it is profaned in the grossest sense by such
irreverence and rudeness as the Corinthians were guilty of. But fearful
believers should not be discouraged from attending at this holy
ordinance by the sound of these words, as if they bound upon themselves
the sentence of damnation by coming to the table of the Lord unprepared.
Thus sin, as well as all others, leaves room for forgiveness upon
repentance; and the Holy Spirit never indited this passage of scripture
to deter serious Christians from their duty, though the devil has often
made this advantage of it, and robbed good Christians of their choicest
comforts. The Corinthians came to the Lord's table as to a common feast,
not discerning the Lord's body - not making a difference or distinction
between that and common food, but setting both on a level: nay, they
used much more indecency at this sacred feast than they would have done
at a civil one. This was very sinful in them, and very displeasing to
God, and brought down his judgments on them: For this cause many are
weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. Some were punished with
sickness, and some with death. Note, A careless and irreverent receiving
of the Lord's supper may bring temporal punishments. Yet the connection
seems to imply that even those who were thus punished were in a state of
favour with God, at least many of them: They were chastened of the Lord,
that they should not be condemned with the world, [Co1
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032). Now divine chastening is a sign
of divine love: Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth ([Heb
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)), especially with so merciful a
purpose, to prevent their final condemnation. In the midst of judgment,
God remembers mercy: he frequently punishes those whom he tenderly
loves. It is kindness to use the rod to prevent the child's ruin. He
will visit such iniquity as this under consideration with stripes, and
yet make those stripes the evidence of his lovingkindness. Those were in
the favour of God who yet so highly offended him in this instance, and
brought down judgments on themselves; at least many of them were; for
they were punished by him out of fatherly good-will, punished now that
they might not perish for ever. Note, It is better to bear trouble in
this world than to be miserable to eternity. And God punishes his people
now, to prevent their eternal woe.

IV\. He points out the duty of those who would come to the Lord's table.
1. In general: Let a man examine himself ([Co1
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028)), try and approve himself. Let
him consider the sacred intention of this holy ordinance, its nature,
and use, and compare his own views in attending on it and his
disposition of mind for it; and, when he has approved himself to his own
conscience in the sight of God, then let him attend. Such
self-examination is necessary to a right attendance at this holy
ordinance. Note, Those who, through weakness of understanding, cannot
try themselves, are by no means fit to eat of this bread and drink of
this cup; nor those who, upon a fair trial, have just ground to charge
themselves with impenitency, unbelief, and alienation from the life of
God. Those should have the wedding-garment on who would be welcome at
this marriage-feast-grace in habit, and grace in exercise. 2. The duty
of those who were yet unpunished for their profanation of this
ordinance: If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged, [Co1
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031). If we would thoroughly search
and explore ourselves, and condemn and correct what we find amiss, we
should prevent divine judgments. Note, To be exact and severe on
ourselves and our own conduct is the most proper way in the world not to
fall under the just severity of our heavenly Father. We must not judge
others, lest we be judged ([Mat 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001));
but we must judge ourselves, to prevent our being judged and condemned
by God. We may be critical as to ourselves, but should be very candid in
judging others.

V. He closes all with a caution against the irregularities of which they
were guilty ([Co1 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#033), [Co1
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#034)), charging them to avoid all
indecency at the Lord's table. They were to eat for hunger and pleasure
only at home, and not to change the holy supper to a common feast; and
much less eat up the provisions before those who could bring none did
partake of them, lest they should come together for condemnation. Note,
Our holy duties, through our own abuse, may prove matter of
condemnation. Christians may keep Sabbaths, hear sermons, attend at
sacraments, and only aggravate guilt, and bring on a heavier doom. A sad
but serious truth! O! let all look to it that they do not come together
at any time to God's worship, and all the while provoke him, and bring
down vengeance on themselves. Holy things are to be used in a holy
manner, or else they are profaned. What else was amiss in this matter,
he tells them, he would rectify when he came to them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 12](co1012)

</div>
