<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1013)  [Next](co1015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 14:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle directs them about the use of their
spiritual gifts, preferring those that are best and fitted to do the
greatest good. I. He begins with advising them of all spiritual gifts to
prefer prophesying, and shows that this is much better than speaking
with tongues ([Co1 14:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)). II. He
goes on to show them how unprofitable the speaking of foreign languages
is, and useless to the church; it is like piping in one tone, like
sounding a trumpet without any certain note, like talking gibberish;
whereas gifts should be used for the good of the church ([Co1
14:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006)). III. He advises that worship
should be celebrated so that the most ignorant might understand, and
join in prayer and praise, and presses the advice by his own example
([Co1 14:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015)). IV. He informs them
that tongues were a sign for unbelievers rather than those that believe;
and represents the advantage of prophecy above speaking with tongues,
from the different suggestions they would give to the mind of an
unbeliever coming into their assemblies ([Co1
14:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021)). V. He blames them for the
disorder and confusion they had brought into the assembly, by their
vanity and ostentation of their gifts; and directs them in using the
gifts both of tongues and prophecy ([Co1
14:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026)). VI. He forbids women
speaking in the church; and closes this subject by requiring them to
perform every thing in the public worship with order and decency ([Co1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034) to the end).

[1 Corinthians 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 14:1</span></span>

The apostle, in the foregoing chapter, had himself preferred, and
advised the Corinthians to prefer, Christian charity to all spiritual
gifts. Here he teaches them, among spiritual gifts, which they should
prefer, and by what rules they should make comparison. He begins the
chapter,

I. With an exhortation to charity ([Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)): Follow after charity, pursue
it. The original, diōkete, when spoken of a thing, signifies a singular
concern to obtain it; and is commonly taken in a good and laudable
sense. It is an exhortation to obtain charity, to get this excellent
disposition of mind upon any terms, whatever pains or prayers it may
cost: as if he had said, "In whatever you fail, see you do not miss of
this; the principal of all graces is worth your getting at any rate."

II\. He directs them which spiritual gift to prefer, from a principle of
charity: "Desire spiritual gifts, but rather that you may prophesy, or
chiefly that you may prophesy." While they were in close pursuit of
charity, and made this Christian disposition their chief scope, they
might be zealous of spiritual gifts, be ambitious of them in some
measure, but especially of prophesying, that is, of interpreting
scripture. This preference would most plainly discover that they were
indeed upon such pursuit, that they had a due value for Christian
charity, and were intent upon it. Note, Gifts are fit objects of our
desire and pursuit, in subordination to grace and charity. That should
be sought first and with the greatest earnestness which is most worth.

III\. He assigns the reasons of this preference. And it is remarkable
here that he only compares prophesying with speaking with tongues. It
seems, this was the gift on which the Corinthians principally valued
themselves. This was more ostentatious than the plain interpretation of
scripture, more fit to gratify pride, but less fit to pursue the
purposes of Christian charity; it would not equally edify nor do good to
the souls of men. For, 1. He that spoke with tongues must wholly speak
between God and himself; for, whatever mysteries might be communicated
in his language, none of his own countrymen could understand them,
because they did not understand the language, [Co1
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002). Note, What cannot be understood
can never edify. No advantage can be reaped from the most excellent
discourses, if delivered in unintelligible language, such as the
audience can neither speak nor understand: but he that prophesies speaks
to the advantage of his hearers; they may profit by his gift.
Interpretation of scripture will be for their edification; they may be
exhorted and comforted by it, [Co1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003). And indeed these two must go
together. Duty is the proper way to comfort; and those that would be
comforted must bear being exhorted. 2. He that speaks with tongues may
edify himself, [Co1 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#004). He may
understand and be affected with what he speaks; and so every minister
should; and he that is most edified himself is in the disposition and
fitness to do good to others by what he speaks; but he that speaks with
tongues, or language unknown, can only edify himself; others can reap no
benefit from his speech. Whereas the end of speaking in the church is to
edify the church ([Co1 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#004)), to which
prophesying, or interpreting scripture by inspiration or otherwise, is
immediately adapted. Note, That is the best and most eligible gift which
best answers the purposes of charity and does most good; not that which
can edify ourselves only, but that which will edify the church. Such is
prophesying, or preaching, and interpreting scripture, compared with
speaking in an unknown tongue. 3. Indeed, no gift is to be despised, but
the best gifts are to be preferred. I could wish, says the apostle, that
you all spoke with tongues, but rather that you prophesied, [Co1
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#005). Every gift of God is a favour
from God, and may be improved for his glory, and as such is to be valued
and thankfully received; but then those are to be most valued that are
most useful. Greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with
tongues, unless he interpret, that the church may receive edifying, [Co1
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#005). Benevolence makes a man truly
great. It is more blessed to give than to receive. And it is true
magnanimity to study and seek to be useful to others, rather than to
raise their admiration and draw their esteem. Such a man has a large
soul, copious and diffused in proportion to his benevolence and bent of
mind for public good. Greater is he who interprets scripture to edify
the church than he who speaks tongues to recommend himself. And what
other end he who spoke with tongues could have, unless he interpreted
what he spoke, is not easy to say, Note, That makes most for the honour
of a minister which is most for the church's edification, not that which
shows his gifts to most advantage. He acts in a narrow sphere, while he
aims at himself; but his spirit and character increase in proportion to
his usefulness, I mean his own intention and endeavours to be useful.

[1 Corinthians 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 14:6</span></span>

In this paragraph he goes on to show how vain a thing the ostentation of
speaking unknown and unintelligible language must be. It was altogether
unedifying and unprofitable ([Co1
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006)): If I come to you speaking with
tongues, what will it profit you, unless I speak to you by revelation,
or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine? It would signify
nothing to utter any of these in an unknown tongue. An apostle, with all
his furniture, could not edify, unless he spoke to the capacity of his
hearers. New revelations, the most clear explications of old ones, the
most instructive discourses in themselves, would be unprofitable in a
language not understood. Nay, interpretations of scripture made in an
unknown tongue would need to be interpreted over again, before they
could be of any use.

I. He illustrates this by several allusions. 1. To a pipe and a harp
playing always in one tone. Of what use can this be to those who are
dancing? If there be no distinction of sounds, how should they order
their steps or motions? Unintelligible language is like piping or
harping without distinction of sounds: it gives no more direction how a
man should order his conversation than a pipe with but one stop or a
harp with but one string can direct a dancer how he should order his
steps, [Co1 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#007). 2. To a trumpet
giving an uncertain sound, adēlon phōnēn, a sound not manifest; either
not the proper sound for the purpose, or not distinct enough to be
discerned from every other sound. If, instead of sounding on onset, it
sounded a retreat, or sounded one knew not what, who would prepare for
the battle? To talk in an unknown language in a Christian assembly is
altogether as vain and to no purpose as for a trumpet to give no certain
sound in the field or day of battle. The army in one case, and the
congregation in the other, must be all in suspense, and at a perfect
nonplus. To speak words that have no significancy to those who hear them
is to leave them ignorant of what is spoken; it is speaking to the air,
[Co1 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#009). Words without a meaning can
convey no notion nor instruction to the mind; and words not understood
have no meaning with those who do not understand them: to talk to them
in such language is to waste our breath. 3. He compares the speaking in
an unknown tongue to the gibberish of barbarians. There are, as he says
([Co1 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#010)), many kinds of voices in
the world, none of which is without its proper signification. This is
true of the several languages spoken by different nations. All of them
have their proper signification. Without this they would be phōnai
aphōnoi - a voice, and no voice. For that is no language, nor can it
answer the end of speaking, which has no meaning. But whatever proper
signification the words of any language may have in themselves, and to
those who understand them, they are perfect gibberish to men of another
language, who understand them not. In this case, speaker and hearers are
barbarians to each other ([Co1 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#011)),
they talk and hear only sounds without sense; for this is to be a
barbarian. For thus says the polite Ovid, when banished into Pontus,

Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intelligor ulli,

I am a barbarian here, none understand me.

To speak in the church in an unknown tongue is to talk gibberish; it is
to play the barbarian; it is to confound the audience, instead of
instructing them; and for this reason is utterly vain and unprofitable.

II\. Having thus established his point, in the two next verses he
applies, 1. By advising them to be chiefly desirous of those gifts that
were most for the church's edification, [Co1
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#012). "Forasmuch as you are zealous
of spiritual gifts, this way it will become commendable zeal, be zealous
to edify the church, to promote Christian knowledge and practice, and
covet those gifts most that will do the best service to men's souls."
This is the great rule he gives, which, 2. He applies to the matter in
hand, that, if they did speak a foreign language, they should beg of God
the gift of interpreting it, [Co1
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#013). That these were different
gifts, see [Co1 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010). Those might
speak and understand a foreign language who could not readily translate
it into their own: and yet was this necessary to the church's
edification; for the church must understand, that it might be edified,
which yet it could not do till the foreign language was translated into
its own. Let him therefore pray for the gift of interpreting what he
speaks in an unknown tongue; or rather covet and ask of God the gift of
interpreting than of speaking in a language that needs interpretation,
this being most for the church's benefit, and therefore among the gifts
that excel; vide [Co1 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#012). Some
understand it, "Let him pray so as to interpret what he utters in prayer
in a language unintelligible without it." The sum is that they should
perform all religious exercises in their assemblies so that all might
join in them and profit by them. 3. He enforces this advice with a
proper reason, that, if he prayed in an unknown tongue, his spirit might
pray, that is, a spiritual gift might be exercised in prayer, or his own
mind might be devoutly engaged, but his understanding would be
unfruitful ([Co1 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#014)), that is, the
sense and meaning of his words would be unfruitful, he would not be
understood, nor therefore would others join with him in his devotions.
Note, It should be the concern of such as pray in public to pray
intelligibly, not in a foreign language, nor in a language that, if it
be not foreign, is above the level of his audience. Language that is
most obvious and easy to be understood is the most proper for public
devotion and other religious exercises.

[1 Corinthians 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 14:15</span></span>

The apostle here sums up the argument hitherto, and,

I. Directs them how they should sing and pray in public ([Co1
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015)): What is it then? I will pray
with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. I will
sing with the spirit, etc. He does not forbid their praying or singing
under a divine afflatus, or when they were inspired for this purpose, or
had such a spiritual gift communicated to them; but he would have them
perform both so as to be understood by others, that others might join
with them. Note, Public worship should be performed so as to be
understood.

II\. He enforces the argument with several reasons.

1\. That otherwise the unlearned could not say Amen to their prayers or
thanksgivings, could not join in the worship, for they did not
understand it, [Co1 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#016). He who
fills up or occupies the place of the unlearned, that is, as the
ancients interpret it, the body of the people, who, in most Christian
assemblies, are illiterate; how should they say Amen to prayers in an
unknown tongue? How should they declare their consent and concurrence?
This is saying Amen, So be it. God grant the thing we have requested;
or, We join in the confession that has been made of sin, and in the
acknowledgment that has been made of divine mercies and favours. This is
the import of saying Amen. All should say Amen inwardly; and it is not
improper to testify this inward concurrence in public prayers and
devotions, by an audible Amen. The ancient Christians said Amen aloud.
Vide Just. Mart. apol. 2. prop fin. Now, how should the people say Amen
to what they did not understand? Note, There can be no concurrence in
those prayers that are not understood. The intention of public devotions
is therefore entirely destroyed if they are performed in an unknown
tongue. He who performs may pray well, and give thanks well, but not in
that time and place, because others are not, cannot be, edified ([Co1
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#017)) by what they understand not.

2\. He alleges his own example, to make the greater impression,
concerning which observe, (1.) That he did not come behind any of them
in this spiritual gift: "I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than
you all ([Co1 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#018)); not only more
than any single person among you, but more than all together." It was
not envy at their better furniture that made Paul depreciate what they
so highly valued and so much vaunted of; he surpassed them all in this
very gift of tongues, and did not vilify their gift because he had it
not. This spirit of envy is too common in the world. But the apostle
took care to guard against this misconstruction of his purpose, by
letting them know there was more ground for them to envy him upon this
head than for him to envy them. Note, When we beat down men's
unreasonable value for themselves, or any of their possessions or
attainments, we should let them see, if possible, that this does not
proceed from an envious and grudging spirit. We miss our aim if they can
fairly give our conduct this invidious turn. Paul could not be justly
censured, nor suspected for any such principle in this whole argument.
He spoke more language than they all. Yet, (2.) He had rather speak five
words with understanding, that is, so as to be understood, and instruct
and edify others, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue, [Co1
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#019). He was so far from valuing
himself upon talking languages, or making ostentation of his talents of
this kind, that he had rather speak five intelligible words, to benefit
others, than make a thousand, ten thousand fine discourses, that would
do no one else any good, because they did not understand them. Note, A
truly Christian minister will value himself much more upon doing the
least spiritual good to men's souls than upon procuring the greatest
applause and commendation to himself. This is true grandeur and
nobleness of spirit; it is acting up to his character; it is approving
himself the servant of Christ, and not a vassal to his own pride and
vanity.

3\. He adds a plain intimation that the fondness then discovered for
this gift was but too plain an indication of the immaturity of their
judgment: Brethren, be not children in understanding; in malice be you
children, but in understanding be men, [Co1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020). Children are apt to be struck
with novelty and strange appearances. They are taken with an outward
show, without enquiring into the true nature and worth of things. Do not
you act like them, and prefer noise and show to worth and substance;
show a greater ripeness of judgment, and act a more manly part; be like
children in nothing but an innocent and inoffensive disposition. A
double rebuke is couched in this passage, both of their pride upon
account of their gifts, and their arrogance and haughtiness towards each
other, and the contests and quarrels proceeding from them. Note,
Christians should be harmless and inoffensive as children, void of all
guile and malice; but should have wisdom and knowledge that are ripe and
mature. They should not be unskilful in the word of righteousness ([Heb
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#013)), though they should be unskilful
in all the arts of mischief.

[1 Corinthians 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 14:21</span></span>

In this passage the apostle pursues the argument, and reasons from other
topics; as,

I. Tongues, as the Corinthians used them, were rather a token of
judgment from God than mercy to any people ([Co1
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021)): In the law (that is, the Old
Testament) it is written, With men of other tongues and other lips will
I speak to this people; and yet for all this they will not hear me,
saith the Lord, [Isa 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011). Compare
[Deu 28:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#046), [Deu
28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049). To both these passages, it is
thought, the apostle refers. Both are delivered by way of threatening,
and one is supposed to interpret the other. The meaning in this view is
that it is an evidence that a people are abandoned of God when he gives
them up to this sort of instruction, to the discipline of those who
speak in another language. And surely the apostle's discourse implies,
"You should not be fond of the tokens of divine displeasure. God can
have no gracious regards to those who are left merely to this sort of
instruction, and taught in language which they cannot understand. They
can never be benefited by such teaching as this; and, when they are left
to it, it is a sad sign that God gives them over as past cure." And
should Christians covet to be in such a state, or to bring the churches
into it? Yet thus did the Corinthian preachers in effect, who would
always deliver their inspirations in an unknown tongue.

II\. Tongues were rather a sign to unbelievers than to believers, [Co1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022). They were a spiritual gift,
intended for the conviction and conversion of infidels, that they might
be brought into the Christian church; but converts were to be built up
in Christianity by profitable instructions in their own language. The
gift of tongues was necessary to spread Christianity, and gather
churches; it was proper and intended to convince unbelievers of that
doctrine which Christians had already embraced; but prophesying, and
interpreting scripture in their own language, were most for the
edification of such as did already believe: so that speaking with
tongues in Christians assemblies was altogether out of time and place;
neither one nor the other was proper for it. Note, That gifts may be
rightly used, it is proper to know the ends which they are intended to
serve. To go about the conversion of infidels, as the apostles did, had
been a vain undertaking without the gift of tongues, and the discovery
of this gift; but, in an assembly of Christians already converted to the
Christian faith, to make use and ostentation of this gift would be
perfectly impertinent, because it would be of no advantage to the
assembly; not for conviction of truth, because they had already embraced
it; not for their edification, because they did not understand, and
could not get benefit without understanding, what they heard.

III\. The credit and reputation of their assemblies among unbelievers
required them to prefer prophesying before speaking with tongues. For,
1. If, when they were all assembled for Christian worship, their
ministers, or all employed in public worship, should talk unintelligible
language, and infidels should drop in, they would conclude them to be
mad, to be no better than a parcel of wild fanatics. Who in their right
senses could carry on religious worship in such a manner? Or what sort
of religion is that which leaves out sense and understanding? Would not
this make Christianity ridiculous to a heathen, to hear the ministers of
it pray, or preach, or perform any other religious exercise, in a
language that neither he nor the assembly understood? Note, The
Christian religion is a sober and reasonable thing in itself, and should
not, by the ministers of it, be made to look wild or senseless. Those
disgrace their religion, and vilify their own character, who do any
thing that has this aspect. But, on the other hand, 2. If, instead of
speaking with tongues, those who minister plainly interpret scripture,
or preach, in language intelligible and proper, the great truths and
rules of the gospel, a heathen or unlearned person, coming in, will
probably be convinced, and become a convert to Christianity ([Co1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024), [Co1
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025)); his conscience will be
touched, the secrets of his heart will be revealed to him, he will be
condemned by the truth he hears, and so will be brought to confess his
guilt, to pay his homage to God, and own that he is indeed among you,
present in the assembly. Note, Scripture - truth, plainly and duly
taught, has a marvellous aptness to awaken the conscience, and touch the
heart. And is not this much more for the honour of our religion than
that infidels should conclude the ministers of it a set of madmen, and
their religious exercises only fits of frenzy? This last would at once
cast contempt on them and their religion too. Instead of procuring
applause for them, it would render them ridiculous, and involve their
profession in the same censure: whereas prophesying would certainly
edify the church, much better keep up their credit, and might probably
convince and convert infidels who might occasionally hear them. Note,
Religious exercises in Christian assemblies should be such as are fit to
edify the faithful, and convince, affect, and convert unbelievers. The
ministry was not instituted to make ostentation of gifts and parts, but
to save souls.

[1 Corinthians 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 14:26</span></span>

In this passage the apostle reproves them for their disorder, and
endeavours to correct and regulate their conduct for the future.

I. He blames them for the confusion they introduced into the assembly,
by ostentation of their gifts ([Co1
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026)): When you come together every
one hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, etc.; that is, "You
are apt to confound the several parts of worship; and, while one has a
psalm to utter by inspiration, another has a doctrine, or revelation;"
or else, "You are apt to be confused in the same branch of worship, many
of you having psalms or doctrines to propose at the same time, without
staying for one another. Is not this perfect uproar? Can this be
edifying? And yet all religious exercises in public assemblies should
have this view, Let all things be done to edifying."

II\. He corrects their faults, and lays down some regulations for their
future conduct. 1. As to speaking in an unknown tongue, he orders that
no more than two or three should do it at one meeting, and this not
altogether, but successively, one after another. And even this was not
to be done unless there were some one to interpret ([Co1
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#027), [Co1
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#028)), some other interpreter besides
himself, who spoke; for to speak in an unknown tongue what he himself
was afterwards to interpret could only be for ostentation. But, if
another were present who could interpret, two miraculous gifts might be
exercised at once, and thereby the church edified, and the faith of the
hearers confirmed at the same time. But, if there were none to
interpret, he was to be silent in the church, and only exercise his gift
between God and himself ([Co1 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#028)),
that is (as I think) in private, at home; for all who are present at
public worship should join in it, and not be at their private devotions
in public assemblies. Solitary devotions are out of time and place when
the church has met for social worship. 2. As to prophesying he orders,
(1.) That two or three only should speak at one meeting ([Co1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)), and this successively, not all
at once; and that the other should examine and judge what he delivered,
that is, discern and determine concerning it, whether it were of divine
inspiration or not. There might be false prophets, mere pretenders to
divine inspiration; and the true prophets were to judge of these, and
discern and discover who was divinely inspired, and by such inspiration
interpreted scripture, and taught the church, and who was not - what was
of divine inspiration and what was not. This seems to be the meaning of
this rule. For where a prophet was known to be such, and under the
divine afflatus, he could not be judged; for this were to subject even
the Holy Spirit to the judgment of men. He who was indeed inspired, and
known to be so, was above all human judgment. (2.) He orders that, if
any assistant prophet had a revelation, while another was prophesying,
the other should hold his peace, be silent ([Co1
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#030)), before the inspired assistant
uttered his revelation. Indeed, it is by many understood that the former
speaker should immediately hold his peace. But this seems unnatural, and
not so well to agree with the context. For why must one that was
speaking by inspiration be immediately silent upon another man's being
inspired, and suppress what was dictated to him by the same Spirit?
Indeed, he who had the new revelation might claim liberty of speech in
his turn, upon producing his vouchers; but why must liberty of speech be
taken from him who was speaking before, and his mouth stopped, when he
was delivering the dictates of the same Spirit, and could produce the
same vouchers? Would the Spirit of God move one to speak, and, before he
had delivered what he had to say, move another to interrupt him, and put
him to silence? This seems to me an unnatural thought. Nor is it more
agreeable to the context, and the reason annexed ([Co1
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#031)): That all might prophesy, one
by one, or one after another, which could not be where any one was
interrupted and silenced before he had done prophesying; but might
easily be if he who was afterwards inspired forbore to deliver his new
revelation till the former prophet had finished what he had to say. And,
to confirm this sense, the apostle quickly adds, The spirits of the
prophets are subject to the prophets ([Co1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033)); that is, the spiritual gifts
they have leave them still possessed of their reason, and capable of
using their own judgment in the exercise of them. Divine inspirations
are not, like the diabolical possessions of heathen priests, violent and
ungovernable, and prompting them to act as if they were beside
themselves; but are sober and calm, and capable of regular conduct. The
man inspired by the Spirit of God may still act the man, and observe the
rules of natural order and decency in delivering his revelations. His
spiritual gift is thus far subject to his pleasure, and to be managed by
his discretion.

III\. The apostle gives the reasons of these regulations. As, 1. That
they would be for the church's benefit, their instruction and
consolation. It is that all may learn, and all may be comforted or
exhorted, that the prophets were to speak in the orderly manner the
apostle advises. Note, The instruction, edification, and comfort of the
church, is that for which God instituted the ministry. And surely
ministers should, as much as possible, fit their ministrations to these
purposes. 2. He tells them, God is not the God of confusion, but of
peace and good order, [Co1 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033).
Therefore divine inspiration should by no means throw Christian
assemblies into confusion, and break through all rules of common
decency, which yet would be unavoidable if several inspired men should
all at once utter what was suggested to them by the Spirit of God, and
not wait to take their turns. Note, The honour of God requires that
things should be managed in Christian assemblies so as not to transgress
the rules of natural decency. If they are managed in a tumultuous and
confused manner, what a notion must this give of the God who is
worshipped, to considerate observers! Does it look as if he were the God
of peace and order, and an enemy to confusion? Things should be managed
so in divine worship that no unlovely nor dishonourable notion of God
should be formed in the minds of observers. 3. He adds that things were
thus orderly managed in all the other churches: As in all the churches
of the saints ([Co1 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033)); they kept
to these rules in the exercise of their spiritual gifts, which was a
manifest proof that the church of Corinth might observe the same
regulations. And it would be perfectly scandalous for them, who exceeded
most churches in spiritual gifts, to be more disorderly than any in the
exercise of them. Note, Though other churches are not to be our rule,
yet the regard they pay to the rules of natural decency and order should
restrain us from breaking these rules. Thus far they may be proposed as
examples, and it is a shame not to follow them.

[1 Corinthians 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">co1 14:34</span></span>

Here the apostle, 1. Enjoins silence on their women in public
assemblies, and to such a degree that they must not ask questions for
their own information in the church, but ask their husbands at home.
They are to learn in silence with all subjection; but, says the apostle,
I suffer them not to teach, [Ti1 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011),
[Ti1 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012). There is indeed an
intimation ([Co1 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005)) as if the women
sometimes did pray and prophecy in their assemblies, which the apostle,
in that passage, does not simply condemn, but the manner of performance,
that is, praying or prophesying with the head uncovered, which, in that
age and country, was throwing off the distinction of sexes, and setting
themselves on a level with the men. But here he seems to forbid all
public performances of theirs. They are not permitted to speak ([Co1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034)) in the church, neither in
praying nor prophesying. The connection seems plainly to include the
latter, in the limited sense in which it is taken in this chapter,
namely, for preaching, or interpreting scripture by inspiration. And,
indeed, for a woman to prophesy in this sense were to teach, which does
not so well befit her state of subjection. A teacher of others has in
that respect a superiority over them, which is not allowed the woman
over the man, nor must she therefore be allowed to teach in a
congregation: I suffer them not to teach. But praying, and uttering
hymns inspired, were not teaching. And seeing there were women who had
spiritual gifts of this sort in that age of the church (see [Act
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#009)), and might be under this impulse
in the assembly, must they altogether suppress it? Or why should they
have this gift, if it must never be publicly exercised? For these
reasons, some think that these general prohibitions are only to be
understood in common cases; but that upon extraordinary occasions, when
women were under a divine afflatus, and known to be so, they might have
liberty of speech. They were not ordinarily to teach, nor so much as to
debate and ask questions in the church, but learn in silence there; and,
if difficulties occurred, ask their own husbands at home. Note, As it is
the woman's duty to learn in subjection, it is the man's duty to keep up
his superiority, by being able to instruct her; if it be her duty to ask
her husband at home, it is his concern and duty to endeavour at lest to
be able to answer her enquiries; if it be a shame for her to speak in
the church, where she should be silent, it is a shame for him to be
silent when he should speak, and not be able to give an answer, when she
asks him at home. 2. We have here the reason of this injunction: It is
God's law and commandment that they should be under obedience ([Co1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034)); they are placed in
subordination to the man, and it is a shame for them to do any thing
that looks like an affectation of changing ranks, which speaking in
public seemed to imply, at least in that age, and among that people, as
would public teaching much more: so that the apostle concludes it was a
shame for women to speak in the church, in the assembly. Shame is the
mind's uneasy reflection on having done an indecent thing. And what more
indecent than for a woman to quit her rank, renounce the subordination
of her sex, or do what in common account had such aspect and appearance?
Note, Our spirit and conduct should be suitable to our rank. The natural
distinctions God has made, we should observe. Those he has placed in
subjection to others should not set themselves on a level, nor affect or
assume superiority. The woman was made subject to the man, and she
should keep her station and be content with it. For this reason women
must be silent in the churches, not set up for teachers; for this is
setting up for superiority over the man.

[1 Corinthians 14:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">co1 14:36</span></span>

In these verses the apostle closes his argument, 1. With a just rebuke
of the Corinthians for their extravagant pride and self-conceit: they so
managed with their spiritual gifts as no church did like them; they
behaved in a manner by themselves, and would not easily endure control
nor regulation. Now, says the apostle, to beat down this arrogant
humour, "Came the gospel out from you? Or came it to you only? [Co1
14:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#036). Did Christianity come our of
Corinth? was its original among you? Or, if not, is it now limited and
confined to you? are you the only church favoured with divine
revelations, that you will depart from the decent usages of all other
churches, and, to make ostentation of your spiritual gifts, bring
confusion into Christian assemblies? How intolerably assuming is this
behaviour! Pray bethink yourselves." When it was needful or proper the
apostle could rebuke with all authority; and surely his rebukes, if
ever, were proper here. Note, Those must be reproved and humbled whose
spiritual pride and self-conceit throw Christian churches and assemblies
into confusion, though such men will hardly bear even the rebukes of an
apostle. 2. He lets them know that what he said to them was the command
of God; nor durst any true prophet, any one really inspired, deny it
([Co1 14:37](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#037)): "If any man think
himself a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge, etc., nay, let him
be tried by this very rule. If he will not own what I deliver on this
head to be the will of Christ, he himself never had the Spirit of
Christ. The Spirit of Christ can never contradict itself; if it speak in
me, and in them, it must speak the same things in both. If their
revelations contradict mine, they do not come from the same Spirit;
either I or they must be false prophets. By this therefore you may know
them. If they say that my directions in this matter are no divine
commandments, you may depend upon it they are not divinely inspired. But
if any continue after all, through prejudice or obstinacy, uncertain or
ignorant whether they or I speak by the Spirit of God, they must be left
under the power of this ignorance. If their pretences to inspiration can
stand in competition with the apostolical character and powers which I
have, I have lost all my authority and influence; and the persons who
allow of this competition against me are out of the reach of conviction,
and must be left to themselves." Note, It is just with God to leave
those to the blindness of their own minds who wilfully shut out the
light. Those who would be ignorant in so plain a case were justly left
under the power of their mistake. 3. He sums up all in two general
advices: - (1.) That though they should not despise the gift of tongues,
nor altogether disuse it, under the regulations mentioned, yet they
should prefer prophesying. This is indeed the scope of the whole
argument. It was to be preferred to the other, because it was the more
useful gift. (2.) He charges them to let all things be done decently and
in order ([Co1 14:40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#040)), that is, that
they should avoid every thing that was manifestly indecent and
disorderly. Not that they should hence take occasion to bring into the
Christian church and worship any thing that a vain mind might think
ornamental to it, or that would help to set it off. Such indecencies and
disorders as he had remarked upon were especially to be shunned. They
must do nothing that was manifestly childish ([Co1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)), or that would give occasion to
say they were mad ([Co1 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#023)), nor
must they act so as to breed confusion, [Co1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033). This would be utterly indecent;
it would make a tumult and mob of a Christian assembly. But they were to
do things in order; they were to speak one after another, and not all at
once; take their turns, and not interrupt one another. To do otherwise
was to destroy the end of a Christians ministry, and all assemblies for
Christian worship. Note, Manifest indecencies and disorders are to be
carefully kept out of all Christian churches, and every part of divine
worship. They should have nothing in them that is childish, absurd,
ridiculous, wild, or tumultuous; but all parts of divine worship should
be carried on in a manly, grave, rational, composed, and orderly manner.
God is not to be dishonoured, nor his worship disgraced, by our
unbecoming and disorderly performance of it and attendance at it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 15](co1015)

</div>
