<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1004)  [Next](co1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 5:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle, I. Blames them for their indulgence in the
case of the incestuous person, and orders him to be excommunicated, and
delivered to Satan ([Co1 5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)). II.
He exhorts them to Christian purity, by purging out the old leaven ([Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007), [Co1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)). And, III. Directs them to shun
even the common conversation of Christians who were guilty of any
notorious and flagitious wickedness ([Co1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#009) to the end).

[1 Corinthians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 5:1</span></span>

Here the apostle states the case; and,

I. Lets them know what was the common or general report concerning them,
that one of their community was guilty of fornication, [Co1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001). It was told in all places, to
their dishonour, and the reproach of Christians. And it was the more
reproachful because it could not be denied. Note, The heinous sins of
professed Christians are quickly noted and noised abroad. We should walk
circumspectly, for many eyes are upon us, and many mouths will be opened
against us if we fall into any scandalous practice. This was not a
common instance of fornication, but such as was not so much as named
among the Gentiles, that a man should have his father's wife - either
marry her while his father was alive, or keep her as his concubine,
either when he was dead or while he was alive. In either of these cases,
his criminal conversation with her might be called fornication; but had
his father been dead, and he, after his decease, married to her, it had
been incest still, but neither fornication nor adultery in the strictest
sense. But to marry her, or keep her as a concubine, while his father
was alive, though he had repudiated her, or she had deserted him,
whether she were his own mother or not, was incestuous fornication:
Scelus incredibile (as Cicero calls it), et prater unum in omni vit
inauditum (Orat. pro Cluent.), when a woman had caused her daughter to
be put away, and was married to her husband. Incredible wickedness! says
the orator; such I never heard of in all my life besides. Not that there
were no such instances of incestuous marriages among the heathens; but,
whenever they happened, they gave a shock to every man of virtue and
probity among them. They could not think of them without horror, nor
mention them without dislike and detestation. Yet such a horrible
wickedness was committed by one in the church of Corinth, and, as is
probable, a leader of one of the factions among them, a principal man.
Note, The best churches are, in this state of imperfection, liable to
very great corruptions. Is it any wonder when so horrible a practice was
tolerated in an apostolical church, a church planted by the great
apostle of the Gentiles?

II\. He greatly blames them for their own conduct hereupon: They were
puffed up ([Co1 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002)), they gloried, 1.
Perhaps on account of this very scandalous person. He might be a man of
great eloquence, of deep science, and for this reason very greatly
esteemed, and followed, and cried up, by many among them. They were
proud that they had such a leader. Instead of mourning for his fall, and
their own reproach upon his account, and renouncing him and removing him
from the society, they continued to applaud him and pride themselves in
him. Note, Pride or self-esteem often lies at the bottom of our
immoderate esteem of others, and this makes us as blind to their faults
as to our own. It is true humility that will bring a man to a sight and
acknowledgement of his errors. The proud man either wholly overlooks or
artfully disguises his faults, or endeavours to transform his blemishes
into beauties. Those of the Corinthians that were admirers of the
incestuous person's gifts could overlook or extenuate his horrid
practices. Or else, 2. It may intimate to us that some of the opposite
party were puffed up. They were proud of their own standing, and
trampled upon him that fell. Note, It is a very wicked thing to glory
over the miscarriages and sins of others. We should lay them to heart,
and mourn for them, not be puffed up with them. Probably this was one
effect of the divisions among them. The opposite party made their
advantage of this scandalous lapse, and were glad of the opportunity.
Note, It is a sad consequence of divisions among Christians that it
makes them apt to rejoice in iniquity. The sins of others should be our
sorrow. Nay, churches should mourn for the scandalous behaviour of
particular members, and, if they be incorrigible, should remove them. He
that had done this wicked deed should have been taken away from among
them.

III\. We have the apostle's direction to them how they should now
proceed with this scandalous sinner. He would have him excommunicated
and delivered to Satan ([Co1 5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003));
as absent in body, yet present in spirit, he had judged already as if he
had been present; that is, he had, by revelation and the miraculous gift
of discerning vouchsafed him by the Spirit, as perfect a knowledge of
the case, and had hereupon come to the following determination, not
without special authority from the Holy Spirit. He says this to let them
know that, though he was at a distance, he did not pass an unrighteous
sentence, nor judge without having as full cognizance of the case as if
he had been on the spot. Note, Those who would appear righteous judges
to the world will take care to inform them that they do not pass
sentence without full proof and evidence. The apostle adds, him who hath
so done this deed. The fact was not only heinously evil in itself, and
horrible to the heathens, but there were some particular circumstances
that greatly aggravated the offence. He had so committed the evil as to
heighten the guilt by the manner of doing it. Perhaps he was a minister,
a teacher, or a principal man among them. By this means the church and
their profession were more reproached. Note, In dealing with scandalous
sinners, not only are they to be charged with the fact, but the
aggravating circumstances of it. Paul had judged that he should be
delivered to Satan ([Co1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)), and
this was to be done in the name of Christ, with the power of Christ, and
in a full assembly, where the apostle would be also present in spirit,
or by his spiritual gift of discerning at a distance. Some think that
this is to be understood of a mere ordinary excommunication, and that
delivering him to Satan for the destruction of the flesh is only meant
of disowning him, and casting him out of the church, that by this means
he might be brought to repentance, and his flesh might be mortified.
Christ and Satan divide the world: and those that live in sin, when they
profess relation to Christ, belong to another master, and by
excommunication should be delivered up to him; and this in the name of
Christ. Note, Church-censures are Christ's ordinances, and should be
dispensed in his name. It was to be done also when they were gathered
together, in full assembly. The more public the more solemn, and the
more solemn the more likely to have a good effect on the offender. Note,
Church-censures on notorious and incorrigible sinners should be passed
with great solemnity. Those who sin in this manner are to be rebuked
before all, that all may fear, [Ti1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020). Others think the apostle is not
to be understood of mere excommunication, but of a miraculous power or
authority they had of delivering a scandalous sinner into the power of
Satan, to have bodily diseases inflicted, and to be tormented by him
with bodily pains, which is the meaning of the destruction of the flesh.
In this sense the destruction of the flesh has been a happy occasion of
the salvation of the spirit. It is probable that this was a mixed case.
It was an extraordinary instance: and the church was to proceed against
him by just censure; the apostle, when they did so, put forth an act of
extraordinary power, and gave him up to Satan, nor for his destruction,
but for his deliverance, at least for the destruction of the flesh, that
the soul might be saved. Note, The great end of church-censures is the
good of those who fall under them, their spiritual and eternal good. It
is that their spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, [Co1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005). Yet it is not merely a regard to
their benefit that is to be had in proceeding against them. For,

IV\. He hints the danger of contagion from this example: Your glorying
is not good. Know you not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?
The bad example of a man in rank and reputation is very mischievous,
spreads the contagion far and wide. It did so, probably, in this very
church and case: see [Co2 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021). They
could not be ignorant of this. The experience of the whole world was for
it; one scabbed sheep infects a whole flock. A little heaven will
quickly spread the ferment through a great lump. Note, Concern for their
purity and preservation should engage Christian churches to remove gross
and scandalous sinners.

[1 Corinthians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 5:7</span></span>

Here the apostle exhorts them to purity, by purging out the old leaven.
In this observe,

I. The advice itself, addressed either, 1. To the church in general; and
so purging out the old leaven, that they might be a new lump, refers to
the putting away from themselves that wicked person, [Co1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013). Note, Christian churches should
be pure and holy, and not bear such corrupt and scandalous members. They
are to be unleavened, and should endure no such heterogeneous mixture to
sour and corrupt them. Or, 2. To each particular member of the church.
And so it implies that they should purge themselves from all impurity of
heart and life, especially from this kind of wickedness, to which the
Corinthians were addicted to a proverb. See the argument at the
beginning. This old leaven was in a particular manner to be purged out,
that they might become a new lump. Note, Christians should be careful to
keep themselves clean, as well as purge polluted members out of their
society. And they should especially avoid the sins to which they
themselves were once most addicted, and the reigning vices of the places
and the people where they live. They were also to purge themselves from
malice and wickedness - all ill-will and mischievous subtlety. This is
leaven that sours the mind to a great degree. It is not improbable that
this was intended as a check to some who gloried in the scandalous
behaviour of the offender, both out of pride and pique. Note, Christians
should be careful to keep free from malice and mischief. Love is the
very essence and life of the Christian religion. It is the fairest image
of God, for God is love ([Jo1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)),
and therefore it is no wonder if it be the greatest beauty and ornament
of a Christian. But malice is murder in its principles: He that hates
his brother is a murderer ([Jo1 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015)),
he bears the image and proclaims him the offspring of him who was a
murderer from the beginning, [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044). How hateful should every thing
be to a Christian that looks like malice and mischief.

II\. The reason with which this advice is enforced: For Christ our
passover is sacrificed for us, [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007). This is the great doctrine of the
gospel. The Jews, after they had killed the passover, kept the feast of
unleavened bread. So must we; not for seven days only, but all our days.
We should die with our Saviour to sin, be planted into the likeness of
his death by mortifying sin, and into the likeness of his resurrection
by rising again to newness of life, and that internal and external. We
must have new hearts and new lives. Note, The whole life of a Christian
must be a feast of unleavened bread. His common conversation and his
religious performances must be holy. He must purge out the old leaven,
and keep the feast of unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. He must
be without guilt in his conduct towards God and man. And the more there
is of sincerity in our own profession, the less shall we censure that of
others. Note, On the whole, The sacrifice of our Redeemer is the
strongest argument with a gracious heart for purity and sincerity. How
sincere a regard did he show to our welfare, in dying for us! and how
terrible a proof was his death of the detestable nature of sin, and
God's displeasure against it! Heinous evil, that could not be expiated
but with the blood of the Son of God! And shall a Christian love the
murderer of his Lord? God forbid.

[1 Corinthians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 5:9</span></span>

Here the apostle advises them to shun the company and converse of
scandalous professors. Consider,

I. The advice itself: I wrote to you in a letter not to company with
fornicators, [Co1 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#009). Some think this
was an epistle written to them before, which is lost. Yet we have lost
nothing by it, the Christian revelation being entire in those books of
scripture which have come down to us, which are all that were intended
by God for the general use of Christians, or he could and would in his
providence have preserved more of the writings of inspired men. Some
think it is to be understood of this very epistle, that he had written
this advice before he had full information of their whole case, but
thought it needful now to be more particular. And therefore on this
occasion he tells them that if any man called a brother, any one
professing Christianity, and being a member of a Christian church, were
a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, that they should
not keep company with him, nor so much as eat with such a one. They were
to avoid all familiarity with him; they were to have no commerce with
him; they were to have no commerce with him: but, that they might shame
him, and bring him to repentance, must disclaim and shun him. Note,
Christians are to avoid the familiar conversation of fellow-christians
that are notoriously wicked, and under just censure for their flagitious
practices. Such disgrace the Christian name. They may call themselves
brethren in Christ, but they are not Christian brethren. They are only
fit companions for the brethren in iniquity; and to such company they
should be left, till they mend their ways and doings.

II\. How he limits this advice. He does not forbid the Christians the
like commerce with scandalously wicked heathens. He does not forbid
their eating nor conversing with the fornicators of this world, etc.
They know no better. They profess no better. The gods they serve, and
the worship they render to many of them, countenance such wickedness.
"You must needs go out of the world if you will have no conversation
with such men. Your Gentile neighbours are generally vicious and
profane; and it is impossible, as long as you are in the world, and have
any worldly business to do, but you must fall into their company. This
cannot be wholly avoided." Note, Christians may and ought to testify
more respect to loose worldlings than to loose Christians. This seems a
paradox. Why should we shun the company of a profane or loose Christian,
rather than that of a profane or loose heathen?

III\. The reason of this limitation is here assigned. It is impossible
the one should be avoided. Christians must have gone out of the world to
avoid the company of loose heathens. But this was impossible, as long as
they had business in the world. While they are minding their duty, and
doing their proper business, God can and will preserve them from
contagion. Besides, they carry an antidote against the infection of
their bad example, and are naturally upon their guard. They are apt to
have a horror at their wicked practices. But the dread of sin wears off
by familiar converse with wicked Christians. Our own safety and
preservation are a reason of this difference. But, besides, heathens
were such as Christians had nothing to do to judge and censure, and
avoid upon a censure passed; for they are without ([Co1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)), and must be left to God's
judgment, [Co1 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013). But, as to
members of the church, they are within, are professedly bound by the
laws and rules of Christianity, and not only liable to the judgment of
God, but to the censures of those who are set over them, and the
fellow-members of the same body, when they transgress those rules. Every
Christian is bound to judge them unfit for communion and familiar
converse. They are to be punished, by having this mark of disgrace put
upon them, that they may be shamed, and, if possible, reclaimed thereby:
and the more because the sins of such much more dishonour God than the
sins of the openly wicked and profane can do. The church therefore is
obliged to clear herself from all confederacy with them, or connivance
at them, and to bear testimony against their wicked practices. Note,
Though the church has nothing to do with those without, it must
endeavour to keep clear of the guilt and reproach of those within.

IV\. How he applies the argument to the case before him: "Therefore put
away from among yourselves that wicked person, [Co1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013). Cast him out of your fellowship,
and avoid his conversation."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 6](co1006)

</div>
