<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2009)  [Next](co2011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 10:0</span></span>

There was no place in which the apostle Paul met with more opposition
from false apostles than at Corinth; he had many enemies there. Let not
any of the ministers of Christ think it strange if they meet with
perils, not only from enemies, but from false brethren; for blessed Paul
himself did so. Though he was so blameless and inoffensive in all his
carriage, so condescending and useful to all, yet there were those who
bore him ill-will, who envied him, and did all they could to undermine
him, and lesson his interest and reputation. Therefore he vindicates
himself from their imputation, and arms the Corinthians against their
insinuations. In this chapter the apostle, in a mild and humble manner,
asserts the power of his preaching, and to punish offenders ([Co2
10:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001)). He then proceeds to reason
the case with the Corinthians, asserting his relation to Christ, and his
authority as an apostle of Christ ([Co2
10:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#007)), and refuses to justify
himself, or to act by such rules as the false teachers did, but
according to the better rules he had fixed for himself ([Co2
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012) to the end).

[2 Corinthians 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 10:1</span></span>

Here we may observe,

I. The mild and humble manner in which the blessed apostle addresses the
Corinthians, and how desirous he is that no occasion may be given him to
use severity. 1. He addresses them in a very mild and humble manner: I
Paul myself beseech you, [Co2 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001). We
find, in the introduction to this epistle, he joined Timothy with
himself; but now he speaks only for himself, against whom the false
apostles had particularly levelled their reproaches; yet in the midst of
the greatest provocations he shows humility and mildness, from the
consideration of the meekness and gentleness of Christ, and desires this
great example may have the same influence on the Corinthians. Note, When
we find ourselves tempted or inclined to be rough and severe towards any
body, we should think of the meekness and gentleness of Christ, that
appeared in him in the days of his flesh, in the design of his
undertaking, and in all the acts of his grace towards poor souls. How
humbly also does this great apostle speak of himself, as one in presence
base among them! So his enemies spoke of him with contempt, and he seems
to acknowledge it; while others thought meanly, and spoke scornfully of
him, he had low thoughts of himself, and spoke humbly of himself. Note,
We should be sensible of our own infirmities, and think humbly of
ourselves, even when men reproach us for them.

2\. He is desirous that no occasion may be given to use severity, [Co2
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#002). He beseeches them to give no
occasion for him to be bold, or to exercise his authority against them
in general, as he had resolved to do against some who unjustly charged
him as walking according to the flesh, that is, regulating his conduct,
even in his ministerial actions, according to carnal policy or with
worldly views. This was what the apostle had renounced, and this is
contrary to the spirit and design of the gospel, and was far from being
the aim and design of the apostle. Hereupon,

II\. He asserts the power of his preaching and his power to punish
offenders.

1\. The power of his preaching, [Co2
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#003), [Co2
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005). Here observe, (1.) The work of
the ministry is a warfare, not after the flesh indeed, for it is a
spiritual warfare, with spiritual enemies and for spiritual purposes.
And though ministers walk in the flesh, or live in the body, and in the
common affairs of life act as other men, yet in their work and warfare
they must not go by the maxims of the flesh, nor should they design to
please the flesh: this must be crucified with its affections and lusts;
it must be mortified and kept under. (2.) The doctrines of the gospel
and discipline of the church are the weapons of this warfare; and these
are not carnal: outward force, therefore, is not the method of the
gospel, but strong persuasions, by the power of truth and the meekness
of wisdom. A good argument this is against persecution for conscience'
sake: conscience is accountable to God only; and people must be
persuaded to God and their duty, not driven by force of arms. And so the
weapons of our warfare are mighty, or very powerful; the evidence of
truth is convincing and cogent. This indeed is through God, or owing to
him, because they are his institutions, and accompanied with his
blessing, which makes all opposition to fall before his victorious
gospel. We may here observe, \[1.\] What opposition is made against the
gospel by the powers of sin and Satan in the hearts of men. Ignorance,
prejudices, beloved lusts, are Satan's strong-holds in the souls of
some; vain imaginations, carnal reasonings, and high thoughts, or proud
conceits, in others, exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, that
is, by these ways the devil endeavours to keep men from faith and
obedience to the gospel, and secures his possession of the hearts of
men, as his own house or property. But then observe, \[2.\] The conquest
which the word of God gains. These strong-holds are pulled down by the
gospel as the means, through the grace and power of God accompanying it
as the principal efficient cause. Note, The conversion of the soul is
the conquest of Satan in that soul.

2\. The apostle's power to punish offenders (and that in an
extraordinary manner) is asserted in [Co2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006). The apostle was a prime-minister
in the kingdom of Christ, and chief officer in his army, and had in
readiness (that is, he had power and authority at hand) to revenge all
disobedience, or to punish offenders in a most exemplary and
extraordinary manner. The apostle speaks not of personal revenge, but of
punishing disobedience to the gospel, and disorderly walking among
church-members, by inflicting church-censures. Note, Though the apostle
showed meekness and gentleness, yet he would not betray his authority;
and therefore intimates that when he would commend those whose obedience
was fulfilled or manifested others would fall under severe censures.

[2 Corinthians 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 10:7</span></span>

In these verses the apostle proceeds to reason the case with the
Corinthians, in opposition to those who despised him, judged him, and
spoke hardly of him: "Do you," says he, "look on things after the
outward appearance? [Co2 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#007). Is this
a fit measure or rule to make an estimate of things or persons by, and
to judge between me and my adversaries?" In outward appearance, Paul was
mean and despicable with some; he did not make a figure, as perhaps some
of his competitors might do: but this was a false rule to make a
judgment by. It should seem that some boasted mighty things of
themselves, and made a fair show. But there are often false appearances.
A man may seem to be learned who has not learned Christ, and appear
virtuous when he has not a principle of grace in his heart. However, the
apostle asserts two things of himself: -

I. His relation to Christ: If any man trust to himself that he is
Christ's, even so are we Christ's, [Co2
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#007). It would seem by this that
Paul's adversaries boasted of their relation to Christ as his ministers
and servants. Now the apostle reasons thus with the Corinthians:
"Suppose it to be so, allowing what they say to be true (and let us
observe that, in fair arguing, we should allow all that may be
reasonably granted, and should not think it impossible but those who
differ from us very much may yet belong to Christ, as well as we),
allowing them," might the apostle say, "what they boast of, yet they
ought also to allow this to us, that we also are Christ's." Note, 1. We
must not, by the most charitable allowances we make to others who differ
from us, cut ourselves off from Christ, nor deny our relation to him.
For, 2. There is room in Christ for many; and those who differ much from
one another may yet be one in him. It would help to heal the differences
that are among us if we would remember that, how confident soever we may
be that we belong to Christ, yet, at the same time, we must allow that
those who differ from us may belong to Christ too, and therefore should
be treated accordingly. We must not think that we are the people, and
that none belong to Christ but ourselves. This we may plead for
ourselves, against those who judge us and despise us that, how weak
soever we are, yet, as they are Christ's, so are we: we profess the same
faith, we walk by the same rule, we build upon the same foundation, and
hope for the same inheritance.

II\. His authority from Christ as an apostle. This he had mentioned
before ([Co2 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)), and now he tells
them that he might speak of it again, and that with some sort of
boasting, seeing it was a truth, that the Lord had given it to him, and
it was more than his adversaries could justly pretend to. It was
certainly what he should not be ashamed of, [Co2
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#008). Concerning this observe, 1. The
nature of his authority: it was for edification, and not for
destruction. This indeed is the end of all authority, civil and
ecclesiastical, and was the end of that extraordinary authority which
the apostles had, and of all church-discipline. 2. The caution with
which he speaks of his authority, professing that his design was not to
terrify them with big words, nor by angry letters, [Co2
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#009). Thus he seems to obviate an
objection that might have been formed against him, [Co2
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010). But the apostle declares he did
not intend to frighten those who were obedient, nor did he write any
thing in his letters that he was not able to make good by deeds against
the disobedient; and he would have his adversaries know this ([Co2
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#011)), that he would, by the exercise
of his apostolical power committed to him, make it appear to have a real
efficacy.

[2 Corinthians 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 10:12</span></span>

In these verses observe,

I. The apostle refuses to justify himself, or to act by such rules as
the false apostles did, [Co2 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012). He
plainly intimates that they took a wrong method to commend themselves,
in measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among
themselves, which was not wise. They were pleased, and did pride
themselves, in their own attainments, and never considered those who far
exceeded them in gifts and graces, in power and authority; and this made
them haughty and insolent. Note, If we would compare ourselves with
others who excel us, this would be a good method to keep us humble; we
should be pleased and thankful for what we have of gifts or graces, but
never pride ourselves therein, as if there were none to be compared with
us or that did excel us. The apostle would not be of the number of such
vain men: let us resolve that we will not make ourselves of that number.

II\. He fixes a better rule for his conduct, namely, not to boast of
things without his measure, which was the measure God had distributed to
him, [Co2 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013). His meaning is,
either that he would not boast of more gifts or graces, or power and
authority, than God had really bestowed on him; or, rather, that he
would not act beyond his commission as to persons or things, nor go
beyond the line prescribed to him, which he plainly intimates the false
apostles did, while they boasted of other men's labors. The apostle's
resolution was to keep within his own province, and that compass of
ground which God had marked out for him. His commission as an apostle
was to preach the gospel every where, especially among the Gentiles, and
he was not confined to one place; yet he observed the directions of
Providence, and the Holy Spirit, as to the particular places whither he
went or where he did abide.

III\. He acted according to this rule: We stretch not ourselves beyond
our measure, [Co2 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#014). And,
particularly, he acted according to this rule in preaching at Corinth,
and in the exercise of his apostolical authority there; for he came
thither by divine direction, and there he converted many to
Christianity; and, therefore, in boasting of them as his charge, he
acted not contrary to his rule, he boasted not of other men's labours,
[Co2 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#015).

IV\. He declares his success in observing this rule. His hope was that
their faith was increased, and that others beyond them, even in the
remoter parts of Achaia, would embrace the gospel also; and in all this
he exceeded not his commission, nor acted in another man's line.

V. He seems to check himself in this matter, as if he had spoken too
much in his own praise. The unjust accusations and reflections of his
enemies had made it needful he should justify himself; and the wrong
methods they took gave him good occasion to mention the better rule he
had observed: yet he is afraid of boasting, or taking any praise to
himself, and therefore he mentions two things which ought to be
regarded: - 1. He that glorieth should glory in the Lord, [Co2
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017). If we are able to fix good
rules for our conduct, or act by them, or have any good success in so
doing, the praise and glory of all are owing unto God. Ministers in
particular must be careful not to glory in their performances, but must
give God the glory of their work, and the success thereof. 2. Not he
that commendeth himself is approved, but he whom the Lord commendeth,
[Co2 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#018). Of all flattery,
self-flattery is the worst, and self-applause is seldom any better than
self-flattery and self-deceit. At the best, self-commendation is no
praise, and it is oftentimes as foolish and vain as it is proud;
therefore, instead of praising or commending ourselves, we should strive
to approve ourselves to God, and his approbation will be our best
commendation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 11](co2011)

</div>
