<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan007)  [Next](dan009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 8:0</span></span>

The visions and prophecies of this chapter look only and entirely at the
events that were then shortly to come to pass in the monarchies of
Persia and Greece, and seem not to have any further reference at all.
Nothing is here said of the Chaldean monarchy, for that was now just at
its period; and therefore this chapter is written not in Chaldee, as the
six foregoing chapters were, for the benefit of the Chaldeans, but in
Hebrew, and so are the rest of the chapters to the end of the book, for
the service of the Jews, that they might know what troubles were before
them and what the issue of them would be, and might provide accordingly.
In this chapter we have, I. The vision itself of the ram, and the
he-goat, and the little horn that should fight and prevail against the
people of God, for a certain limited time ([Dan
8:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)). II. The interpretation of
this vision by an angel, showing that the ram signified the Persian
empire, the he-goat the Grecian, and the little horn a king of the
Grecian monarchy, that should set himself against the Jews and religion,
which was Antiochus Epiphanes ([Dan
8:15-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015)). The Jewish church, from its
beginning, had been all along, more or less, blessed with prophets, men
divinely inspired to explain God's mind to them in his providences and
give them some prospect of what was coming upon them; but, soon after
Ezra's time, divine inspiration ceased, and there was no more any
prophet till the gospel day dawned. And therefore the events of that
time were here foretold by Daniel, and left upon record, that even then
God might not leave himself without witness, nor them without a guide.

[Daniel 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 8:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The date of this vision, [Dan
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001). It was in the third year of the
reign of Belshazzar, which proved to be his last year, as many reckon;
so that this chapter also should be, in order of time, before the fifth.
That Daniel might not be surprised at the destruction of Babylon, now at
hand, God gives him a foresight of the destruction of other kingdoms
hereafter, which in their day had been as potent as that of Babylon.
Could we foresee the changes that shall be hereafter, when we are gone,
we should the less admire, and be less affected with, the changes in our
own day; for that which is done is that which shall be done, [Ecc
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009). Then it was that a vision
appeared to me, even to me, Daniel. Here he solemnly attests the truth
of it: it was to him, even to him, that the vision was shown; he was the
eye-witness of it. And this vision puts him in mind of a former vision
which appeared to him at the first, in the first year of this reign,
which he makes mention of because this vision was an explication and
confirmation of that, and points at many of the same events. That seems
to have been a dream, a vision in his sleep; this seems to have been
when he was awake.

II\. The scene of this vision. The place where that was laid was in
Shushan the palace, one of the royal seats of the kings of Persia,
situated on the banks of the river Ulai, which surrounded the city; it
was in the province of Elam, that part of Persia which lay next to
Babylon. Daniel was not there in person, for he was now in Babylon, a
captive, in some employment under Belshazzar, and might not go to such a
distant country, especially being now an enemy's country. But he was
there in vision; as Ezekiel, when a captive in Babylon, was often
brought, in the spirit, to the land of Israel. Note, The soul may be a
liberty when the body is in captivity; for, when we are bound, the
Spirit of the Lord is not bound. The vision related to that country, and
therefore there he was made to fancy himself to be as strongly as if he
had really been there.

III\. The vision itself and the process of it.

1\. He saw a ram with two horns, [Dan
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003). This was the second monarchy, of
which the kingdoms of Media and Persia were the two horns. The horns
were very high; but that which came up last was the higher, and got the
start of the former. So the last shall be first, and the first last. The
kingdom of Persia, which rose last, in Cyrus, became more eminent than
that of the Medes.

2\. He saw this ram pushing all about him with his horns ([Dan
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004)), westward (towards Babylon,
Syria, Greece, and Asia the less), northward (towards the Lydians,
Armenians, and Scythians), and southward (towards Arabia, Ethiopia, and
Egypt), for all these nations did the Persian empire, one time or other,
make attempts upon for the enlarging of their dominion. And at last he
became so powerful that no beasts might stand before him. This ram,
though of a species of animal often preyed upon, became formidable even
to the beasts of prey themselves, so that there was no standing before
him, no escaping him, none that could deliver out of his hand, but all
must yield to him: the kings of Persia did according to their will,
prospered in all their ways abroad, had an uncontrollable power at home,
and became great. He thought himself great because he did what he would;
but to do good is that which makes men truly great.

3\. He saw this ram overcome by a he-goat. He was considering the ram
(wondering that so weak an animal should come to be so prevalent) and
thinking what would be the issue; and, behold, a he-goat came, [Dan
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005). This was Alexander the Great, the
son of Philip king of Macedonia. He came from the west, from Greece,
which lay west from Persia. He fetched a great compass with his army: he
came upon the face of the whole earth; he did in effect conquer the
world, and then sat down and wept because there was not another world to
be conquered. Unus Pellaeo juveni non sufficit orbis - One world was too
little for the youth of Pellae. This he-goat (a creature famed for
comeliness in going, [Pro 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#031)) went
on with incredible swiftness, so that he touched not the ground, so
lightly did he move; he rather seemed to fly above the ground than to go
upon the ground; or none touched him in the earth, that is, he met with
little or no opposition. This he-goat, or buck, had a notable horn
between his eyes, like a unicorn. He had strength, and knew his own
strength; he saw himself a match for all his neighbours. Alexander
pushed his conquests on so fast, and with so much fury, that none of the
kingdoms he attacked had courage to make a stand, or give check to the
progress of his victorious arms. In six years he made himself master of
the greatest part of the then known world. Well might he be called a
notable horn, for his name still lives in history as the name of one of
the most celebrated commanders in war that ever the world knew.
Alexander's victories and achievements are still the entertainment of
the ingenious. This he-goat came to the ram that had two horns, [Dan
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#006). Alexander with his victorious
army attacked the kingdom of Persia, an army consisting of no more than
30,000 foot and 5000 horse. He ran unto him, to surprise him ere he
could get intelligence of his motions, in the fury of his power. He came
close to the ram. Alexander with his army came up with Darius
Codomannus, then emperor of Persia, being moved with choler against him,
[Dan 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007). It was with the greatest
violence that Alexander pushed on his war against Darius, who, though he
brought vast numbers into the field, yet, for want of skill, was an
unequal match for him, so that Alexander was too hard for him whenever
he engaged him, smote him, cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon
him, which three expressions, some think, refer to the three famous
victories that Alexander obtained over Darius, at Granicus, at Issus,
and at Arbela, by which he was at length totally routed, having, in the
last battle, had 600,000 men killed, so that Alexander became absolute
master of all the Persian empire, broke his two horns, the kingdoms of
Media and Persia. The ram that had destroyed all before him ([Dan
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004)) now is himself destroyed; Darius
has no power to stand before Alexander, not has he any friends or allies
to help to deliver him out of his hand. Note, Those kingdoms which, when
they had power, abused it, and, because none could oppose them, withheld
not themselves from the doing of any wrong, may expect to have their
power at length taken from them, and to be served in their own kind,
[Isa 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001).

4\. He saw the he-goat made hereby very considerable; but the great
horn, that had done all this execution, was broken, [Dan
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008). Alexander was about twenty years
old when he began his wars. When he was about twenty-six he conquered
Darius, and became master of the whole Persian empire; but when he was
about thirty-two or thirty-three years of age, when he was strong, in
his full strength, he was broken. He was not killed in war, in the bed
of honour, but died of a drunken surfeit, or, as some suspect, by poison
and left no child living behind him to enjoy that which he had endlessly
laboured for, but left a lasting monument of the vanity of worldly pomp
and power, and their insufficiency to make a man happy.

5\. He saw this kingdom divided into four parts, and that instead of
that one great horn there came up four notable ones, Alexander's four
captains, to whom he bequeathed his conquests; and he had so much that,
when it was divided among four, they had each of them enough for any one
man. These four notable horns were towards the four winds of heaven, the
same with the four heads of the leopard ([Dan
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#006)), the kingdoms of Syria and Egypt,
Asia and Greece - Syria lying to the east, Greece to the west, Asia
Minor to the north, and Egypt to the south. Note, Those that heap up
riches know not who shall gather them, nor whose all those things shall
be which they have provided.

6\. He saw a little horn which became a great persecutor of the church
and people of God; and this was the principal thing that was intended to
be shown to him in this vision, as afterwards, [Dan
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#030), etc. All agree that this was
Antiochus Epiphanes (so he called himself) - the illustrious, but others
called him Antiochus Epimanes - Antiochus the furious. He is called here
(as before, [Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008)), a little horn,
because he was in his original contemptible; there were others between
him and the kingdom, and he was of a base servile disposition, had
nothing in him of princely qualities, and had been for some time a
hostage and prisoner at Rome, whence he made his escape, and, though,
the youngest brother, and his elder living, got the kingdom. He waxed
exceedingly great towards the south, for he seized upon Egypt, and
towards the east, for he invaded Persia and Armenia. But that which is
here especially taken notice of is the mischief that he did to the
people of the Jews. They are not expressly named, or prophecies must not
be too plain; but they are here so described that it would be easy for
those who understood scripture-language to know who were meant; and the
Jews, having notice of this before, might be awakened to prepare
themselves and their children beforehand for these suffering trying
times. (1.) He set himself against the pleasant land, the land of
Israel, so called because it was the glory of all lands, for
fruitfulness and all the delights of human life, but especially for the
tokens of God's presence in it, and its being blessed with divine
revelations and institutions; it was Mount Zion that was beautiful for
situation, the joy of the whole earth, [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002). The pleasantness of that land
was that there the Messiah was to be born, who would be both the
consolation and the glory of his people Israel. Note, We have reason to
reckon that a pleasant place which is a holy place, in which God dwells,
and where we may have opportunity of communing with him. Surely, It is
good to be here. (2.) He fought against the host of heaven, that is, the
people of God, the church, which is the kingdom of heaven, the
church-militant here on earth. The saints, being born from above, and
citizens of heaven, and doing the will of God, by his grace, in some
measure, as the angels of heaven do it, may be well called a heavenly
host. Or the priests and Levites, who were employed in the service of
the tabernacle, and there warred a good warfare, were this host of
heaven. These Antiochus set himself against; he waxed great to the host
of heaven, in opposition to them and in defiance of them. (3.) He cast
down some of the host (that is, of the stars, for they are called the
host of heaven) to the ground, and stamped upon them. Some of those that
were most eminent both in church and state, that were burning and
shining lights in their generation, he either forced to comply with his
idolatries or put them to death; he got them into his hands, and then
trampled upon them and triumphed over them; as good old Eleazar, and the
seven brethren, whom he put to death with cruel tortures, because they
would not eat swine's flesh, 2 Macc. 6:7. He gloried in it that herein
he insulted Heaven itself and exalted his throne above the stars of God,
[Isa 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013). (4.) He magnified himself
even to the prince of the host. He set himself against the high priest,
Onias, whom he deprived of his dignity, or rather against God himself,
who was Israel's King of old, who reigns for ever Zion's King, who
himself heads his own host that fight his battles. Against him Antiochus
magnified himself; as Pharaoh, when he said, Who is the Lord? Note,
Those who persecute the people of God persecute God himself. (5.) He
took away the daily sacrifice. The morning and evening lamb, which God
appointed to be offered every day upon his altar to his honour,
Antiochus forbade and restrained the offering of. No doubt he took away
all other sacrifices, but only the daily sacrifice is mentioned, because
that was the greatest loss of all, for in that they kept up their
constant communion with God, which they preferred before that which is
only occasional. God's people reckon their daily sacrifices, their
morning and evening exercises of devotion, the most needful of their
daily business and the most delightful of their daily comforts, and
would not for all the world part with them. (6.) He cast down the place
of his sanctuary. He did not burn and demolish the temple, but he cast
it down, when he profaned it, made it the temple of Jupiter Olympius,
and set up his image in it. He also cast down the truth to the ground,
trampled upon the book of the law, that word of truth, tore it, and
burnt it, and did what he could to destroy it quite, that it might be
lost and forgotten for ever. These were the projects of that wicked
prince. In these he practised. And (would you think it?) in these he
prospered. He carried the matter very far, seemed to have gained his
point, and went near to extirpate that holy religion which God's right
hand had planted. But lest he or any other should triumph, as if herein
he had prevailed against God himself and been too hard for him, the
matter is here explained and set in a true light. \[1.\] He could not
have done this if God had not permitted him to do it, could have had no
power against Israel unless it had been given him from above. God put
this power into his hand, and gave him a host against the daily
sacrifice. God's providence put that sword into his hand by which he was
enabled thus to bear down all before him. Note, We ought to eye and own
the hand of God in all the enterprises and all the successes of the
church's enemies against the church. They are but the rod in God's hand.
\[2.\] God would not have permitted it if his people had not provoked
him to do so. It is by reason of transgression, the transgression of
Israel, to correct them for that, that Antiochus is employed to give
them all this trouble. Note, When the pleasant land and all its pleasant
things are laid waste, it must be acknowledged that sin is the procuring
cause of all the desolation. Who gave Jacob to the spoil? Did not the
Lord, he against whom we have sinned? [Isa
42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024). The great transgression of the
Jews after the captivity (when they were cured of idolatry) was a
contempt and profanation of the holy things, snuffing at the service of
God, bringing the torn and the lame for sacrifice, as if the table of
the Lord were a contemptible thing (so we find [Mal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007), [Mal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008), etc., and that the priests were
guilty of this [Mal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001), [Mal
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#008)), and therefore God sent Antiochus
to take away the daily sacrifice and cast down the place of his
sanctuary. Note, It is just with God to deprive those of the privileges
of his house who despise and profane them, and to make those know the
worth of ordinances by the want of them who would not know it by the
enjoyment of them.

7\. He heard the time of this calamity limited and determined, not the
time when it should come (that is not here fixed, because God would have
his people always prepared for it), but how long it should last, that,
when they had no more any prophets to tell them how long ([Psa
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009), which psalm seems to have been
calculated for this dark and doleful day), they might have this prophecy
to give them a prospect of deliverance in due time. Now concerning this
we have here,

(1.) The question asked concerning it, [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013). Observe \[1.\] By whom the
question was put: I heard one saint speaking to this purport, and then
another saint seconded him. "O that we knew how long this trouble will
last!" The angels here are called saints, for they are holy ones ([Dan
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013)), the holy myriads, [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014). The angels concern themselves in
the affairs of the church, and enquire concerning them, if, as here,
concerning its temporal salvations, much more do they desire to look
into the great salvation, [Pe1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012).
One saint spoke of the thing, and another enquired concerning it. Thus
John, who lay in Christ's bosom, was beckoned to by Peter to ask Christ
a question, [Joh 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023), [Joh
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#024). \[2.\] To whom the question was
put. He said unto Palmoni that spoke. Some make this certain saint to be
a superior angel who understood more than the rest, to whom therefore
they came with their enquiries. Others make it to be the eternal Word,
the Son of God. He is the unknown One. Palmoni seems to be compounded of
Peloni Almoni, which is used ([Rut
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001)) for Ho, such a one, and ([Kg2
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#008)) for such a place. Christ was yet
the nameless One. Wherefore asked thou after my name, seeing it is
secret? [Jdg 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#018). He is the numberer
of secrets (as some translate it), for from him there is nothing hidden
- the wonderful numberer, so others; his name is called Wonderful. Note,
If we would know the mind of God, we must apply to Jesus Christ, who lay
in the bosom of the Father, and in whom are hidden all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, not hidden from us, but hidden for us. \[3.\] The
question itself that was asked: "How long shall be the vision concerning
the daily sacrifice? How long shall the prohibition of it continue? How
long shall the pleasant land be made unpleasant by that severe
interdict? How long shall the transgression of desolation (the image of
Jupiter), that great transgression which makes all our sacred things
desolate, how long shall that stand in the temple? How long shall the
sanctuary and the host, the holy place and the holy persons that
minister in it, be trodden under foot by the oppressor?" Note, Angels
are concerned for the prosperity of the church on earth and desirous to
see an end of its desolations. The angels asked, for the satisfaction of
Daniel, not doubting but he was desirous to know, how long these
calamities should last? The question takes it for granted that they
should not last always. The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the
lot of the righteous, though it may come upon their lot. Christ
comforted himself in his sufferings with this, The things concerning me
have an end ([Luk 22:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#037)), and so may
the church in hers. But it is desirable to know how long they shall
last, that we may provide accordingly.

(2.) The answer given to this question, [Dan
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014). Christ gives instruction to the
holy angels, for they are our fellow-servants; but here the answer was
given to Daniel, because for his sake the question was asked: He said
unto me. God sometimes gives in great favours to his people, in answer
to the enquiries and requests of their friends for them. Now, \[1.\]
Christ assures him that the trouble shall end; it shall continue 2300
days and no longer, so many evenings and mornings (so the word is), so
many nuchthēmerai, so many natural days, reckoned, as in the beginning
of Genesis, by the evenings and mornings, because it was the evening and
the morning sacrifice that they most lamented the loss of, and thought
the time passed very slowly while they were deprived of them. Some make
the morning and the evening, in this number, to stand for two, and then
2300 evenings and as many mornings will make but 1150 days; and about so
many days it was that the daily sacrifice was interrupted: and this
comes nearer to the computation ([Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)) of a time, times, and the
dividing of a time. But it is less forced to understand them of so many
natural days; 2300 days make six years and three months, and about
eighteen days; and just so long they reckon from the defection of the
people, procured by Menelaus the high priest in the 142nd year of the
kingdom of the Seleucidae, the sixth month of that year, and the 6th day
of the month (so Josephus dates it), to the cleansing of the sanctuary,
and the reestablishment of religion among them, which was in the 148th
year, the 9th month, and the 25th day of the month, 1 Macc. 4:52. God
reckons the time of his people's afflictions he is afflicted. [Rev
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010), Thou shalt have tribulation ten
days. \[2.\] He assures him that they shall see better days afterwards:
Then shall the sanctuary be cleansed. Note, The cleansing of the
sanctuary is a happy token for good to any people; when they begin to be
reformed they will soon be relieved. Though the righteous God may, for
the correction of his people, suffer his sanctuary to be profaned for a
while, yet the jealous God will, for his own glory, see to the cleansing
of it in due time. Christ died to cleanse his church, and he will so
cleanse it as at length to present it blameless to himself.

[Daniel 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 8:15</span></span>

Here we have,

I. Daniel's earnest desire to have this vision explained to him ([Dan
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015)): I sought the meaning. Note,
Those that rightly know the things of God cannot but desire to know more
and more of them, and to be led further into the mystery of them; and
those that would find the meaning of what they have seen or heard from
God must seek it, and seek it diligently. Seek and you shall find.
Daniel considered the thing, compared it with the former discoveries, to
try if he could understand it; but especially he sought by prayer (as he
had done [Dan 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#018)), and he did not
seek in vain.

II\. Orders given to the angel Gabriel to inform him concerning this
vision. One in the appearance of a man (who, some think, was Christ
himself, for who besides could command angels?) orders Gabriel to make
Daniel understand this vision. Sometimes God is pleased to make use of
the ministration of angels, not only to protect his children, but to
instruct them, to serve the kind intentions, not only of his providence,
but of his grace.

III\. The consternation that Daniel was in upon the approach of his
instructor ([Dan 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017)): When he came
near I was afraid. Though Daniel was a man of great prudence and
courage, and had been conversant with the visions of the Almighty, yet
the approach of an extraordinary messenger from heaven put him into this
fright. He fell upon his face, not to worship the angel, but because he
could no longer bear the dazzling lustre of his glory. Nay, being
prostrate upon the ground, he fell into a deep sleep, ([Dan
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018)), which came not from any neglect
of the vision, or indifference towards it, but was an effect of his
faintness and the oppression of spirit he was under, through the
abundance of revelations. The disciples in the garden slept for sorrow;
and, as there, so here, the spirit was willing, but the flesh was weak.
Daniel would have kept awake, and could not.

IV\. The relief which the angel gave to Daniel, with great encouragement
to him to expect a satisfactory discovery of the meaning of this vision.
1. He touched him, and set him upon his feet, [Dan
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018). Thus when John, in a similar
case, was in similar consternation, Christ laid his right hand upon him,
[Rev 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017). It was a gentle touch that
the angel here gave to Daniel, to show that he came not to hurt him, not
to plead against him with his great power, or with a hand heavy upon
him, but to help him, to put strength into him ([Job
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#006)), which God can do with a touch.
When we are slumbering and grovelling on this earth we are very unfit to
hear from God, and to converse with him. But, if God design instruction
for us, he will be his grace awaken us out of our slumber, raise us from
things below, and set us upright. 2. He promised to inform him:
"Understand, O son of man! [Dan 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017).
Thou shalt understand, if thou wilt but apply thy mind to understand."
He calls him son of man to intimate that he would consider his frame,
and would deal tenderly with him, accommodating himself to his capacity
as a man. Or thus he preaches humility to him; though he be admitted to
converse with angels, he must not be puffed up with it, but must
remember that he is a son of man. Or perhaps this title puts honour upon
him: the Messiah was lately called the Son of man ([Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)), and Daniel is akin to him, and
is a figure of him as a prophet and one greatly beloved. He assures him
that he shall be made to know what shall be in the last end of the
indignation, [Dan 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019). Let it be laid
up for a comfort to those who shall live to see these calamitous times
that there shall be an end of them; the indignation shall cease ([Isa
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#025)); it shall be overpast, [Isa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020). It may intermit and return
again, but the last end shall be glorious; good will follow it, nay, and
good will be brought out of it. He tells him ([Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017)), "At the time of the end shall
be the vision; when the last end of the indignation comes, when the
course of this providence is completed, then the vision shall be made
plain and intelligible by the event, as the event shall be made plain
and intelligible by the vision." Or, "At the time of the end of the
Jewish church, in the latter days of it, shall this vision be
accomplished, 300 or 400 years hence; understand it therefore, that thou
mayest leave it on record for the generations to come." But is he ask
more particularly, "When is the time of the end? And how long will it be
before it arrive?" let this answer suffice ([Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019)): At the time appointed the end
shall be; it is fixed in the divine counsel, which cannot be altered and
which must not be pried into.

V. The exposition which he gave him of the vision.

1\. Concerning the two monarchies of Persia and Greece, [Dan
8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020). The ram signified the
succession of the kings of Media and Persia; the rough goat signified
the kings of Greece; the great horn was Alexander; the four horns that
rose in his room were the four kingdoms into which his conquests were
cantoned, of which before, [Dan 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008).
They are said to stand up out of the nations, but not in his power; none
of them ever made the figure that Alexander did. Josephus relates that
when Alexander had taken Tyre, and subdued Palestine, and was upon his
march to Jerusalem, Jaddas, who was them high priest (Nehemiah mentions
one of his name, [Neh 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#011)), fearing
his rage, had recourse to God by prayer and sacrifice for the common
safety, and was by him warned in a dream that upon Alexander's approach
he should throw open the gates of the city, and that he and the rest of
the priests should go forth to meet him in their habits, and all the
people in white. Alexander, seeing this company at a distance, went
himself alone to the high priest, and, having prostrated himself before
that God whose name was engraven in the golden plate of his mitre, he
first saluted him; and, being asked by one of his own captains why he
did so, he said that while he was yet in Macedon, musing on the conquest
of Asia, there appeared to him a man like unto this, and thus attired,
who invited him into Asia, and assured him of success in the conquest of
it. The priests led him to the temple, where he offered sacrifice to the
God of Israel as they directed him; and there they showed him this book
of the prophet Daniel, that it was there foretold that a Grecian should
come and destroy the Persians, which animated him very much in the
expedition he was now meditating against Darius. Hereupon he took the
Jews and their religion under his protection, promised to be kind to
those of their religion in Babylon and Media, whither he was now
marching, and in honour of him all the priests that had sons born that
year called them Alexander. Joseph. lib. 11.

2\. Concerning Antiochus, and his oppression of the Jews. This is said
to be in the latter time of the kingdom of the Greeks, when the
transgressors are come to the full ([Dan
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023)); that is, when the degenerate
Jews have filled up the measure of their iniquity, and are ripe for this
destruction, so that God cannot in honour bear with them any longer then
shall stand up this king, to be flagellum Dei - the rod in God's hand
for the chastising of the Jews. Now observe here, (1.) His character: He
shall be a king of fierce countenance, insolent and furious, neither
fearing God nor regarding man, understanding dark sentences, or (rather)
versed in dark practices, the hidden things of dishonesty; he was master
of all the arts of dissimulation and deceit, and knew the depths of
Satan as well as any man. He was wise to do evil. (2.) His success. He
shall make dreadful havoc of the nations about him: His power shall be
mighty, bear down all before it, but not by his own power ([Dan
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024)), but partly by the assistance of
his allies, Eumenes and Attalus, partly by the baseness and treachery of
many of the Jews, even of the priests that came into his interests, and
especially by the divine permission. it was not by his own power, but by
a power given him from above, that he destroyed wonderfully, and thought
he made himself a great man by being a great destroyer. He destroys
wonderfully indeed, for he destroys, \[1.\] The mighty people, and they
cannot resist him by their power. The princes of Egypt cannot stand
before him with all their forces, but he practises against them and
prospers. Note, The mighty ones of the earth commonly meet with those at
length that are too hard for them, that are more mighty than they. Let
not the strong man then glory in his strength, be it ever so great,
unless he could be sure that there were none stronger than he. \[2.\] He
destroys the holy people, or the people of the holy ones; and their
sacred character does neither deter him from destroying them nor defend
them from being destroyed. All things come alike to all, and there is
one event to the mighty and to the holy in this world. \[3.\] The
methods by which he will gain this success, not by true courage, wisdom,
or justice, but by his policy and craft ([Dan
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025)), by fraud and deceit, and
serpentine subtlety: He shall cause craft to prosper; so cunningly shall
he carry on his projects that he shall gain his point by the art of
wheedling. By peace he shall destroy many, as others do by war; under
the pretence of treaties, leagues, and alliances, with them, he shall
encroach on their rights, and trick them into a subjection to him. Thus
sometimes what a nation truly brave has gained in a righteous war a
nation truly base has regained in a treacherous peace, and craft has
been caused to prosper. \[4.\] The mischief that he shall do to
religion: He shall magnify himself in his heart, and think himself fit
to prescribe and give law to every body, so that he shall stand up
against the Prince of princes, that is, against God himself. He will
profane his temple and altar, prohibit his worship, and persecute his
worshippers. See what a height of impudence some men's impiety brings
them to; they openly bid defiance to God himself though he is the Kings
of kings. \[5.\] The ruin that he shall be brought to at last: He shall
be broken without hand, that is, without the hand of man. He shall not
be slain in war, nor shall he be assassinated, as tyrants commonly were,
but he shall fall into the hand of the living God and die by an
immediate stroke of his vengeance. He, hearing that the Jews had cast
the image of Jupiter Olympius out of the temple, where he had placed it,
was so enraged at the Jews that he vowed he would make Jerusalem a
common burial-place, and determined to march thither immediately; but no
sooner had he spoken these proud words than he was struck with an
incurable plague in his bowels; worms bred so fast in his body that
whole flakes of flesh sometimes dropped from him; his torments were
violent, and the stench of his disease such that none could endure to
come near him. He continued in this misery very long. At first he
persisted in his menaces against the Jews; but at length, despairing of
his recovery, he called his friends together, and acknowledged all those
miseries to have fallen upon him for the injuries he had done to the
Jews and his profaning the temple at Jerusalem. Then he wrote courteous
letters to the Jews, and vowed that if he recovered he would let them
have the free exercise of their religion. But, finding his disease grow
upon him, when he could no longer endure his own smell, he said, It is
meet to submit to God, and for man who is mortal not to set himself in
competition with God, and so died miserably in a strange land, on the
mountains of Pacata near Babylon: so Ussher's Annals, A.M. 3840, about
160 years before the birth of Christ.

3\. As to the time fixed for the continuance of the cessation of the
daily sacrifice, it is not explained here, but only confirmed ([Dan
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026)). That vision of the evening and
morning is true, in the proper sense of the words, and needs no
explication. How unlikely soever it might be that God should suffer his
own sanctuary to be thus profaned, yet it is true, it is too true, so it
shall be.

VI\. Here is the conclusion of this vision, and here, 1. The charge
given to Daniel to keep it private for the present: Shut thou up the
vision; let it not be publicly know among the Chaldeans, lest the
Persians, who were now shortly to possess the kingdom, should be
incensed against the Jews by it, because the downfall of their kingdom
was foretold by it, which would be unseasonable now that the edict for
their release was expected from the king of Persia. Shut it up, for it
shall be for many days. It was about 300 years from the time of this
vision to the time of the accomplishment of it; therefore he must shut
it up for the present, even from the people of the Jews, lest it should
amaze and perplex them, but let it be kept safely for the generations to
come, that should live about the time of the accomplishment of it, for
to them it would be both most intelligible and most serviceable. Note,
What we know of the things of God should be carefully laid up, that
hereafter, when there is occasion, it may be faithfully laid out; and
what we have not now any use for, yet we may have another time. Divine
truths should be sealed up among our treasures, that we may find them
again after many days. 2. The care he took to keep it private, having
received such a charge, [Dan 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027). He
fainted, and was sick, with the multitude of his thoughts within him
occasioned by this vision, which oppressed and overwhelmed him the more
because he was forbidden to publish what he had seen, so that his belly
was as wine which has no vent, he was ready to burst like new bottles,
[Job 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#019). However, he kept it to
himself, stifled and smothered the concern he was in; so that those he
conversed with could not perceive it, but he did the king's business
according to the duty of his place, whatever it was. Note, As long as we
live in this world we must have something to do in it; and even those
whom God has most dignified with his favours must not think themselves
above their business; nor must the pleasure of communion with God take
us off from the duties of our particular callings, but still we must in
them abide with God. Those especially that are entrusted with public
business must see to it that they conscientiously discharge their trust.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 9](dan009)

</div>
