<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan005)  [Next](dan007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 6:0</span></span>

Daniel does not give a continued history of the reigns in which he
lived, nor of the state-affairs of the kingdoms of Chaldea and Persia,
though he was himself a great man in those affairs; for what are those
to us? But he selects such particular passages of story as serve for the
confirming of our faith in God and the encouraging of our obedience to
him, for the things written aforetime were written for our learning. It
is a very observable improvable story that we have in this chapter, how
Daniel by faith "stopped the mouths of lions," and so "obtained a good
report," [Heb 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#033). The three
children were cast into the fiery furnace for not committing a known
sin, Daniel was cast into the lions' den for not omitting a known duty,
and God's miraculously delivering both them and him is left upon record
for the encouragement of his servants in all ages to be resolute and
constant both in their abhorrence of that which is evil and in their
adherence to that which is good, whatever it cost them. In this chapter
we have, I. Daniel's preferment in the court of Darius ([Dan
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)). II. The envy and malice of his
enemies against him ([Dan 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#004), [Dan
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#005)). III. The decree they obtained
against prayer for thirty days ([Dan
6:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006)). IV. Daniel's continuance and
constancy in prayer, notwithstanding that decree ([Dan
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010)). V. Information given against
him for it, and the casting of him into the den of lions ([Dan
6:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011)). VI. His miraculous
preservation in the lions' den, and deliverance out of it ([Dan
6:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018)). VII. The casting of his
accusers into the den, and their destruction there ([Dan
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024)). VIII. The decree which Darius
made upon this occasion, in honour of the God of Daniel, and the
prosperity of Daniel afterwards ([Dan
6:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#025)). And this God is our God for
ever and ever.

[Daniel 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 6:1</span></span>

We are told concerning Daniel,

I. What a great man he was. When Darius, upon his accession to the crown
of Babylon by conquest, new-modelled the government, he made Daniel
prime-minister of state, set him at the helm, and made him first
commissioner both of the treasury and of the great seal. Darius's
dominion was very large; all he got by his conquests and acquests was
that he had so many more countries to take care of; no more can be
expected from himself than what one man can do, and therefore others
must be employed under him. He set over the kingdom 120 princes ([Dan
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)), and appointed them their
districts, in which they were to administer justice, preserve the public
peace, and levy the king's revenue. Note, Inferior magistrates are
ministers of God to us for good as well as the sovereign; and therefore
we must submit ourselves both to the king as supreme and to the
governors that are constituted and commissioned by him, [Pe1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013), [Pe1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#014). Over these princes there was a
triumvirate, or three presidents, who were to take and state the public
accounts, to receive appeals from the princes, or complaints against
them in case of mal-administration, that the king should have no damage
([Dan 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#002)), that he should not sustain
loss in his revenue and that the power he delegated to the princes might
not be abused to the oppression of the subject, for by that the king
(whether he thinks so or no) receives real damage, both as it alienates
the affections of his people from him and as it provokes the displeasure
of his God against him. Of these three Daniel was chief, because he was
found to go beyond them all in all manner of princely qualifications. He
was preferred above the presidents and princes ([Dan
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#003)), and so wonderfully well pleased
the king was with his management that he thought to set him over the
whole realm, and let him place and displace at his pleasure. Now, 1. We
must take notice of it to the praise of Darius that he would prefer a
man thus purely for his personal merit, and his fitness for business;
and those sovereigns that would be well served must go by that rule.
Daniel had been a great man in the kingdom that was conquered, and for
that reason, one would think, should have been looked upon as an enemy,
and as such imprisoned or banished. He was a native of a foreign
kingdom, and a ruined one, and upon that account might have been
despised as a stranger and captive. But, Darius, it seems, was very
quick-sighted in judging of men's capacities, and was soon aware that
this Daniel had something extraordinary in him, and therefore, though no
doubt he had creatures of his own, not a few, that expected preferment
in this newly-conquered kingdom, and were gaping for it, and those that
had been long his confidants would depend upon it that they should be
now his presidents, yet so well did he consult the public welfare that,
finding Daniel to excel them all in prudence and virtue, and probably
having heard of his being divinely inspired, he made him his right hand.
2. We must take notice of it, to the glory of God, that, though Daniel
was now very old (it was above seventy years since he was brought a
captive to Babylon), yet he was as able as ever for business both in
body and mind, and that he who had continued faithful to his religion
through all the temptations of the foregoing reigns in a new government
was as much respected as ever. He kept in by being an oak, not by being
a willow, by a constancy in virtue, not by a pliableness to vice. Such
honesty is the best policy, for it secures a reputation; and those who
thus honour God he will honour.

II\. What a good man he was: An excellent spirit was in him, [Dan
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#003). And he was faithful to every
trust, dealt fairly between the sovereign and the subject, and took care
that neither should be wronged, so that there was no error, or fault, to
be found in him, [Dan 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#004). He was not
only not chargeable with any treachery or dishonesty, but not even with
any mistake or indiscretion. He never made any blunder, nor had any
occasion to plead inadvertency or forgetfulness for his excuse. This is
recorded for an example to all that are in places of public trust to
approve themselves both careful and conscientious, that they may be
free, not only from fault, but from error, not only from crime, but from
mistake.

III\. What ill-will was borne him, both for his greatness and for his
goodness. The presidents and princes envied him because he was advanced
above them, and probably hated him because he had a watchful eye upon
them and took care they should not wrong the government to enrich
themselves. See here, 1. The cause of envy, and that is every thing that
is good. Solomon complains of it as a vexation that for every right work
a man is envied of his neighbour ([Ecc
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004)), that the better a man is the
worse he is thought of by his rivals. Daniel is envied because he has a
more excellent spirit than his neighbours. 2. The effect of envy, and
that is every thing that is bad. Those that envied Daniel sought no less
than his ruin. His disgrace would not serve them; it was his death that
they desired. Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous, but who can stand
before envy? [Pro 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004). Daniel's
enemies set spies upon him, to observe him in the management of his
place; they sought to find occasion against him, something on which to
ground an accusation concerning the kingdom, some instance of neglect or
partiality, some hasty word spoken, some person borne hard upon, or some
necessary business overlooked. And if they could but have found the
mote, the mole-hill, of a mistake, it would have been soon improved to
the beam, to the mountain, of an unpardonable misdemeanour. But they
could find no occasion against him; they owned that they could not.
Daniel always acted honestly, and now the more warily, and stood the
more upon his guard, because of his observers, [Psa
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#011). Note, We have all need to walk
circumspectly, because we have many eyes upon us, and some that watch
for our halting. Those especially have need to carry their cup even that
have it full. They concluded, at length, that they should not find any
occasion against him except concerning the law of his God [Dan
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#005). It seems then that Daniel kept up
the profession of his religion, and held it fast without wavering or
shrinking, and yet that was no bar to his preferment; there was no law
that required him to be of the king's religion, or incapacitated him to
bear office in the state unless he were. It was all one to the king what
God he prayed to, so long as he did the business of his place faithfully
and well. He was at the king's service usque ad aras - as far as the
altars; but there he left him. In this matter therefore his enemies
hoped to ensnare him. Quaerendum est crimen laesae religionis ubi
majestatis deficit - When treason could not be charged upon him he was
accused of impiety. Grotius. Note, It is an excellent thing, and much
for the glory of God, when those who profess religion conduct themselves
so inoffensively in their whole conversation that their most watchful
spiteful enemies may find no occasion of blaming them, save only in the
matters of their God, in which they walk according to their consciences.
It is observable that, when Daniel's enemies could find no occasion
against him concerning the kingdom, they had so much sense of justice
left that they did not suborn witnesses against him to accuse him of
crimes he was innocent of, and to swear treason upon him, wherein they
shame many that were called Jews and are called Christians.

[Daniel 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 6:6</span></span>

Daniel's adversaries could have no advantage against him from any law
now in being; they therefore contrive a new law, by which they hope to
ensnare him, and in a matter in which they knew they should be sure of
him; and such was his fidelity to his God that they gained their point.
Here is,

I. Darius's impious law. I call it Darius's, because he gave the royal
assent to it, and otherwise it would not have been of force; but it was
not properly his: he contrived it not, and was perfectly wheedled to
consent to it. The presidents and princes framed the edict, brought in
the bill, and by their management it was agreed to by the convention of
the states, who perhaps were met at this time upon some public occasion.
It is pretended that this bill which they would have to pass into a law
was the result of mature deliberation, that all the presidents of the
kingdom, the governors, princes, counsellors, and captains, had
consulted together about it, and that they not only agreed to it, but
advised it, for divers good causes and considerations, that they had
done what they could to establish it for a firm decree; nay, they
intimate to the king that it was carried nemine contradicente -
unanimously: "All the presidents are of this mind;" and yet we are sure
that Daniel, the chief of the three presidents, did not agree to it, and
have reason to think that many more of the princes excepted against it
as absurd and unreasonable. Note, It is no new thing for that to be
represented, and with great assurance too, as the sense of the nation,
which is far from being so; and that which few approve of is sometimes
confidently said to be that which all agree to. But, O the infelicity of
kings, who, being under a necessity of seeing and hearing with other
people's eyes and ears, are often wretchedly imposed upon! These
designing men, under colour of doing honour to the king, but really
intending the ruin of his favourite, press him to pass this into a law,
and make it a royal statute, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any
god or man for thirty days, save of the king, shall be put to death
after the most barbarous manner, shall be cast into the den of lions,
[Dan 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#007). This is the bill they have
been hatching, and they lay it before the king to be signed and passed
into a law. Now, 1. There is nothing in it that has the least appearance
of good, but that it magnifies the king, and makes him seem both very
great and very kind to his subjects, which, they suggest, will be of
good service to him now that he has newly come to his throne, and will
confirm his interests. All men must be made to believe that the king is
so rich, and withal so ready to all petitioners, that none in any want
or distress need to apply either to God or man for relief, but to him
only. And for thirty days together he will be ready to give audience to
all that have any petition to present to him. It is indeed much for the
honour of kings to be benefactors to their subjects and to have their
ears open to their complaints and requests; but if they pretend to be
their sole benefactors, and undertake to be to them instead of God, and
challenge that respect from them which is due to God only, it is their
disgrace, and not their honour. But, 2. There is a great deal in it that
is apparently evil. It is bad enough to forbid asking a petition of any
man. Must not a beggar ask an alms, or one neighbour beg a kindness of
another? If the child want bread, must he not ask it of his parents, or
be cast into the den of lions if he do? Nay, those that have business
with the king, may they not petition those about him to introduce them?
But it was much worse, and an impudent affront to all religion, to
forbid asking a petition of any god. It is by prayer that we give glory
to God, fetch in mercy from God; and so keep up our communion with God;
and to interdict prayer for thirty days is for so long to rob God of all
the tribute he has from man and to rob man of all the comfort he has in
God. When the light of nature teaches us that the providence of God has
the ordering and disposing of all our affairs does not the law of nature
oblige us by prayer to acknowledge God and seek to him? Does not every
man's heart direct him, when he is in want or distress, to call upon
God, and must this be made high treason? We could not live a day without
God; and can men live thirty days without prayer? Will the king himself
be tied up for so long from praying to God; or, if it be allowed him,
will he undertake to do it for all his subjects? Did ever any nation
thus slight their gods? But see what absurdities malice will drive men
to. Rather than not bring Daniel into trouble for praying to his God,
they will deny themselves and all their friends the satisfaction of
praying to theirs. Had they proposed only to prohibit the Jews from
praying to their God, Daniel would have been as effectually ensnared;
but they knew the king would not pass such a law, and therefore made it
thus general. And the king, puffed up with a fancy that this would set
him up as a little god, was fond of the feather in his cap (for so it
was, and not a flower in his crown) and signed the writing and the
decree ([Dan 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#009)), which, being once
done, according to the constitution of the united kingdom of the Medes
and Persians, was not upon any pretence whatsoever to be altered or
dispensed with, or the breach of it pardoned.

II\. Daniel's pious disobedience to this law, [Dan
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010). He did not retire into the
country, nor abscond for some time, though he knew the law was levelled
against him; but, because he knew it was so, therefore he stood his
ground, knowing that he had now a fair opportunity of honouring God
before men, and showing that he preferred his favour, and his duty to
him, before life itself. When Daniel knew that the writing was signed he
might have gone to the king, and expostulated with him about it; nay, he
might have remonstrated against it, as grounded upon a misinformation
that all the presidents had consented to it, whereas he that was chief
of them had never been consulted about it; but he went to his house, and
applied himself to his duty, cheerfully trusting God with the event. Now
observe,

1\. Daniel's constant practice, which we were not informed of before
this occasion, but which we have reason to think was the general
practice of the pious Jews. (1.) He prayed in his house, sometimes alone
and sometimes with his family about him, and made a solemn business of
it. Cornelius was a man that prayed in his house, [Act
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#030). Note, Every house not only may
be, but ought to be, a house of prayer; where we have a tent God must
have an alter, and on it we must offer spiritual sacrifices. (2.) In
every prayer he gave thanks. When we pray to God for the mercies we want
we must praise him for those we have received. Thanksgiving must be a
part of every prayer. (3.) In his prayer and thanksgiving he had an eye
to God as his God, his in covenant, and set himself as in his presence.
He did this before his God, and with a regard to him. (4.) When he
prayed and gave thanks he kneeled upon his knees, which is the most
proper gesture in prayer, and most expressive of humility, and
reverence, and submission to God. Kneeling is a begging posture, and we
come to God as beggars, beggars for our lives, whom it concerns to be
importunate. (5.) He opened the windows of his chamber, that the sight
of the visible heavens might affect his heart with an awe of that God
who dwells above the heavens; but that was not all: he opened them
towards Jerusalem, the holy city, though now in ruins, to signify the
affection he had for its very stones and dust ([Psa
102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014)) and the remembrance he had of
its concerns daily in his prayers. Thus, though he himself lived great
in Babylon, yet he testified his concurrence with the meanest of his
brethren the captives, in remembering Jerusalem and preferring it before
his chief joy, [Psa 137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005), [Psa
137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006). Jerusalem was the place which
God had chosen to put his name there; and, when the temple was
dedicated, Solomon's prayer to God was that if his people should in the
land of their enemies pray unto him with their eye towards the land
which he gave them, and the city he had chosen, and the house which was
built to his name, then he would hear and maintain their cause ([Kg1
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#048), [Kg1
8:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#049)), to which prayer Daniel had
reference in this circumstance of his devotions. (6.) He did this three
times a day, three times every day according to the example of David
([Psa 55:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017)), Morning, evening, and at
noon, I will pray. It is good to have our hours of prayer, not to bind,
but to remind conscience; and, if we think our bodies require
refreshment by food thrice a day, can we think seldomer will serve our
souls? This is surely as little as may be to answer the command of
praying always. (7.) He did this so openly and avowedly that all who
knew him knew it to be his practice; and he thus showed it, not because
he was proud of it (in the place where he was there was no room for that
temptation, for it was not reputation, but reproach, that attended it),
but because he was not ashamed of it. Though Daniel was a great man, he
did not think it below him to be thrice a day upon his knees before his
Maker and to be his own chaplain; though he was an old man, he did not
think himself past it; nor, though it had been his practice from his
youth up, was he weary of this well doing. Though he was a man of
business, vast business, for the service of the public, he did not think
that would excuse him from the daily exercises of devotion. How
inexcusable then are those who have but little to do in the world, and
yet will not do thus much for God and their souls! Daniel was a man
famous for prayer, and for success in it ([Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)), and he came to be so by thus
making a conscience of prayer and making a business of it daily; and in
thus doing God blessed him wonderfully.

2\. Daniel's constant adherence to this practice, even when it was made
by the law a capital crime. When he knew that the writing was signed he
continued to do as he did aforetime, and altered not one circumstance of
the performance. Many a man, yea, and many a good man, would have
thought it prudence to omit it for these thirty days, when he could not
do it without hazard of his life; he might have prayed so much oftener
when those days had expired and the danger was over, or he might have
performed the duty at another time, and in another place, so secretly
that it should not be possible for his enemies to discover it; and so he
might both satisfy his conscience and keep up his communion with God,
and yet avoid the law, and continue in his usefulness. But, if he had
done so, it would have been thought, both by his friends and by his
enemies, that he had thrown up the duty for this time, through cowardice
and base fear, which would have tended very much to the dishonour of God
and the discouragement of his friends. Others who moved in a lower
sphere might well enough act with caution; but Daniel, who had so many
eyes upon him, must act with courage; and the rather because he knew
that the law, when it was made, was particularly levelled against him.
Note, We must not omit duty for fear of suffering, so, nor so much as
seems to come short of it. In trying times great stress is laid upon our
confessing Christ before men ([Mat
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032)), and we must take heed lest,
under pretence of discretion, we be found guilty of cowardice in the
cause of God. If we do not think that this example of Daniel obliges us
to do likewise, yet I am sure it forbids us to censure those that do,
for God owned him in it. By his constancy to his duty it now appears
that he had never been used to admit any excuse for the omission of it;
for, if ever any excuse would serve to put it by, this would have served
now, (1.) That it was forbidden by the king his master, and in honour of
the king too; but it is an undoubted maxim, in answer to that, We are to
obey God rather than men. (2.) That it would be the loss of his life,
but it is an undoubted maxim, in answer to that, Those who throw away
their souls (as those certainly do that live without prayer) to save
their lives make but a bad bargain for themselves; and though herein
they make themselves, like the king of Tyre, wiser than Daniel, at their
end they will be fools.

[Daniel 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 6:11</span></span>

Here is 1. Proof made of Daniel's praying to his God, notwithstanding
the late edict to the contrary ([Dan
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011)): These men assembled; the came
tumultuously together, so the word is, the same that was used [Dan
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006), borrowed from [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), Why do the heathen rage? They
came together to visit Daniel, perhaps under pretence of business, at
that time which they knew to be his usual hour of devotion; and, if they
had not found him so engaged, they would have upbraided him with his
faint-heartedness and distrust of his God, but (which they rather wished
to do) they found him on his knees praying and making supplication
before his God. For his love they are his adversaries; but, like his
father David, he gives himself unto prayer, [Psa
109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004). 2. Complaint made of it to the
king. When they had found occasion against Daniel concerning the law of
his God they lost no time, but applied to the king ([Dan
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#012)), and having appealed to his
whether there was not such a law made, and gained from him a recognition
of it, and that it was so ratified that it might not be altered, they
proceeded to accuse Daniel, [Dan 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#013).
They so describe him, in the information they give, as to exasperate the
king and incense him the more against him: "He is of the children of the
captivity of Judah; he is of Judah, that despicable people, and now a
captive in a despicable state, that can call nothing his own but what he
has by the king's favour, and yet he regards not thee, O king! nor the
decree that thou hast signed." Note, It is no new thing for that which
is done faithfully, in the conscience towards God, to be misrepresented
as done obstinately and in contempt of the civil powers, that is, for
the best saints to be reproached as the worst men. Daniel regarded God,
and therefore prayed, and we have reason to think prayed for the king
and his government, yet this is construed as not regarding the king.
That excellent spirit which Daniel was endued with, and that established
reputation which he had gained, could not protect him from these
poisonous darts. They do not say, He makes his petition to his God, lest
Darius should take notice of that to his praise, but only, He makes his
petition, which is the thing the law forbids. 3. The great concern the
king was in hereupon. He now perceived that, whatever they pretended, it
was not to honour him, but in spite to Daniel, that they had proposed
that law, and now he is sorely displeased with himself for gratifying
them in it, [Dan 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#014). Note, When men
indulge a proud vain-glorious humour, and please themselves with that
which feeds it, they know not what vexations they are preparing for
themselves; their flatterers may prove their tormentors, and are but
spreading a net for their feet. Now, the king sets his heart to deliver
Daniel; both by argument and by authority he labours till the going down
of the sun to deliver him, that is, to persuade his accusers not to
insist upon his prosecution. Note, We often do that, through
inconsideration, which afterwards we see cause a thousand times to wish
undone again, which is a good reason why we should ponder the path of
our feet, for then all our ways will be established. 4. The violence
with which the prosecutors demanded judgment, [Dan
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#015). We are not told what Daniel
said; the king himself is his advocate, he needs not plead his own
cause, but silently commits himself and it to him that judges
righteously. But the prosecutors insist upon it that the law must have
its course; it is a fundamental maxim in the constitution of the
government of the Medes and Persians, which had now become the universal
monarchy, that no decree or statute which the king establishes may be
changed. The same we find [Est 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#019);
[Est 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008). The Chaldeans magnified the
will of their king, by giving him a power to make and unmake laws at his
pleasure, to slay and keep alive whom he would. The Persians magnified
the wisdom of their king, by supposing that whatever law he solemnly
ratified it was so well made that there could be no occasion to alter
it, or dispense with it, as if any human foresight could, in framing a
law, guard against all inconveniences. But, if this maxim be duly
applied to Daniel's case (as I am apt to think it is not, but
perverted), while it honours the king's legislative power it hampers his
executive power, and incapacitates him to show that mercy which upholds
the throne, and to pass acts of indemnity, which are the glories of a
reign. Those who allow not the sovereign's power to dispense with a
disabling statute, yet never question his power to pardon an offence
against a penal statute. But Darius is denied this power. See what need
we have to pray for princes that God would give them wisdom, for they
are often embarrassed with great difficulties, even the wisest and best
are. 5. The executing of the law upon Daniel. The king himself, with the
utmost reluctance, and against his conscience, signs the warrant for his
execution; and Daniel, that venerable grave man, who carried such a
mixture of majesty and sweetness in his countenance, who had so often
looked great upon the bench, and at the council-board, and greater upon
his knees, who had power with God and man, and had prevailed, is
brought, purely for worshipping his God, as if he had been one of the
vilest of malefactors, and thrown into the den of lions, to be devoured
by them, [Dan 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#016). One cannot think
of it without the utmost compassion to the gracious sufferer and the
utmost indignation at the malicious prosecutors. To make sure work, the
stone laid upon the mouth of the den is sealed, and the king (an
over-easy man) is persuaded to seal it with his own signet ([Dan
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#017)), that unhappy signet with which
he had confirmed the law that Daniel falls by. But his lords cannot
trust him, unless they add their signets too. Thus, when Christ was
buried, his adversaries sealed the stone that was rolled to the door of
his sepulchre. 6. The encouragement which Darius gave to Daniel to trust
in God: Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee,
[Dan 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#016). Here (1.) He justifies
Daniel from guilt, owning all his crime to be serving his God
continually, and continuing to do so even when it was made a crime. (2.)
He leaves it to God to free him from punishment, since he could not
prevail to do it: He will deliver thee. He is sure that his God can
deliver him, for he believes him to be an almighty God, and he has
reason to think he will do it, having heard of his delivering Daniel's
companions in a like case from the fiery furnace, and concluding him to
be always faithful to those who approve themselves faithful to him.
Note, Those who serve God continually he will continually preserve, and
will bear them out in his service.

[Daniel 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 6:18</span></span>

Here is, I. The melancholy night which the king had, upon Daniel's
account, [Dan 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018). He had said,
indeed, that God would deliver him out of the danger, but at the same
time he could not forgive himself for throwing him into the danger; and
justly might God deprive him of a friend whom he had himself used so
barbarously. He went to his palace, vexed at himself for what he had
done, and calling himself unwise and unjust for not adhering to the law
of God and nature with a non obstante - a negative to the law of the
Medes and Persians. He ate no supper, but passed the night fasting; his
heart was already full of grief and fear. He forbade the music; nothing
is more unpleasing that songs sung to a heavy heart. He went to bed, but
got no sleep, was full of tossings to and fro till the dawning of the
day. Note, the best way to have a good night is to keep a good
conscience, then we may lie down in peace.

II\. The solicitous enquiry he made concerning Daniel the next morning,
[Dan 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#019), [Dan
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#020). He was up early, very early; for
how could he lie in bed when he could not sleep for dreaming of Daniel,
nor lie awake quietly for thinking of him? And he was no sooner up than
he went in haste to the den of lions, for he could not satisfy himself
to send a servant (that would not sufficiently testify his affection for
Daniel), nor had he patience to stay so long as till a servant would
return. When he comes to the den, not without some hopes that God had
graciously undone what he had wickedly done, he cries, with a lamentable
voice, as one full of concern and trouble, O Daniel! art thou alive? He
longs to know, yet trembles to ask the question, fearing to be answered
with the roaring of the lions after more prey: O Daniel! servant of the
living God, has thy God whom thou servest made it to appear that he is
able to deliver thee from the lions? If he rightly understood himself
when he called him the living God, he could not doubt of his ability to
keep Daniel alive, for he that has life in himself quickens whom he
will; but has he thought fit in this case to exert his power? What he
doubted of we are sure of, that the servants of the living God have a
Master who is well able to protect them and bear them out in his
service.

III\. The joyful news he meets with - that Daniel is alive, is safe, and
well, and unhurt in the lions' den, [Dan
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#021), [Dan
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#022). Daniel knew the king's voice,
though it was now a lamentable voice, and spoke to him with all the
deference and respect that were due to him: O king! live for ever. He
does not reproach him for his unkindness to him, and his easiness in
yielding to the malice of his persecutors; but, to show that he has
heartily forgiven him, he meets him with his good wishes. Note, We
should not upbraid those with the diskindnesses they have done us who,
we know, did them with reluctance, and are very ready to upbraid
themselves with them. The account Daniel gives the king is very
pleasant; it is triumphant. 1. God has preserved his life by a miracle.
Darius had called him Daniel's god (thy God whom thou servest), to which
Daniel does as it were echo back, Yea, he is my God, whom I own, and who
owns me, for he has sent his angel. The same bright and glorious being
that was seen in the form of the Son of God with the three children in
the fiery furnace had visited Daniel, and, it is likely, in a visible
appearance had enlightened the dark den, and kept Daniel company all
night, and had shut the lions' mouths, that they had not in the least
hurt him. The angel's presence made even the lions' den his strong-hold,
his palace, his paradise; he had never had a better night in his life.
See the power of God over the fiercest creatures, and believe his power
to restrain the roaring lion that goes about continually seeking to
devour from hurting those that are his. See the care God takes of his
faithful worshippers, especially when he calls them out to suffer for
him. If he keeps their souls from sin, comforts their souls with his
peace, and receives their souls to himself, he does in effect stop the
lions' mouths, that they cannot hurt them. See how ready the angels are
to minister for the good of God's people, for they own themselves their
fellow servants. 2. God has therein pleaded his cause. He was
represented to the king as disaffected to him and his government. We do
not find that he said any thing in his own vindication, but left it to
God to clear up his integrity as the light; and he did it effectually,
by working a miracle for his preservation. Daniel, in what he had done,
had not offended either God or the king: Before him whom I prayed to
innocency was found in me. He pretends not to a meritorious excellence,
but the testimony of his conscience concerning his sincerity is his
comfort - As also that before thee, O king! I have done no hurt, nor
designed thee any affront.

IV\. The discharge of Daniel from his confinement. His prosecutors
cannot but own that the law is satisfied, though they are not, or, if it
be altered, it is by a power superior to that of the Medes and Persians;
and therefore no cause can be shown why Daniel should not be fetched out
of the den ([Dan 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#023)): The king was
exceedingly glad to find him alive, and gave orders immediately that
they should take him out of the den, as Jeremiah out of the dungeon;
and, when they searched, no manner of hurt was found upon him; he was
nowhere crushed nor scarred, but was kept perfectly well, because he
believed in his God. Note, Those who boldly and cheerfully trust in God
to protect them in the way of their duty shall never be made ashamed of
their confidence in him, but shall always find him a present help.

V. The committing of his prosecutors to the same prison, or place of
execution rather, [Dan 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024). Darius is
animated by this miracle wrought for Daniel, and now begins to take
courage and act like himself. Those that would not suffer him to show
mercy to Daniel shall, now that God has done it for him, be made to feel
his resentments; and he will do justice for God who had shown mercy for
him. Daniel's accusers, now that his innocency is cleared, and Heaven
itself has become his compurgator, have the same punishment inflicted
upon them which they designed against him, according to the law of
retaliation made against false accusers, [Deu
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#018), [Deu
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#019). Such they were to be reckoned
now that Daniel was proved innocent; for, though the fact was true, yet
it was not a fault. They were cast into the den of lions, which perhaps
was a punishment newly invented by themselves; however, it was what they
maliciously designed for Daniel. Nec lex est justior ulla qum necis
artifices arte perire su - No law can be more just than that which
adjudges the devisers of barbarity to perish by it, [Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015), [Psa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016); [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015), [Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016). And now Solomon's observation is
verified ([Pro 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#008)), The righteous is
delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead. In this
execution we may observe, 1. The king's severity, in ordering their
wives and children to be thrown to the lions with them. How righteous
are God's statutes above those of the nations! for God commanded that
the children should not die for the fathers' crimes, [Deu
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016). Yet they were put to death in
extraordinary cases, as those of Achan, and Saul, and Haman. 2. The
lion's fierceness. They had the mastery of them immediately, and tore
them to pieces before they came to the bottom of the den. This verified
and magnified the miracle of their sparing Daniel; for hereby it
appeared that it was not because they had not appetite, but because they
had not leave. Mastiffs that are kept muzzled are the more fierce when
the muzzle is taken off; so were these lions. And the Lord is known by
those judgments which he executes.

[Daniel 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 6:25</span></span>

Darius here studies to make some amends for the dishonour he had done
both to God and Daniel, in casting Daniel into the lions' den, by doing
honour to both.

I. He gives honour to God by a decree published to all nations, by which
they are required to fear before him. And this is a decree which is
indeed fit to be made unalterable, according to the laws of the Medes
and Persians, for it is the everlasting gospel, preached to those that
dwell on the earth, [Rev 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007). Fear
God, and give glory to him. Observe, 1. To whom he sends this decree -
to all people, nations and languages, that dwell in all the earth, [Dan
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#025). These are great words, and it is
true that all the inhabitants of the earth are obliged to that which is
here decreed; but here they mean no more than every dominion of his
kingdom, which, though it contained many nations, did not contain all
nations; but so it is, those that have much are ready to think they have
all. 2. What the matter of the decree is - that men tremble and fear
before the God of Daniel. This goes further than Nebuchadnezzar's decree
upon a similar occasion, for that only restrained people from speaking
amiss of this God, but this requires them to fear before him, to keep up
and express awful reverent thoughts of him. And well might this decree
he prefaced, as it is, with Peace be multiplied unto you, for the only
foundation of true and abundant peace is laid in the fear of God, for
that is true wisdom. If we live in the fear of God, and walk according
to that rule, peace shall be upon us, peace shall be multiplied to us.
But, though this decree goes far, it does not go far enough; had he done
right, and come up to his present convictions, he would have commanded
all men not only to tremble and fear before this God, but to love him
and trust in him, to forsake the service of their idols, and to worship
him only, and call upon him as Daniel did. But idolatry had been so long
and so deeply rooted that it was not to be extirpated by the edicts of
princes, nor by any power less than that which went along with the
glorious gospel of Christ. 3. What are the causes and considerations
moving him to make this decree. They are sufficient to have justified a
decree for the total suppression of idolatry, much more will they serve
to support this. There is good reason why all men should fear before
this God, for, (1.) His being is transcendent. "He is the living God,
lives as a God, whereas the gods we worship are dead things, have not so
much as an animal life." (2.) His government is incontestable. He has a
kingdom, and a dominion; he not only lives, but reigns as an absolute
sovereign. (3.) Both his being and his government are unchangeable. He
is himself stedfast for ever, and with him is no shadow of turning. And
his kingdom too is that which shall not be destroyed by any external
force, nor has his dominion any thing in itself that threatens a decay
or tends towards it, and therefore it shall be even to the end. (4.) He
has an ability sufficient to support such an authority, [Dan
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#027). He delivers his faithful
servants from trouble and rescues them out of trouble; he works signs
and wonders, quite above the utmost power of nature to effect, both in
heaven and on earth, by which it appears that he is sovereign Lord of
both. (5.) He has given a fresh proof of all this in delivering his
servant Daniel from the power of the lions. This miracle, and that of
the delivering of the three children, were wrought in the eyes of the
world, were seen, published, and attested by two of the greatest
monarchs that ever were, and were illustrious confirmations of the first
principles of religion, abstracted from the narrow scheme of Judaism,
effectual confutations of all the errors of heathenism, and very proper
preparations for pure catholic Christianity.

II\. He puts honour upon Daniel ([Dan
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#028)): So this Daniel prospered. See
how God brought to him good out of evil. This bold stroke which his
enemies made at his life was a happy occasion of taking them off, and
their children too, who otherwise would still have stood in the way of
his preferment, and have been upon all occasions vexatious to him; and
now he prospered more than ever, was more in favour with his prince and
in reputation with the people, which gave him a great opportunity of
doing good to his brethren. Thus out of the eater (and that was a lion
too) comes forth meat, and out of the strong sweetness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 7](dan007)

</div>
