<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan003)  [Next](dan005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 4:0</span></span>

The penman of this chapter is Nebuchadnezzar himself: the story here
recorded concerning him is given us in his own words, as he himself drew
it up and published it; but Daniel, a prophet, by inspiration, inserts
it in his history, and so it has become a part of sacred writ and a very
memorable part. Nebuchadnezzar was as daring a rival with God Almighty
for the sovereignty as perhaps any mortal man ever was; but here he
fairly owns himself conquered, and gives it under his hand that the God
of Israel is above him. Here is, I. The preface to his narrative,
wherein he acknowledges God's dominion over him ([Dan
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)). II. The narrative itself,
wherein he relates, 1. His dream, which puzzled the magicians (v. 1-18).
2. The interpretation of his dream by Daniel, who showed him that it was
a prognostication of his own fall, advising him therefore to repent and
reform ([Dan 4:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#019)). 3. The
accomplishment of it in his running stark mad for seven years, and then
recovering the use of his reason again ([Dan
4:28-36](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#028)). 4. The conclusion of the
narrative, with a humble acknowledgment and adoration of God as Lord of
all ([Dan 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#037)). This was extorted
from him by the overruling power of that God who has all men's hearts in
his hand, and stands upon record a lasting proof of God's supremacy, a
monument of his glory, a trophy of his victory, and a warning to all not
to think of prospering while they lift up or harden their hearts against
God.

[Daniel 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 4:1</span></span>

Here is, I. Something of form, which was usual in writs, proclamations,
or circular letters, issued by the king, [Dan
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001). The royal style which
Nebuchadnezzar makes use of has nothing in it of pomp or fancy, but is
plain, short, and unaffected - Nebuchadnezzar the king. If at other
times he made use of great swelling words of vanity in his title, how he
laid them all aside; for he was old, he had lately recovered from a
distraction which had humbled and mortified him, and was now in the
actual contemplation of God's greatness and sovereignty. The declaration
is directed not only to his own subjects, but to all to whom this
present writing shall come - to all people, nations, and languages, that
dwell in all the earth. He is not only willing that they should all hear
of it, though it carry the account if his own infamy (which perhaps none
durst have published if he had not done it himself, and therefore Daniel
published the original paper), but he strictly charges and commands all
manner of persons to take notice of it; for all are concerned, and it
may be profitable to all. He salutes those to whom he writes, in the
usual form, Peace be multiplied unto you. Note, It becomes kings with
their commands to disperse their good wishes, and, as fathers of their
country, to bless their subjects. So the common form with us. We send
greeting, Omnibus quibus hae praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem -
To all to whom these presents shall come, health; and sometimes Salutem
sempiternam - Health and salvation everlasting.

II\. Something of substance and matter. He writes this, 1. To acquaint
others with the providences of God that had related to him ([Dan
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#002)): I thought it good to show the
signs and wonders that the high God (so he calls the true God) has
wrought towards me. He thought it seemly (so the word is), that it was
his duty, and did well become him, that it was a debt he owed to God and
the world, now that he had recovered from his distraction, to relate to
distant places, and record for future ages, how justly God had humbled
him and how graciously he had at length restored him. All the nations,
no doubt, had heard what befell Nebuchadnezzar, and rang of it; but he
thought it fit that they should have a distinct account of it from
himself, that they might know the hand of God in it, and what
impressions were made upon his own spirit by it, and might speak of it
not as a matter of news, but as a matter of religion. The events
concerning him were not only wonders to be admired, but signs to be
instructed by, signifying to the world that Jehovah is greater than all
gods. Note, We ought to show to others God's dealings with us, both the
rebukes we have been under and the favours we have received; and though
the account hereof may reflect disgrace upon ourselves, as this did upon
Nebuchadnezzar, yet we must not conceal it, as long as it may redound to
the glory of God. Many will be forward to tell what God has done for
their souls, because that turns to their own praise, who care not for
telling what God has done against them, and how they deserved it;
whereas we ought to give glory to God, not only by praising him for his
mercies, but by confessing our sins, accepting the punishment of our
iniquity, and in both taking shame to ourselves, as this mighty monarch
here does. 2. To show how much he was himself affected with them and
convinced by them, [Dan 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#003). We should
always speak of the word and works of God with concern and seriousness
and show ourselves affected with those great things of God which we
desire others should take notice of. (1.) He admires God's doings. He
speaks of them as one amazed: How great are his signs, and how mighty
are his wonders! Nebuchadnezzar was now old, had reigned above forty
years, and had seen as much of the world and the revolutions of it as
most men ever did; and yet never till now, when himself was nearly
touched, was he brought to admire surprising events as God's signs and
his wonders. Now, How great, how mighty, are they! Note, The more we see
events to be the Lord's doing, and see in them the product of a divine
power and the conduct of a divine wisdom, the more marvellous they will
appear in our eyes, [Psa 118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023); [Psa
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#002). (2.) He thence infers God's
dominion. This is that which he is at length brought to subscribe to:
His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom; and not like his own kingdom,
which he saw, and long since foresaw, in a dream, hastening towards a
period. He now owns that there is a God that governs the world and has a
universal, incontestable, absolute dominion in and over all the affairs
of the children of men. And it is the glory of this kingdom that it is
everlasting. Other reigns are confined to one generation, and other
dynasties to a few generations, but God's dominion is from generation to
generation. It should seem, Nebuchadnezzar here refers to what Daniel
had foretold of a kingdom which the God of heaven would set up, that
should never be destroyed ([Dan 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044)),
which, though meant of the kingdom of the Messiah, he understood of the
providential kingdom. Thus we may make a profitable practical use and
application of those prophetical scriptures which yet we do not fully,
and perhaps not rightly, comprehend the meaning of.

[Daniel 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 4:4</span></span>

Nebuchadnezzar, before he relates the judgments of God that had been
wrought upon him for his pride, gives an account of the fair warning he
had of them before they came, a due regard to which might have prevented
them. But he was told of them, and of the issue of them, before they
came to pass, that, when they did come to pass, by comparing them with
the prediction of them, he might see, and say, that they were the Lord's
doing, and might be brought to believe that there is a divine revelation
in the world, as well as a divine Providence, and that the works of God
agree with his word.

Now, in the account he here gives of his dream, by which he had notice
of what was coming, we may observe,

I. The time when this alarm was given to him ([Dan
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#004)); it was when he was at rest in
his house, and flourishing in his palace. He had lately conquered Egypt,
and with it completed his victories, and ended his wars, and made
himself monarch of all those parts of the world, which was about the
thirty-fourth or thirty-fifth year of his reign, [Eze
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#017). Then he had this dream, which
was accomplished about a year after. Seven years his distraction
continued, upon his recovery from which he penned this declaration,
lived about two years after, and died in his forty-fifth year. He had
undergone a long fatigue in his wars, had made many a tedious and
dangerous campaign in the field; but now at length he is at rest in his
house, and there is no adversary, nor any evil occurrent. Note, God can
reach the greatest of men with his terrors even when they are most
secure, and think themselves at rest and flourishing.

II\. The impression it made upon him ([Dan
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#005)): I saw a dream which made me
afraid. One would think no little thing would frighten him that had been
a man of war from his youth, and used to look the perils of war in the
face without change of countenance; yet, when God pleases, a dream
strikes a terror upon him. His bed, no doubt, was soft, and easy, and
well-guarded, and yet his own thoughts upon his bed made him uneasy, and
the visions of his head, the creatures of his own imagination, troubled
him. Note, God can make the greatest of men uneasy even when they say to
their souls, Take your ease, eat, drink, and be merry; he can make those
that have been the troublers of the world, and have tormented thousands,
to be their own troublers, their own tormentors, and those that have
been the terror of the mighty a terror to themselves. By the
consternation which this dream put him into, and the impression it made
upon him, he perceived it to be, not an ordinary dream, but sent of God
on a special errand.

III\. His consulting, in vain, with the magicians and astrologers
concerning the meaning of it. He had not now forgotten the dream, as
before, ch. 2. He had it ready enough, but he wanted to know the
interpretation of it and what was prefigured by it, [Dan
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#006). Orders are immediately given to
summon all the wise men of Babylon that were such fools as to pretend by
magic, divination, inspecting the entrails of beasts, or observations of
the stars, to predict things to come: they must all come together, to
see if any, or all of them in consultation, could interpret the king's
dream. It is probable that these people had sometimes, in a like case,
given the king some sort of satisfaction, and by the rules of their art
had answered the king's queries so as to please him, whether it were
right or wrong, hit or missed; but now his expectation from them was
disappointed: He told them the dream ([Dan
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#007)), but they could not tell him the
interpretation of it, though they had boasted, with great assurance
([Dan 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004), [Dan
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#007)), that, if they had but the dream
told them, they would without fail interpret it. But the key of this
dream was in a sacred prophecy ([Eze
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#003), etc.), where the Assyrian is
compared, as Nebuchadnezzar here, to a tree cut down, for his pride; and
that was a book they had not studied, nor acquainted themselves with,
else they might have been let into the mystery of this dream. Providence
ordered it so that they should be first puzzled with it, that Daniel's
interpreting it afterwards might redound to the glory of the God of
Daniel. Now was fulfilled what Isaiah foretold ([Isa
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#012), [Isa
47:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013)), that when the ruin of Babylon
was drawing on her enchantments and sorceries, her astrologers and
star-gazers, should not be able to do her any service.

IV\. The court he made to Daniel, to engage him to expound his dream to
him: At the last Daniel came in. [Dan
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#008). Either he declined associating
with the rest because of their badness, or they declined his company
because of his goodness; or perhaps the king would rather that his own
magicians should have the honour of doing it if they could than that
Daniel should have it; or Daniel, being governor of the wise men ([Dan
2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048)), was, as is usual, last
consulted. Many make God's word their last refuge, and never have
recourse to it till they are driven off from all other succours. He
compliments Daniel very highly, takes notice of the name which he had
himself given him, in the choice of which he thinks he was very happy
and that it was a good omen: "His name was Belteshazzar, from Bel, the
name of my god." He applauds his rare endowments: He has the spirit of
the holy gods, so he tells him to his face ([Dan
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#009)), with which we may suppose that
Daniel was so far from being puffed up that he was rather very much
grieved to hear that which he had by gift from the God of Israel, the
true and living God, ascribed to Nebuchadnezzar's god, a dunghill deity.
Here is a strange medley in Nebuchadnezzar, but such as is commonly
found in those that side with their corruptions against their
convictions. 1. He retains the language and dialect of his idolatry, and
therefore, it is to be feared, is no convert to the faith and worship of
the living God. He is an idolater, and his speech betrayeth him. For he
speaks of many gods, and is brought to acquiesce in one as sufficient,
no, not in him who is all-sufficient. And some think, when he speaks of
the spirit of the holy gods, that he supposes there are some evil
malignant deities, whom men are concerned to worship, only to prevent
their doing them a mischief, and some who are good beneficent deities,
and that by the spirit of the latter Daniel was animated. He also owns
that Bel was his god still, though he had once and again acknowledged
the God of Israel to be Lord of all, [Dan
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047); [Dan
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029). He also applauds Daniel, not as
a servant of God, but as master of the magicians ([Dan
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#009)), supposing his knowledge to
differ from theirs, not in kind, but only in degree; and he consulted
him not as a prophet, but as a celebrated magician, so endeavouring to
save the credit of the art when those blundered and were nonplussed who
were masters of the art. See how close his idolatry sat to him. He has
got a notion of many gods, and has chosen Bel for his god, and he cannot
persuade himself to quit either his notion or his choice, though the
absurdity of both had been evidenced to him, more than once, beyond
contradiction. He, like other heathens, would not change his gods,
though they were no gods, [Jer 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011).
Many persist in a false way only because they think they cannot in
honour leave it. See how loose his convictions sat, and how easily he
had dropped them. He once called the God of Israel a God of gods, [Dan
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047). Now he sets him upon a level
with the rest of those whom he calls the holy gods. Note, If convictions
be not speedily prosecuted, it is a thousand to one but in a little time
they will be quite lost and forgotten. Nebuchadnezzar, not going forward
with the acknowledgements he had been brought to make of the sovereignty
of the true God, soon went backwards, and relapsed to the same
veneration he had always had for his false gods. And yet, 2. He
professes a great opinion of Daniel, whom he knows to be a servant of
the true God, and of him only. He looked upon him as one that had such
an insight, such a foresight, as none of his magicians had: I know that
no secret troubles thee. Note, The spirit of prophecy quite outdoes the
spirit of divination, even the enemies themselves being judges; for so
it was adjudged here, upon a fair trial of skill.

V. The particular account he gives him of his dream.

1\. He saw a stately flourishing tree, remarkable above all the trees of
the wood. This tree was planted in the midst of the earth ([Dan
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010)), fitly representing him who
reigned in Babylon, which was about the midst of the then known world.
His dignity and eminency above all his neighbours were signified by the
height of this tree, which was exceedingly great; it reached unto
heaven. He over-topped those about him, and aimed to have divine honours
given him; nay, he over-powered those about him, and the potent armies
he had the command of, with which he carried all before him, are
signified by the strength of this tree: it grew and was strong. And so
much were Nebuchadnezzar and his growing greatness the talk of the
nations, so much had they their eye upon him (some a jealous eye, all a
wondering eye), that the sight of this tree is said to be to the end of
all the earth. This tree had every thing in it that was pleasant to the
eye and good for food ([Dan 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#012)); The
leaves thereof were fair, denoting the pomp and splendour of
Nebuchadnezzar's court, which was the wonder of strangers and the glory
of his own subjects. Nor was this tree for sight and state only, but for
use. (1.) For protection; the boughs of it were for shelter both to the
beasts and to the fowls. Princes should be a screen to their subjects
from the heat and from the storm, should expose themselves to secure
them, and study how to make them safe and easy. If the bramble be
promoted over the trees, he invites them to come and trust in his
shadow, such as it is, [Jdg 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#015). It
is protection that draws allegiance. The kings of the earth are to their
subjects but as the shadow of a great tree; but Christ is to his
subjects as the shadow of a great rock, [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002). Nay, because that, though
strong, may be cold, they are said to be hidden under the shadow of his
wings ([Psa 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)), where they are not
only safe, but warm. (2.) For provision, The Assyrian was compared to a
cedar ([Eze 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#006)), which affords
shadow only; but this tree here had much fruit - in it was meat for all
and all flesh was fed of it. This mighty monarch, it should seem by
this, not only was great, but did good; he did not impoverish, but
enrich his country, and by his power and interest abroad brought wealth
and trade to it. Those that exercise authority would be called
benefactors ([Luk 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#025)), and the most
effectual course they can take to support their authority is to be
really benefactors. And see what is the best that great men, with their
wealth and power can attain to, and that is to have the honour of having
many to live upon them and to be maintained by them; for, as goods are
increased, those are increased that eat them.

2\. He heard the doom of this tree read, which he perfectly remembered,
and related here, perhaps word for word as he heard it. The sentence was
passed upon it by an angel, whom he saw come down from heaven, and heard
proclaim this sentence aloud. This angel is here called a watcher, or
watchman, not only because angels by their nature are spirits, and
therefore neither slumber nor sleep, but because by their office they
are ministering spirits, and attend continually to their ministrations,
watching all opportunities of serving their great Master. They, as
watchers, encamp round those that fear God, to deliver them, and bear
them up in their hands. This angel was a messenger, or ambassador (so
some read it), and a holy one. Holiness becomes God's house; therefore
angels that attend and are employed by him are holy ones; they preserve
the purity and rectitude of their nature, and are in every thing
conformable to the divine will. Let us review the doom passed upon the
tree.

(1.) Orders are given that it be cut down ([Dan
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#014)); now also the axe is laid to the
root of this tree. Though it is ever so high, ever so strong, that
cannot secure it when its day comes to fall; the beasts and fowls, that
are sheltered in and under the boughs of it, are driven away and
dispersed; the branches are cropped, the leaves shaken off, and the
fruit scattered. Note, Worldly prosperity in its highest degree is a
very uncertain thing; and it is no uncommon thing for those that have
lived in the greatest pomp and power to be stripped of all that which
they trusted to and gloried in. By the turns of providence, those who
made a figure become captives, those who lived in plenty, and above what
they had, are reduced to straits, and live far below what they had, and
those perhaps are brought to be beholden to others who once had many
depending upon them and making suit to them. But the trees of
righteousness, that are planted in the house of the Lord and bring forth
fruit to him, shall not be cut down, nor shall their leaf wither.

(2.) Care is taken that the root be preserved ([Dan
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#015)); "Leave the stump of it in the
earth, exposed to all weathers. There let it lie neglected and buried in
the grass. Let the beasts that formerly sheltered themselves under the
boughs now repose themselves upon the stump; but that it may not be
raked to pieces, nor trodden to dirt, and to show that it is yet
reserved for better days, let it be hooped round with a band of iron and
brass, to keep it firm." Note, God in judgment remembers mercy; and may
yet have good things in store for those whose condition seems most
forlorn. There is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout
again, that through the scent of water it will bud, [Job
14:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007).

(3.) The meaning of this is explained by the angel himself to
Nebuchadnezzar, [Dan 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016). Whoever is
the person signified by this tree he is sentenced to be deposed from the
honour, state, and dignity of a man, to be deprived of the use of his
reason, and to be and live like a brute, till seven times pass over him.
Let a beast's heart be given unto him. This is surely the saddest and
sorest of all temporal judgments, worse a thousand times than death, and
though, like it, least felt by those that lie under it, yet to be
dreaded and deprecated more than any other. Nay, whatever outward
affliction God is pleased to lay upon us, we have reason to bear it
patiently, and to be thankful that he continues to us the use of our
reason and the peace of our consciences. But those proud tyrants who set
their heart as the heart of God ([Eze
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#002)) may justly be deprived of the
heart of man, and have a beast's heart given them.

(4.) The truth of it is confirmed ([Dan
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017)); This matter is by the decree of
the watchers and the demand by the word of the holy ones. God has
determined it, as a righteous Judge; he has signed this edict; pursuant
to his eternal counsel, the decree has gone forth, And, \[1.\] The
angels of heaven have subscribed to it, as attesting it, approving it,
and applauding it. It is by the decree of the watchers; not that the
great God needs the counsel or concurrence of the angels in any thing he
determines or does, but, as he uses their ministration in executing his
counsels, so he is sometimes represented, after the manner of men, as if
he consulted them. Whom shall I send? [Isa
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008). Who shall persuade Ahab? [Kg1
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#020). So it denotes the solemnity of
this sentence. The king's breves, or short writs, pass, Teste me ipso -
in my presence; but charters used to be signed, His testibus - In the
presence of us whose names are under-written; such was Nebuchadnezzar's
doom; it was by the decree of the watchers. \[2.\] The saints on earth
petitioned for it, as well as the angels in heaven: The demand is by the
word of the holy ones. God's suffering people, that had long groaned
under the heavy yoke of Nebuchadnezzar's tyranny, cried to him for
vengeance; they made the demand, and God gave this answer to it; for,
when the oppressed cry to God, he will hear, [Exo
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#027). Sentence was passed, in Ahab's
time, that there should be no more rain, at Elijah's word, when he made
intercession against Israel, [Kg1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001).

(5.) The design of it is declared. Orders are given for the cutting down
of this tree, to the intent that the living may know that the Most High
rules. This judgment must be executed, to convince the unthinking,
unbelieving, world, that verily there is a God that judges in the earth,
a God that governs the world, that not only has a kingdom of his own in
it, and administers the affairs of that kingdom, but rules also in the
kingdom of men, in the dominion that one man has over another, and gives
that to whomsoever he will; from him promotion comes, [Psa
75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006), [Psa
75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007). He advances men to power and
dominion that little expected it, and crosses the projects of the
ambitious and aspiring. Sometimes he sets up the basest of men, and
serves his own purposes by them. He sets up mean men, as David from the
sheepfold; he raises the poor out of the dust, to set them among
princes, [Psa 113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007), [Psa
113:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#008). Nay, sometimes he sets up bad
men, to be a scourge to a provoking people. Thus he can do, thus he may
do, thus he often does, and gives not account of any of his matters. By
humbling Nebuchadnezzar it was designed that the living should be made
to know this. The dead know it, that have gone to the world of spirits,
the world of retribution; they know that the Most High rules; but the
living must be made to know it and lay it to heart, that they may make
their peace with God before it be too late.

Thus has Nebuchadnezzar fully and faithfully related his dream, what he
saw and what he heard, and then demands of Daniel the interpretation of
it ([Dan 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#018)), for he found that no
one else was able to interpret it, but was confident that he was: For
the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, or of the Holy God, the proper
title of the God of Israel. Much may be expected from those that have in
them the Spirit of the Holy God. Whether Nebuchadnezzar had any jealousy
that it was his own doom that was read by this dream does not appear;
perhaps he was so vain and secure as to imagine that it was some other
prince that was a rival with him, whose fall he had the pleasing
prospect of given him in this dream; but, be it for him or against him,
he is very solicitous to know the true meaning of it and depends upon
Daniel to give it to him. Now, When God gives us general warnings of his
judgments we should be desirous to understand his mind in them, to hear
the Lord's voice crying in the city.

[Daniel 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 4:19</span></span>

We have here the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream; and when once
it is applied to himself, and it is declared that he is the tree in the
dream (Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur - Change but the name, the
fable speaks of thee), when once it is said, Thou art the man, there
needs little more to be said for the explication of the dream. Out of
his own mouth he is judged; so shall his doom be, he himself has decided
it. The thing was so plain that Daniel, upon hearing the dream, was
astonished for one hour, [Dan 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#019). He
was struck with amazement and terror at so great a judgment coming upon
so great a prince. His flesh trembled for fear of God. He was likewise
struck with confusion when he found himself under a necessity of being
the man that must bring to the king these heavy tidings, which, having
received so many favours from the king, he had rather he should have
heard from any one else; so far is he from desiring the woeful day that
he dreads it, and the thoughts of it trouble him. Those that come after
the ruined sinner are said to be astonished at his day, as those that
went before, and saw it coming (as Daniel here), were affrighted, [Job
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#020).

I. The preface to the interpretation is a civil compliment which, as a
courtier, he passes upon the king. The king observed him to stand as one
astonished, and, thinking he was loth to speak out for fear of offending
him, he encouraged him to deal plainly and faithfully with him; Let not
the dream, nor the interpretation thereof, trouble thee. This he speaks
either, 1. As one that sincerely desired to know this truth. Note, Those
that consult the oracles of God must be ready to receive them as they
are, whether they be for them or against them, and must accordingly give
their ministers leave to be free with them. Or, 2. As one that despised
the truth, and set it at defiance. When we see how regardless he was of
this warning afterwards we are tempted to think that this was his
meaning; "Let it not trouble thee, for I am resolved it shall not
trouble me; nor will I lay it to heart." But, whether he have any
concern for himself or no, Daniel is concerned for him, and therefore
wishes, "The dream be to those that hate thee. Let the ill it bodes
light on the head of thy enemies, not on thy head." Though
Nebuchadnezzar was an idolater, a persecutor, and an oppressor of the
people of God, yet he was, at present, Daniel's prince; and therefore,
though Daniel foresees, and is now going to foretell, ill concerning
him, he dares not wish ill to him.

II\. The interpretation itself is only a repetition of the dream, with
application to the king. "As for the tree which thou sawest flourishing
([Dan 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#020), [Dan
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#021)), it is thou, O king!" [Dan
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#022). And willing enough would the
king be to hear this (as, before, to hear, Thou art the head of gold),
but for that which follows. He shows the king his present prosperous
state in the glass of his own dream; "Thy greatness has grown and
reaches as near to heaven as human greatness can do, and thy dominion is
to the end of the earth," [Dan 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037),
[Dan 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038). "As for the doom passed
upon the tree ([Dan 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#023)), it is the
decree of the Most High, which comes upon my lord the king," [Dan
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#024). He must not only be deposed from
his throne, but driven from men, and being deprived of his reason, and
having a beast's heart given him, his dwelling shall be with the beasts
of the field, and with them he shall be a fellow-commoner: he shall eat
grass as oxen, and, like them, lie out all weathers, and be wet with the
dew of heaven, and this till seven times pass over him, that is, seven
years; and then he shall know that the Most High rules, and when he is
brought to know and own this he shall be restored to his dominion again
([Dan 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#026)): "Thy kingdom shall be
sure unto thee, shall remain as firm as the stump of the tree in the
ground, and thou shalt have it, after thou shalt have known that the
heavens do rule." God is here called the heavens, because it is in
heaven that he has prepared his throne ([Psa
103:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#019)), thence he beholds all the
sons of men, [Psa 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#013). The heavens,
even the heavens, are the Lord's; and the influence which the visible
heavens have upon this earth is intended as a faint representation of
the dominion the God of heaven has over this lower world; we are said to
sin against heaven, [Luk 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#018). Note,
Then only we may expect comfortably to enjoy our right in, and
government of, both ourselves and others, when we dutifully acknowledge
God's title to, and dominion over, us and all we have.

III\. The close of the interpretation is the pious counsel which Daniel,
as a prophet, gave the king, [Dan
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027). Whether he appeared concerned or
not at the interpretation of the dream, a word of advice would be very
seasonable - if careless, to awaken him, if troubled, to comfort him;
and it is not inconsistent with the dream and the interpretation of it,
for Daniel knew not but it might be conditional, like the prediction of
Nineveh's destruction. Observe, 1. How humbly he gives his advice, and
with what tenderness and respect: "O king! let my counsel be acceptable
unto thee; take it in good part, as coming from love, and well-meant,
and let it not be misinterpreted." Note, Sinners need to be courted to
their own good, and respectfully entreated to do well for themselves.
The apostle beseeches men to suffer the word of exhortation, [Heb
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#022). We think it a good point gained
if people will be persuaded to take good counsel kindly; nay, if they
will take it patiently. 2. What his advice is. He does not counsel him
to enter into a course of physic, for the preventing of the distemper in
his head, but to break off a course of sin that he was in, to reform his
life. He wronged his own subjects, and dealt unfairly with his allies;
and he must break off this by righteousness, by rendering to all their
due, making amends for wrong done, and not triumphing over right with
might. He had been cruel to the poor, to God's poor, to the poor Jews;
and he must break off this iniquity by showing mercy to those poor,
pitying those oppressed ones, setting them at liberty or making their
captivity easy to them. Note, It is necessary, in repentance, that we
not only cease to do evil, but learn to do well, not only do no wrong to
any, but do good to all. 3. What the motive is with which he backs this
advice: If it may be a lengthening of thy tranquility. Though it should
not wholly prevent the judgment, yet by this means a reprieve may be
obtained, as by Ahab's humbling himself, [Kg1
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029). Either the trouble may be the
longer before it comes or the shorter when it does come; yet he cannot
assure him of this, but it may be, it may prove so. Note, The mere
probability of preventing a temporal judgment is inducement enough to a
work so good in itself as the leaving off of our sins and reforming of
our lives, much more the certainty of preventing our eternal ruin. "That
will be a healing of thy error" (so some read it); "thus the quarrel
will be taken up, and all will be well again."

[Daniel 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 4:28</span></span>

We have here Nebuchadnezzar's dream accomplished, and Daniel's
application of it to him justified and confirmed. How he took it we are
not told, whether he was pleased with Daniel or displeased; but here we
have,

I. God's patience with him: All this came upon him, but not till twelve
months after ([Dan 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#029)), so long
there was a lengthening of his tranquility, though it does not appear
that he broke off his sins, or showed any mercy to the poor captives,
for this was still God's quarrel with him, that he opened not the house
of his prisoners, [Isa 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#017). Daniel
having counselled him to repent, God so far confirmed his word that he
gave him space to repent; he let him alone this year also, this one year
more, before he brought this judgment upon him. Note, God is
long-suffering with provoking sinners, because he is not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, [Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009).

II\. His pride, and haughtiness, and abuse of that patience. He walked
in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon, in pomp and pride, pleasing
himself with the view of that vast city, which, with all the territories
thereunto belonging, was under his command, and he said, either to
himself or to those about him, perhaps some foreigners to whom he was
showing his kingdom and the glory of it, Is not this great Babylon? Yes,
it is great, of vast extent, no less that forty-five miles compass
within the walls. It is full of inhabitants, and they are full of
wealth. It is a golden city, and that is enough to proclaim it great,
[Isa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004). See the grandeur of the
houses, walls, towers, and public edifices. Every thing in Babylon he
thinks looks great; "and this great Babylon I have built." Babylon was
built many ages before he was born, but because he fortified and
beautified it, and we may suppose much of it was rebuilt during his long
and prosperous reign, he boasts that he has built it, as Augustus Caesar
boasted concerning Rome, Lateritiam inveni, marmoream reliqui - I found
it brick, but I left it marble. He boasts that he built it for the house
of the kingdom, that is, the metropolis of his empire. This vast city,
compared with the countries that belonged to his dominions, was but as
one house. He built it with the assistance of his subjects, yet boasts
that he did it by the might of his power; he built it for his security
and convenience, yet, as if he had no occasion for it, boasts that he
built it purely for the honour of his majesty. Note, Pride and
self-conceitedness are sins that most easily beset great men, who have
great things in the world. They are apt to take the glory to themselves
which is due to God only.

III\. His punishment for his pride. When he was thus strutting, and
vaunting himself, and adoring his own shadow, while the proud word was
in the king's mouth the powerful word came from heaven, by which he was
immediately deprived, 1. Of his honour as a king: The kingdom has
departed from thee. When he thought he had erected impregnable bulwarks
for the preserving of his kingdom, now, in an instant, it has departed
from him; when he thought it so well guarded that none could take it
from him, behold, it departs of itself. As soon as he becomes utterly
incapable to manage it, it is of course taken out of his hands. 2. He is
deprived of his honour as a man. He loses his reason, and by that means
loses his dominion: They shall drive thee from men, [Dan
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#032). And it was fulfilled ([Dan
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#033)): he was driven from men the same
hour. On a sudden he fell stark mad, distracted in the highest degree
that ever any man was. His understanding and memory were gone, and all
the faculties of a rational soul broken, so that he became a perfect
brute in the shape of a man. He went naked, and on all four, like a
brute, did himself shun the society of reasonable creatures and run wild
into the fields and woods, and was driven out by his own servants, who,
after some time of trial, despairing of his return to his right mind,
abandoned him, and looked after him no more. He had not the spirit of a
beast of prey (that of the royal lion), but of the abject and less
honourable species, for he was made to eat grass as oxen; and, probably,
he did not speak with human voice, but lowed like an ox. Some think that
his body was all covered with hair; however, the hair of his head and
beard, being never cut nor combed, grew like eagles feathers, and his
nails like birds' claws. Let us pause a little, and view this miserable
spectacle; and let us receive instruction from it. (1.) Let us see here
what a mercy it is to have the use of our reason, how thankful we ought
to be for it, and how careful we ought to be not to do any thing which
may either provoke God or may have a natural tendency to put us out of
the possession of our own souls. Let us learn how to value our own
reason, and to pity the case of those that are under the prevailing
power of melancholy or distraction, or are delirious, and to be very
tender in our censures of them and conduct towards them, for it is a
trial common to men, and a case which, some time or other, may be our
own. (2.) Let us see here the vanity of human glory and greatness. Is
this Nebuchadnezzar the Great? What this despicable animal that is
meaner than the poorest beggar? Is this he that looked so glorious on
the throne, so formidable in the camp, that had politics enough to
subdue and govern kingdoms, and now has not so much sense as to keep his
own clothes on his back? Is this the man that made the earth to tremble,
that did shake kingdoms? [Isa 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#016).
Never let the wise man then glory in his wisdom, nor the mighty man in
his strength. (3.) Let us see here how God resists the proud, and
delights to abase them and put contempt upon them. Nebuchadnezzar would
be more than a man, and therefore God justly makes him less than a man,
and puts him upon a level with the beasts who set up for a rival with
his Maker. See [Job 40:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#011).

[Daniel 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">dan 4:34</span></span>

We have here Nebuchadnezzar's recovery from his distraction, and his
return to his right mind, at the end of the days prefixed, that is, of
the seven years. So long he continued a monument of God's justice and a
trophy of his victory over the children of pride, and he was made more
so by being struck mad than if he had been in an instant struck dead
with a thunderbolt; yet it was a mercy to him that he was kept alive,
for while there is life there is hope that we may yet praise God, as he
did here: At the end of the days (says he), I lifted up my eyes unto
heaven ([Dan 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)), looked no longer
down towards the earth as a beast, but begun to look up as a man. Os
homini sublime dedit - Heaven gave to man an erect countenance. But
there was more in it than this; he looked up as a devout man, as a
penitent, as a humble petitioner for mercy, being perhaps never till now
made sensible of his own misery. And now,

I. He has the use of his reason so far restored to him that with it he
glorifies God, and humbles himself under his mighty hand. He was told
that he should continue in that forlorn case till he should know that
the Most High rules, and here we have him brought to the knowledge of
this: My understanding returned to me, and I blessed the Most High.
Note, Those may justly be reckoned void of understanding that do not
bless and praise God; nor do men ever rightly use their reason till they
begin to be religious, nor live as men till they live to the glory of
God. As reason is the substratum or subject of religion (so that
creatures which have no reason are not capable of religion), so religion
is the crown and glory of reason, and we have our reason in vain, and
shall one day wish we had never had it, if we do not glorify God with
it. This was the first act of Nebuchadnezzar's returning reason; and,
when this became the employment of it, he was then, and not till then,
qualified for all the other enjoyments of it. And till he was for a
great while disabled to exercise it in other things he never was brought
to apply it to this, which is the great end for which our reason is
given us. His folly was the means whereby he became wise; he was not
recovered by his dream of this judgment (that was soon forgotten like a
dream), but he is made to feel it, and then his ear is opened to
discipline. To bring him to himself, he must first be beside himself.
And by this it appears that what good thoughts there were in his mind,
and what good work was wrought there, were not of himself (for he was
not his own man), but it was the gift of God. Let us see what
Nebuchadnezzar is now at length effectually brought to the
acknowledgment of; and we may learn from it what to believe concerning
God. 1. That the most high God lives for ever, and his being knows
neither change nor period, for he has it of himself. His flatterers
often complimented him with, O king! live for ever. But he is now
convinced that no king lives for ever, but the God of Israel only, who
is still the same. 2. That his kingdom is like himself, everlasting, and
his dominion from generation to generation; there is no succession, no
revolution, in his kingdom. As he lives, so he reigns, for ever, and of
his government there is no end. 3. That all nations before him are as
nothing. He has no need of them; he makes no account of them. The
greatest of men, in comparison with him, are less than nothing. Those
that think highly of God think meanly of themselves. 4. That his kingdom
is universal, and both the armies of heaven and the inhabitants of the
earth are his subjects, and under his check and control. Both angels and
men are employed by him, and are accountable to him; the highest angel
is not above his command, nor the meanest of the children of men beneath
his cognizance. The angels of heaven are his armies, the inhabitants of
the earth his tenants. 5. That his power is irresistible, and his
sovereignty uncontrollable, for he does according to his will, according
to his design and purpose, according to his decree and counsel; whatever
he pleases that he does; whatever he appoints that he performs; and none
can resist his will, change his counsel, nor stay his hand, nor say unto
him, What doest thou? None can arraign his proceedings, enquire into the
meaning of them, nor demand a reason for them. Woe to him that strives
with his Maker, that says to him, What doest thou? Or, Why doest thou
so? 6. That every thing which God does is well done: His works are
truth, for they all agree with his word. His ways are judgment, both
wise and righteous, exactly consonant to the rules both of prudence and
equity, and no fault is to be found with them. 7. That he has power to
humble the haughtiest of his enemies that act in contradiction to him or
competition with him: Those that walk in pride he is able to abuse ([Dan
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#037)); he is able to deal with those
that are most confident of their own sufficiency to contend with him.

II\. He has the use of his reason so far restored to him as with it to
re-enjoy himself, and the pleasures of his re-established prosperity
([Dan 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#036)): At the same time my
reason returned to me; he had said before ([Dan
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)) that his understanding returned
to him, and here he mentions it again, for the use of our reason is a
mercy we can never be sufficiently thankful for. Now his lords sought to
him; he did not need to seek to them, and they soon perceived, not only
that he had recovered his reason and was fit to rule, but that he had
recovered it with advantage, and was more fit to rule than ever. It is
probable that the dream and the interpretation of it were well known,
and much talked of, at court; and the former part of the prediction
being fulfilled, that he should go distracted, they doubted not but
that, according to the prediction, he should come to himself again at
seven years' end, and, in confidence of that, when the time had expired
they were ready to receive him; and then his honour and brightness
returned to him, the same that he had before his madness seized him. He
is now established in his kingdom as firmly as if there had been no
interruption given him. He becomes a fool, that he may be wise, wiser
than ever; and he that but the other day was in the depth of disgrace
and ignominy has now excellent majesty added to him, beyond what he had
when he went from kingdom to kingdom conquering and to conquer. Note, 1.
When men are brought to honour God, particularly by a penitent
confession of sin and a believing acknowledgment of his sovereignty,
then, and not till then, they may expect that God will put honour upon
them, will not only restore them to the dignity they lost by the sin of
the first Adam, but add excellent majesty to them from the righteousness
and grace of the second Adam. 2. Afflictions shall last no longer than
till they have done the work for which they were sent. When this prince
is brought to own God's dominion over himself. 3. All the accounts we
take and give of God's dealing with us ought to conclude with praises to
him. When Nebuchadnezzar is restored to his kingdom he praises, and
extols, and honours the King of heaven ([Dan
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#037)), before he applies himself to
his secular business. Therefore we have our reason, that we may be in a
capacity of praising him, and therefore our prosperity, that we may have
cause to praise him.

It was not long after this that Nebuchadnezzar ended his life and reign.
Abydenus, quoted by Eusebius (Prap. Evang. 1.9), reports, from the
tradition of the Chaldeans, that upon his death-bed he foretold the
taking of Babylon by Cyrus. Whether he continued in the same good mind
that here he seems to have been in we are not told, nor does any thing
appear to the contrary but that he did: and, if so great a blasphemer
and persecutor did find mercy, he was not the last. And, if our charity
may reach so far as to hope he did, we must admire free grace, by which
he lost his wits for a while that he might save his soul for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 5](dan005)

</div>
