<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu013)  [Next](deu015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 14:0</span></span>

Moses in this chapter teaches them, I. To distinguish themselves from
their neighbours by a singularity, 1. In their mourning ([Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001), [Deu
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#002)). 2. In their meat (v. 3-21). II.
To devote themselves unto God, and, in token of that, to give him his
dues out of their estates, the yearly tithe, and that every third year,
for the maintenance of their religious feasts, the Levites, and the poor
([Deu 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022), etc.).

[Deuteronomy 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 14:1</span></span>

Moses here tells the people of Israel,

I. How God had dignified them, as a peculiar people, with three
distinguishing privileges, which were their honour, and figures of those
spiritual blessings in heavenly things with which God has in Christ
blessed us. 1. Here is election: The Lord hath chosen thee, v: 2. Not
for their own merit, nor for any good works foreseen, but because he
would magnify the riches of his power and grace among them. He did not
choose them because they were by their own dedication and subjection a
peculiar people to him above other nations, but he chose them that they
might be so by his grace; and thus were believers chosen, [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004). 2. Here is adoption ([Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001)): "You are the children of the
Lord your God, formed by him into a people, owned by him as his people,
nay, his family, a people near unto him, nearer than any other." Israel
is my son, my first-born; not because he needed children, but because
they were orphans, and needed a father. Every Israelite is indeed a
child of God, a partaker of his nature and favour, his love and blessing
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us! 3. Here is
sanctification ([Deu 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#002)): "Thou art
a holy people, separated and set apart for God, devoted to his service,
designed for his praise, governed by a holy law, graced by a holy
tabernacle, and the holy ordinances relating to it." God's people are
under the strongest obligations to be holy, and, if they are holy, are
indebted to the grace of God that makes them so. The Lord has set them
apart for himself, and qualified them for his service and the enjoyment
of him, and so has made them holy to himself.

II\. How they ought to distinguish themselves by a sober singularity
from all the nations that were about them. And, God having thus advanced
them, let not them debase themselves by admitting the superstitious
customs of idolaters, and, by making themselves like them, put
themselves upon the level with them. Be you the children of the Lord
your God; so the Seventy read it, as a command, that is, "Carry
yourselves as becomes the children of God, and do nothing to disgrace
the honour and forfeit the privileges of the relation." In two things
particularly they must distinguish themselves: -

1\. In their mourning: You shall not cut yourselves, [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001). This forbids (as some think),
not only their cutting themselves at their funerals, either to express
their grief or with their own blood to appease the infernal deities, but
their wounding and mangling themselves in the worship of their gods, as
Baal's prophets did ([Kg1 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#028)), or
their marking themselves by incisions in their flesh for such and such
deities, which in them, above any, would be an inexcusable crime, who in
the sign of circumcision bore about with them in their bodies the marks
of the Lord Jehovah. So that, (1.) They are forbidden to deform or hurt
their own bodies upon any account. Methinks this is like a parent's
change to his little children, that are foolish, careless, and wilful,
and are apt to play with knives: Children, you shall not cut yourselves.
This is the intention of those commands which oblige us to deny
ourselves; the true meaning of them, if we understood them aright, would
appear to be, Do yourselves no harm. And this also is the design of
those providences which most cross us, to remove from us those things by
which we are in danger of doing ourselves harm. Knives are taken from
us, lest we should cut ourselves. Those that are dedicated to God as a
holy people must do nothing to disfigure themselves; the body is for the
Lord, and is to be used accordingly. (2.) They are forbidden to disturb
and afflict their own minds with inordinate grief for the loss of near
and dear relations: "You shall not express or exasperate you sorrow,
even upon the most mournful occasions, by cutting yourselves, and making
baldness between your eyes, like men enraged, or resolvedly hardened in
sorrow for the dead, as those that have no hope," [Th1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013). It is an excellent passage which
Mr. Ainsworth here quotes from one of the Jewish writers, who
understands this as a law against immoderate grief for the death of our
relations. If your father (for instance) die, you shall not cut
yourselves, that is, you shall not sorrow more than is meet, for you are
not fatherless, you have a Father, who is great, living, and permanent,
even the holy blessed God, whose children you are, [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001). But an infidel (says he), when
his father dies, hath no father that can help him in time of need; for
he hath said to a stock, Thou art my father, and to a stone, Thou hast
brought me forth ([Jer 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027));
therefore he weeps, cuts himself, and makes himself bald. We that have a
God to hope in, and a heaven to hope for, must bear up ourselves with
that hope under every burden of this kind.

2\. They must be singular in their meat. Observe,

(1.) Many sorts of flesh which were wholesome enough, and which other
people did commonly eat, they must religiously abstain from as unclean.
This law we had before [Lev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#002),
where it was largely opened. It seems plainly, by the connection here,
to be intended as a mark of peculiarity; for their observance of it
would cause them to be taken notice of in all mixed companies as a
separate people, and would preserve them from mingling themselves with,
and conforming themselves to, their idolatrous neighbours. \[1.\]
Concerning beasts, here is a more particular enumeration of those which
they were allowed to eat then was in Leviticus, to show that they had no
reason to complain of their being restrained from eating swines' flesh,
and hares, and rabbits (which were all that were then forbidden, but are
now commonly used), when they were allowed so great a variety, not only
of that which we call butcher's meat ([Deu
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#004)), which alone was offered in
sacrifice, but of venison, which they had great plenty of in Canaan, the
hart, and the roe-buck, and the fallow deer ([Deu
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#005)), which, though never brought to
God's altar, was allowed them at their own table. See [Deu
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#022). When of all these (as Adam of
every tree of the garden) they might freely eat, those were inexcusable
who, to gratify a perverse appetite, or (as should seem) in honour of
their idols, and in participation of their idolatrous sacrifices, ate
swines' flesh, and had broth of abominable things (made so by this law)
in their vessels, [Isa 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004). \[2.\]
Concerning fish there is only one general rule given, that whatsoever
had not fins and scales (as shell-fish and eels, besides leeches and
other animals in the water that are not proper food) was unclean and
forbidden, [Deu 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#009), [Deu
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#010). \[3.\] No general rule is given
concerning fowl, but those are particularly mentioned that were to be
unclean to them, and there are few or none of them which are here
forbidden that are now commonly eaten; and whatsoever is not expressly
forbidden is allowed, [Deu 14:11-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#011).
Of all clean fowls you may eat. \[4.\] They are further forbidden,
First, To eat the flesh of any creature that died of itself, because the
blood was not separated from it, and, besides the ceremonial uncleanness
which it lay under (from [Lev 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#039)),
it is not wholesome food, nor ordinarily used among us, except by the
poor. Secondly, To seethe a kid in its mother's milk, either to gratify
their own luxury, supposing it a dainty bit, or in conformity to some
superstitious custom of the heathen. The Chaldee paraphrasts read it,
Thou shalt not eat flesh - meats and milk - meats together; and so it
would forbid the use of butter as sauce to any flesh.

(2.) Now as to all these precepts concerning their food, \[1.\] It is
plain in the law itself that they belonged only to the Jews, and were
not moral, nor of perpetual use, because not of universal obligation;
for what they might not eat themselves they might give to a stranger, a
proselyte of the gate, that had renounced idolatry, and therefore was
permitted to live among them, though not circumcised; or they might sell
it to an alien, a mere Gentile, that came into their country for trade,
but might not settle it, [Deu 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021).
They might feed upon that which an Israelite might not touch, which is a
plain instance of their peculiarity, and their being a holy people.
\[2.\] It is plain in the gospel that they are now antiquated and
repealed. For every creature of God is good, and nothing now to be
refused, or called common and unclean, [Ti1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004).

[Deuteronomy 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 14:22</span></span>

We have here a part of the statute concerning tithes. The productions of
the ground were twice tithed, so that, putting both together, a fifth
part was devoted to God out of their increase, and only four parts of
five were for their own common use; and they could not but own they paid
an easy rent, especially since God's part was disposed of to their own
benefit and advantage. The first tithe was for the maintenance of their
Levites, who taught them the good knowledge of God, and ministered to
them in holy things; this is supposed as anciently due, and is entailed
upon the Levites as an inheritance, by that law, [Num
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#024), etc. But it is the second tithe
that is here spoken of, which was to be taken out of the remainder when
the Levites had had theirs.

I. They are here charged to separate it, and set it apart for God: Thou
shalt truly tithe all the increase of they seed, [Deu
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022). The Levites took care of their
own, but the separating of this was left to the owners themselves, the
law encouraging them to be honest by reposing a confidence in them, and
so trying their fear of God. They are commanded to tithe truly, that is,
to be sure to do it, and to do it faithfully and carefully, that God's
part might not be diminished either with design or by oversight. Note,
We must be sure to give God his full dues out of our estates; for, being
but stewards of them, it is required that we be faithful, as those that
must give account.

II\. They are here directed how to dispose of it when they had separated
it. Let every man lay by as God prospers him and gives him success, and
then let him lay out in pious uses as God gives him opportunity; and it
will be the easier to lay out, and the proportion will be more
satisfying, when first we have laid by. This second tithe may be
disposed of,

1\. In works of piety, for the first two years after the year of
release. They must bring it up, either in kind or in the full value of
it, to the place of the sanctuary, and there must spend it in holy
feasting before the Lord. If they could do it with any convenience, they
must bring it in kind ([Deu 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#023));
but, if not, they might turn it into money ([Deu
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#024), [Deu
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#025)), and that money must be laid
out in something to feast upon before the Lord. The comfortable cheerful
using of what God has given us, with temperance and sobriety, is really
the honouring of God with it. Contentment, holy joy, and thankfulness,
make every meal a religious feast. The end of this law we have ([Deu
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#023)): That thou mayest learn to fear
the Lord thy God always; it was to keep them right and firm to their
religion, (1.) By acquainting them with the sanctuary, the holy things,
and the solemn services that were there performed. What they read the
appointment of their Bibles, it would do them good to see the observance
of in the tabernacle; it would make a deeper impression upon them, which
would keep them out of the snares of the idolatrous customs. Note, It
will have a good influence upon our constancy in religion never to
forsake the assembling of ourselves together, [Heb
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025). By the comfort of the communion
of saints, we may be kept to our communion with God. (2.) By using them
to the most pleasant and delightful services of religion. Let them
rejoice before the Lord, that they may learn to fear him always. The
more pleasure we find in the ways of religion the more likely we shall
be to persevere in those ways. One thing they must remember in their
pious entertainments - to bid their Levites welcome to them. Thou shalt
not forsake the Levites ([Deu 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#027)):
"Let him never be a stranger to thy table, especially when thou eatest
before the Lord."

2\. Every third year this tithe must be disposed of at home in works of
charity ([Deu 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028), [Deu
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#029)): Lay it up within they own
gates, and let it be given to the poor, who, knowing the provision this
law had made for them, no doubt would come to seek it; and, that they
might make the poor familiar to them and not disdain their company, they
are here directed to welcome them to their houses. "Thither let them
come, and eat and be satisfied." In this charitable distribution of the
second tithe they must have an eye to the poor ministers and add to
their encouragement by entertaining them, then to poor strangers (not
only for the supply of their necessities, but to put a respect upon
them, and so to invite them to turn proselytes), and then to the
fatherless and widow, who, though perhaps they might have a competent
maintenance left them, yet could not be supposed to live so plentifully
and comfortably as they had done in months past, and therefore they were
to countenance them, and help to make them easy by inviting them to this
entertainment. God has a particular care for widows and fatherless, and
he requires that we should have the same. It is his honour, and will be
ours, to help the helpless. And if we thus serve God, and do good with
what we have, it is promised here that the Lord our God will bless us in
all the work of our hand. Note, (1.) The blessing of God is all in all
to our outward prosperity, and, without that blessing, the work of our
hands which we do will bring nothing to pass. (2.) The way to obtain
that blessing is to be diligent and charitable. The blessing descends
upon the working hand: "Except not that God should bless thee in thy
idleness and love of ease, but in all the work of they hand." It is the
hand of the diligent, with the blessing of God upon it, that makes rich,
[Pro 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004), [Pro
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#022). And it descends upon the giving
hand; he that thus scatters certainly increases, and the liberal soul
will be made fat. It is an undoubted truth, though little believed, that
to be charitable to the poor, and to be free and generous in the support
of religion and any good work, is the surest and safest way of thriving.
What is lent to the Lord will be repaid with abundant interest. See [Eze
44:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#030).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 15](deu015)

</div>
