<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](num036)  [Next](deu001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Fifth Book of Moses,
Called Deuteronomy

This book is a repetition of very much both of the history and of the
laws contained in the three foregoing books, which repetition Moses
delivered to Israel (both by word of mouth, that it might affect, and by
writing, that it might abide) a little before his death. There is no new
history in it but that of the death of Moses in the last chapter, nor
any new revelation to Moses, for aught that appears, and therefore the
style here is not, as before, The Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. But the
former laws are repeated and commented upon, explained and enlarged, and
some particular precepts added to them, with copius reasonings for the
enforcing of them: in this Moses was divinely inspired and assisted, so
that this is as truly the word of the Lord by Moses as that which was
spoken to him with an audible voice out of the tabernacle of the
congregation, [Lev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001). The Greek
interpreters call it Deuteronomy, which signifies the second law, or a
second edition of the law, not with amendments, for there needed none,
but with additions, for the further direction of the people in divers
cases not mentioned before. Now, I. It was much for the honour of the
divine law that it should be thus repeated; how great were the things of
that law which was thus inculcated, and how inexcusable would those be
by whom they were counted as a strange thing! [Hos
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#012). II. There might be a particular
reason for the repeating of it now; the men of that generation to which
the law was first given were all dead, and a new generation had sprung
up, to whom God would have it repeated by Moses himself, that, if
possible, it might make a lasting impression upon them. Now that they
were just going to take possession of the land of Canaan, Moses must
read the articles of agreement to them, that they might know upon what
terms and conditions they were to hold and enjoy that land, and might
understand that they were upon their good behaviour in it. III. It would
be of great use to the people to have those parts of the law thus
gathered up and put together which did more immediately concern them and
their practice; for the laws which concerned the priests and Levites,
and the execution of their offices, are not repeated: it was enough for
them that they were once delivered. But, in compassion to the
infirmities of the people, the laws of more common concern are delivered
a second time. Precept must be upon precept, and line upon line, [Isa
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#010). The great and needful truths of
the gospel should be often pressed upon people by the ministers of
Christ. To write the same things (says Paul, [Phi
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001)) to me indeed is not grievous, but
for you it is safe. What God has spoken once we have need to hear twice,
to hear many times, and it is well if, after all, it be duly perceived
and regarded. In three ways this book of Deuteronomy was magnified and
made honourable: - 1. The king was to write a copy of it with his own
hand, and to read therein all the days of his life, ch. 17, 18, 19. 2.
It was to be written upon great stones plastered, at their passing over
Jordan, [Deu 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#002), [Deu
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#003). 3. It was to be read publicly
every seventh year, at the feast of tabernacles, by the priests, in the
audience of all Israel, [Deu 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009),
etc. The gospel is a kind of Deuteronomy, a second law, a remedial law,
a spiritual law, a law of faith; by it we are under the law of Christ,
and it is a law that makes the comers thereunto perfect.

This book of Deuteronomy begins with a brief rehearsal of the most
remarkable events that had befallen the Israelites since they came from
Mount Sinai. In the fourth chapter we have a most pathetic exhortation
to obedience. In the twelfth chapter, and so on to the twenty-seventh,
are repeated many particular laws, which are enforced (ch. 27 and 28)
with promises and threatenings, blessings and curses, formed into a
covenant, ch. 29 and 30. Care is taken to perpetuate the remembrance of
these things among them (ch. 31), particularly by a song (ch. 32), and
so Moses concludes with a blessing, ch. 33. All this was delivered by
Moses to Israel in the last month of his life. The whole book contains
the history but of two months; compare [Deu
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#003) with [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019), the latter of which was the
thirty days of Israel's mourning for Moses; see how busy that great and
good man was to do good when he knew that his time was short, how quick
his motion when he drew near his rest. Thus we have more recorded of
what our blessed Saviour said and did in the last week of his life than
in any other. The last words of eminent persons make or should make deep
impressions. Observe, for the honour of this book, that when our Saviour
would answer the devil's temptations with, It is written, he fetched all
his quotations out of this book, [Mat
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004), [Mat
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007), [Mat
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 1](deu001)

</div>
