<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu017)  [Next](deu019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 18:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. The rights and revenues of the church are settled,
and rules given concerning the Levites' ministration and maintenance
([Deu 18:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001)). II. The caution against
the idolatrous abominable customs of the heathen is repeated ([Deu
18:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009)). III. A promise is given them
of the spirit of prophecy to continue among them, and to centre at last
in Christ the great prophet ([Deu
18:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)). IV. Wrath threatened
against those that despise prophecy ([Deu
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019)) or counterfeit it ([Deu
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#020)), and a rule given for the trial
of it ([Deu 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#021), [Deu
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022)).

[Deuteronomy 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 18:1</span></span>

Magistracy and ministry are two divine institutions of admirable use for
the support and advancement of the kingdom of God among men. Laws
concerning the former we had in the close of the foregoing chapter,
directions are in this given concerning the latter. Land-marks are here
set between the estates of the priests and those of the people.

I. Care is taken that the priests entangle not themselves with the
affairs of this life, nor enrich themselves with the wealth of this
world; they have better things to mind. They shall have no part nor
inheritance with Israel, that is, no share either in the spoils taken in
war or in the land that was to be divided by lot, [Deu
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001). Their warfare and husbandry are
both spiritual, and enough to fill their hands both with work and profit
and to content them. The Lord is their inheritance, [Deu
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#002). Note, Those that have God for
their inheritance, according to the new covenant, should not be greedy
of great things in the world, neither gripe what they have nor grasp at
more, but look upon all present things with the indifference which
becomes those that believe God to be all-sufficient.

II\. Care is likewise taken that they want not any of the comforts and
conveniences of this life. Though God, who is a Spirit, is their
inheritance, it does not therefore follow that they must live upon the
air; no,

1\. The people must provide for them. They must have their due from the
people, [Deu 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#003). Their maintenance
must not depend upon the generosity of the people, but they must be by
law entitled to it. He that is taught in the word ought in justice to
communicate to him that teaches him; and he that has the benefit of
solemn religious assemblies ought to contribute to the comfortable
support of those that preside in such assemblies. (1.) The priests who
in their courses served at the altar had their share of the sacrifices,
namely, the peace-offerings, that were brought while they were in
waiting: besides the breast and shoulder, which were appointed them
before ([Lev 7:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#032)), the cheeks and
maw are here ordered to be given them; so far was the law from
diminishing what was already granted that it gave them an augmentation
(2.) The first-fruits which arose within such a precinct were brought
in, as it should seem, to the priests that resided among them, for their
maintenance in the country; the first of their corn and wine for food,
and the first of their fleece for clothing ([Deu
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#004)); for the priests who were
employed to teach others ought themselves to learn, having food and
raiment, to be therewith content. The first-fruits were devoted to God,
and he constituted the priests his receivers; and if God reckons what
is, in general, given to the poor, lent to him, to be repaid with
interest, much more what is, in particular, given to the poor, lent to
him, to be repaid with interest, much more what is, in particular, given
to poor ministers. There is a good reason given for this constant charge
upon their estates ([Deu 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#005)),
because the Levites were chosen of God, and his choice must be owned and
countenanced, and those honoured by us whom he honours; and because they
stood to minister, and ought to be recompensed for their attendance and
labour, especially since it was in the name of the Lord, by his warrant,
in his service, and for his praise, and this charge entailed upon their
seed for ever; those who were thus engaged and thus employed ought to
have all due encouragement given them, as some of the most needful
useful members of their commonwealth.

2\. The priests must not themselves stand in one another's light. If a
priest that by the law was obliged to serve at the altar only in his
turn, and was paid for that, should, out of his great affection to the
sanctuary, devote himself to a constant attendance there, and quit the
ease and pleasure of the city in which he had his lot for the
satisfaction of serving the altar, the priests whose turn it was to
attend must admit him both to join in the work and to share in the
wages, and not grudge him either the honour of the one or the profit of
the other, though it might seem to break in upon them, [Deu
18:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#006). Note, A hearty pious zeal to
serve God and his church, though it may a little encroach upon a settled
order, and there may be somewhat in it that looks irregular, yet ought
to be gratified and not discouraged. He that appears to have a hearty
affection to the sanctuary, and loves dearly to be employed in the
service of it, in God's name let him minister; he shall be as welcome to
God as the Levites whose course it was to minister, and should be so to
them. The settling of the courses was intended rather to secure those to
the work that were not willing to do so much than to exclude any that
were willing to do more. And he that thus serves as a volunteer shall
have as good pay as the pressed men, besides that which comes of the
sale of his patrimony. The church of Rome obliges those who leave their
estates to go into a monastery to bring the produce of their estates
with them into the common stock of the monastery, for gain is their
godliness; but here it is ordered that the pious devotee should reserve
to himself the produce of his patrimony, for religion and the ministry
were never appointed of God, however they have been abused by men, to
serve a secular interest.

[Deuteronomy 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 18:9</span></span>

One would not think there had been so much need as it seems there was to
arm the people of Israel against the infection of the idolatrous customs
of the Canaanites. Was it possible that a people so blessed with divine
institutions should ever admit the brutish and barbarous inventions of
men and devils? Were they in any danger of making those their tutors and
directors in religion whom God had made their captives and tributaries?
It seems they were in danger, and therefore, after many similar
cautions, they are here charged not to do after the abominations of
those nations, [Deu 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009).

I. Some particulars are specified; as, 1. The consecrating of their
children to Moloch, an idol that represented the sun, by making them to
pass through the fire, and sometimes consuming them as sacrifices in the
fire, [Deu 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010). See the law against
this before, [Lev 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021). 2. Using arts
of divination, to get the unnecessary knowledge of things to come,
enchantments, witchcrafts, charms, etc., by which the power and
knowledge peculiar to God were attributed to the devil, to the great
reproach both of God's counsels and of his providence, [Deu
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010), [Deu
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011). one would wonder that such arts
and works of darkness, so senseless and absurd, so impious and profane,
could be found in a country where divine revelation shone so clearly;
yet we find remains of them even where Christ's holy religion is known
and professed; such are the powers and policies of the rulers of the
darkness of this world. But let those give heed to fortune-tellers, or
go to wizards for the discovery of things secret, that use spells for
the cure of diseases, are in any league or acquaintance with familiar
spirits, or form a confederacy with those that are - let them know that
they can have no fellowship with God while thus they have fellowship
with devils. It is amazing to think that there should by any pretenders
of this kind in such a land and day of light as we live in.

II\. Some reasons are given against their conformity to the customs of
the Gentiles. 1. Because it would make them abominable to God. The
things themselves being hateful to him, those that do them are an
abomination; and miserable is that creature that has become odious to
its Creator, [Deu 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#012). See the
malignity and mischievousness of sin; that must needs be an evil thing
indeed which provokes the God of mercy to detest the work of his own
hands. 2. Because these abominable practices had been the ruin of the
Canaanites, of which ruin they were not only the witnesses but the
instruments. It would be the most inexcusable folly, as well as the most
unpardonable impiety, for them to practise themselves those very things
for which they had been employed so severely to chastise others. Did the
land spue out the abominations of the Canaanites, and shall Israel lick
up the vomit? 3. Because they were better taught, [Deu
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#013), [Deu
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#014). It is an argument like that of
the apostle against Christians walking as the Gentiles walked ([Eph
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017), [Eph
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018), [Eph
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020)): You have not so learned Christ.
"It is true these nations, whom God gave up to their own hearts' lusts,
and suffered to walk in their own ways ([Act
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016)), did thus corrupt themselves;
but thou art not thus abandoned by the grace of God: the Lord thy God
had not suffered thee to do so; thou art instructed in divine things,
and hast fair warning given thee of the evil of those practices; and
therefore, whatever others do, it is expected that thou shouldest be
perfect with the Lord thy God," that is, "that thou shouldest give
divine honours to him, to him only, and to no other, and not mix any of
the superstitious customs of the heathen with his institutions." One of
the Chaldee paraphrasts here takes notice of God's furnishing them with
the oracle of urim and thummim, as a preservative from all unlawful arts
of divination. Those were fools indeed who would go to consult the
father of lies when they had such a ready way of consulting the God of
truth.

[Deuteronomy 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 18:15</span></span>

Here is, I. The promise of the great prophet, with a command to receive
him, and hearken to him. Now,

1\. Some think it is the promise of a succession of prophets, that
should for many ages be kept up in Israel. Besides the priests and
Levites, their ordinary ministers, whose office it was to teach Jacob
God's law, they should have prophets, extraordinary ministers, to
reprove them for their faults, remind them of their duty, and foretel
things to come, judgments for warning and deliverances for their
comfort. Having these prophets, (1.) They need not use divinations, nor
consult with familiar spirits, for they might enquire of God's prophets
even concerning their private affairs, as Saul did when he was in quest
of his father's asses, [Sa1 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#006). (2.)
They could not miss the way of their duty through ignorance or mistake,
nor differ in their opinions about it, having prophets among them, whom,
in every difficult doubtful case, they might advise with and appeal to.
These prophets were like unto Moses in some respects, though far
inferior to him, [Deu 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010).

2\. Whether a succession of prophets be included in this promise or not,
we are sure that it is primarily intended as a promise of Christ, and it
is the clearest promise of him that is in all the law of Moses. It is
expressly applied to our Lord Jesus as the Messiah promised ([Act
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022); [Act
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#037)), and the people had an eye to
this promise when they said concerning him, This is of a truth that
prophet that should come into the world ([Joh
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#014)); and it was his Spirit that
spoke in all the other prophets, [Pe1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011). Observe,

(1.) What it is that is here promised concerning Christ. What God
promised Moses at Mount Sinai (which he relates, [Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018)), he promised the people ([Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)) in God's name. \[1.\] That
there should come a prophet, great above all the prophets, by whom God
would make known himself and his will to the children of men more fully
and clearly than ever he had done before. He is the light of the world,
as prophecy was of the Jewish church, [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012). He is the Word, by whom God
speaks to us, [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001); [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002). \[2.\] That God would raise him
up from the midst of them. In his birth he should be one of that nation,
should live among them and be sent to them. In his resurrection he
should be raised up at Jerusalem, and thence his doctrine should go
forth to all the world: thus God, having raised up his Son Christ Jesus,
sent him to bless us. \[3.\] That he should be like unto Moses, only as
much above him as the other prophets came short of him. Moses was such a
prophet as was a law-giver to Israel and their deliverer out of Egypt,
and so was Christ: he not only teaches, but rules and saves. Moses was
the founder of a new dispensation by signs and wonders and mighty deeds,
and so was Christ, by which he proved himself a teacher come from God.
Was Moses faithful? So was Christ; Moses as a servant, but Christ as a
Son. \[4.\] That God would put his words in his mouth, [Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018). What messages God had to send
to the children of men he would send them by him, and give him full
instructions what to say and do as a prophet. Hence our Saviour says, My
doctrine is not mine originally, but his that sent me, [Joh
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016). So that this great promise is
performed; this Prophet has come, even Jesus; it is he that should come,
and we are to look for no other.

(2.) The agreeableness of this designed dispensation to the people's
avowed choice and desire at Mount Sinai, [Deu
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#016), [Deu
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#017). There God had spoken to them in
thunder and lightning, out of the midst of the fire and thick darkness.
Every word made their ears tingle and their hearts tremble, so that the
whole congregation was ready to die with fear. In this fright, they
begged hard that God would not speak to them in this manner any more
(they could not bear it, it would overwhelm and distract them), but that
he would speak to them by men like themselves, by Moses now, and
afterwards by other prophets like unto him. "Well," says God, "it shall
be so; they shall be spoken to by men, whose terrors shall not make them
afraid;" and, to crown the favour beyond what they were able to ask or
think, in the fulness of time the Word itself was made flesh, and they
saw his glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, not, as at Mount
Sinai, full of majesty and terror, but full of grace and truth, [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014). Thus, in answer to the request
of those who were struck with amazement by the law, God promised the
incarnation of his Son, though we may suppose it far from the thoughts
of those that made that request.

(3.) A charge and command given to all people to hear and believe, hear
and obey, this great prophet here promised: Unto him you shall hearken
([Deu 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)); and whoever will not
hearken to him shall be surely and severely reckoned with for his
contempt ([Deu 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019)): I will require
it of him. God himself applied this to our Lord Jesus in the voice that
came out of the excellent glory, [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005), Hear you him, that is, this is
he concerning whom it was said by Moses of old, Unto him you shall
hearken; and Moses and Elias then stood by and assented to it. The
sentence here passed on those that hearken not to this prophet is
repeated and ratified in the New Testament. He that believeth not the
Son, the wrath of God abideth on him, [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036). And how shall we escape if we
turn away from him that speaketh from heaven? [Heb
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#025). The Chaldee paraphrase here
reads it, My Word shall require it of him, which can be no other than a
divine person, Christ the eternal Word, to whom the Father has committed
all judgement, and by whom he will at the last day judge the world.
Whoever turns a deaf ear to Jesus Christ shall find that it is at his
peril; the same that is the prophet is to be his judge, [Joh
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048).

II\. Here is a caution against false prophets, 1. By way of threatening
against the pretenders themselves, [Deu
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#020). Whoever sets up for a prophet,
and produces either a commission from the true God, shall be deemed and
adjudged guilty of high treason against the crown and dignity of the
King of kings, and that traitor shall be put to death ([Deu
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#020)), namely, by the judgment of the
great sanhedrim, which, in process of time, sat at Jerusalem; and
therefore our Saviour says that a prophet could not perish but at
Jerusalem, and lays the blood of the prophets at Jerusalem's door ([Luk
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#033), [Luk
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#034)), whom therefore God himself
would punish; yet there false prophets were supported. 2. By way of
direction to the people, that they might not be imposed upon by
pretenders, of which there were many, as appears, [Jer
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#025); [Eze
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#006); [Kg1
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#006). It is a very proper question
which they are supposed to ask, [Deu
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#021). Since it is so great a duty to
hearken to the true prophets, and yet there is so much danger of being
misled by false prophets, how shall we know the word which the Lord has
not spoken? By what marks may we discover a cheat? Note, It highly
concerns us to have a right touchstone wherewith to try the word we
hear, that we may know what that word is which the Lord has not spoken.
Whatever is directly repugnant to sense, to the light and law of nature,
and to the plain meaning of the written word, we may be sure is not that
which the Lord has spoken; nor that which gives countenance and
encouragement to sin, or has a manifest tendency to the destruction of
piety or charity: far be it from God that he should contradict himself.
The rule here given in answer to this enquiry was adapted chiefly to
that state, [Deu 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022). If there was
any cause to suspect the sincerity of a prophet, let them observe that
if he gave them any sign, or foretold something to come, and the event
was not according to his prediction, they might be sure he was not sent
of God. This does not refer so much to the foretelling of mercies and
judgments (though as to these, and the difference between the
predictions of mercies and judgments, there is a rule of discerning
between truth and falsehood laid down by the prophet, [Jer
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#008), [Jer
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#009)), but rather to the giving of
signs on purpose to confirm their mission. Though the sign did come to
pass, yet this would not serve to prove their mission if they called
them to serve other gods; this point had been already settled, [Deu
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001). But, if the sign did not come
to pass, this would serve to disprove their mission. "When Moses cast
his rod upon the ground (it is bishop Patrick's explanation of this),
and said it would become a serpent, if it had not accordingly been
turned into a serpent, Moses had been a false prophet: if, when Elijah
called for fire from heaven to consume the sacrifice, none had come, he
had been no better than the prophets of Baal." Samuel's mission was
proved by this, that God let none of his words fall to the ground, [Sa1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019), [Sa1
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#020). And by the miracles Christ
wrought, especially by that great sign he gave of his resurrection the
third day, which came to pass as he foretold, it appeared that he was a
teacher come from God. Lastly, They are directed not to be afraid of a
false prophet; that is, not to be afraid of the judgments such a one
might denounce to amuse people and strike terror upon them; nor to be
afraid of executing the law upon him when, upon a strict and impartial
scrutiny, it appeared that he was a false prophet. This command not to
fear a false prophet implies that a true prophet, who proved his
commission by clear and undeniable proofs, was to be feared, and it was
at their peril if they offered him any violence or put any slight upon
him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 19](deu019)

</div>
