<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu029)  [Next](deu031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 30:0</span></span>

One would have thought that the threatenings in the close of the
foregoing chapter had made a full end of the people of Israel, and had
left their case for ever desperate; but in this chapter we have a plain
intimation of the mercy God had in store for them in the latter days, so
that mercy at length rejoices against judgment, and has the last word.
Here we have, I. Exceedingly great and precious promises made to them,
upon their repentance and return to God ([Deu
30:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)). II. The righteousness of
faith set before them in the plainness and easiness of the commandment
that was now given them ([Deu
30:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)). III. A fair reference of
the whole matter to their choice ([Deu
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015), etc.).

[Deuteronomy 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 30:1</span></span>

These verses may be considered either as a conditional promise or as an
absolute prediction.

I. They are chiefly to be considered as a conditional promise, and so
they belong to all persons and all people, and not to Israel only; and
the design of them is to assure us that the greatest sinners, if they
repent and be converted, shall have their sins pardoned, and be restored
to God's favour. This is the purport of the covenant of grace, it leaves
room for repentance in case of misdemeanour, and promises pardon upon
repentance, which the covenant of innocency did not. Now observe here,

1\. How the repentance is described which is the condition of these
promises. (1.) It begins in serious consideration, [Deu
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001). "Thou shalt call to mind that
which thou hadst forgotten or not regarded." Note, Consideration is the
first step towards conversion. [Isa
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#008), Bring to mind, O you
transgressors. The prodigal son came to himself first, and then to his
father. That which they should call to mind is the blessing and the
curse. If sinners would but seriously consider the happiness they have
lost by sin and the misery they have brought themselves into, and that
by repentance they may escape that misery and recover that happiness,
they would not delay to return to the Lord their God. The prodigal
called to mind the blessing and the curse when he considered his present
poverty and the plenty of bread in his father's house, [Luk
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#017). (2.) It consists in sincere
conversion. The effect of the consideration cannot but be godly sorrow
and shame, [Eze 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#009); [Eze
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#016). But that which is the life and
soul of repentance, and without which the most passionate expressions
are but a jest, is returning to the Lord our God, [Deu
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#002). If thou turn ([Deu
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#010)) with all thy heart and with all
thy soul. We must return to our allegiance to God as our Lord and ruler,
our dependence upon him as our Father and benefactor, our devotedness to
him as our highest end, and our communion with him as our God in
covenant. We must return to God from all that which stands in opposition
to him or competition with him. In this return to God we must be upright
- with the heart and soul, and universal - with all the heart and all
the soul. (3.) It is evidenced by a constant obedience to the holy will
of God: If thou shalt obey his voice ([Deu
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#002)), thou and thy children; for it
is not enough that we do our duty ourselves, but we must train up and
engage our children to do it. Or this comes in as the condition of the
entail of the blessing upon their children, provided their children kept
close to their duty. \[1.\] This obedience must be with an eye to God:
Thou shalt obey his voice ([Deu 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#008)),
and hearken to it, [Deu 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#010). \[2.\]
It must be sincere, and cheerful, and entire: With all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, [Deu 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#002). \[3.\]
It must be from a principle of love, and that love must be with all thy
heart and with all thy soul, [Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006). It is the heart and soul that
God looks at and requires; he will have these or nothing, and these
entire or not at all. \[4.\] It must be universal: According to all that
I command thee, [Deu 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#002), and again
[Deu 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#008), to do all his commandments;
for he that allows himself in the breach of one commandment involves
himself in the guilt of contemning them all, [Jam
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010). An upright heart has respect to
all God's commandments, [Psa 119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006).

2\. What the favour is which is promised upon this repentance. Though
they are brought to God by their trouble and distress, in the nations
whither they were driven ([Deu 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)),
yet God will graciously accept of them notwithstanding; for on this
errand afflictions are sent, to bring us to repentance. Though they are
driven out to the utmost parts of heaven, yet thence their penitent
prayers shall reach God's gracious ear, and there his favour shall find
them out, [Deu 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004). Undique ad caelos
tantundem est viae - From every place there is the same way to heaven.
This promise Nehemiah pleads in his prayer for dispersed Israel, [Neh
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#009). It is here promised, (1.) That
God would have compassion upon them, as proper objects of his pity, [Deu
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003). Against sinners that go on in
sin God has indignation ([Deu 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#020)),
but on those that repent and bemoan themselves he has compassion, [Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018), [Jer
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020). True penitents may take great
encouragement from the compassions and tender mercies of our God, which
never fail, but overflow. (2.) That he would turn their captivity, and
gather them from the nations whither they were scattered ([Deu
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003)), though ever so remote, [Deu
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004). One of the Chaldee paraphrasts
applies this to the Messiah, explaining it thus: The word of the Lord
shall gather you by the hand of Elias the great priest, and shall bring
you by the hand of the king Messiah; for this was God's covenant with
him, that he should restore the preserved of Israel, [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006). And this was the design of his
death, to gather into one the children of God that were scattered
abroad, [Joh 11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051), [Joh
11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052). To him shall the gathering of
the people be. (3.) That he would bring them into their land again, [Deu
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#005). Note, Penitent sinners are not
only delivered out of their misery, but restored to true happiness in
the favour of God. The land they are brought into to possess it is ,
though not the same, yet in some respects better than that which our
first father Adam possessed, and out of which he was expelled. (4.) That
he would do them good ([Deu 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#005)) and
rejoice over them for good, [Deu 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#009).
For there is joy in heaven upon the repentance and conversion of
sinners: the father of the prodigal rejoiced over him for good. (5.)
That he would multiply them ([Deu
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#005)), and that, when they grew
numerous, every mouth might have meat: he would make them plenteous in
every work of their hand, [Deu 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#009).
National repentance and reformation bring national plenty, peace, and
prosperity. It is promised, The Lord will make thee plenteous in the
fruit of thy cattle and land, for good. Many have plenty for hurt; the
prosperity of fools destroys them. Then it is for good when with it God
gives us grace to use it for his glory. (6.) That he would transfer the
curses they had been under to their enemies, [Deu
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#007). When God was gathering them in
to re-establish them they would meet with much opposition; but the same
curses that had been a burden upon them should become a defence to them,
by being turned upon their adversaries. The cup of trembling should be
taken out of their hand, and put into the hand of those that afflicted
them, [Isa 51:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022), [Isa
51:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#023). (7.) That he would give them
his grace to change their hearts, and rule there ([Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006)): The Lord thy God will
circumcise thy heart, to love the Lord. Note, \[1.\] The heart must be
circumcised to love God. The filth of the flesh must be put away; and
the foolishness of the heart, as the Chaldee paraphrase expounds it. See
[Col 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011), [Col
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012); [Rom
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029). Circumcision was a seal of the
covenant; the heart is then circumcised to love God when it is strongly
engaged and held by that bond to this duty. \[2.\] It is the work of
God's grace to circumcise the heart, and to shed abroad the love of God
there; and this grace is given to all that repent and seek it carefully.
Nay, that seems to be rather a promise than a precept ([Deu
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#008)): Thou shalt return and obey the
voice of the Lord. He that requires us to return promises grace to
enable us to return: and it is our fault if that grace be not effectual.
herein the covenant of grace is well ordered, that whatsoever is
required in the covenant is promised. Turn you at my reproof: behold, I
will pour out my Spirit, [Pro 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#023).

3\. It is observable how Moses here calls God the Lord thy God twelve
times in these ten verses, intimating, (1.) That penitents may take
direction and encouragement in their return to God from their relation
to him. [Jer 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022), "Behold, we come
unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God; therefore to thee we are bound
to come, whither else should we go? And therefore we hope to find favour
with thee." (2.) That those who have revolted from God, if they return
to him and do their first works, shall be restored to their former state
of honour and happiness. Bring hither the first robe. In the
threatenings of the former chapter he is all along called the Lord, a
God of power and the Judge of all: but, in the promises of this chapter,
the Lord thy God, a God of grace, and in covenant with thee.

II\. This may also be considered as a prediction of the repentance and
restoration of the Jews: When all these things shall have come upon thee
([Deu 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)), the blessing first, and
after that the curse, then the mercy in reserve shall take place. Though
their hearts were wretchedly hardened, yet the grace of God could soften
and change them; and then, though their case was deplorably miserable,
the providence of God would redress all their grievances. Now, 1. It is
certain that this was fulfilled in their return from their captivity in
Babylon. It was a wonderful instance of their repentance and reformation
that Ephraim, who had been joined to idols, renounced them, and said,
What have I to do any more with idols? That captivity effectually cured
them of idolatry; and then God planted them again in their own land and
did them good. But, 2. Some think that it is yet further to be
accomplished in the conversion of the Jews who are now dispersed, their
repentance for the sin of their fathers in crucifying Christ, their
return to God through him, and their accession to the Christian church.
But, alas! who shall live when God doth this?

[Deuteronomy 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 30:11</span></span>

Moses here urges them to obedience from the consideration of the
plainness and easiness of the command.

I. This is true of the law of Moses. They could never plead in excuse of
their disobedience that God had enjoined them that which was either
unintelligible or impracticable, impossible to be known or to be done
([Deu 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)): It is not hidden from
thee. That is, not send messengers to heaven ([Deu
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)), to enquire what thou must do
to please God; nor needest thou go beyond sea ([Deu
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#013)), as the philosophers did, that
travelled through many and distant regions in pursuit of learning; no,
thou art not put to that labour and expense; nor is the commandment
within the reach of those only that have a great estate or a refined
genius, but it is very nigh unto thee, [Deu
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014). It is written in thy books,
made plain upon tables, so that he that runs may read it; thy priests'
lips keep this knowledge, and, when any difficulty arises, thou mayest
ask the law at their mouth, [Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007).
It is not communicated in a strange language; but it is in thy mouth,
that is, in the vulgar tongue that is commonly used by thee, in which
thou mayest hear it read, and talk of it familiarly among thy children.
It is not wrapped up in obscure phrases or figures to puzzle and amuse
thee, or in hieroglyphics, but it is in thy heart; it is delivered in
such a manner as that it is level to thy capacity, even to the capacity
of the meanest." 2. "It is not too hard nor heavy for thee:" so the
Septuagint reads it, [Deu 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011). Thou
needest not say, "As good attempt to climb to heaven, or flee upon the
wings of the morning to the uttermost part of the sea, as go about to do
all the words of this law:" no, the matter is not so; it is no such
intolerable yoke as some ill-minded people represent it. It was indeed a
heavy yoke in comparison with that of Christ ([Act
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010)), but not in comparison with the
idolatrous services of the neighbouring nations. God appeals to
themselves that he had not made them to serve with an offering, nor
wearied them with incense, [Isa 43:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#023);
[Mic 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003). But he speaks especially of
the moral law, and its precepts: "That is very nigh thee, consonant to
the law of nature, which would have been found in every man's heart, and
every man's mouth, if he would but have attended to it. There is that in
thee which consents to the law that it is good, [Rom
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016). Thou hast therefore no reason to
complain of any insuperable difficulty in the observance of it."

II\. This is true of the gospel of Christ, to which the apostle applies
it, and makes it the language of the righteousness which is of faith,
[Rom 10:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006). And many think this is
principally intended by Moses here; for he wrote of Christ, [Joh
5:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046). This is God's commandment now
under the gospel that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ,
[Jo1 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023). If we ask, as the blind man
did, Lord, who is he? or where is he, that we may believe on him? ([Joh
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#036)), this scripture gives an answer,
We need not go up to heaven, to fetch him thence, for he has come down
thence in his incarnation; nor down to the deep, to fetch him thence,
for thence he has come up in his resurrection. But the word is nigh us,
and Christ in that word; so that if we believe with the heart that the
promises of the incarnation and resurrection of the Messiah are
fulfilled in our Lord Jesus, and receive him accordingly, and confess
him with our mouth, we have then Christ with us, and we shall be saved.
He is near, very near, that justifies us. The law was plain and easy,
but the gospel much more so.

[Deuteronomy 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 30:15</span></span>

Moses here concludes with a very bright light, and a very strong fire,
that, if possible, what he had been preaching of might find entrance
into the understanding and affections of this unthinking people. What
could be said more moving, and more likely to make deep and lasting
impressions? The manner of his treating with them is so rational, so
prudent, so affectionate, and every way so apt to gain the point, that
it abundantly shows him to be in earnest, and leaves them inexcusable in
their disobedience.

I. He states the case very fairly. He appeals to themselves concerning
it whether he had not laid the matter as plainly as they could wish
before them. 1. Every man covets to obtain life and good, and to escape
death and evil, desires happiness and dreads misery. "Well," says he, "I
have shown you the way to obtain all the happiness you can desire and to
avoid all misery. Be obedient, and all shall be well, and nothing
amiss." Our first parents ate the forbidden fruit, in hopes of getting
thereby the knowledge of good and evil; but it was a miserable knowledge
they got, of good by the loss of it, and of evil by the sense of it; yet
such is the compassion of God towards man that, instead of giving him to
his own delusion, he has favoured him by his word with such a knowledge
of good and evil as will make him for ever happy if it be not his own
fault. 2. Every man is moved and governed in his actions by hope and
fear, hope of good and fear of evil, real of apparent. "Now," says
Moses, "I have tried both ways; if you will be either drawn to obedience
by the certain prospect of advantage by it, or driven to obedience by
the no less certain prospect of ruin in case you be disobedient - if you
will be wrought upon either way, you will be kept close to God and your
duty; but, if you will not, you are utterly inexcusable." Let us, then,
hear the conclusion of the whole matter. (1.) If they and theirs would
love God and serve him, they should live and be happy, [Deu
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#016). If they would love God, and
evidence the sincerity of their love by keeping his commandments - if
they would make conscience of keeping his commandments, and do it from a
principle of love - then God would do them good, and they should be as
happy as his love and blessing could make them. (2.) If they or theirs
should at any time turn from God, desert his service, and worship other
gods this would certainly be their ruin, [Deu
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#017), [Deu
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#018). Observe, It is not for every
failure in the particulars of their duty that ruin is threatened, but
for apostasy and idolatry: though every violation of the command
deserved the curse, yet the nation would be destroyed by that only which
is the violation of the marriage covenant. The purport of the New
Testament is much the same; this, in like manner, sets before us life
and death, good and evil; He that believes shall be saved; he that
believes not shall be damned, [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016). And this faith includes love
and obedience. To those who by patient continuance in well doing seek
for glory, honour, and immortality, God will give eternal life. But to
those that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness (and so, in effect, worship other gods and serve them),
will be rendered the indignation and wrath of an immortal God, the
consequence of which must needs be the tribulation and anguish of an
immortal soul, [Rom 2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007).

II\. Having thus stated the case, he fairly puts them to their choice,
with a direction to them to choose well. He appeals to heaven and earth
concerning his fair and faithful dealing with them, [Deu
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019). They could not but own that
whatever was the issue he had delivered his soul; therefore, that they
might deliver theirs, he bids them choose life, that is, choose to do
their duty, which would be their life. Note, 1. Those shall have life
that choose it: those that choose the favour of God and communion with
him for their felicity, and prosecute their choice as they ought, shall
have what they choose. 2. Those that come short of life and happiness
must thank themselves; they would have had it if they had chosen it when
it was put to their choice: but they die because they will die; that is,
because they do not like the life promised upon the terms proposed.

III\. In the last verse, 1. He shows them, in short, what their duty is,
to love God, and to love him as the Lord, a Being most amiable, and as
their God, a God in covenant with them; and, as an evidence of this
love, to obey his voice in every thing, and by a constancy in this love
and obedience to cleave to him, and never to forsake him in affection or
practice. 2. He shows them what reason there was for this duty,
inconsideration, (1.) Of their dependence upon God: He is thy life, and
the length of thy days. He gives life, preserves life, restores life,
and prolongs it by his power though it is a frail life, and by his
patience though it is a forfeited life: he sweetens life with his
comforts, and is the sovereign Lord of life; in his hand our breath is.
Therefore we are concerned to keep ourselves in his love; for it is good
having him our friend, and bad having him our enemy. (2.) Of their
obligation to him for the promise of Canaan made to their fathers and
ratified with an oath. And, (3.) Of their expectations from him in
performance of that promise: "Love God, and serve him, that thou mayest
dwell in that land of promise which thou mayest be sure he can give, and
uphold to thee who is thy life and the length of thy days." All these
are arguments to us to continue in love and obedience to the God of our
mercies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 31](deu031)

</div>
