<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu032)  [Next](deu034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 33:0</span></span>

Yet Moses has not done with the children of Israel; he seemed to have
taken final leave of them in the close of the foregoing chapter, but
still he has something more to say. He had preached them a farewell
sermon, a very copious and pathetic discourse. After sermon he had given
out a psalm, a long psalm; and now nothing remains but to dismiss them
with a blessing; that blessing he pronounces in this chapter in the name
of the Lord, and so leaves them. I. He pronounces them all blessed in
what God had done for them already, especially in giving them his law
([Deu 33:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)). II. He pronounces a
blessing upon each tribe, which is both a prayer for and a prophecy of
their felicity. 1. Reuben ([Deu 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006)).
2. Judah ([Deu 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007)). 3. Levi ([Deu
33:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008)). 4. Benjamin ([Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012)). 5. Joseph ([Deu
33:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013)). 6. Zebulun and Issachar
([Deu 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#018), [Deu
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#019)). 7. Gad ([Deu
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020), [Deu
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#021)). 8. Dan ([Deu
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#022)). 9. Naphtali ([Deu
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#023)). 10. Asher ([Deu
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#024), [Deu
33:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#025)). III. He pronounces them all in
general blessed upon the account of what God would be to them, and do
for them if they were obedient ([Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026), etc.).

[Deuteronomy 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 33:1</span></span>

The first verse is the title of the chapter: it is a blessing. In the
foregoing chapter he had thundered out the terrors of the Lord against
Israel for their sin; it was a chapter like Ezekiel's roll, full of
lamentation, and mourning, and woe. Now to soften that, and that he
might not seem to part in anger, he here subjoins a blessing, and leaves
his peace, which should descend and rest upon all those among them that
were the sons of peace. Thus Christ's last work on earth was to bless
his disciples ([Luk 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050)), like Moses
here, in token of parting as friends. Moses blessed them, 1. As a
prophet - a man of God. Note, It is a very desirable thing to have an
interest in the prayers of those that have an interest in heaven; it is
a prophet's reward. In this blessing Moses not only expresses his good
wishes to this people, but by the spirit of prophecy foretels things to
come concerning them. 2. As a parent to Israel; for so good princes are
to their subjects. Jacob upon his death-bed blessed his sons ([Gen
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)), in conformity to whose example
Moses here blesses the tribes that were descended from them, to show
that though they had been very provoking yet the entail of the blessing
was not cut off. The doing of this immediately before his death would
not only be the more likely to leave an impression upon them, but would
be an indication of the great good-will of Moses to them, that he
desired their happiness, though he must die and not share in it.

He begins his blessing with a lofty description of the glorious
appearances of God to them in giving them the law, and the great
advantage they had by it.

I. There was a visible and illustrious discovery of the divine majesty,
enough to convince and for ever silence atheists and infidels, to awaken
and affect those that were most stupid and careless, and to put to shame
all secret inclinations to other gods, [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002). 1. His appearance was glorious:
he shone forth like the sun when he goes forth in his strength. Even
Seir and Paran, two mountains at some distance, were illuminated by the
divine glory which appeared on Mount Sinai, and reflected some of the
rays of it, so bright was the appearance, and so much taken notice of by
the adjacent countries. To this the prophet alludes, to set forth the
wonders of the divine providence, [Hab
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003), [Hab
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004); [Psa
18:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007). The Jerusalem Targum has a
strange gloss upon this, that, "when God came down to give the law, he
offered it on Mount Seir to the Edomites, but they refused it, because
they found in it, Thou shalt not kill. Then he offered it on Mount Paran
to the Ishmaelites, but they also refused it, because they found in it,
Thou shalt not steal; and then he came to Mount Sinai and offered it to
Israel, and they said, All that the Lord shall say we will do." I would
not have transcribed so groundless a conceit but for the antiquity of
it. 2. His retinue was glorious; he came with his holy myriads, as Enoch
had long since foretold he should come in the last day to judge the
world, [Jde 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014). These were the
angels, those chariots of God in the midst of which the Lord was, on
that holy place, [Psa 68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017). They
attended the divine majesty, and were employed as his ministers in the
solemnities of the day. Hence the law is said to be given by the
disposition of angels, [Act 7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053); [Heb
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002).

II\. He gave them his law, which is, 1. Called a fiery law, because it
was given them out of the midst of the fire ([Deu
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033)), and because it works like fire;
if it be received, it is melting, warming, purifying, and burns up the
dross of corruption; if it be rejected, it hardens, sears, torments, and
destroys. The Spirit descended in cloven tongues as of fire; for the
gospel also is a fiery law. 2. It is said to go from his right hand,
either because he wrote it on tables of stone, or to denote the power
and energy of the law and the divine strength that goes along with it,
that it may not return void. Or it came as a gift to them, and a
precious gift it was, a right-hand blessing. 3. It was an instance of
the special kindness he had for them: Yea, he loved the people (v. 32),
and therefore, though it was a fiery law, yet it is said to go for them
([Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)), that is, in favour to
them. Note, The law of God written in the heart is a certain evidence of
the love of God shed abroad there: we must reckon God's law one of the
gifts of his grace. Yea, he embraced the people, or laid them in his
bosom; so the word signifies, which denotes not only the dearest love,
but the most tender and careful protection. All his saints are in his
hand. Some understand it particularly of his supporting them and
preserving them alive at Mount Sinai, when the terror was so great that
Moses himself quaked; they heard the voice of God and lived, [Deu
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033). Or it denotes his forming them
into a people by his law; he moulded and fashioned them as a potter does
the clay. Or they were in his hand to be covered and protected, used and
disposed of, as the seven stars were in the hand of Christ, [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016). Note, God has all his saints in
his hand; and, though there are ten thousands of his saints ([Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)), yet his hand, with which he
measures the waters, is large enough, and strong enough, to hold them
all, and we may be sure that none can pluck them out of his hand, [Joh
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028).

III\. He disposed them to receive the law which he gave them: They sat
down at thy feet, as scholars at the feet of their master, in token of
reverence, in attendance and humble submission to what is taught; so
Israel sat at the foot of Mount Sinai, and promised to hear and do
whatever God should say. They were struck to thy feet, so some read it;
namely, by the terrors of Mount Sinai, which greatly humbled them for
the present, [Exo 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019). Every one
then stood ready to receive God's words, and did so again when the law
was publicly read to them, as [Jos
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#034). It is a great privilege when we
have heard the words of God to have opportunity of hearing them again.
[Joh 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#026), I have declared thy name,
and will declare it. So Israel not only had received the law, but should
still receive it by their prayers, and other lively oracles. The people
are taught ([Deu 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#004), [Deu
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005)), in gratitude for the law of
God, always to keep up an honourable remembrance both of the law itself
and of Moses by whom it was given. Two of the Chaldee paraphrasts read
it, The children of Israel said, Moses commanded us a law. And the Jews
say that as soon as a child was able to speak his father was obliged to
teach him these words: Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of
the congregation of Jacob.

1\. They are taught to speak with great respect of the law, and to call
it the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob. They looked upon it,
(1.) As peculiar to them, and that by which they were distinguished from
other nations, who neither had the knowledge of it ([Psa
147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)), nor, if they had, were under
those obligations to observe it that Israel were under: and therefore
(says bishop Patrick), "when the Jews conquered any country, they did
not force any to embrace the law of Moses, but only to submit to the
seven precepts of Noah." (2.) As entailed upon them; for so inheritances
are to be transmitted to their posterity. And, (3.) As their wealth and
true treasure. Those that enjoy the word of God and the means of grace
have reason to say, We have a goodly heritage. He is indeed a rich man
in whom the word of Christ dwells richly. Perhaps the law is called
their inheritance because it was given them with their inheritance, and
we so annexed to it that the forsaking of the law would be a forfeiture
of the inheritance. See [Psa 119:111](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#111).

2\. They are taught to speak with great respect of Moses; and they were
the more obliged to keep up his name because he had not provided for the
keeping of it up in his family; his posterity were never called the sons
of Moses, as the priests were the sons of Aaron. (1.) They must own
Moses a great benefactor to their nation, in that he commanded them the
law; for, though it came from the hand of God, it went through the hand
of Moses. (2.,) He was king in Jeshurun. Having commanded them the law,
as long as he lived he took care to see it observed and put in
execution; and they were very happy in having such a king, who ruled
them, and went in and out before them at all times, but did in a special
manner look great when the heads of the people were gathered together in
parliament, as it were, and Moses was president among them. Some
understand this of God himself; he did then declare himself their King
when he gave them the law, and he continued so long as they were
Jeshurun, an upright people, and till they rejected him, [Sa1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#012). But it seems rather to be
understood of Moses. A good government is a great blessing to any
people, and what they have reason to be very thankful for; and that
constitution is very happy which as Israel's, which as ours, divides the
power between the king in Jeshurun and the heads of the tribes, when
they are gathered together.

[Deuteronomy 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 33:6</span></span>

Here is, I. The blessing of Reuben. Though Reuben had lost the honour of
his birthright, yet Moses begins with him; for we should not insult over
those that are disgraced, nor desire to perpetuate marks of infamy upon
any, though ever so justly fastened at first, [Deu
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006). Moses desires and foretels, 1.
The preserving of this tribe. Though a frontier tribe on the other side
Jordan, yet, "Let it live, and not be either ruined by its neighbours or
lost among them." And perhaps he refers to those chosen men of that
tribe who, having had their lot assigned them already, left their
families in it, and were now ready to go over armed before their
brethren, [Num 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#027). "Let them be
protected in this noble expedition, and have their heads covered in the
day of battle." 2. Let it be a numerous tribe; though their other
honours be lost, so that they shall not excel, yet let them multiply."
Let Reuben live and not die, though his men be few; so bishop Patrick,
thinks it may be rendered. "Though he must not expect to flourish ([Gen
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004)), yet let him not perish." All
the Chaldee paraphrasts refer this to the other world: Let Reuben live
in life eternal, and not die the second death, so Onkelos. Let Reuben
live in this world, and not die that death which the wicked die in the
world to come, so Jonathan and the Jerusalem Targum.

II\. The blessing of Judah, which is put before Levi because our Loud
sprang out of Judah, and (as Dr. Lightfoot says) because of the dignity
of the kingdom above the priesthood. The blessing ([Deu
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007)) may refer either, 1. To the
whole tribe in general. Moses prays for, and prophesies, the great
prosperity of that tribe., That God would hear his prayers (see an
instance, [Ch2 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#014), [Ch2
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#015)), settle him in his lot, prosper
him in all his affairs, and give him victory over his enemies. It is
taken for granted that the tribe of Judah would be both a praying tribe
and an active tribe. "Lord," says Moses, "hear his prayers, and give
success to all his undertakings: let his hands be sufficient for him
both in husbandry and in war." The voice of prayer should always be
attended with the hand of endeavour, and then we may expect prosperity.
Or, 2. It may refer in particular to David, as a type of Christ, that
God would hear his prayers, [Psa 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001)
(and Christ was heard always, [Joh
11:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042)), that he would give him victory
over his enemies, and success in his great undertakings. See [Psa
89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020) etc. And that prayer that God
would bring him to his people seems to refer to Jacob's prophecy
concerning Shiloh, That to him should the gathering of the people be,
[Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010). The tribe of Simeon is
omitted in the blessing, because Jacob had left it under a brand, and it
had never done any thing, as Levi had done, to retrieve its honour. It
was lessened in the wilderness more than any other of the tribes; and
Zimri, who was so notoriously guilty in the matter of Peor but the other
day, was of that tribe. Or, because the lot of Simeon was an appendage
to that of Judah, that tribe is included in the blessing of Judah. Some
copies of the Septuagint join Simeon with Reuben: Let Reuben live and
not die; and let Simeon be many in number.

[Deuteronomy 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 33:8</span></span>

In blessing the tribe of Levi, Moses expresses himself more at large,
not so much because it was his own tribe (for he takes no notice of his
relation to it) as because it was God's tribe. The blessing of Levi has
reference.

I. To the high priest, here called God's holy one ([Deu
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008)), because his office was holy, in
token of which, Holiness to the Lord was written upon his forehead. 1.
He seems to acknowledge that God might justly have displaced Aaron and
his seed, for his sin at Meribah, ([Exo
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007)), which might be very remarkable,
and which God might have an eye to in conferring the priesthood upon
him, though no mention is made of it there. All the Chaldee paraphrasts
agree that it was a trial in which he was found perfect and faithful,
and stood in the trial; therefore not that, [Num
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#002). He prays that the office of the
high priest might ever remain: Let thy thummim and thy urim be with him.
It was given him for some eminent piece of service, as appears, [Mal
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005). "Lord, let it never be taken from
him." Notwithstanding this blessing, the urim and thummim were lost in
the captivity, and never restored under the second temple. But this
prayer has its full accomplishment in Jesus Christ, God's Holy One, and
our great high priest, of whom Aaron was a type: with him who had lain
in the Father's bosom from eternity the urim and thummim shall remain;
for he is the wonderful and everlasting counsellor. Some translate the
thummim and urim appellatively, the rather because the usual order is
here inverted, and here only. Thummim signifies integrity, and Urim
illumination: Let these be with thy holy one, that is, "Lord, let the
high priest ever be both an upright man and an understanding man." A
good prayer to be put up for the ministers of the gospel, that they may
have clear heads and honest hearts; light and sincerity make a complete
minister.

II\. To the inferior priests and Levites, [Deu
33:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009).

1\. He commends the zeal of this tribe for God when they sided with
Moses (and so with God) against the worshippers of the golden calf ([Exo
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#026) etc.), and, being employed in
cutting off the ring-leaders in that wickedness, they did it
impartially: the best friends they had in the world, though as dear to
them as their next relations, they did not spare if they were idolaters.
Note, Our regard to God and to his glory ought always to prevail above
our regard to any creature whatsoever. And those who not only keep
themselves pure from the common iniquities of the times and places in
which they live, but, as they are capable, bear testimony against them,
and stand up for God against the evil-doers, shall have special marks of
honour put upon them. Perhaps Moses may have an eye to the sons of
Korah, who refused to join with their father in his gain-saying, [Num
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#011). Also to Phinebas, who executed
judgment, and stayed the plague. And indeed the office of the priests
and Levites, which engaged their constant attendance, at least in their
turns, at God's altar, laid them under a necessity of being frequently
absent from their families, which they could not take such care of, nor
make such provision for, as other Israelites might. This was the
constant self-denial they submitted to, that they might observe God's
word, and keep the covenant of priesthood. Note, Those that are called
to minister in holy things must sit loose to the relations and interests
that are dearest to them in this world, and prefer the gratifying of the
best friend they have, [Act 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#013);
[Act 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024). Our Lord Jesus knew not
his mother and his brethren when they would have taken him off from his
work, [Mat 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048).

2\. He confirms the commission granted to this tribe to minister in holy
things, which was the recompence of their zeal and fidelity, [Deu
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010). (1.) They were to deal for God
with the people: "They shall teach Jacob thy judgments and Israel thy
laws, both as preachers in thy religious assemblies, reading and
expounding the law ([Neh 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007), [Neh
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008)), and as judges, determining
doubtful and difficult cases that were brought before them," [Ch2
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#008), [Ch2
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#009). The priests' lips kept this
knowledge for the use of the people, who were to ask the law at their
mouth, [Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007). Even Haggai, a
prophet, consulted the priests in a case of conscience, [Hag
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#011), etc. Note, Preaching is
necessary, not only for the first planting of churches, but for the
preserving and edifying of churches when they are planted. See [Eze
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#023), [Eze
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#024). (2.) They were to deal for the
people with God, in burning incense to the praise and glory of God, and
offering sacrifices to make atonement for sin and to obtain the divine
favour. This was the work of the priests, but the Levites attended and
assisted in it. Those that would have benefit by their incense and
offerings must diligently and faithfully observe their instructions.

3\. He prays for them, [Deu 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#011).
(1.) That God would prosper them in their estates, and make that which
was allotted them for their maintenance comfortable to them. Bless,
Lord, his substance. The provision made for them was very plentiful, and
came to them easily, and yet they could have no joy of it unless God
blessed it to them; and, since God himself was their portion, a
particular blessing might be expected to attend this portion. Bless,
Lord, his virtue; so some read it. "Lord, increase thy graces in them,
and make them more and more fit for their work." (2.) That he would
accept them in their services: "Accept the work of his hands, both for
himself and for the people for whom he ministers." Acceptance with God
is that which we should all aim at, and be ambitious of, in all our
devotions, whether men accept us or no ([Co2
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#009)), and it is the most valuable
blessing we can desire either for ourselves or others. (3.) That he
would take his part against all his enemies: Smite through the loins of
those that rise against him. He supposes that God's ministers would have
many enemies: some would hate their persons for their faithfulness, and
would endeavour to do them a mischief; others would envy them their
maintenance, and endeavour sacrilegiously to deprive them of it; others
would oppose them in the execution of their office and not submit to the
sentence of the priests; and some would aim to overthrow the office
itself. Now he prays that God would blast all such attempts, and return
the mischief upon the heads of the authors. This prayer is a prophecy
that God will certainly reckon with those that are enemies to his
ministers, and will keep up a ministry in his church to the end of time,
in spite of all the designs of the gates of hell against it. Saul rose
up against the Lord's priests ([Sa1
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#018)), and this filled the measure of
his sin.

[Deuteronomy 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 33:12</span></span>

Here is, I. The blessing of Benjamin, [Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012). Benjamin is put next to Levi,
because the temple, where the priests' work lay, was just upon the edge
of the lot of this tribe; and it is put before Joseph because of the
dignity of Jerusalem (part of which was in this tribe) above Samaria,
which was in the tribe of Ephraim, and because Benjamin adhered to the
house of David, and to the temple of the Lord, when the rest of the
tribes deserted both with Jeroboam. 1. Benjamin is here called the
beloved of the Lord, and the father of this tribe was Jacob's beloved
son, the son of his right hand. Note, Those are blessed indeed that are
beloved of the Lord. Saul the first king, and Paul the great apostle,
were both of this tribe. 2. He is here assured of the divine protection:
he shall dwell safely. Note, Those are safe whom God loves, [Psa
91:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001). 3. It is here intimated that the
temple in which God would dwell should be built in the borders of this
tribe. Jerusalem the holy city was in the lot of this tribe ([Jos
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#028)); and though Zion, the city of
David, is supposed to belong to Judah, yet Mount Moriah, on which the
temple was built, was in Benjamin's lot. God is therefore said to dwell
between his shoulders, because the temple stood on that mount, as the
head of a man upon his shoulders. And by this means Benjamin was covered
all the day long under the protection of the sanctuary ([Psa
125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002)), which is often spoken of as a
place of refuge, [Psa 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004), [Psa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005); [Neh
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#010). Benjamin, dwelling by the temple
of God, dwelt in safety by him. Note, It is a happy thing to be in the
neighbourhood of the temple. This situation of Benjamin, it is likely,
was the only thing that kept that tribe in adherence with Judah to the
divine institutions, when the other ten tribes apostatized. Those have
corrupt and wicked hearts indeed who, the nearer they are to the church,
are so much the further from God.

II\. The blessing of Joseph, including both Manasseh and Ephraim. In
Jacob's blessing (Gen. 49) that of Joseph is the largest, and so it is
here; and thence Moses here borrows the title he gives to Joseph ([Deu
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#016)), that he was separated from his
brethren, or, as it might be read, a Nazarite among them, both in regard
of his piety, wherein it appears, by many instances, he excelled them
all, and of his dignity in Egypt, where he was both their ruler and
benefactor. His brethren separated him from them by making him a slave,
but God distinguished him from them by making him a prince. Now the
blessings here prayed for, and prophesied of, for this tribe, are great
plenty and great power.

1\. Great plenty, [Deu 33:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013). In
general: Blessed of the Lord be his land. Those were very fruitful
countries that fell into the lot of Ephraim and Manasseh, yet Moses
prays they might be watered with the blessing of God, which makes rich,
and on which all fruitfulness depends. Now,

(1.) He enumerates many particulars which he prays may contribute to the
wealth and abundance of those two tribes, looking up to the Creator for
the benefit and serviceableness of all the inferior creatures, for they
are all that to us which he makes them to be. He prays, \[1.\] For
seasonable rains and dews, the precious things of heaven; and so
precious they are, though but pure water, that without them the fruits
of the earth would all fail and be cut off. \[2.\] For plentiful
springs, which help to make the earth fruitful, called here the deep
that coucheth beneath; both are the rivers of God ([Psa
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009)), and he made particularly the
fountains of waters, [Rev 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007). \[3.\]
For the benign influences of the heavenly bodies ([Deu
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#014)), for the precious fruits (the
word signifies that which is most excellent, and the best in its kind)
put forth by the quickening heat of the sun, and the cooling moisture of
the moon. "Let them have the yearly fruits in their several months,
according to the course of nature, in one month olives, in another
dates," etc. So some understand it. \[4.\] For the fruitfulness even of
their hills and mountains, which in other countries used to be barren
([Deu 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#015)): Let them have the chief
things of the ancient mountains; and, if the mountains be fruitful, the
fruits on them will be first and best ripened. They are called ancient
mountains, not because prior in time to other mountains, but because ,
like the first-born, they were superior in worth and excellency; and
lasting hills, not only because as other mountains they were immovable
([Hab 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006)), but because the
fruitfulness of them should continue. \[5.\] For the productions of the
lower grounds ([Deu 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#016)): For the
precious things of the earth. Though the earth itself seems a useless
worthless lump of matter, yet there are precious things produced out of
it, for the support and comfort of human life. [Job
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#005). Out of it cometh bread, because
out of it came our bodies, and to it they must return. But what are the
precious things of the earth to a soul that came from God and must
return to him? Or what is its fulness to the fulness that is in Christ,
whence we receive grace for grace? Some make these precious things here
prayed for to be figures of spiritual blessings in heavenly things by
Christ, the gifts, graces, and comforts of the Spirit.

(2.) He crowns all with the good-will, or favourable acceptance, of him
that dwelt in the bush ([Deu 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#016)),
that is, of God, that God who appeared to Moses in the bush that burned
and was not consumed ([Exo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)), to
give him his commission for the bringing of Israel out of Egypt. Though
God's glory appeared there but for a while, yet it is said to dwell
there, because it continued as long as there was occasion for it: the
good-will of the shechinah in the bush; so it might be read, for
shechinah signifies that which dwelleth; and, though it was but a little
while a dweller in the bush, yet it continued to dwell with the people
of Israel. My dweller in the bush; so it should be rendered; that was an
appearance of the divine Majesty to Moses only, in token of the
particular interest he had in God, which he desires to improve for the
good of this tribe. Many a time God has appeared to Moses, but now that
he is just dying he seems to have the most pleasing remembrance of that
which was the first time, when his acquaintance with the visions of the
Almighty first began, and his correspondence with heaven was first
settled: that was a time of love never to be forgotten. It was at the
bush that God declared himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
so confirmed the promise made to the fathers, that promise which reached
as far as the resurrection of the body and eternal life, as appears by
our Saviour's argument from it, [Luk
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#037). So that, when he prays for the
good-will of him that dwelt in the bush, he has an eye to the covenant
then and there renewed, on which all our hopes of God's favour must be
bottomed. Now he concludes this large blessing with a prayer for the
favour or good-will of God, \[1.\] Because that is the fountain and
spring-head of all these blessings; they are gifts of God's good-will;
they are so to his own people, whatever they are to others. Indeed when
Ephraim (a descendant from Joseph) slid back from God, as a backsliding
heifer, those fruits of his country were so far from being the gifts of
God's good-will that they were intended but to fatten him for the
slaughter, as a lamb in a large place, [Hos
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#016), [Hos
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#017). \[2.\] Because that is the
comfort and sweetness of all these blessings; then we have joy of them
when we taste God's good-will in them. \[3.\] Because that is better
than all these, infinitely better; for if we have but the favour and
good-will of God we are happy, and may be easy in the want of all these
things, and may rejoice in the God of our salvation though the fig-tree
do not blossom, and there be no fruit in the vine, [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017), [Hab
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#018).

2\. Great power Joseph is here blessed with, [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017). Here are three instances of his
power foretold: (1.) His authority among his brethren: His glory is like
the firstling of his bullock, or young bull, which is a stately
creature, and therefore was formerly used as an emblem of royal majesty.
Joshua, who was to succeed Moses, was of the tribe of Ephraim the son of
Joseph, and his glory was indeed illustrious, and he was an honour to
his tribe. In Ephraim was the royal city of the ten tribes afterwards.
And of Manasseh were Gideon, Jephthah, and Jair, who were all ornaments
and blessings to their country. Some think he is compared to the
firstling of the bullock because the birthright which Reuben lost
devolved upon Joseph ([Ch1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#001), [Ch1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#002)), and to the firstling of his
bullock, because Bashan, which was in the lot of Manasseh, was famous
for bulls and cows, [Psa 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012); [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001). (2.) His force against his
enemies and victory over them: His horns are like the horn of a unicorn,
that is, "The forces he shall bring into the field shall be very strong
and formidable, and with them he shall push the people," that is, "He
shall overcome all that stand in his way." It appears from the
Ephraimites' contests, both with Gideon ([Jdg
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001)) and with Jephthah ([Jdg
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#001)), that they were a warlike tribe
and fierce. Yet we find the children of Ephraim, when they had forsaken
the covenant of God, though they were armed, turning back in the day of
battle ([Psa 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009), [Psa
78:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#010)); for, though here pronounced
strong and bold as unicorns, when God had departed from them they became
as weak as other men. (3.) The numbers of his people, in which Ephraim,
though the younger house, exceeded, Jacob having, in the foresight of
the same thing, crossed hands, [Gen
48:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#019). They are the ten thousands of
Ephraim, and the thousands of Manasseh. Jonathan's Targum applies it to
the ten thousands of Canaanites conquered by Joshua, who was of the
tribe of Manasseh. And the gloss of the Jerusalem Targum upon the former
part of this verse is observable, that "as the firstlings of the bullock
were never to be worked, nor could the unicorn ever be tamed, so Joseph
should continue free; and they would have continued free if they had not
by sin sold themselves."

[Deuteronomy 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 33:18</span></span>

Here we have, I. The blessings of Zebulun and Issachar put together, for
they were both the sons of Jacob by Leah, and by their lot in Canaan
they were neighbours; it is foretold,

1\. That they should both have a comfortable settlement and employment,
[Deu 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#018). Zebulun must rejoice, for
he shall have cause to rejoice; and Moses prays that he may have cause
in his going out, either to war (for Zebulun jeoparded their lives in
the high places of the field, [Jdg
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#018)), or rather to sea, for Zebulun
was a haven of ships, [Gen 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013). And
Issachar must rejoice in his tents, that is, in his business at home,
his husbandry, to which the men of that tribe generally confined
themselves, because they saw that rest was good, and when the sea was
rough the land was pleasant, [Gen
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#014), [Gen
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#015). Observe here, (1.) That the
providence of God, as it variously appoints the bounds of men's
habitation, some in the city and some in the country, some in the
seaports and some in the inland towns, so it wisely disposes men's
inclinations to different employments for the good of the public, as
each member of the body is situated and qualified for the service of the
whole. The genius of some men leads them to a book, of others to the
sea, of others to the sword; some are inclined to rural affairs, others
to trade, and some have a turn for mechanics; and it is well it is so.
If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? [Co1
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#017). It was for the common good of
Israel that the men of Zebulun were merchants and that the men of
Issachar were husbandmen. (2.) That whatever our place and business are
it is our wisdom and duty to accommodate ourselves to them, and it is a
great happiness to be well pleased with them. Let Zebulun rejoice in his
going out; let him thank God for the gains and make the best of the
losses and inconveniences of his merchandise, and not despise the
meanness, nor envy the quietness, of Issachar's tents. Let Issachar
rejoice in his tents, let him be well pleased with the retirements and
content with the small profits of his country seats, and not grudge that
he has not Zebulun's pleasure of travelling and profit of trading. Every
business has both its conveniences and inconveniences, and therefore
whatever Providence has made our business we ought to bring our minds to
it; and it is really a great happiness, whatever our lot is, to be easy
with it. This is the gift of God, [Ecc
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#019).

2\. That they should both be serviceable in their places to the honour
of God and the interests of religion in the nation ([Deu
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#019)): They shall call the people to
the mountain, that is, to the temple, which Moses foresaw should be
built upon a mountain. I see not why this should be confined (as it is
by most interpreters) to Zebulun; if both Zebulun and Issachar received
the comforts of their respective employments, why may we not suppose
that they both took care to give God the glory of them? Two things they
shall do for God: -

(1.) They shall invite others to his service. Call the people to the
mountain. \[1.\] Zebulun shall improve his acquaintance and commerce
with the neighbouring nations, to whom he goes out, for this noble
purpose, to propagate religion among them, and to invite them into the
service of the God of Israel. Note, Men of great business, or large
conversation, should wisely and zealously endeavour to recommend the
practice of serious godliness to those with whom they converse and among
whom their business lies. Such are blessed, for they are blessings. It
were well if the enlargement of trade with foreign countries might be
made to contribute to the spreading of the gospel. This prophecy
concerning Zebulun perhaps looks as far as the preaching of Christ and
his apostles, which began in the land of Zebulun ([Mat
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#014), [Mat
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#015)); then they called the people to
the mountain, that is, to the kingdom of the Messiah, which is called
the mountain of the Lord's house, [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002). \[2.\] Issachar that tarries at
home, and dwells in tents, shall call upon his neighbours to go up to
the sanctuary at the times appointed for their solemn feasts, either
because they should be more zealous and forward than their neighbours
(and it has been often observed that though those that with Zebulun
dwell in the haven of ships, which are places of concourse, have
commonly more of the light of religion, those that with Issachar dwell
in tents in the country have more of the life and heat of it), and may
therefore with their zeal provoke those to a holy emulation that have
more knowledge ([Psa 122:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001)); or
because they were more observant of the times appointed for their feasts
than others were. One of the Chaldee paraphrasts reads the foregoing
verse, Rejoice, Issachar, in the tents of thy schools, supposing they
would many of them be scholars, and would use their learning for that
purpose, according to the revolutions of the year, to give notice of the
times of the feasts; for almanacs were not then so common as they are
now. And Onkelos more particularly, Rejoice, Issachar, when thou goest
to compute the times of the solemnities at Jerusalem; for then the
tribes of Israel shall be gathered to the mountain of the house of the
sanctuary. So he reads the beginning of this verse; and many think this
is the meaning of that character of the men of Issachar in David's time,
That they had understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to
do, [Ch1 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#032). And the character
which follows (v. 33) of the men of Zebulun, that they were such as went
forth to battle, expert in war, perhaps may explain the blessing of that
tribe here. Note, Those that have not opportunity as Zebulun had of
bringing into the church those that are without may yet be very
serviceable to its interest by helping to quicken, encourage, and build
up, those that are within. And it is good work to call people to God's
ordinances, to put those in remembrance that are forgetful, and to stir
up those that are slothful, who will follow, but care not to lead.

(2.) They shall not only invite others to the service of God, but they
shall abound in it themselves: There they shall offer sacrifices of
righteousness. They shall not send others to the temple and stay at home
themselves, under pretence that they cannot leave their business; but,
when they stir up others to go speedily to pray before the Lord, they
shall say, We will go also, as it is [Zac
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#021). Note, The good we exhort others
to we should ourselves be examples of. And, when they come to the
temple, they shall not appear before the Lord empty, but shall bring for
the honour and service of God according as he has prospered them, [Co1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002). \[1.\] It is here foretold that
both these tribes should grow rich. Zebulun that goes abroad shall suck
of the abundance of the seas, which are full breasts to the merchants,
while Issachar, that tarries at home, shall enrich himself with
treasures hid in the sands, either the fruits of the earth or the
underground treasures of metals and minerals, or (because the word for
sand here signifies properly the sand of the sea) the rich things thrown
up by the sea, for the lot of Issachar reached to the sea-side. Perhaps
their success in calling the people to the mount is intimated by their
sucking of the abundance of the seas, for we have a like phrase used for
the bringing in of the nations to the church ([Isa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005)), The abundance of the sea shall
be converted unto thee, and ([Deu
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#016)), Thou shalt suck the milk of
the Gentiles. It is foretold, \[2.\] That these tribes, being thus
enriched, should consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their
substance unto the Lord of the whole earth, [Mic
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013). The merchandise of Zebulun, and
the hire of Issachar, shall be holiness to the Lord ([Isa
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018)), for thereof they shall offer
sacrifices of righteousness, that is, sacrifices according to the law.
Note, We must serve and honour God with what we have; and where he sows
plentifully he expects to reap accordingly. Those that suck of the
abundance of the seas, and of the treasures hid in the sand, ought to
offer sacrifices of righteousness proportionable.

II\. The blessing of the tribe of Gad comes next, [Deu
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020), [Deu
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#021). This was one of the tribes that
was already seated on that side Jordan where Moses now was. Now,

1\. He foretels what this tribe would be, [Deu
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020). (1.) That it would be enlarged,
as at present it had a spacious allotment; and he gives God the glory
both of its present and of its future extent: Blessed be he that
enlargeth Gad. We find how this tribe was enlarged by their success in a
war which it seems they carried on very religiously against the
Hagarites, [Ch1 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#019), [Ch1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#020), [Ch1
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#022). Note, God is to have the glory
of all our enlargements. (2.) That it would be a valiant and victorious
tribe, would, if let alone, dwell secure and fearless as a lion; but, if
provoked, would, like a lion, tear the arm with the crown of the head;
that is, would pull in pieces all that stood in his way, both the arm
(that is, the strength) and the crown of the head (that is, the policy
and authority) of his enemies. In David's time there were Gadites whose
faces were as the faces of lions, [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008). Some reckon Jehu to be of this
tribe, because the first mention we have of him is at Ramoth Gilead,
which belonged to Gad, and they think this may refer to his valiant
acts.

2\. He commends this tribe for what they had done and were now doing,
[Deu 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#021). (1.) They had done very
wisely for themselves, when they chose their lot with the first, in a
country already conquered: He provided the first part for himself;
though he had a concern for his brethren, yet his charity began at home,
and he was willing to see himself first served, first settled. The
Gadites were the first and most active movers for an allotment on that
side Jordan, and therefore are still mentioned before the Reubenites in
the history of that affair, [Num 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#002).
And thus, while the other tribes had their portion assigned them by
Joshua the conqueror, Gad and his companions had theirs from Moses the
law-giver, and in it they were seated by law; or (as the word is)
covered or protected by a special providence which watched over those
that were left behind, while the men of war went forward with their
brethren. Note, Men will praise thee when thou doest well for thyself
(when thou providest first for thyself, as Gad did), [Psa
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#018). And God will praise thee when
thou doest well for thy soul, which is indeed thyself, and providest the
first part for that in a portion from the law-giver. (2.) They were now
doing honestly and bravely for their brethren; for they came with the
heads of the people, before whom they went armed over Jordan, to execute
the justice of the Lord upon the Canaanites, under the conduct of
Joshua, to whom we afterwards find they solemnly vowed obedience, [Jos
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#012), [Jos
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#016). This was what they undertook to
do when they had their lot assigned them, [Num
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#027). This they did, [Jos
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#012). And, when the wars of Canaan
were ended, Joshua dismissed them with a blessing, [Jos
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#007). Note, It is a blessed and
honourable thing to be helpful to our brethren in their affairs, and
particularly to assist in executing the justice of the Lord by
suppressing that which is provoking to him: it was this that was counted
to Phinehas for righteousness.

[Deuteronomy 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 33:22</span></span>

Here is, I. The blessing of Dan, [Deu
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#022). Jacob in his blessing had
compared him to a serpent for subtlety; Moses compares him to a lion for
courage and resolution: and what could stand before those that had the
head of a serpent and the heart of a lion? He is compared to the lions
that leaped from Bashan, a mountain noted for fierce lions, whence they
came down to leap upon their prey in the plains. This may refer either,
1. To the particular victories obtained by Samson (who was of this
tribe) over the Philistines. The Spirit of the Lord began to move him in
the camp of Dan when he was very young, as a lion's whelp, so that in
his attacks upon the Philistines he surprised them, and overpowered them
by main strength, as a lion does his prey; and one of his first exploits
was the rending of a lion. Or, 2. To a more general achievement of that
tribe, when a party of them, upon information brought them of the
security of Laish, which lay in the furthest part of the land of Canaan
from them, surprised it, and soon made themselves masters of it. See
[Jdg 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027). And, the mountains of
Bashan lying not far from that city, probably thence they made their
descent upon it; and therefore are here said to leap from Bashan.

II\. The blessing of Naphtali, [Deu
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#023). He looks upon this tribe with
wonder, and applauds it: "O Naphtali, thou art happy, thou shalt be so,
mayest thou be ever so!" Three things make up the happiness of this
tribe: - 1. Be thou satisfied with favour. Some understand it of the
favour of men, their good-will and good word. Jacob had described this
tribe to be, generally, courteous obliging people, giving goodly words,
as the loving hind, [Gen 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#021). Now
what should they get by being so? Moses here tells them they should have
an interest in the affections of their neighbours, and be satisfied with
favour. Those that are loving shall be beloved. But others understand it
of the favour of God, and with good reason; for that only is the favour
that is satisfying to the soul and puts true gladness into the heart.
Those are happy indeed that have the favour of God; and those shall have
it that place their satisfaction in it, and reckon that, in having that,
they have enough and desire no more. 2. Be thou full with the blessing
of the Lord, that is, not only with those good things that are the
fruits of the blessing (corn, and wine, and oil), but with the blessing
itself; that is, the grace of God, according to his promise and
covenant. Those who have that blessing may well reckon themselves full:
they need nothing else to make them happy. "The portion of the tribe of
Naphtali" (the Jews say) "was so fruitful, and the productions so
forward, though it lay north, that those of that tribe were generally
the first that brought their first-fruits to the temple; and so they had
first the blessing from the priest, which was the blessing of the Lord."
Capernaum, in which Christ chiefly resided, lay in this tribe. 3. Be
thou in possession of the sea and the south; so it may be read, that is,
of that sea which shall lie south of thy lot, that was the sea of
Galilee, which we so often read of in the gospels, directly north of
which the lot of this tribe lay, and which was of great advantage to
this tribe, witness the wealth of Capernaum and Bethsaida, which lay
within this tribe, and upon the shore of that sea. See how Moses was
guided by a spirit of prophesy in these blessings; for before the lot
was cast into the lap he foresaw and foretold how the disposal of it
would be.

III\. The blessing of Asher, [Deu
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#024), [Deu
33:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#025). Four things he prays for and
prophecies concerning this tribe, which carries blessedness in its name;
for Leah called the father of it Asher, saying Happy am I, [Gen
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#013). 1. The increase of their
numbers. They were now a numerous tribe, [Num
26:47](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#047). "Let it be more so: Let Asher
be blessed with children." Note, Children, especially children of the
covenant, are blessings, not burdens. 2. Their interest in their
neighbours: Let him be acceptable to his brethren. Note, It is a very
desirable thing to have the love and good-will of those we live among:
it is what we should pray to God for, who has all hearts in his hand;
and what we should endeavour to gain by meekness and humility, and a
readiness, as we have ability and opportunity, to do good to all men. 3.
The richness of their land. (1.) Above ground: Let him dip his foot in
oil, that is, "Let him have such plenty of it in his lot that he may not
only anoint his head with it, but, if he please, wash his feet in it,"
which was not commonly done; yet we find our blessed Saviour so
acceptable to his brethren that his feet were anointed with the most
precious ointment, [Luk 7:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#046). (2.)
Under ground: Thy shoes shall be iron and brass, that is, "Thou shalt
have great plenty of these metals (mines of them) in thy own ground,
which by an uncommon blessing shall have both its surface and its bowels
rich:" or, if they had them not as the productions of their own country,
they should have them imported from abroad; for the lot of this tribe
lay on the sea-coast. The Chaldee paraphrasts understand this
figuratively: "Thou shalt be strong and bright, as iron and brass." 4.
The continuance of their strength and vigour: As thy days, so shall thy
strength be. Many paraphrase it thus, "The strength of thy old age shall
be like that of thy youth; thou shalt not feel a decay, nor be the worse
for the wearing, but shalt renew thy youth; as if not thy shoes only,
but thy bones, were iron and brass." The day is often in scripture put
for the events of the day; and, taking it so here, it is a promise that
God would graciously support them under their trials and troubles,
whatever they were. And so it is a promise sure to all the spiritual
seed of Abraham, that God will wisely proportion their graces and
comforts to the services and sufferings he calls them out to. Have they
work appointed them? They shall have strength to do it. Have they
burdens appointed them? They shall have strength to bear them; and never
be tempted above that they are able. Faithful is he that has thus
promised, and hath caused us to hope in this promise.

[Deuteronomy 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 33:26</span></span>

These are the last words of all that ever Moses, that great writer, that
great dictator, either wrote himself or had written from his dictation;
they are therefore very remarkable, and no doubt we shall find them very
improving. Moses, the man of God (who had as much reason as ever any
mere man had to know both), with his last breath magnifies both the God
of Israel and the Israel of God. They are both incomparable in his eye;
and we are sure that in this his judgment of both his eye did not wax
dim.

I. No God like the God of Israel. None of the gods of the nations were
capable of doing that for their worshippers which Jehovah did for his:
There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026). Note, When we are expecting
that God should bless us in doing well for us we must bless him by
speaking well of him: and one of the most solemn ways of praising God is
by acknowledging that there is none like him. Now, 1. This was the
honour of Israel. Every nation boasted of its god; but none had such a
God to boast of as Israel had. 2. It was their happiness that they were
taken into covenant with such a God. Two things he takes notice of as
proofs of the incontestable pre-eminence of the God of Jeshurun above
all other gods: (1.) His sovereign power and authority: He rides upon
the heavens, and with the greatest state and magnificence on the skies.
Riding on the heavens denotes his greatness and glory, in which he
manifests himself to the upper world, and the use he makes of the
influences of heaven, and the productions of the clouds, in bringing to
pass his own counsels in this lower world: he manages and directs them
as a man does the horse he rides on. When he has any thing to do for his
people he rides upon the heavens to do it; for he does it swiftly and
strongly: no enemy can either anticipate or obstruct the progress of him
that rides on the heavens. (2.) His boundless eternity; he is the
eternal God, and his arms are everlasting, [Deu
33:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#027). The gods of the heathen were
but lately invented, and would shortly perish; but the God of Jeshurun
is eternal: he was before all worlds, and will be when time and days
shall be no more. See [Hab 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012).

II\. No people like the Israel of God. Having pronounced each tribe
happy, in the close he pronounces all together very happy, so happy in
all respects that there was no nation under the sun comparable to them
([Deu 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029)): Happy art thou, O
Israel, a people whose God is the Lord, on that account truly happy, and
none like unto thee. If Israel honour God as a non-such God, he will
favour them so as to make them a non-such people, the envy of all their
neighbours and the joy of all their well-wishers. Who is like unto thee,
O people? Behold, thou art fair, my love, says Christ of his spouse. To
which she presently returns, Behold thou art fair, my beloved. What one
nation (no, not all the nations together) is like thy people Israel?
[Sa2 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#023). What is here said of the
church of Israel and the honours and privileges of it is certainly to be
applied to the church of the first-born, that are written in heaven. The
Christian church is the Israel of God, as the apostle calls it ([Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016)), on which there shall be peace,
and which is dignified above all societies in the world, as Israel was.

1\. Never were people so well seated and sheltered ([Deu
33:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#027)): The eternal God is thy refuge.
Or, as the word signifies, "thy habitation, or mansion-house, in which
thou art safe, and easy, and at rest, as a man in his own house." Every
Israelite indeed is at home in God; the soul returns to him, and reposes
in him as its resting-place ([Psa
116:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#007)), its hiding-place, [Psa
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#007). And those that make him their
habitation shall have all the comforts and benefits of a habitation in
him, [Psa 91:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001). Moses had an eye to
God as the habitation of Israel when they were wandering in the
wilderness ([Psa 90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)): Lord, thou
hast been our dwelling-place in all generations. And now that they were
going to settle in Canaan they must not change their habitation; still
they will need, and still they shall have, the eternal God for their
dwelling-place; without him Canaan itself would be a wilderness, and a
land of darkness.

2\. Never were people so well supported and borne up: Underneath are the
everlasting arms; that is, the almighty power of God is engaged for the
protection and consolation of all that trust in him, in their greatest
straits and distresses, and under the heaviest burdens. The everlasting
arms shall support, (1.) The interests of the church in general, that
they shall not sink, or be run down; underneath the church is that rock
of ages on which it is built, and against which the gates of hell shall
never prevail, [Mat 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018). (2.) The
spirits or particular believers, so that, though they may be oppressed,
they shall not be overwhelmed by any trouble. How low soever the people
of God are at any time brought, everlasting arms are underneath them to
keep the spirit from sinking, from fainting, and the faith from failing,
even when they are pressed above measure. The everlasting covenant, and
the everlasting consolations that flow from it, are indeed everlasting
arms, with which believers have been wonderfully sustained, and kept
cheerful in the worst of times; divine grace is sufficient for them,
[Co2 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009).

3\. Never were people so well commanded and led on to battle: "He shall
thrust out the enemy from before thee by his almighty power, which will
make room for thee; and by a commission which will bear thee out he
shall say, Destroy them." They were now entering upon a land that was in
the full possession of a strong and formidable people, and who, being
its first planters, looked upon themselves as its rightful owners; how
shall Israel justify, and how shall they accomplish, the expulsion of
them? (1.) God will give them a commission to destroy the Canaanites,
and that will justify them, and bear them out in it, against all the
world. He that is sovereign Lord of all lives and all lands not only
allowed and permitted, but expressly commanded and appointed the
children of Israel both to take possession of the land of Canaan and to
put the sword to the people of Canaan, which, being thus authorized,
they might not only lawfully but honourably do, without incurring the
least stain or imputation of theft by the one or murder by the other.
(2.) God will give them power and ability to destroy them; nay, he will
in effect do it to their hands: he will thrust out the enemy from before
them; for the very fear of Israel shall put them to flight. God drive
out the heathen to plant his people, [Psa
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#002). Thus believers are more than
conquerors over their spiritual enemies, through Christ that loved them.
The captain of our salvation thrust out the enemy from before us when he
overcame the world and spoiled principalities and powers on the cross;
and the word of command to us is, "Destroy them; pursue the victory, and
you shall divide the spoil."

4\. Never were people so well secured and protected ([Deu
33:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#028)): Israel shall then dwell in
safety alone. Those that dwell in God, and make his name their strong
tower, dwell in safety; the place of their defence is the munitions of
rocks, [Isa 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#016). They shall dwell in
safety alone. (1.) Though alone. Though they contract no alliances with
their neighbours, nor have any reason to expect help or succour from any
of them, yet they shall dwell in safety; they shall really be safe, and
they shall think themselves so. (2.) Because alone. They shall dwell in
safety as long as they continue pure, and unmixed with the heathen, a
singular and peculiar people. Their distinction from other nations,
though it made them like a speckled bird ([Jer
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009)), and exposed them to the
ill-will of those about them, yet was really their preservation from the
mischief their neighbours wished them, as it kept them under the divine
protection. All that keep close to God shall be kept safely by him. It
is promised that in the kingdom of Christ Israel shall dwell safely,
[Jer 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006).

5\. Never were people so well provided for: The fountain of Jacob (that
is, the present generation of that people, which is as the fountain to
all the streams that shall hereafter descend and be derived from it)
shall now presently be fixed upon a good land. The eye of Jacob (so it
might be read, for the same word signifies a fountain and an eye) is
upon the land of corn and wine, that is, where they now lay encamped
they had Canaan in their eye, it was just before their faces, on the
other side the river, and they would have it in their hands and under
their feet quickly. This land upon which they had set their eye was
blessed both with the fatness of the earth and the dew of heaven; it was
a land of corn and wine, substantial and useful productions: also his
heavens (as if the heavens were particularly designed to be blessings to
that land) shall drop down dew, without which, though the soil were ever
so good, the corn and wine would soon fail. Every Israelite indeed has
his eye, the eye of faith, upon the better country, the heavenly Canaan,
which is richly replenished with better things than corn and wine.

6\. Never were people so well helped. If they were in any strait, God
himself rode upon the heavens for their help, [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026). And they were a people saved by
the Lord, [Deu 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029). If they were in
danger of any harm, or in want of any good, they had an eternal God to
go to, an almighty power to trust to; nothing could hurt those whom God
helped, nor was it possible that the people should perish which was
saved by the Lord. Those that are added to the gospel Israel are such as
shall be saved, [Act 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047).

7\. Never were people so well armed. God himself was the shield of their
help by whom they were armed defensively, and sufficiently guarded
against all assailants: and he was the sword of their excellency, by
whom they were armed offensively, and made both formidable and
successful in all their wars. God is called the sword of their
excellency because, in fighting for them, he made them to excel other
people, or because in all he did for them he had an eye to his sanctuary
among them, which is called the excellency of Jacob, [Psa
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004); [Eze
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#021); [Amo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008). Those in whose hearts is the
excellency of holiness have God himself for their shield and sword - are
defended by the whole armour of God; his word is their sword, and faith
in it is their shield, [Eph 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016), [Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017).

8\. Never were people so well assured of victory over their enemies:
They shall be found liars unto thee; That is, "shall be forced to submit
to thee sorely against their will, so that it will be but a counterfeit
submission; yet the point shall be gained, for thou shalt tread upon
their necks" (so the Septuagint), which we find done, [Jos
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024). "Thou shalt tread down their
strong-holds, be they ever so high, and trample upon their palaces and
temples, though esteemed ever so sacred. If thy enemies be found liars
to thee" (so some read it), "thou shalt tread upon their high places; if
they will not be held by the bonds of leagues and treaties, they shall
be broken by the force of war." Thus shall the God of peace tread Satan
under the feet of all believers, and shall do it shortly, [Rom
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020).

Now lay all this together, and then you will say, Happy art thou, O
Israel! Who is like unto thee, O people! Thrice happy the people whose
God is the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 34](deu034)

</div>
