<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu014)  [Next](deu016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 15:0</span></span>

In this chapter Moses gives orders, I. Concerning the release of debts,
every seventh year ([Deu 15:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#001)), with
a caution that this should be no hindrance to charitable lending ([Deu
15:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#007)). II. Concerning the release
of servants after seven years' service ([Deu
15:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#012)). III. Concerning the
sanctification of the firstlings of cattle to God ([Deu
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#019), etc.).

[Deuteronomy 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 15:1</span></span>

Here is, I. A law for the relief of poor debtors, such (we may suppose)
as were insolvent. Every seventh year was a year of release, in which
the ground rested from being tilled and servants were discharged from
their services; and, among other acts of grace, this was one, that those
who had borrowed money, and had not been able to pay it before, should
this year be released from it; and though, if they were able, they were
afterwards bound in conscience to repay it, yet thenceforth the creditor
should never recover it by law. Many good expositors think it only
forbids the exacting of the debt in the year of release, because, no
harvest being gathered in that year, it could not be expected that men
should pay their debts then, but that afterwards it might be sued for
and recovered: so that the release did not extinguish the debt, but only
stayed the process for a time. But others think it was a release of the
debt for ever, and this seems more probable, yet under certain
limitations expressed or implied. It is supposed ([Deu
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#003)) that the debtor was an Israelite
(an alien could not take the benefit of this law) and that he was poor
([Deu 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#004)), that he did not borrow
for trade or purchase, but for the subsistence of his family, and that
now he could not pay it without reducing himself to poverty and coming
under a necessity of seeking relief in other countries, which might be
his temptation to revolt from God. The law is not that the creditor
shall not receive the debt if the debtor, or his friends for him, can
pay it; but he shall not exact it by a legal process. The reasons of
this law are, 1. To put an honour upon the sabbatical year: Because it
is called the Lord's release, [Deu
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#002). That was Gods year for their
land, as the weekly sabbath was God's day for themselves, their
servants, and cattle; and, as by the resting of their ground, so by the
release of their debts, God would teach them to depend upon his
providence. This year of release typified the grace of the gospel, in
which is proclaimed the acceptable year of the Lord, and by which we
obtain the release of our debts, that is, the pardon of our sins, and we
are taught to forgive injuries, as we are and hope to be forgiven of
God. 2. It was to prevent the falling of any Israelite into extreme
poverty: so the margin reads ([Deu
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#004)), To the end there shall be no
poor among you, none miserably and scandalously poor, to the reproach of
their nation and religion, the reputation of which they ought to
preserve. 3. God's security is here given by a divine promise that,
whatever they lost by their poor debtors, it should be made up to them
in the blessing of God upon all they had and did, [Deu
15:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#004). Let them take care to do their
duty, and then God would bless them with such great increase that what
they might lose by bad debts, if they generously remitted them, should
not be missed out of their stock at the year's end. Not only, the Lord
shall bless thee ([Deu 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#004)), but he
doth bless thee, [Deu 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#006). It is
altogether inexcusable if, though God had given us abundance, so that we
have not only enough but to spare, yet we are rigorous and server in our
demands from our poor brethren; for our abundance should be the supply
of their wants, that at least there may not be such an inequality as is
between two extremes, [Co2 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#014). They
must also consider that their land was God's gift to them, that all
their increase was the fruit of God's blessing upon them, and therefore
they were bound in duty to him to use and dispose of their estates as he
should order and direct them. And, lastly, If they would remit what
little sums they had lent to their poor brethren, it is promised that
they should be able to lend great sums to their rich neighbours, even to
many nations ([Deu 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#006)), and should
be enriched by those loans. Thus the nations should become subject to
them, and dependent on them, as the borrower is servant to the lender,
[Pro 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#007). To be able to lend, and not
to have need to borrow, we must look upon as a great mercy, and a good
reason why we should do good with what we have, lest we provoke God to
turn the scales.

II\. Here is a law in favour of poor borrowers, that they might not
suffer damage by the former law. Men would be apt to argue, If the case
of a man be so with his debtor that if the debt be not paid before the
year of release it shall be lost, it were better not to lend. "No," says
this branch of the statute, "thou shalt not think such a thought." 1. It
is taken for granted that there would be poor among them, who would have
occasion to borrow ([Deu 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#007)), and
that there would never cease to be some such objects of charity ([Deu
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#007)), and that there would never
cease to be some such objects of charity ([Deu
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#011)): The poor shall never cease out
of thy land, though not such as were reduced to extreme poverty, yet
such as would be behind-hand, and would have occasion to borrow; of such
poor he here speaks, and such we have always with us, so that a
charitable disposition may soon find a charitable occasion. 2. In such a
case we are here commanded to lend or give, according to our ability and
the necessity of the case: Thou shalt not harden thy heart, nor shut thy
hand, [Deu 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#007). If the hand be shut,
it is a sign the heart is hardened; for, if the clouds were full of
rain, they would empty themselves, [Ecc
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#003). Bowels of compassion would
produce liberal distributions, [Jam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015), [Jam
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#016). Thou shalt not only stretch out
thy hand to him to reach him something, but thou shalt open thy hand
wide unto him, to lend him sufficient, [Deu
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#008). Sometimes there is as much
charity in prudent lending as in giving, as it obliges the borrower to
industry and honesty and may put him into a way of helping himself. We
are sometimes tempted to think, when an object of charity presents
itself, we may choose whether we will give any thing or nothing, little
or much; whereas it is here an express precept ([Deu
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#011)), I command thee, not only to
give, but to open thy hand wide, to give liberally. 3. Here is a caveat
against that objection which might arise against charitable lending from
the foregoing law for the release of debts ([Deu
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#009)): Beware that there be not a
thought, a covetous ill-natured thought, in thy Belial heart, "The year
of release is at hand, and therefore I will not lend what I must then be
sure to lose;" lest thy poor brother, whom thou refusest to lend to,
complain to God, and it will be a sin, a great sin, to thee. Note, (1.)
The law is spiritual and lays a restraint upon the thoughts of the
heart. We mistake if we think thoughts are free from the divine
cognizance and check. (2.) That is a wicked heart indeed that raises
evil thoughts from the good law of God, as theirs did who, because God
had obliged them to the charity of forgiving, denied the charity of
giving. (3.) We must carefully watch against all those secret
suggestions which would divert us from our duty or discourage us in it.
Those that would keep from the act of sin must keep out of their minds
the very thought of sin. (4.) When we have an occasion of charitable
lending, if we cannot trust the borrower, we must trust God, and lend,
hoping for nothing again in this world, but expecting it will be
recompensed in the resurrection of the just, [Luk
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035); [Luk
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#014). (5.) It is a dreadful thing to
have the cry of the poor against us, for God has his ear open to that
cry, and, in compassion to them, will be sue to reckon with those that
deal hardly with them. (6.) That which we think is our prudence often
proves sin to us; he that refused to lend because the year of release
was at hand thought he did wisely, and that men would praise him as
doing well for himself, [Psa 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#018).
But he is here told that he did wickedly, and that God would condemn him
as doing ill to his brother; and we are sure that the judgment of God is
according to truth, and that what he says is sin to us will certainly be
ruin to us if it be not repented of.

III\. Here is a command to give cheerfully whatever we give in charity:
"Thy heart shall not be grieved when thou givest, [Deu
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#010). Be not loth to part with thy
money on so good an account, nor think it lost; grudge not a kindness to
they brother; and distrust not the providence of God, as if thou
shouldest want that thyself which thou givest in charity; but, on the
contrary, let it be a pleasure and a satisfaction of soul to thee to
think that thou art honouring God with thy substance, doing good, making
thy brother easy, and laying up for thyself a good security for the time
to come. What thou doest do freely, for God loves a cheerful giver,"
[Co2 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007).

IV\. Here is a promise of a recompence in this life: "For this thing the
Lord thy God shall bless thee." Covetous people say "Giving undoes us;"
no, giving cheerfully in charity will enrich us, it will fill the barns
with plenty ([Pro 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#010)) and the soul
with true comfort, [Isa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#010), [Isa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011).

[Deuteronomy 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 15:12</span></span>

Here is, I. A repetition of the law that had been given concerning
Hebrew servants who had sold themselves for servants, or were sold by
their parents through extreme poverty, or were sold by the court of
judgment for some crime committed. The law was, 1. That they should
serve but six years, and in the seventh should go out free, [Deu
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#012). Compare [Exo
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#002). And, if the year of jubilee
happened before they served out their time, that would be their
discharge. God's Israel were a free people, and must not be compelled to
perpetual slavery; thus are God's spiritual Israel called unto liberty.
2. That if, when their six years' service had expired, they had no mind
to go out free, but would rather continue in service, as having less
care, though taking more pains, than their masters, in this case they
must lay themselves under an obligation to serve for ever, that is, for
life, by having their ears bored to the door-posts, [Deu
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#016), [Deu
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#017). Compare [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006). If hereby a man disgraced
himself with some, as of a mean and servile spirit, that had not a due
sense of the honour and pleasure of liberty, yet, we may suppose, with
others he got reputation, as of a quiet contented spirit, humble, and
diligent, and loving, and not given to change.

II\. Here is an addition to this law, requiring them to put some small
stock into their servants' hands to set up with for themselves, when
they sent them out of their service, [Deu
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#013), [Deu
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#014). It was to be supposed that they
had nothing of their own, and that their friends had little or nothing
for them, else they else they would have been redeemed before they were
discharged by law; they had no wages for their service, and all they got
by their labour was their masters', so that their liberty would do them
little good, having nothing to begin the world with; therefore their
masters are here commanded to furnish them liberally with corn and
cattle. No certain measure is prescribed: that is left to the generosity
of the master, who probably would have respect to the servant's merit
and necessity; but the Jewish writers say, "He could not give less than
the value of thirty shekels of silver, but as much more as he pleased"
The maid-servants, though they were not to have their ears bored if they
were disposed to stay, yet, if they went out free, they were to have a
gratuity given them; for to this those words refer, Unto thy
maid-servant thou shalt do likewise, [Deu
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#017). The reasons for this are taken
from the law of gratitude. They must do it, 1. In gratitude to God, who
had not only brought them out of Egypt ([Deu
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#015)), but brought them out greatly
enriched with the spoils of the Egyptians. Let them not send their
servants out empty, for they were not sent empty out of the house of
bondage. God's tender care of us and kindness to us oblige us to be
careful of, and kind to, those that have a dependence upon us. Thus we
must render according to the benefit done unto us. 2. In gratitude to
their servants, [Deu 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#018). "Grudge
not to give him a little out of thy abundance, for he has been worth a
double hired servant unto thee. The days of the hireling at most were
but three years ([Isa 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#014)), but he
has served thee six years, and, unlike the hired servant, without any
wages." Masters and landlords ought to consider what need they have of,
and what ease and advantage they have by, their servants and tenants,
and should not only be just but kind to them. To these reasons it is
added, as before in this chapter ([Deu
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#004), [Deu
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#006), [Deu
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#010)), The Lord they God shall bless
thee. Then we may expect family blessings, the springs of
family-prosperity, when we make conscience of our duty to our
family-relations.

[Deuteronomy 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 15:19</span></span>

Here is, 1. A repetition of the law concerning the firstlings of their
cattle, that, if they were males, they were to be sanctified to the Lord
([Deu 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#019)), in remembrance of, and
in thankfulness for, the sparing of the first-born of Israel, when the
first-born of the Egyptians, both of man and beast, were slain by the
destroying angel ([Exo 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002), [Exo
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#015)); on the eighth day it was to be
given to God ([Exo 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030)), and to be
divided between the priest and the altar, [Num
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#017), [Num
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#018). 2. An addition to that law, for
the further explication of it, directing them what to do with the
firstlings, (1.) That were females: "Thou shalt do no work with the
female firstlings of the cow, nor shear those of the sheep" ([Deu
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#019)); of them the learned bishop
Patrick understands it. Though the female firstlings were not so
entirely sanctified to God as the males, nor so early as at eight days
old, yet they were not to be converted by the owners to their own use as
the other cattle, but must be offered to God as peace-offerings, or used
in a religious feast, at the year's end, [Deu
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#020). Thou shalt eat it before the
Lord thy God, as directed [Deu 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018).
(2.) But what must they do with that which was blemished, ill-blemished?
[Deu 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#021). Were it male or female, it
must not be brought near the sanctuary, nor used either for sacrifice or
for holy feasting, for it would not be fit to honour God with, nor to
typify Christ, who is a Lamb without blemish; yet it must not be reared,
but killed and eaten at their own houses as common food ([Deu
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#022)), only they must be sure not to
eat it with the blood, [Deu 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#023). The
frequent repetition of this caution intimates what need the people had
of it, and what stress God laid upon it. What a mercy it is that we are
not under this yoke! We are not dieted as they were; we make no
difference between a first calf, or lamb, and the rest that follow. Let
us therefore realize the gospel meaning of this law, devoting ourselves
and the first of our time and strength to God, as a kind of first-fruits
of his creatures, and using all our comforts and enjoyments to his
praise and under the direction of his law, as we have them all by his
gift.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 16](deu016)

</div>
