<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](gal006)  [Next](eph001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Epistle of St. Paul
to the Ephesians

Some think that this epistle to the Ephesians was a circular letter sent
to several churches, and that the copy directed to the Ephesians
happened to be taken into the canon, and so it came to bear that
particular inscription. And they have been induced the rather to think
this because it is the only one of all Paul's epistles that has nothing
in it peculiarly adapted to the state or case of that particular church;
but it has much of common concernment to all Christians, and especially
to all who, having been Gentiles in times past, were converted to
Christianity. But then it may be observed, on the other hand, that the
epistle is expressly inscribed ([Eph
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)) to the saints which are at
Ephesus; and in the close of it he tells them that he had sent Tychicus
unto them, whom, in [Ti2 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#012), he says
he had sent to Ephesus. It is an epistle that bears date out of a
prison: and some have observed that what this apostle wrote when he was
a prisoner had the greatest relish and savour in it of the things of
God. When his tribulations did abound, his consolations and experiences
did much more abound, whence we may observe that the afflictive
exercises of God's people, and particularly of his ministers, often tend
to the advantage of others as well as to their own. The apostle's design
is to settle and establish the Ephesians in the truth, and further to
acquaint them with the mystery of the gospel, in order to it. In the
former part he represents the great privilege of the Ephesians, who,
having been in time past idolatrous heathens, were now converted to
Christianity and received into covenant with God, which he illustrates
from a view of their deplorable state before their conversion, ch. 1-3.
In the latter part (which we have in the [Eph
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001), [Eph
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001), and [Eph
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001) chapters) he instructs them in the
principal duties of religion, both personal and relative, and exhorts
and quickens them to the faithful discharge of them. Zanchy observes
that we have here an epitome of the whole Christian doctrine, and of
almost all the chief heads of divinity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 1](eph001)

</div>
