<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph003)  [Next](eph005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 4:0</span></span>

We have gone through the former part of this epistle, which consists of
several important doctrinal truths, contained in the three preceding
chapters. We enter now on the latter part of it, in which we have the
most weighty and serious exhortations that can be given. We may observe
that in this, as in most others of Paul's epistles, the former part is
doctrinal, and fitted to inform the minds of men in the great truths and
doctrines of the gospel, the latter is practical, and designed for the
direction of their lives and manners, all Christians being bound to
endeavour after soundness in the faith, and regularity in life and
practice. In what has gone before we have heard of Christian privileges,
which are the matter of our comfort. In what follows we shall hear of
Christian duties, and what the Lord our God requires of us in
consideration of such privileges vouchsafed to us. The best way to
understand the mysteries and partake of the privileges of which we have
read before is conscientiously to practise the duties prescribed to us
in what follows: as, on the other hand, a serious consideration and
belief of the doctrines that have been taught us in the foregoing
chapters will be a good foundation on which to build the practice of the
duties prescribed in those which are yet before us. Christian faith and
Christian practice mutually befriend each other. In this chapter we have
divers exhortations to important duties. I. One that is more general
([Eph 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)). II. An exhortation to
mutual love, unity, and concord, with the proper means and motives to
promote them ([Eph 4:2-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002)). III. An
exhortation to Christian purity and holiness of life; and that both more
general ([Eph 4:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017)) and in several
particular instances ([Eph 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025) to the
end).

[Ephesians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 4:1</span></span>

This is a general exhortation to walk as becomes our Christian
profession. Paul was now a prisoner at Rome; and he was the prisoner of
the Lord, or in the Lord, which signifies as much as for the Lord. See
of this, [Eph 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001). He mentions this
once and again, to show that he was not ashamed of his bonds, well
knowing that he suffered not as an evil doer: and likewise to recommend
what he wrote to them with the greater tenderness and with some special
advantage. It was a doctrine he thought worth suffering for, and
therefore surely they should think it worthy their serious regards and
their dutiful observance. We have here the petition of a poor prisoner,
one of Christ's prisoners: "I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord,
beseech you," etc. Considering what God has done for you, and to what a
state and condition he has called you, as has been discoursed before, I
now come with an earnest request to you (not to send me relief, nor to
use your interest for the obtaining of my liberty, the first thing which
poor prisoners are wont to solicit from their friends, but) that you
would approve yourselves good Christians, and live up to your profession
and calling; That you walk worthily, agreeably, suitably, and
congruously to those happy circumstances into which the grace of God has
brought you, whom he has converted from heathenism to Christianity.
Observe, Christians ought to accommodate themselves to the gospel by
which they are called, and to the glory to which they are called; both
are their vocation. We are called Christians; we must answer that name,
and live like Christians. We are called to God's kingdom and glory; that
kingdom and glory therefore we must mind, and walk as becomes the heirs
of them.

[Ephesians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eph 4:2</span></span>

Here the apostle proceeds to more particular exhortations. Two he
enlarges upon in this chapter: - To unity an love, purity and holiness,
which Christians should very much study. We do not walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith we are called if we be not faithful friends to all
Christians, and sworn enemies to all sin.

This section contains the exhortation to mutual love, unity, and
concord, with the proper means and motives to promote them. Nothing is
pressed upon us more earnestly in the scriptures than this. Love is the
law of Christ's kingdom, the lesson of his school, the livery of his
family. Observe,

I. The means of unity: Lowliness and meekness, long-suffering, and
forbearing one another in love, [Eph
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002). By lowliness we are to understand
humility, entertaining mean thoughts of ourselves, which is opposed to
pride. By meekness, that excellent disposition of soul which makes men
unwilling to provoke others, and not easily to be provoked or offended
with their infirmities; and it is opposed to angry resentments and
peevishness. Long-suffering implies a patient bearing of injuries,
without seeking revenge. Forbearing one another in love signifies
bearing their infirmities out of a principle of love, and so as not to
cease to love them on the account of these. The best Christians have
need to bear one with another, and to make the best one of another, to
provoke one another's graces and not their passions. We find much in
ourselves which it is hard to forgive ourselves; and therefore we must
not think it much if we find that in others which we think hard to
forgive them, and yet we must forgive them as we forgive ourselves. Now
without these things unity cannot be preserved. The first step towards
unity is humility; without this there will be no meekness, no patience,
or forbearance; and without these no unity. Pride and passion break the
peace, and make all the mischief. Humility and meekness restore the
peace, and keep it. Only by pride comes contention; only by humility
comes love. The more lowly-mindedness the more like-mindedness. We do
not walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called if we be not
meek and lowly of heart: for he by whom we are called, he to whom we are
called, was eminent for meekness and lowliness of heart, and has
commanded us therein to learn of him.

II\. The nature of that unity which the apostle prescribes: it is the
unity of the Spirit, [Eph 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003). The
seat of Christian unity is in the heart or spirit: it does not lie in
one set of thoughts, nor in one form and mode of worship, but in one
heart and one soul. This unity of heart and affection may be said to be
of the Spirit of God; it is wrought by him, and is one of the fruits of
the Spirit. This we should endeavour to keep. Endeavouring is a gospel
word. We must do our utmost. If others will quarrel with us, we must
take all possible care not to quarrel with them. If others will despise
and hate us, we must not despise and hate them. In the bond of peace.
Peace is a bond, as it unites persons, and makes them live friendly one
with another. A peaceable disposition and conduct bind Christians
together, whereas discord and quarrelling disband and disunite their
hearts and affections. Many slender twigs, bound together, become
strong. The bond of peace is the strength of society. Not that it can be
imagined that all good people, and all the members of societies, should
be in every thing just of the same length, and the same sentiments, and
the same judgment: buy the bond of peace unites them all together, with
a non obstante to these. As in a bundle of rods, they may be of
different lengths and different strength; but, when they are tied
together by one bond, they are stronger than any, even than the thickest
and strongest was of itself.

III\. The motives proper to promote this Christian unity and concord.
The apostle urges several, to persuade us thereto.

1\. Consider how many unities there are that are the joy and glory of
our Christian profession. There should be one heart; for there is one
body, and one spirit, [Eph 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004). Two
hearts in one body would be monstrous. If there be but one body, all
that belong to that body should have one heart. The Catholic church is
one mystical body of Christ, and all good Christians make up but one
body, incorporated by one charter, that of the gospel, animated by one
Spirit, the same Holy Spirit who by his gifts and graces quickens,
enlivens, and governs that body. If we belong to Christ, we are all
actuated by one and the same Spirit, and therefore should be one. Even
as you are called in one hope of your calling. Hope is here put for its
object, the thing hoped for, the heavenly inheritance, to the hope of
which we are called. All Christians are called to the same hope of
eternal life. There is one Christ that they all hope in, and one heaven
that they are all hoping for; and therefore they should be of one heart.
One Lord ([Eph 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)), that is, Christ,
the head of the church, to whom, by God's appointment, all Christians
are immediately subject. One faith, that is, the gospel, containing the
doctrine of the Christian faith: or, it is the same grace of faith
(faith in Christ) whereby all Christians are saved. One baptism, by
which we profess our faith, being baptized in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; and so the same sacramental covenant, whereby we
engage ourselves to the Lord Christ. One God and Father of all, [Eph
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006). One God, who owns all the true
members of the church for his children; for he is the Father of all such
by special relation, as he is the Father of all men by creation: and he
is above all, by his essence, and with respect to the glorious
perfections of his nature, and as he has dominion over all creatures and
especially over his church, and through all, by his providence upholding
and governing them: and in you all, in all believers, in whom he dwells
as in his holy temple, by his Spirit and special grace. If then there be
so many ones, it is a pity but there should be one more - one heart, or
one soul.

2\. Consider the variety of gifts that Christ has bestowed among
Christians: But unto every one of us is given grace according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. Though the members of Christ's church
agree in so many things, yet there are some things wherein they differ:
but this should breed no difference of affection among them, since they
are all derived from the same bountiful author and designed for the same
great ends. Unto every one of us Christians is given grace, some gift of
grace, in some kind or degree or other, for the mutual help of one
another. Unto every one of us ministers is given grace; to some a
greater measure of gifts, to others a less measure. The different gifts
of Christ's ministers proved a great occasion of contention among the
first Christians: one was for Paul, and another for Apollos. The apostle
shows that they had no reason to quarrel about them, but all the reason
in the world to agree in the joint use of them, for common edification;
because all was given according to the measure of the gift of Christ, in
such a measure as seemed best to Christ to bestow upon every one.
Observe, All the ministers, and all the members of Christ, owe all the
gifts and graces that they are possessed of to him; and this is a good
reason why we should love one another, because to every one of us is
given grace. All to whom Christ has given grace, and on whom he has
bestowed his gifts (though they are of different sizes, different names,
and different sentiments, yet), ought to love one another. The apostle
takes this occasion to specify some of the gifts which Christ bestowed.
And that they were bestowed by Christ he makes appear by those words of
David wherein he foretold this concerning him ([Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)), Wherefore he saith ([Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)), that is, the Psalmist saith,
When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men. David prophesied of the ascension of Christ; and the apostle
descants upon it here, and in the three following verses. When he
ascended up on high. We may understand the apostle both of the place
into which he ascended in his human nature, that is, the highest
heavens, and particularly of the state to which he was advanced, he
being then highly exalted, and eminently glorified, by his Father. Let
us set ourselves to think of the ascension of Jesus Christ: that our
blessed Redeemer, having risen from the dead, in gone to heaven, where
he sits at the right hand of the Majesty on high, which completed the
proof of his being the Son of God. As great conquerors, when they rode
in their triumphal chariots, used to be attended with the most
illustrious of their captives led in chains, and were wont to scatter
their largesses and bounty among the soldiers and other spectators of
their triumphs, so Christ, when he ascended into heaven, as a triumphant
conqueror, led captivity captive. It is a phrase used in the Old
Testament to signify a conquest over enemies, especially over such as
formerly had led others captive; see [Jdg
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012). Captivity is here put for
captives, and signifies all our spiritual enemies, who brought us into
captivity before. He conquered those who had conquered us; such as sin,
the devil, and death. Indeed, he triumphed over these on the cross; but
the triumph was completed at his ascension, when he became Lord over
all, and had the keys of death and hades put into his hands. And he gave
gifts unto men: in the psalm it is, He received gifts for men. He
received for them, that he might give to them, a large measure of gifts
and graces; particularly, he enriched his disciples with the gift of the
Holy Ghost. The apostle, thus speaking of the ascension of Christ, takes
notice that he descended first, [Eph
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009). As much as if he had said, "When
David speaks of Christ's ascension, he intimates the knowledge he had of
Christ's humiliation on earth; for, when it is said that he ascended,
this implies that he first descended: for what is it but a proof or
demonstration of his having done so?" Into the lower parts of the earth;
this may refer either to his incarnation, according to that of David,
[Psa 139:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#015), My substance was not
hidden from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in
the lowest parts of the earth; or, to his burial, according to that of
[Psa 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#009), Those that seek my soul to
destroy it shall go into the lower parts of the earth. He calls his
death (say some of the fathers) his descent into the lower parts of the
earth. He descended to the earth in his incarnation. He descended into
the earth in his burial. As Jonas was three days and three nights in the
whale's belly, so was the Son of man in the heart of the earth. He that
descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens ([Eph
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)), far above the airy and starry
(which are the visible) heavens, into the heaven of heavens; that he
might fill all things, all the members of his church, with gifts and
graces suitable to their several conditions and stations. Observe, Our
Lord humbled himself first, and then he was exalted. He descended first,
and then ascended. The apostle next tells us what were Christ's gifts at
his ascension: He gave some apostles, etc., [Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011). Indeed he sent forth some of
these before his ascension, [Mat
10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001). But one was then added, [Act
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#026). And all of them were more
solemnly installed, and publicly confirmed, in their office, by his
visibly pouring forth the Holy Ghost in an extraordinary manner and
measure upon them. Note, The great gift that Christ gave to the church
at his ascension was that of the ministry of peace and reconciliation.
The gift of the ministry is the fruit of Christ's ascension. And
ministers have their various gifts, which are all given them by the Lord
Jesus. The officers which Christ gave to his church were of two sorts -
extraordinary ones advanced to a higher office in the church: such were
apostles, prophets, and evangelists. The apostles were chief. These
Christ immediately called, furnished them with extraordinary gifts and
the power of working miracles, and with infallibility in delivering his
truth; and, they having been the witnesses of his miracles and doctrine,
he sent them forth to spread the gospel and to plant and govern
churches. The prophets seem to have been such as expounded the writings
of the Old Testament, and foretold things to come. The evangelists were
ordained persons ([Ti2 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006)), whom the
apostles took for their companions in travel ([Gal
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)), and sent them out to settle and
establish such churches as the apostles themselves had planted ([Act
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022)), and, not being fixed to any
particular place, they were to continue till recalled, [Ti2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009). And then there are ordinary
ministers, employed in a lower and narrower sphere; as pastors and
teachers. Some take these two names to signify one office, implying the
duties of ruling and teaching belonging to it. Others think they design
two distinct offices, both ordinary, and of standing use in the church;
and then pastors are such as are fixed at the head of particular
churches, with design to guide, instruct, and feed them in the manner
appointed by Christ; and they are frequently called bishops and elders:
and the teachers were those whose work it was also to preach the gospel
and to instruct the people by way of exhortation. We see here that it is
Christ's prerogative to appoint what officers and offices he pleases in
his church. And how rich is the church, that had at first such a variety
of officers and has still such a variety of gifts! How kind is Christ to
his church! How careful of it and of its edification! When he ascended,
he procured the gift of the Holy Ghost; and the gifts of the Holy Ghost
are various: some have greater, others have less measures; but all for
the good of the body, which brings us to the third argument,

3\. Which is taken from Christ's great end and design in giving gifts
unto men. The gifts of Christ were intended for the good of his church,
and in order to advance his kingdom and interest among men. All these
being designed for one common end is a good reason why all Christians
should agree in brotherly love, and not envy one another's gifts. All
are for the perfecting of the saints ([Eph
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012)); that is, according to the
import of the original, to bring into an orderly spiritual state and
frame those who had been as it were dislocated and disjointed by sin,
and then to strengthen, confirm, and advance them therein, that so each,
in his proper place and function, might contribute to the good of the
whole. - For the work of the ministry, or for the work of dispensation;
that is, that they might dispense the doctrines of the gospel, and
successfully discharge the several parts of their ministerial function.
- For the edifying of the body of Christ; that is, to build up the
church, which is Christ's mystical body, by an increase of their graces,
and an addition of new members. All are designed to prepare us for
heaven: Till we all come, etc., [Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013). The gifts and offices (some of
them) which have been spoken of are to continue in the church till the
saints be perfected, which will not be till they all come in the unity
of the faith (till all true believers meet together, by means of the
same precious faith) and of the knowledge of the Son of God, by which we
are to understand, not a bare speculative knowledge, or the
acknowledging of Christ to be the Son of God and the great Mediator, but
such as is attended with appropriation and affection, with all due
honour, trust, and obedience. - Unto a perfect man, to our full growth
of gifts and graces, free from those childish infirmities that we are
subject to in the present world. - Unto the measure of the stature of
the fulness of Christ, so as to be Christians of a full maturity and
ripeness in all the graces derived from Christ's fulness: or, according
to the measure of that stature which is to make up the fulness of
Christ, which is to complete his mystical body. Now we shall never come
to the perfect man, till we come to the perfect world. There is a
fulness in Christ, and a fulness to be derived from him; and a certain
stature of that fulness, and a measure of that stature, are assigned in
the counsel of God to every believer, and we never come to that measure
till we come to heaven. God's children, as long as they are in this
world, are growing. Dr Lightfoot understands the apostle as speaking
here of Jews and Gentiles knit in the unity of the faith and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, so making a perfect man, and the measure of
the stature of the fulness of Christ. The apostle further shows, in the
following verses, what was God's design in his sacred institutions, and
what effect they ought to have upon us. As, (1.) That we henceforth be
no more children, etc. ([Eph 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014));
that is, that we may be no longer children in knowledge, weak in the
faith, and inconstant in our judgments, easily yielding to every
temptation, readily complying with every one's humour, and being at
every one's back. Children are easily imposed upon. We must take care of
this, and of being tossed to and fro, like ships without ballast, and
carried about, like clouds in the air, with such doctrines as have no
truth nor solidity in them, but nevertheless spread themselves far and
wide, and are therefore compared to wind. By the sleight of men; this is
a metaphor taken from gamesters, and signifies the mischievous subtlety
of seducers: and cunning craftiness, by which is meant their skilfulness
in finding ways to seduce and deceive; for it follows, whereby they lie
in wait to deceive, as in an ambush, in order to circumvent the weak,
and draw them from the truth. Note, Those must be very wicked and
ungodly men who set themselves to seduce and deceive others into false
doctrines and errors. The apostle describes them here as base men, using
a great deal of devilish art and cunning, in order thereunto. The best
method we can take to fortify ourselves against such is to study the
sacred oracles, and to pray for the illumination and grace of the Spirit
of Christ, that we may know the truth as it is in Jesus, and be
established in it. (2.) That we should speak the truth in love ([Eph
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015)), or follow the truth in love, or
be sincere in love to our fellow-christians. While we adhere to the
doctrine of Christ, which is the truth, we should live in love one with
another. Love is an excellent thing; but we must be careful to preserve
truth together with it. Truth is an excellent thing; yet it is requisite
that we speak it in love, and not in contention. These two should go
together - truth and peace. (3.) That we should grow up into Christ in
all things. Into Christ, so as to be more deeply rooted in him. In all
things; in knowledge, love, faith, and all the parts of the new man. We
should grow up towards maturity, which is opposed to being children.
Those are improving Christians who grow up into Christ. The more we grow
into an acquaintance with Christ, faith in him, love to him, dependence
upon him, the more we shall flourish in every grace. He is the head; and
we should thus grow, that we may thereby honour our head. The
Christian's growth tends to the glory of Christ. (4.) We should be
assisting and helpful one to another, as members of the same body, [Eph
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016). Here the apostle makes a
comparison between the natural body and Christ's mystical body, that
body of which Christ is the head: and he observes that as there must be
communion and mutual communications of the members of the body among
themselves, in order to their growth and improvement, so there must be
mutual love and unity, together with the proper fruits of these, among
Christians, in order to their spiritual improvement and growth in grace.
From whom, says he (that is, from Christ their head, who conveys
influence and nourishment to every particular member), the whole body of
Christians, fitly joined together and compacted (being orderly and
firmly united among themselves, every one in his proper place and
station), by that which every joint supplies (by the assistance which
every one of the parts, thus united, gives to the whole, or by the
Spirit, faith, love, sacraments, etc., which, like the veins and
arteries in the body, serve to unite Christians to Christ their head,
and to one another as fellow-members), according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part (that is, say some, according to
the power which the Holy Ghost exerts to make God's appointed means
effectual for this great end, in such a measure as Christ judges to be
sufficient and proper for every member, according to its respective
place and office in the body; or, as others, according to the power of
Christ, who, as head, influences and enlivens every member; or,
according to the effectual working of every member, in communicating to
others of what it has received, nourishment is conveyed to all in their
proportions, and according to the state and exigence of every part)
makes increase of the body, such an increase as is convenient for the
body. Observe, Particular Christians receive their gifts and graces from
Christ for the sake and benefit of the whole body. Unto the edifying of
itself in love. We may understand this two ways: - Either that all the
members of the church may attain a greater measure of love to Christ and
to one another; or that they are moved to act in the manner mentioned
from love to Christ and to one another. Observe, Mutual love among
Christians is a great friend to spiritual growth: it is in love that the
body edifies itself; whereas a kingdom divided against itself cannot
stand.

[Ephesians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 4:17</span></span>

The apostle having gone through his exhortation to mutual love, unity,
and concord, in the foregoing verses, there follows in these an
exhortation to Christian purity and holiness of heart and life, and that
both more general ([Eph 4:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017)) and
in several particular instances, [Eph
4:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025). This is solemnly introduced:
"This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord; that is, seeing the
matter is as above described, seeing you are members of Christ's body
and partakers of such gifts, this I urge upon your consciences, and bear
witness to as your duty in the Lord's name, and by virtue of the
authority I have derived from him." Consider,

I. The more general exhortation to purity and holiness of heart and
life.

1\. It begins thus, "That you henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk
- that for the time to come you do not live, and behave yourselves, as
ignorant and unconverted heathens do, who are wholly guided by an
understanding employed about vain things, their idols and their worldly
possessions, things which are no way profitable to their souls, and
which will deceive their expectations." Converted Gentiles must not live
as unconverted Gentiles do. Though they live among them, they must not
live like them. Here,

(1.) The apostle takes occasion to describe the wickedness of the
Gentile world, out of which regenerate Christians were snatched as
brands out of the burning. \[1.\] Their understandings were darkened,
[Eph 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018). They were void of all
saving knowledge; yea, ignorant of many things concerning God which the
light of nature might have taught them. They sat in darkness, and they
loved it rather than light: and by their ignorance they were alienated
from the life of God. They were estranged fRom. and had a dislike and
aversion to, a life of holiness, which is not only that way of life
which God requires and approves, and by which we live to him, but which
resembles God himself, in his purity, righteousness, truth, and
goodness. Their wilful ignorance was the cause of their estrangement
from this life of God, which begins in light and knowledge. Gross and
affected ignorance is destructive to religion and godliness. And what
was the cause of their being thus ignorant? It was because of the
blindness or the hardness of their heart. It was not because God did not
make himself known to them by his works, but because they would not
admit the instructive rays of the divine light. They were ignorant
because they would be so. Their ignorance proceeded from their obstinacy
and the hardness of their hearts, their resisting the light and
rejecting all the means of illumination and knowledge. \[2.\] Their
consciences were debauched and seared: Who being past feeling, [Eph
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019). They had no sense of their sin,
nor of the misery and danger of their case by means of it; whereupon
they gave themselves over unto lasciviousness. They indulged themselves
in their filthy lusts; and, yielding themselves up to the dominion of
these, they became the slaves and drudges of sin and the devil, working
all uncleanness with greediness. They made it their common practice to
commit all sorts of uncleanness, and even the most unnatural and
monstrous sins, and that with insatiable desires. Observe, When men's
consciences are once seared, there are no bounds to their sins. When
they set their hearts upon the gratification of their lusts, what can be
expected but the most abominable sensuality and lewdness, and that their
horrid enormities will abound? This was the character of the Gentiles;
but,

(2.) These Christians must distinguish themselves from such Gentiles:
You have not so learned Christ, [Eph
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020). It may be read, But you not so;
you have learned Christ. Those who have learned Christ are saved from
the darkness and defilement which others lie under; and, as they know
more, they are obliged to live in a better manner than others. It is a
good argument against sin that we have not so learned Christ. Learn
Christ! Is Christ a book, a lesson, a way, a trade? The meaning is, "You
have not so learned Christianity - the doctrines of Christ and the rules
of life prescribed by him. Not so as to do as others do. If so be, or
since, that you have heard him ([Eph
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021)), have heard his doctrine
preached by us, and have been taught by him, inwardly and effectually,
by his Spirit." Christ is the lesson; we must learn Christ: and Christ
is the teacher; we are taught by him. As the truth is in Jesus. This may
be understood two ways: either, "You have been taught the real truth, as
held forth by Christ himself, both in his doctrine and in his life." Or
thus, "The truth has made such an impression on your hearts, in your
measure, as it did upon the heart of Jesus." The truth of Christ then
appears in its beauty and power, when it appears as in Jesus.

2\. Another branch of the general exhortation follows in those words,
That you put off, concerning the former conversation, the old man, etc.,
[Eph 4:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022). "This is a great part of
the doctrine which has been taught you, and which you have learned."
Here the apostle expresses himself in metaphors taken from garments. The
principles, habits, and dispositions of the soul must be changed, before
there can be a saving change of the life. There must be sanctification,
which consists of these two things: - (1.) The old man must be put off.
The corrupt nature is called a man, because, like the human body, it
consists of divers parts, mutually supporting and strengthening one
another. It is the old man, as old Adam, from whom we derive it. It is
bred in the bone, and we brought it into the world with us. It is subtle
as the old man; but in all God's saints decaying and withering as an old
man, and ready to pass away. It is said to be corrupt; for sin in the
soul is the corruption of its faculties: and, where it is not mortified,
it grows daily worse and worse, and so tends to destruction. According
to the deceitful lusts. Sinful inclinations and desires are deceitful
lusts: they promise men happiness, but render them more miserable, and
if not subdued and mortified betray them into destruction. These
therefore must be put off as an old garment that we should be ashamed to
be seen in: they must be subdued and mortified. These lusts prevailed
against them in their former conversation, that is, during their state
of unregeneracy and heathenism. (2.) The new man must be put on. It is
not enough to shake off corrupt principles, but we must be actuated by
gracious ones. We must embrace them, espouse them, and get them written
on our hearts: it is not enough to cease to do evil, but we must learn
to do well. "Be renewed in the spirit of your mind ([Eph
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)); that is, use the proper and
prescribed means in order to have the mind, which is a spirit, renewed
more and more." And that you put on the new man, [Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024). By the new man is meant the new
nature, the new creature, which is actuated by a new principle, even
regenerating grace, enabling a man to lead a new life, that life of
righteousness and holiness which Christianity requires. This new man is
created, or produced out of confusion and emptiness, by God's almighty
power, whose workmanship it is, truly excellent and beautiful. After
God, in imitation of him, and in conformity to that grand exemplar and
pattern. The loss of God's image upon the soul was both the sinfulness
and misery of man's fallen state; and that resemblance which it bears to
God is the beauty, the glory, and the happiness, of the new creature. In
righteousness towards men, including all the duties of the second table;
and in holiness towards God, signifying a sincere obedience to the
commands of the first table; true holiness in opposition to the outward
and ceremonial holiness of the Jews. We are said to put on this new man
when, in the use of all God's appointed means, we are endeavouring after
this divine nature, this new creature. This is the more general
exhortation to purity and holiness of heart and life.

II\. The apostle proceeds to some things more particular. Because
generals are not so apt to affect, we are told what are those particular
limbs of the old man that must be mortified, those filthy rags of the
old nature that must be put off, and what are the peculiar ornaments of
the new man wherewith we should adorn our Christian profession. 1. Take
heed of lying, and be ever careful to speak the truth ([Eph
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025)): "Wherefore, since you have been
so well instructed in your duty, and are under such obligations to
discharge it, let it appear, in your future behaviour and conduct, that
there is a great and real change wrought in you, particularly by putting
away lying." Of this sin the heathen were very guilty, affirming that a
profitable lie was better than a hurtful truth; and therefore the
apostle exhorts them to cease from lying, from every thing that is
contrary to truth. This is a part of the old man that must be put off;
and that branch of the new man that must be put on in opposition to it
is speaking the truth in all our converse with others. It is the
character of God's people that they are children who will not lie, who
dare not lie, who hate and abhor lying. All who have grace make
conscience of speaking the truth, and would not tell a deliberate lie
for the greatest gain and benefit to themselves. The reason here given
for veracity is, We are members one of another. Truth is a debt we owe
to one another; and, if we love one another, we shall not deceive nor
lie one to another. We belong to the same society or body, which
falsehood or lying tends to dissolve; and therefore we should avoid it,
and speak truth. Observe, Lying is a very great sin, a peculiar
violation of the obligations which Christians are under, and very
injurious and hurtful to Christian society. 2. "Take heed of anger and
ungoverned passions. Be you angry, and sin not," [Eph
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026). This is borrowed from the
Septuagint translation of [Psa 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004),
where we render it, Stand in awe, and sin not. Here is an easy
concession; for as such we should consider it, rather than as a command.
Be you angry. This we are apt enough to be, God knows: but we find it
difficult enough to observe the restriction, and sin not. "If you have a
just occasion to be angry at any time, see that it be without sin; and
therefore take heed of excess in your anger." If we would be angry and
not sin (says one), we must be angry at nothing but sin; and we should
be more jealous for the glory of God than for any interest or reputation
of our own. One great and common sin in anger is to suffer it to burn
into wrath, and then to let it rest; and therefore we are here cautioned
against that. "If you have been provoked and have had your spirits
greatly discomposed, and if you have bitterly resented any affront that
has been offered, before night calm and quiet your spirits, be
reconciled to the offender, and let all be well again: Let not the sun
go down upon your wrath. If it burn into wrath and bitterness of spirit,
O see to it that you suppress it speedily." Observe, Though anger in
itself is not sinful, yet there is the upmost danger of its becoming so
if it be not carefully watched and speedily suppressed. And therefore,
though anger may come into the bosom of a wise man, it rests only in the
bosom of fools. Neither give place to the devil, [Eph
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#027). Those who persevere in sinful
anger and in wrath let the devil into their hearts, and suffer him to
gain upon them, till he bring them to malice, mischievous machinations,
etc. "Neither give place to the calumniator, or the false accuser" (so
some read the words); that is, "let your ears be deaf to whisperers,
talebearers, and slanderers." 3. We are here warned against the sin of
stealing, the breach of the eighth commandment, and advised to honest
industry and to beneficence: Let his that stole steal no more, [Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028). It is a caution against all
manner of wrong-doing, by force or fraud. "Let those of you who, in the
time of your gentilism, have been guilty of this enormity, be no longer
guilty of it." But we must not only take heed of the sin, but
conscientiously abound in the opposite duty: not only not steal, but
rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing that is good.
Idleness makes thieves. So Chrysostom, To gar kleptein argias estin -
Stealing is the effect of idleness. Those who will not work, and who are
ashamed to beg, expose themselves greatly to temptations to thievery.
Men should therefore be diligent and industrious, not in any unlawful
way, but in some honest calling: Working the thing which is good.
Industry, in some honest way, will keep people out of temptation of
doing wrong. But there is another reason why men ought to be
industrious, namely, that they may be capable of doing some good, as
well as that they may be preserved from temptation: That he may have to
give to him that needeth. They must labour not only that they may live
themselves, and live honestly, but they may distribute for supplying the
wants of others. Observe, Even those who get their living by their
labour should be charitable out of their little to those who are
disabled for labour. So necessary and incumbent a duty is it to be
charitable to the poor that even labourers and servants, and those who
have but little for themselves, must cast their mite into the treasury.
God must have his dues and the poor are his receivers. Observe further,
Those alms that are likely to be acceptable to God must not be the
produce of unrighteousness and robbery, but of honesty and industry. God
hates robbery for burnt-offerings. 4. We are here warned against corrupt
communication; and directed to that which is useful and edifying, [Eph
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029). Filthy and unclean words and
discourse are poisonous and infectious, as putrid rotten meat: they
proceed from and prove a great deal of corruption in the heart of the
speaker, and tend to corrupt the minds and manners of others who hear
them; and therefore Christians should beware of all such discourse. It
may be taken in general for all that which provokes the lusts and
passions of others. We must not only put off corrupt communications, but
put on that which is good to the use of edifying. The great use of
speech is to edify those with whom we converse. Christians should
endeavour to promote a useful conversation: that it may minister grace
unto the hearers; that it may be good for, and acceptable to, the
hearers, in the way of information, counsel, pertinent reproof, or the
like. Observe, It is the great duty of Christians to take care that they
offend not with their lips, and that they improve discourse and
converse, as much as may be, for the good of others. 5. Here is another
caution against wrath and anger, with further advice to mutual love and
kindly dispositions towards each other, [Eph
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031), [Eph
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032). By bitterness, wrath, and anger,
are meant violent inward resentment and displeasure against others: and,
by clamour, big words, loud threatenings, and other intemperate
speeches, by which bitterness, wrath, and anger, vent themselves.
Christians should not entertain these vile passions in their hearts not
be clamorous with their tongues. Evil speaking signifies all railing,
reviling, and reproachful speeches, against such as we are angry with.
And by malice we are to understand that rooted anger which prompts men
to design and to do mischief to others. The contrary to all this
follows: Be you kind one to another. This implies the principle of love
in the heart, and the outward expressions of it, in an affable, humble,
courteous behaviour. It becomes the disciples of Jesus to be kind one to
another, as those who have learned, and would teach, the art of
obliging. Tender-hearted; that is, merciful, and having tender sense of
the distresses and sufferings of others, so as to be quickly moved to
compassion and pity. Forgiving one another. Occasions of difference will
happen among Christ's disciples; and therefore they must be placable,
and ready to forgive, therein resembling God himself, who for Christ's
sake hath forgiven them, and that more than they can forgive one
another. Note, With God there is forgiveness; and he forgives sin for
the sake of Jesus Christ, and on account of that atonement which he has
made to divine justice. Note again, Those who are forgiven of God should
be of a forgiving spirit, and should forgive even as God forgives,
sincerely and heartily, readily and cheerfully, universally and for
ever, upon the sinner's sincere repentance, as remembering that they
pray, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us. Now we may observe concerning all these particulars that the
apostle has insisted on that they belong to the second table, whence
Christians should learn the strict obligations they are under to the
duties of the second table, and that he who does not conscientiously
discharge them can never fear nor love God in truth and in sincerity,
whatever he may pretend to.

In the midst of these exhortations and cautions the apostle interposes
that general one, And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, [Eph
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030). By looking to what precedes, and
to what follows, we may see what it is that grieves the Spirit of God.
In the previous verses it is intimated that all lewdness and filthiness,
lying, and corrupt communications that stir up filthy appetites and
lusts, grieve the Spirit of God. In what follows it is intimated that
those corrupt passions of bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour,
and evil speaking, and malice, grieve this good Spirit. By this we are
not to understand that this blessed Being could properly be grieved or
vexed as we are; but the design of the exhortation is that we act not
towards him in such a manner as is wont to be grievous and disquieting
to our fellow-creatures: we must not do that which is contrary to his
holy nature and his will; we must not refuse to hearken to his counsels,
nor rebel against his government, which things would provoke him to act
towards us as men are wont to do towards those with whom they are
displeased and grieved, withdrawing themselves and their wonted kindness
from such, and abandoning them to their enemies. O provoke not the
blessed Spirit of God to withdraw his presence and his gracious
influences from you! It is a good reason why we should not grieve him
that by him we are sealed unto the day of redemption. There is to be a
day of redemption; the body is to be redeemed from the power of the
grave at the resurrection-day, and then God's people will be delivered
from all the effects of sin, as well as from all sin and misery, which
they are not till rescued out of the grave: and then their full and
complete happiness commences. All true believers are sealed to that day.
God has distinguished them from others, having set his mark upon them;
and he gives them the earnest and assurance of a joyful and glorious
resurrection; and the Spirit of God is the seal. Wherever that blessed
Spirit is as a sanctifier, he is the earnest of all the joys and glories
of the redemption-day; and we should be undone should God take away his
Holy Spirit from us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 5](eph005)

</div>
