<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est002)  [Next](est004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 3:0</span></span>

A very black and mournful scene here opens, and which threatens the ruin
of all the people of God. Were there not some such dark nights, the
light of the morning would not be so welcome. I. Haman is made the
king's favourite ([Est 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001)). II.
Mordecai refuses to give him the honour he demands ([Est
3:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#002)). III. Haman, for his sake, vows
to be revenged upon all the Jews ([Est
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#005), [Est
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#006)). IV. He, upon a malicious
suggestion, obtains an order from the king to have the all massacred
upon a certain day ([Est 3:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007)). V.
This order is dispersed through the kingdom ([Est
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#014), [Est
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015)).

[Esther 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 3:1</span></span>

Here we have,

I. Haman advanced by the prince, and adored thereupon by the people.
Ahasuerus had lately laid Esther in his bosom, but she had no such
interest in him as to get her friends preferred, or to prevent the
preferring of one who she knew was an enemy to her people. When those
that are good become great they still find that they cannot do good, nor
prevent mischief, as they would. This Haman was an Agagite (an
Amalekite, says Josephus), probably of the descendants of Agag, a common
name of the princes of Amalek, as appears, [Num
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#007). Some think that he was by birth
a prince, as Jehoiakim was, whose seat was set above the rest of the
captive kings ([Kg2 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#028)), as Haman's
here was, [Est 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001). The king took a
fancy to him (princes are not bound to give reasons for their favours),
made him his favourite, his confidant, his prime-minister of state. Such
a commanding influence the court then had that (contrary to the proverb)
those whom it blessed the country blessed too; for all men adored this
rising sun, and the king's servants were particularly commanded to bow
before him and to do him reverence ([Est
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#002)), and they did so. I wonder what
the king saw in Haman that was commendable or meritorious; it is plain
that he was not a man of honour or justice, of any true courage or
steady conduct, but proud, and passionate, and revengeful; yet was he
promoted, and caressed, and there was none so great as he. Princes'
darlings are not always worthies.

II\. Mordecai adhering to his principles with a bold and daring
resolution, and therefore refusing to reverence Haman as the rest of the
king's servants did, [Est 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#002). He was
urged to it by his friends, who reminded him of the king's commandment,
and consequently of the danger he incurred if he refused to comply with
it; it was as much as his life was worth, especially considering Haman's
insolence, [Est 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#003). They spoke daily
to him ([Est 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#004)), to persuade him to
conform, but all in vain: he hearkened not to them, but told them
plainly that he was a Jew, and could not in conscience do it. Doubtless
his refusal, when it came to be taken notice of and made the subject of
discourse, was commonly attributed to pride and envy, that he would not
pay respect to Haman because, on the score of his alliance to Esther, he
was not himself as much promoted, or to a factious seditious spirit and
a disaffection to the king and his government; those that would make the
best of it looked upon it as his weakness, or his want of breeding,
called it a humour, and a piece of affected singularity. It does not
appear that any one scrupled at conforming to it except Mordecai; and
yet his refusal was pious, conscientious, and pleasing to God, for the
religion of a Jew forbade him, 1. To give such extravagant honours as
were required to any mortal man, especially so wicked a man as Haman
was. In the apocryphal chapters of this book (ch. 13:12-14) Mordecai is
brought in thus appealing to God in this matter: Thou knowest, Lord,
that it was neither in contempt nor pride, nor for any desire of glory,
that I did not bow down to proud Haman, for I could have been content
with good will, for the salvation of Israel, to kiss the soles of his
feet; but I did this that I might not prefer the glory of man above the
glory of God, neither will I worship any but thee. 2. He especially
thought it a piece of injustice to his nation to give such honour to an
Amalekite, one of that devoted nation with which God had sworn that he
would have perpetual war ([Exo 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#016))
and concerning which he had given that solemn charge ([Deu
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#017)), Remember what Amalek did.
Though religion does by no means destroy good manners, but teaches us to
render honour to whom honour is due, yet it is the character of a
citizen of Zion that not only in his heart, but in his eyes, such a vile
person as Haman was is contemned, [Psa
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004). Let those who are governed by
principles of conscience be steady and resolute, however censured or
threatened, as Mordecai was.

III\. Haman meditating revenge. Some that hoped thereby to curry favour
with Haman took notice to him of Mordecai's rudeness, waiting to see
whether he would bend or break, [Est
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#004). Haman then observed it himself,
and was full of wrath, [Est 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#005). A
meek and humble man would have slighted the affront, and have said, "Let
him have his humour; what am I the worse for it?" But it makes Haman's
proud spirit rage, and fret, and boil, within him, so that he becomes
uneasy to himself and all about him. It is soon resolved that Mordecai
must die. The head must come off that will not bow to Haman; if he
cannot have his honours, he will have his blood. It is as penal in this
court not to worship Haman as it was in Nebuchadnezzar's not to worship
the golden image which he had set up. Mordecai is a person of quality,
in a post of honour, and own cousin to the queen; and yet Haman thinks
his life nothing towards a satisfaction for the affront: thousands of
innocent and valuable lives must be sacrificed to his indignation; and
therefore he vows the destruction of all the people of Mordecai, for his
sake, because his being a Jew was the reason he gave why he did not
reverence Haman. Herein appear Haman's intolerable pride, insatiable
cruelty, and the ancient antipathy of an Amalekite to the Israel of God.
Saul the son of Kish, a Benjamite, spared Agag, but Mordecai the son of
Kish, a Benjamite ([Est 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#005)), shall
find no mercy with this Agagite, whose design is to destroy all the Jews
throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus ([Est
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#006)), which, I suppose, would include
those that had returned to their own land, for that was now a province
of his kingdom. Come and let us cut them off from being a nation, [Psa
83:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#004). Nero's barbarous wish is his,
that they had all but one neck.

[Esther 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 3:7</span></span>

Haman values himself upon that bold and daring thought, which he fancied
well became his great spirit, of destroying all the Jews - an
undertaking worthy of its author, and which he promised himself would
perpetuate his memory. He doubts not but to find desperate and bloody
hands enough to cut all their throats if the king will but give him
leave. How he obtained leave, and commission to do it, we are here told.
He had the king's ear, let him alone to manage him.

I. He makes a false and malicious representation of Jews, and their
character, to the king, [Est 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#008). The
enemies of God's people could not give them such bad treatment as they
do if they did not first give them a bad name. He would have the king
believe, 1. That the Jews were a despicable people, and that it was not
for his credit to harbour them:"A certain people there is," without
name, as if nobody knew whence they came and what they were; "they are
not incorporated, but scattered abroad and dispersed in all the
provinces as fugitives and vagabonds on the earth, and inmates in all
countries, the burden and scandal of the places where they live." 2.
That they were a dangerous people, and that it was not safe to harbour
them. "They have laws and usages of their own, and conform not to the
statutes of the kingdom and the customs of the country; and therefore
they may be looked upon as disaffected to the government and likely to
infect others with their singularities, which may end in a rebellion."
It is no new thing for the best of men to have such invidious characters
as these given of them; if it be no sin to kill them, it is no sin to
belie them.

II\. He bids high for leave to destroy them all, [Est
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#009). He knew there were many that
hated the Jews, and would willingly fall upon them if they might but
have a commission: Let it be written therefore that they may be
destroyed. Give but orders for a general massacre of all the Jews, and
Haman will undertake it shall be easily done. If the king will gratify
him in this matter, he will make him a present of ten thousand talents,
which shall be paid into the king's treasuries. This, he thought, would
be a powerful inducement to the king to consent, and would obviate the
strongest objection against him, which was that the government must
needs sustain loss in its revenues by the destruction of so many of its
subjects; so great a sum, he hoped, would be equivalent for that. Proud
and malicious men will not stick at the expenses of their revenge, nor
spare any cost to gratify it. Yet no doubt Haman knew how to re-imburse
himself out of the spoil of the Jews, which his janizaries were to seize
for him ([Est 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#013)), and so to make
them bear the charges of their own ruin; while he himself hoped to be
not only a saver but a gainer by the bargain.

III\. He obtains what he desired, a full commission to do what he would
with the Jews, [Est 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#010), [Est
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#011). The king was so inattentive to
business, and so bewitched with Haman, that he took no time to examine
the truth of his allegations, but was as willing as Haman could wish to
believe the worst concerning the Jews, and therefore he gave them up
into his hands, as lambs to the lion: The people are thine, do with them
as it seemeth good unto thee. He does not say, "Kill them, slay them"
(hoping Haman's own cooler thoughts would abate the rigour of that
sentence and induce him to sell them for slaves); but "Do what thou wilt
with them." And so little did he consider how much he should lose in his
tribute, and how much Haman would gain in the spoil, that he gave him
withal the ten thousand talents: The silver is thine. Such an implicit
confidence likewise he had in Haman, and so perfectly had he abandoned
all care of his kingdom, that he gave Haman his ring, his privy-seal, or
sign-manual, wherewith to confirm whatever edict he pleased to draw up
for this purpose. Miserable is the kingdom that is at the disposal of
such a head as this, which has one ear only, and a nose to be led by,
but neither eyes nor brains, nor scarcely a tongue of its own.

IV\. He then consults with his soothsayers to find out a lucky day for
the designed massacre, [Est 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007). The
resolve was taken up in the first month, in the twelfth year of the
king, when Esther had been his wife about five years. Some day or other
in that year must be pitched upon; and, as if he doubted not but that
Heaven would favour his design and further it, he refers it to the lot,
that is, to the divine Providence, to choose the day for him; but that,
in the decision, proved a better friend to the Jews than to him, for the
lot fell upon the twelfth month, so that Mordecai and Esther had eleven
months to turn themselves in for the defeating of the design, or, if
they could not defeat it, space would be left for the Jews to make their
escape and shift for their safety. Haman, though eager to have the Jews
cut off, yet will submit to the laws of his superstition, and not
anticipate the supposed fortunate day, no, not to gratify his impatient
revenge. Probably he was in some fear lest the Jews should prove too
hard for their enemies, and therefore durst not venture on such a
hazardous enterprise but under the smiles of a good omen. This may shame
us, who often acquiesce not in the directions and disposals of
Providence when they cross our desires and intentions. He that believeth
the lot, much more that believeth the promise, will not make haste. But
see how God's wisdom serves its own purposes by men's folly. Haman has
appealed to the lot, and to the lot he shall go, which, by adjourning
the execution, gives judgment against him and breaks the neck of the
plot.

V. The bloody edict is hereupon drawn up, signed, and published, giving
orders to the militia of every province to be ready against the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, and, on that day, to murder all the
Jews, men, women, and children, and seize their effects, [Est
3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#012). Had the decree been to banish
all the Jews and expel them out of the king's dominions, it would have
been severe enough; but surely never any act of cruelty appeared so
barefaced as this, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all the
Jews, appointing them as sheep for the slaughter without showing any
cause for so doing. No crime is laid to their charge; it is not
pretended that they were obnoxious to the public justice, nor is any
condition offered, upon performance of which they might have their lives
spared; but die they must, without mercy. Thus have the church's enemies
thirsted after blood, the blood of the saints and the martyrs of Jesus,
and drunk of it till they have been perfectly intoxicated ([Rev
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006)); yet still, like the
horse-leech, they cry, Give, give. This cruel offer is ratified with the
king's seal, directed to the king's lieutenants, and drawn up in the
king's name, and yet the king knows not what he does. Posts are sent
out, with all expedition, to carry copies of the decree to the
respective provinces, [Est 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015). See
how restless the malice of the church's enemies is: it will spare no
pains; it will lose no time.

VI\. The different temper of the court and city hereupon. 1. The court
was very merry upon it: The king and Haman sat down to drink, perhaps to
drink "Confusion to all the Jews." Haman was afraid lest the king's
conscience should smite him for what he had done and he should begin to
wish it undone again, to prevent which he engrossed him to himself, and
kept him drinking. This cursed method many take to drown their
convictions, and harden their own hearts and the hearts of others in
sin. 2. The city was very sad upon it (and the other cities of the
kingdom, no doubt, when they had notice of it): The city Shushan was
perplexed, not only the Jews themselves, but all their neighbours that
had any principles of justice and compassion. It grieved them to see
their king so abused, to see wickedness in the place of judgment ([Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016)), to see men that lived peaceably
treated so barbarously; and what would be the consequences of it to
themselves they knew not. But the king and Haman cared for none of these
things. Note, It is an absurd and impious thing to indulge ourselves in
mirth and pleasure when the church is in distress and the public are
perplexed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 4](est004)

</div>
