<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est000)  [Next](est002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

Several things in this chapter itself are very instructive and of great
use; but the design of recording the story of it is to show how way was
made for Esther to the crown, in order to her being instrumental to
defeat Haman's plot, and this long before the plot was laid, that we may
observe and admire the foresight and vast reaches of Providence. "Known
unto God are all his works" before-hand. Ahasuerus the king, I. In his
height feasts all his great men ([Est
1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)). II. In his heat he divorces
his queen, because she would not come to him when he sent for her ([Est
1:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010)). This shows how God serves
his own purposes even by the sins and follies of men, which he would not
permit if he know not how to bring good out of them.

[Esther 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 1:1</span></span>

Which of the kings of Persia this Ahasuerus was the learned are not
agreed. Mordecai is said to have been one of those that were carried
captive from Jerusalem ([Est 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#005), [Est
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#006)), whence it should seem that this
Ahasuerus was one of the first kings of that empire. Dr. Lightfoot
thinks that he was that Artaxerxes who hindered the building of the
temple, who is called also Ahasuerus ([Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006), [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007)), after his great-grandfather of
the Medes, [Dan 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001). We have here an
account,

I. Of the vast extent of his dominion. In the time of Darius and Cyrus
there were but 120 princes ([Dan 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001));
now there were 127, from India to Ethiopia, [Est
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001). It had become an over-grown
kingdom, which in time would sink with its own weight, and, as usual,
would lose its provinces as fast as it got them. If such vast power be
put into a bad hand, it is able to do so much the more mischief; but, if
into a good hand, it is able to do so much the more good. Christ's
kingdom is, or shall be, far larger than this, when the kingdoms of the
world shall all become his; and it shall be everlasting.

II\. Of the great pomp and magnificence of his court. When he found
himself fixed in his throne, the pride of his heart rising with the
grandeur of his kingdom, he made a most extravagant feast, wherein he
put himself to vast expense and trouble only to show the riches of his
glorious kingdom and the honour of his excellent majesty, [Est
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004). This was vain glory, an affection
of pomp to no purpose at all; for none questioned the riches of his
kingdom, nor offered to vie with him for honour. If he had shown the
riches of his kingdom and the honour of his majesty, as some of his
successors did, in contributing largely towards the building of the
temple and the maintaining of the temple service ([Ezr
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008), [Ezr
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#022)), it would have turned to a much
better account. Two feasts Ahasuerus made: - 1. One for his nobles and
princes, which lasted a hundred and eighty days, [Est
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003), [Est
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004). Not that he feasted the same
persons every day for all that time, but perhaps the nobles and princes
of one province one day, of another province another day, while thus he
and his constant attendants fared sumptuously every day. The Chaldee
paraphrast (who is very bold in his additions to the story of this book)
says that there had been a rebellion among his subjects and that this
feast was kept for joy of the quashing of it. 2. Another was made for
all the people, both great and small, which lasted seven days, some one
day and some another; and, because no house would hold them, they were
entertained in the court of the garden, [Est
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#005). The hangings with which the
several apartments were divided or the tents which were there pitched
for the company, were very fine and rich; so were the beds or benches on
which they sat, and the pavement under their feet, [Est
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#006). Better is a dinner of herbs with
quietness, and the enjoyment of one's self and a friend, than this
banquet of wine with all the noise and tumult that must needs attend it.

III\. Of the good order which in some respects was kept there
notwithstanding. We do not find this like Belshazzar's feast, in which
dunghill-gods were praised and the vessels of the sanctuary profaned,
[Dan 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#003), [Dan
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#004). Yet the Chaldee paraphrase says
that the vessels of the sanctuary were used in this feast, to the great
grief of the pious Jews. It was not like Herod's feast, which reserved a
prophet's head for the last dish. Two things which are laudable we may
gather from the account here given of this feast: - 1. That there was no
forcing of healths, nor urging of them: The drinking was according to
the law, probably some law lately made; none did compel, no, not by
continual proposing of it (as Josephus explains it); they did not send
the glass about, but every man drank as he pleased ([Est
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#008)), so that if there were any that
drank to excess it was their own fault, a fault which few would commit
when the king's order put an honour upon sobriety. This caution of a
heathen prince, even when he would show his generosity, may shame many
who are called Christians, who think they do not sufficiently show their
good housekeeping, nor bid their friends welcome, unless they make them
drunk, and, under pretence of sending the health round, send the sin
round, and death with it. There is a woe to those that do so; let them
read it and tremble, [Hab 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015), [Hab
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016). It is robbing men of their
reason, their richest jewel, and making them fools, the greatest wrong
that can be. 2. That there was no mixed dancing; for the gentlemen and
ladies were entertained asunder, not as in the feast of Belshazzar,
whose wives and concubines drank with him ([Dan
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002)), or that of Herod, whose daughter
danced before him. Vashti feasted the women in her own apartment; not
openly in the court of the garden, but in the royal house, [Est
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#009). Thus, while the king showed the
honour of his majesty, she and her ladies showed the honour of their
modesty, which is truly the majesty of the fair sex.

[Esther 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 1:10</span></span>

We have here a damp to all the mirth of Ahasuerus's feast; it ended in
heaviness, not as Job's children's feast by a wind from the wilderness,
not as Belshazzar's by a hand-writing on the wall, but by is own folly.
An unhappy falling out there was, at the end of the feast, between the
king and queen, which broke of the feast abruptly, and sent the guests
away silent and ashamed.

I. It was certainly the king's weakness to send for Vashti into his
presence when he was drunk, and in company with abundance of gentlemen,
many of whom, it is likely, were in the same condition. When his heart
was merry with wine nothing would serve him but Vashti must come, well
dressed as she was, with the crown on her head, that the princes and
people might see what a handsome woman she was, [Est
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010), [Est
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#011). Hereby, 1. He dishonoured
himself as a husband, who ought to protect, but by no means expose, the
modesty of his wife, who ought to be to her a covering of the eyes ([Gen
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016)), not to uncover them. 2. He
diminished himself as a king, in commanding that from his wife which she
might refuse, much to the honour of her virtue. It was against the
custom of the Persians for the women to appear in public, and he put a
great hardship upon her when he did not court, but command her to do so
uncouth a thing, and make her a show. If he had not been put out of the
possession of himself by drinking to excess, he would not have done such
a thing, but would have been angry at any one that should have mentioned
it. When the wine is in the wit is out, and men's reason departs from
them.

II\. However, perhaps it was not her wisdom to deny him. She refused to
come ([Est 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#012)); though he sent his
command by seven honourable messengers, and publicly, and Josephus says
sent again and again, yet she persisted in her denial. Had she come,
while it was evident that she did it in pure obedience, it would have
been no reflection upon her modesty, nor a bad example. The thing was
not in itself sinful, and therefore to obey would have been more her
honour than to be so precise. Perhaps she refused in a haughty manner,
and then it was certainly evil; she scorned to come at the king's
commandment. What a mortification was this to him! While he was showing
the glory of his kingdom he showed the reproach of his family, that he
had a wife that would do as she pleased. Strifes between yoke-fellows
are bad enough at any time, but before company they are very scandalous,
and occasion blushing and uneasiness.

III\. The king thereupon grew outrageous. He that had rule over 127
provinces had no rule over his own spirit, but his anger burned in him,
[Est 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#012). He would have consulted his
own comfort and credit more if he had stifled his resentment, had passed
by the affront his wife gave him, and turned it off with a jest.

IV\. Though he was very angry, he would not do any thing in this matter
till he advised with his privy-counsellors; as he had seven chamberlains
to execute his orders, who are named ([Est
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010)), so he had seven counsellors to
direct his orders. The greater power a man has the greater need he has
of advice, that he may not abuse his power. Of these counsellors it is
said that they were learned men, for they knew law and judgment, that
they were wise men, for they knew the times, and that the king put great
confidence in them and honour upon them, for they saw the king's face
and sat first in the kingdom, [Est
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013), [Est
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014). In the multitude of such
counsellors there is safety. Now here is,

1\. The question proposed to this cabinet-council ([Est
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#015)): What shall we do to the queen
Vashti according to the law? Observe, (1.) Though it was the queen that
was guilty, the law must have its course. (2.) Though the king was very
angry, yet he would do nothing but what he was advised was according to
law.

2\. The proposal which Memucan made, that Vashti should be divorced for
her disobedience. Some suggest that he gave this severe advice, and the
rest agreed to it, because they knew it would please the king, would
gratify both his passion now and his appetite afterwards. But Josephus
says that, on the contrary, he had a strong affection for Vashti, and
would not have put her away for this offence if he could legally have
passed it by; and then we must suppose Memucan, in his advice, to have
had a sincere regard to justice and the public good. (1.) He shows what
would be the bad consequences of the queen's disobedience to her
husband, if it were passed by and not animadverted upon, that it would
embolden other wives both to disobey their husbands and to domineer over
them. Had this unhappy falling out between the king and his wife,
wherein she was conqueror, been private, the error would have remained
with themselves and the quarrel might have been settled privately
between themselves; but it happening to be public, and perhaps the
ladies that were now feasting with the queen having shown themselves
pleased with her refusal, her bad example would be likely to have a bad
influence upon all the families of the kingdom. If the queen must have
her humour, and the king must submit to it (since the houses of private
persons commonly take their measures from the courts of princes), the
wives would be haughty and imperious and would scorn to obey their
husbands, and the poor despised husbands might fret at it, but could not
help themselves; for the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping,
[Pro 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#013); [Pro
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#015); and see [Pro
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#009); [Pro
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#024). When wives despise their
husbands, whom they ought to reverence ([Eph
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#033)), and contend for dominion over
those to whom they ought to be in subjection ([Pe1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001)), there cannot but be continual
guilt and grief, confusion and every evil work. And great ones must take
heed of setting copies of this kind, [Est
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#016). (2.) He shows what would be
the good consequence of a decree against Vashti that she should be
divorced. We may suppose that before they proceeded to this extremity
they sent to Vashti to know if she would yet submit, cry Peccavi - I
have done wrong, and ask the king's pardon, and that, if she had done
so, the mischief of her example would have been effectually prevented,
and process would have been stayed; but it is likely she continued
obstinate, and insisted upon it as her prerogative to do as she pleased,
whether it pleased the king or no, and therefore they gave this judgment
against her, that she come no more before the king, and this judgment so
ratified as never to be reversed, [Est
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#019). The consequence of this, it was
hoped, would be that the wives would give to their husbands honour, even
the wives of the great, notwithstanding their own greatness, and the
wives of the small, notwithstanding the husband's meanness ([Est
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#020)); and thus every man would bear
rule in his own house, as he ought to do, and, the wives being subject,
the children and servants would be so too. It is the interest of states
and kingdoms to provide that good order be kept in private families.

3\. The edict that passed according to this proposal, signifying that
the queen was divorced for contumacy, according to the law, and that, if
other wives were in like manner undutiful to their husbands, they must
expect to be in like manner disgraced ([Est
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#021), [Est
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#022)): were they better than the
queen? Whether it was the passion or the policy of the king that was
served by this edict, God's providence served its own purpose by it,
which was to make way for Esther to the crown.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 2](est002)

</div>
