<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo022)  [Next](exo024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 23:0</span></span>

This chapter continues and concludes the acts that passed in the first
session (if I may so call it) upon mount Sinai. Here are, I. Some laws
of universal obligation, relating especially to the ninth commandment,
against bearing false witness ([Exo
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)), and giving false judgment ([Exo
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#002), [Exo
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#003), [Exo
23:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#006)). Also a law of doing good to
our enemies ([Exo 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004), [Exo
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#005)), and not oppressing strangers
([Exo 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#009)). II. Some laws peculiar to
the Jews. The sabbatical year ([Exo
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010), [Exo
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011)), the three annual feasts ([Exo
23:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#014)), with some laws pertaining
thereto. III. Gracious promises of the completing of the mercy God had
begun for them, upon condition of their obedience. That God would
conduct them through the wilderness ([Exo
23:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020)), that he would prosper all
they had ([Exo 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#025), [Exo
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#026)), that he would put them in
possession of Canaan ([Exo 23:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027)).
But they must not mingle themselves with the nations ([Exo
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#032), [Exo
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#033)).

[Exodus 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 23:1</span></span>

Here are, I. Cautions concerning judicial proceedings; it was not enough
that they had good laws, better than ever any nation had, but care must
be taken for the due administration of justice according to those laws.

1\. The witnesses are here cautioned that they neither occasion an
innocent man to be indicted, by raising a false report of him and
setting common fame against him, nor assist in the prosecution of an
innocent man, or one whom they do not know to be guilty, by putting
their hand in swearing as witnesses against him, [Exo
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001). Bearing false witness against a
man, in a matter that touches his life, has in it all the guilty of
lying, perjury, malice, theft, murder, with the additional stains of
colouring all with a pretence of justice and involving many others in
the same guilt. There is scarcely any one act of wickedness that a man
can possibly be guilty of which has in it a greater complication of
villanies than this has. Yet the former part of this caution is to be
extended, not only to judicial proceedings, but to common conversation;
so that slandering and backbiting are a species of falsewitness-bearing.
A man's reputation lies as much at the mercy of every company as his
estate or life does at the mercy of a judge or jury; so that he who
raises, or knowingly spreads, a false report against his neighbour,
especially if the report be made to wise and good men whose esteem one
would desire to enjoy, sins as much against the laws of truth, justice,
and charity, as a false witness does - with this further mischief, that
he leaves it not in the power of the person injured to obtain redress.
That which we translate, Thou shalt not raise, the margin reads, Thou
shalt not receive a false report; for sometimes the receiver, in this
case, is as bad as the thief; and a backbiting tongue would not do so
much mischief as it does if it were not countenanced. Sometimes we
cannot avoid hearing a false report, but we must not receive it, that
is, we must not hear it with pleasure and delight as those that rejoice
in iniquity, nor give credit to it as long as there remains any cause to
question the truth of it. This is charity to our neighbour's good name,
and doing as we would be done by.

2\. The judges are here cautioned not to pervert judgment. (1.) They
must not be overruled, either by might or multitude, to go against their
consciences in giving judgment, [Exo
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#002). With the Jews causes were tried
by a bench of justices, and judgment given according to the majority of
votes, in which cause every particular justice must go according to
truth, as it appeared to him upon the strictest and most impartial
enquiry, though the multitude of the people, and their outcries, or, the
sentence of the rabbim (we translate it many), the more ancient and
honourable of the justices, went the other way. Therefore (as with us),
among the Jews, the junior upon the bench voted first, that he might not
be swayed nor overruled by the authority of the senior. Judges must not
respect the persons either of the parties or of their fellow-judges. The
former part of this verse also gives a general rule for all, as well as
judges, not to follow a multitude to do evil. General usage will never
excuse us in a bad practice; nor is the broad way ever the better or
safer for its being tracked and crowded. We must enquire what we ought
to do, not what the majority do; because we must be judged by our
Master, not by our fellow-servants, and it is too great a compliment to
be willing to go to hell for company. (2.) They must not pervert
judgment, no, not in favour of a poor man, v. 3. Right must in all cases
take place and wrong must be punished, and justice never biassed nor
injury connived at under pretence of charity and compassion. If a poor
man be a bad man, and do a bad thing, it is foolish pity to let him fare
the better for his poverty, [Deu 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#016),
[Deu 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017). (3.) Neither must they
pervert judgment in prejudice to a poor man, nor suffer him to be
wronged because he had not wherewithal to right himself; in such cases
the judges themselves must become advocates for the poor, as far as
their cause was good and honest ([Exo
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#006)): "Thou shalt not wrest the
judgment of the poor; remember they are thy poor, bone of thy bone, thy
poor neighbours, thy poor brethren; let them not therefore fare the
worse for being poor." (4.) They must dread the thoughts of assisting or
abetting a bad cause ([Exo 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#007)):
"Keep thyself far from a false matter; do not only keep thyself free
from it, nor think it enough to say thou art unconcerned in it, but keep
far from it, dread it as a dangerous snare. The innocent and righteous
thou wouldest not, for all the world, slay with thy own hands; keep far
therefore from a false matter, for thou knowest not but it may end in
that, and the righteous God will not leave such wickedness unpunished: I
will not justify the wicked," that is, "I will condemn him that unjustly
condemns others." Judges themselves are accountable to the great judge.
(5.) They must not take bribes, v. 8. They must not only not be swayed
by a gift to give an unjust judgment, to condemn the innocent, or acquit
the guilty, or adjudge a man's right from him, but they must not so much
as take a gift, lest it should have a bad influence upon them, and
overrule them, contrary to their intentions; for it has a strange
tendency to blind those that otherwise would do well. (6.) They must not
oppress a stranger, v. 9. Though aliens might not inherit lands among
them, yet they must have justice done them, must peaceably enjoy their
own, and be redressed if they were wronged, though they were strangers
to the commonwealth of Israel. It is an instance of the equity and
goodness of our law, that, if an alien be tried for any crime except
treason, the one half of his jury, if he desire it, shall be foreigners;
they call it a trial per mediatatem linguae, a kind provision that
strangers may not be oppressed. The reason here given is the same with
that in ch. 22:21, You were strangers, which is here elegantly enforced,
You know the heart of a stranger; you know something of the griefs and
fears of a stranger by sad experience, and therefore, being delivered,
can the more easily put your souls into their souls' stead.

II\. Commands concerning neighbourly kindnesses. We must be ready to do
all good offices, as there is occasion, for any body, yea even for those
that have done us ill offices, [Exo
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004), [Exo
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#005). The command of loving our
enemies, and doing good to those that hate us, is not only a new, but an
old commandment, [Pro 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#021), [Pro
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#022). Infer hence, 1. If we must do
this kindness for an enemy, much more for a friend, though an enemy only
is mentioned, because it is supposed that a man would not be
unneighbourly to any unless such as he had a particular spleen against.
2. If it be wrong not to prevent our enemy's loss and damage, how much
worse is it to occasion harm and loss to him, or any thing he has. 3. If
we must bring back our neighbours' cattle when they go astray, much more
must we endeavour, by prudent admonitions and instructions, to bring
back our neighbours themselves, when they go astray in any sinful path,
see [Jam 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019), [Jam
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020). And, if we must endeavour to
help up a fallen ass, much more should we endeavour, by comforts and
encouragements, to help up a sinking spirit, saying to those that are of
a fearful heart, Be strong. We must seek the relief and welfare of
others as our own, [Phi 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#004). If thou
sayest, Behold, we know it not, doth not he that pondereth the heart
consider it? See [Pro 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011), [Pro
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#012).

[Exodus 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 23:10</span></span>

Here is, I. The institution of the sabbatical year, [Exo
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010), [Exo
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011). Every seventh year the land was
to rest; they must not plough nor sow it at the beginning of the year,
and then they could not expect any great harvest at the end of the year:
but what the earth did produce of itself should be eaten from hand to
mouth, and not laid up. Now this was designed, 1. To show what a
plentiful land that was into which God was bringing them - that so
numerous a people could have rich maintenance out of the produce of so
small a country, without foreign trade, and yet could spare the increase
of every seventh year. 2. To remind them of their dependence upon God
their great landlord, and their obligation to use the fruit of their
land as he should direct. Thus he would try their obedience in a matter
that nearly touched their interest. Afterwards we find that their
disobedience to this command was a forfeiture of the promises, [Ch2
36:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#021). 3. To teach them a confidence
in the divine Providence, while they did their duty - that, as the sixth
day's manna served for two day's meat, so the sixth year's increase
should serve for two years' subsistence. Thus they must learn not to
take thought for their life, [Mat
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025). If we are prudent and diligent
in our affairs, we may trust Providence to furnish us with the bread of
the day in its day.

II\. The repetition of the law of the fourth commandment concerning the
weekly sabbath, [Exo 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#012). Even in
the year of rest they must not think that the sabbath day was laid in
common with the other days, but, even that year, it must be religiously
observed; yet thus some have endeavoured to take away the observance of
the sabbath, by pretending that every day must be a sabbath day.

III\. All manner of respect to the gods of the heathen is here strictly
forbidden, [Exo 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#013). A general
caution is prefixed to this, which has reference to all these precepts:
In all things that I have said unto you, be circumspect. We are in
danger of missing our way on the right hand and on the left, and it is
at our peril if we do; therefore we have need to look about us. A man
may ruin himself through mere carelessness, but he cannot save himself
without great care and circumspection: particularly, since idolatry was
a sin which they were much addicted to, and would be greatly tempted to,
they must endeavour to blot out the remembrance of the gods of the
heathen, and must disuse and forget all their superstitious forms of
speech, and never mention them but with detestation. In Christian
schools and academies (for it is in vain to think of reforming the
play-houses), it were to be wished that the names and stories of the
heathen deities, or demons rather, were not so commonly and familiarly
used as they are, even with intimations of respect, and sometimes with
forms of invocation. Surely we have not so learned Christ.

IV\. Their solemn religious attendance on God in the place which he
should choose is here strictly required, [Exo
23:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#014). 1. Thrice a year all their
males must come together in a holy convocation, that they might the
better know and love one another, and keep up their communion as a
dignified and peculiar people. 2. They must come together before the
Lord ([Exo 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017)) to present
themselves before him, looking towards the place where his honour dwelt,
and to pay their homage to him as their great Lord, from and under whom
they held all their enjoyments. 3. They must feast together before the
Lord, eating and drinking together, in token of their joy in God and
their grateful sense of his goodness to them; for a feast is made for
laughter, [Ecc 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#019). O what a good
Master do we serve, who has made it our duty to rejoice before him, who
feasts his servants when they are in waiting! Never let religion be
called a melancholy thing, when its solemn services are solemn feasts.
4. They must not appear before God empty, [Exo
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015). Some free-will offering or
other they must bring, in token of their respect and gratitude to their
great benefactor; and, as they were not allowed to come empty-handed, so
we must not come to worship God empty-hearted; our souls must be filled
with grace, with pious and devout affections, holy desires towards him,
and dedications of ourselves to him, for with such sacrifices God is
well-pleased. 5. The passover, pentecost, and feast of tabernacles, in
spring, summer, and autumn, were the three times appointed for their
attendance: not in winter, because travelling was then uncomfortable;
not in the midst of their harvest, because then they were otherwise
employed; so that they had no reason to say that he made them to serve
with an offering, or wearied them with incense.

V. Some particular directions are here given about the three feasts,
though not so fully as afterwards. 1. As to the passover, it was not to
be offered with leavened bread, for at that feast all leaven was to be
cast out, nor was the fat of it to remain until the morning, lest it
should become offensive, [Exo 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#018).
2. At the feast of pentecost, when they were to begin their harvest,
they must bring the first of their first-fruits to God, by the pious
presenting of which the whole harvest was sanctified, [Exo
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019). 3. At the feast of ingathering,
as it is called ([Exo 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016)), they
must give God thanks for the harvest-mercies they had received, and must
depend upon him for the next harvest, and must not think to receive
benefit by that superstitious usage of some of the Gentiles, who, it is
said, at the end of their harvest, seethed a kid in its dam's milk, and
sprinkled that milk-pottage, in a magical way, upon their gardens and
fields, to make them more fruitful next year. But Israel must abhor such
foolish customs.

[Exodus 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 23:20</span></span>

Three gracious promises are here made to Israel, to engage them to their
duty and encourage them in it; and each of the promises has some needful
precepts and cautions joined to it.

I. It is here promised that they should be guided and kept in their way
through the wilderness to the land of promise: Behold, I send an angel
before thee ([Exo 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020)), my angel
([Exo 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#023)), a created angel, say
some, a minister of God's providence, employed in conducting and
protecting the camp of Israel; that it might appear that God took a
particular care of them, he appointed one of his chief servants to make
it his business to attend them, and see that they wanted for nothing.
Others suppose it to be the Son of God, the angel of the covenant; for
the Israelites in the wilderness are said to tempt Christ; and we may as
well suppose him God's messenger, and the church's Redeemer, before his
incarnation, as the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. And we
may the rather think he was pleased to undertake the deliverance and
guidance of Israel because they were typical of his great undertaking.
It is promised that this blessed angel should keep them in the way,
though it lay through a wilderness first, and afterwards through their
enemies' country; thus God's spiritual Israel shall be kept through the
wilderness of this earth, and from the insults of the gates of hell. It
is also promised that he should bring them into the place which God had
not only designed but prepared for them: and thus Christ has prepared a
place for his followers, and will preserve them to it, for he is
faithful to him that appointed him. The precept joined with this promise
is that they be observant of, and obedient to, this angel whom God would
send before them ([Exo 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021)): "Beware
of him, and obey his voice in every thing; provoke him not in any thing,
for it is at your peril if you do, he will visit your iniquity." Note,
1. Christ is the author of salvation to those only that obey him. The
word of command is Hear you him, [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005). Observe what he hath commanded,
[Mat 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020). 2. Our necessary
dependence upon the divine power and goodness should awe us into
obedience. We do well to take heed of provoking our protector and
benefactor, because if our defence depart from us, and the streams of
his goodness be cut off, we are undone. Therefore, "Beware of him, and
carry it towards him with all possible reverence and caution. Fear the
Lord, and his goodness." 3. Christ will be faithful to those who are
faithful to him, and will espouse their cause who adhere to his: I will
be an adversary to thine adversaries, [Exo
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#022). The league shall be offensive
and defensive, like that with Abraham, I will bless him that blesseth
thee, and curse him that curseth thee. Thus is God pleased to twist his
interests and friendships with his people's.

II\. It is promised that they should have a comfortable settlement in
the land of Canaan, which they hoped now (though it proved otherwise)
within a few months to be in the possession of, [Exo
23:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#024). Observe, 1. How reasonable
the conditions of this promise are - only that they should serve their
own God, who was indeed the only true God, and not the gods of the
nations, which were no gods at all, and which they had no reason at all
to have any respect for. They must not only not worship their gods, but
they must utterly overthrow them, in token of their great abhorrence of
idolatry, their resolution never to worship idols themselves, and their
care to prevent any other from worshipping them; as the converted
conjurors burnt their books, [Act
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019). 2. How rich the particulars of
this promise are. (1.) The comfort of their food. He shall bless thy
bread and thy water; and God's blessing will make bread and water more
refreshing and nourishing than a feast of fat things and wines on the
lees without that blessing. (2.) The continuance of their health: "I
will take sickness away, either prevent it or remove it. Thy land shall
not be visited with epidemical diseases, which are very dreadful, and
sometimes have laid countries waste." (3.) The increase of their wealth.
Their cattle should not be barren, nor cast their young, which is
mentioned as an instance of prosperity, [Job
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#010). (4.) The prolonging of their
lives to old age: "The number of thy days I will fulfil, and they shall
not be cut off in the midst by untimely deaths." Thus hath godliness the
promise of the life that now is.

III\. It is promised that they should conquer and subdue their enemies,
the present occupants of the land of Canaan, who must be driven out to
make room for them. This God would do, 1. Effectually by his power ([Exo
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017), [Exo
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#018)); not so much by the sword and
bow of Israel as by the terrors which he would strike into the
Canaanites. Though they were so obstinate as not to be willing to submit
to Israel, resign their country, and retire elsewhere, which they might
have done, yet they were so dispirited that they were not able to stand
before them. This completed their ruin; such power had the devil in them
that they would resist, but such power had God over them that they could
not. I will send my fear before thee; and those that fear will soon
flee. Hosts of hornets made way for the hosts of Israel; such mean
creatures can God make use of for the chastising of his people's
enemies, as in the plagues of Egypt. When God pleases, hornets can drive
out Canaanites, as well as lions could, [Jos
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#012). 2. He would do it gradually, in
wisdom ([Exo 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#029), [Exo
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#030)), not all at once, but by little
and little. As the Canaanites had kept possession till Israel had grown
into a people, so there should still be some remains of them till Israel
should grow so numerous as to replenish the whole. Note, The wisdom of
God is to be observed in the gradual advances of the church's interests.
It is in real kindness to the church that its enemies are subdued by
little and little; for thus we are kept upon our guard, and in a
continual dependence upon God. Corruptions are thus driven out of the
hearts of God's people; not all at once, but by little and little; the
old man is crucified, and therefore dies slowly. God, in his providence,
often delays mercies, because we are not ready for them. Canaan has room
enough to receive Israel, but Israel is not numerous enough to occupy
Canaan. We are not straitened in God; if we are straitened, it is in
ourselves. The land of Canaan is promised them ([Exo
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#031)) in its utmost extent, which yet
they were not possessed of till the days of David; and by their sins
they soon lost possession. The precept annexed to this promise is that
they should not make any friendship, nor have any familiarity, with
idolaters, [Exo 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#032), [Exo
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#033). Idolaters must not so much as
sojourn in their land, unless they renounced their idolatry. Thus they
must avoid the reproach of intimacy with the worshippers of false gods
and the danger of being drawn to worship with them. By familiar converse
with idolaters, their dread and detestation of the sin would wear off;
they would think it no harm, in compliment to their friends, to pay some
respect to their gods, and so by degrees would be drawn into the fatal
snare. Note, Those that would be kept from bad courses must keep from
bad company; it is dangerous living in a bad neighbourhood; others' sins
will be our snares, if we look not well to ourselves. We must always
look upon our greatest danger to be from those that would cause us to
sin against God. Whatever friendship is pretended, that is really our
worst enemy that draws us from our duty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 24](exo024)

</div>
