<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo014)  [Next](exo016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 15:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. Israel looks back upon Egypt with a song of praise
for their deliverance. Here is, I. The song itself (v. 1-19). 2. The
solemn singing of it ([Exo 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020), [Exo
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021)). II. Israel marches forward in
the wilderness ([Exo 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022)), and
there, 1. Their discontent at the waters of Marah ([Exo
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023), [Exo
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#024)), and the relief granted them
([Exo 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#025), [Exo
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026)). 2. Their satisfaction in the
waters of Elim ([Exo 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#027)).

[Exodus 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 15:1</span></span>

Having read how that complete victory of Israel over the Egyptians was
obtained, here we are told how it was celebrated; those that were to
hold their peace while the deliverance was in working ([Exo
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014)) must not hold their peace now
that it was wrought; the less they had to do then the more they had to
do now. If God accomplishes deliverance by his own immediate power, it
redounds so much the more to his glory. Moses, no doubt by divine
inspiration, indited this song, and delivered it to the children of
Israel, to be sung before they stirred from the place where they saw the
Egyptians dead upon the shore. Observe, 1. They expressed their joy in
God, and thankfulness to him, by singing; it is almost natural to us
thus to give vent to our joy and the exultations of our spirit. By this
instance it appears that the singing of psalms, as an act of religious
worship, was used in the church of Christ before the giving of the
ceremonial law, and therefore was no part of it, nor abolished with it.
Singing is as much the language of holy joy as praying is of holy
desire. 2. Moses, who had gone before them through the sea, goes before
them in the song, and composes it for them. Note, Those that are active
in public services should not be neuters in public praises. 3. When the
mercy was fresh, and they were much affected with it, then they sang
this song. Note, When we have received special mercy from God, we ought
to be quick and speedy in our returns of praise to him, before time and
the deceitfulness of our own hearts efface the good impressions that
have been made. David sang his triumphant song in the day that the Lord
delivered him, [Sa2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001). Bis dat qui
cito dat - He gives twice who gives quickly. 4. When they believed the
Lord ([Exo 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)) then they sang this
song: it was a song of faith; this connection is observed ([Psa
106:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#012)): Then believed they his words,
they sang his praise. If with the heart man believes, thus confession
must be made. Here is,

I. The song itself; and,

1\. We may observe respecting this song, that it is, (1.) An ancient
song, the most ancient that we know of. (2.) A most admirable
composition, the style lofty and magnificent, the images lively and
proper, and the whole very moving. (3.) It is a holy song, consecrated
to the honour of God, and intended to exalt his name and celebrate his
praise, and his only, not in the least to magnify any man: holiness to
the Lord is engraven in it, and to him they made melody in the singing
of it. (4.) It is a typical song. The triumphs of the gospel church, in
the downfall of its enemies, are expressed in the song of Moses and the
song of the Lamb put together, which are said to be sung upon a sea of
glass, as this was upon the Red Sea, [Rev
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002), [Rev
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003).

2\. Let us observe what Moses chiefly aims at in this song.

(1.) He gives glory to God, and triumphs in him; this is first in his
intention ([Exo 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)): I will sing
unto the Lord. Note, All our joy must terminate in God, and all our
praises be offered up to him, the Father of lights and Father of
mercies, for he hath triumphed. Note, All that love God triumph in his
triumphs; what is his honour should be our joy. Israel rejoiced in God,
\[1.\] As their own God, and therefore their strength, song, and
salvation, [Exo 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002). Happy therefore
the people whose God is the Lord; they need no more to make them happy.
They have work to do, temptations to grapple with, and afflictions to
bear, and are weak in themselves; but he strengthens them: his grace is
their strength. They are often in sorrow, upon many accounts, but in him
they have comfort, he is their song; sin, and death, and hell, threaten
them, but he is, and will be, their salvation: See [Isa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002). \[2.\] As their fathers' God.
This they take notice of, because, being conscious to themselves of
their own unworthiness and provocations, they had reason to think that
what God had now done for them was for their fathers' sake, [Deu
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037). Note, The children of the
covenant ought to improve their fathers' relation to God as their God
for comfort, for caution, and for quickening. \[3.\] As a God of
infinite power ([Exo 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003)): The Lord
is a man of war, that is, well able to deal with all those that strive
with their Maker, and will certainly be too hard for them. \[4.\] As a
God of matchless and incomparable perfection, [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011). This is expressed, First, More
generally: Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods! This is pure
praise, and a high expression of humble adoration. - It is a challenge
to all other gods to compare with him: "Let them stand forth, and
pretend their utmost; none of them dare make the comparison." Egypt was
notorious for the multitude of its gods, but the God of the Hebrews was
too hard for them and baffled them all, [Num
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#004); Deu. 32:23-39. The princes and
potentates of the world are called gods, but they are feeble and mortal,
none of them all comparable to Jehovah, the almighty and eternal God. -
It is confession of his infinite perfection, as transcendent and
unparalleled. Note, God is to be worshipped and adored as a being of
such infinite perfection that there is none like him, nor any to be
compared with him, as one that in all things has and must have the
pre-eminence, [Psa 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006). Secondly,
More particularly, 1. He is glorious in holiness; his holiness is his
glory. It is that attribute which angels adore, [Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003). His holiness appeared in the
destruction of Pharaoh, his hatred of sin, and his wrath against
obstinate sinners. It appeared in the deliverance of Israel, his delight
in the holy seed, and his faithfulness to his own promise. God is rich
in mercy - this is his treasure, glorious in holiness - this is his
honour. Let us always give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness. 2.
He is fearful in praises. That which is the matter of our praise, though
it is joyful to the servants of God, is dreadful and very terrible to
his enemies, [Psa 66:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001). Or it
directs us in the manner of our praising God; we should praise him with
a humble holy awe, and serve the Lord with fear. Even our spiritual joy
and triumph must be balanced with a religious fear. 3. He is doing
wonders, wondrous to all, being above the power and out of the common
course of nature; especially wondrous to us, in whose favour they are
wrought, who are so unworthy that we had little reason to expect them.
They were wonders of power and wonders of grace; in both God was to be
humbly adored.

(2.) He describes the deliverance they were now triumphing in, because
the song was intended, not only to express and excite their thankfulness
for the present, but to preserve and perpetuate the remembrance of this
work of wonder to after-ages. Two things were to be taken notice of: -

\[1.\] The destruction of the enemy; the waters were divided, [Exo
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008). The floods stood upright as a
heap. Pharaoh and all his hosts were buried in the waters. The horse and
his rider could not escape ([Exo
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)), the chariots, and the chosen
captains ([Exo 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#004)); they themselves
went into the sea, and they were overwhelmed, [Exo
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#019). The depths, the sea, covered
them, and the proud waters went over the proud sinners; they sank like a
stone, like lead ([Exo 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#005), [Exo
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010)), under the weight of their own
guilt and God's wrath. Their sin had made them hard like a stone, and
now they justly sink like a stone. Nay, the earth itself swallowed them
([Exo 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#012)); their dead bodies sank
into the sands upon which they were thrown up, which sucked them in.
Those whom the Creator fights against the whole creation is at war with.
All this was the Lord's doing, and his only. It was an act of his power:
Thy right hand, O Lord, not ours, has dashed in pieces the enemy, [Exo
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#006). It was with the blast of thy
nostrils ([Exo 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008)), and thy wind
([Exo 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010)), and the stretching out
of thy right hand, [Exo 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#012). It was
an instance of his transcendent power - in the greatness of thy
excellency; and it was the execution of his justice: Thou sentest forth
thy wrath, [Exo 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#007). This destruction
of the Egyptians was made the more remarkable by their pride and
insolence, and their strange assurance of success: The enemy said, I
will pursue, [Exo 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009). Here is,
First, Great confidence. When they pursue, they do not question but they
shall overtake; and, when they overtake, they do not question but they
shall overcome, and obtain so decisive a victory as to divide the spoil.
Note, It is common for men to be most elevated with the hope of success
when they are upon the brink of ruin, which makes their ruin so much the
sorer. See [Isa 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024), [Isa
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#025). Secondly, Great cruelty -
nothing but killing, and slaying, and destroying, and this will satisfy
his lust; and a barbarous lust that is which so much blood must be the
satisfaction of. Note, It is a cruel hatred with which the church is
hated; its enemies are bloody men. This is taken notice of here to show,
1. That God resists the proud, and delights to humble those who lift up
themselves; he that says, "I will, and I will, whether God will or no,"
shall be made to know that wherein he deals proudly God is above him. 2.
That those who thirst for blood shall have enough of it. Those who love
to be destroying shall be destroyed; for we know who has said, Vengeance
is mine, I will repay.

\[2.\] The protection and guidance of Israel ([Exo
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#013)): Thou in thy mercy hast led
forth the people, led them forth out of the bondage Egypt, led them
forth out of the perils of the Red Sea, [Exo
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#019). But the children of Israel went
on dry land. Note, The destruction of the wicked serves for a foil to
set off the salvation of Israel, and to make it the more illustrious,
[Isa 45:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#013).

(3.) He sets himself to improve this wonderful appearance of God for
them. \[1.\] In order to quicken them to serve God: in consideration of
this, I will prepare him habitation, [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002). God having preserved them, and
prepared a covert for them under which they had been safe and easy, they
resolve to spare no cost nor pains for the erecting of a tabernacle to
his honour, and there they will exalt him, and mention, to his praise,
the honour he had got upon Pharaoh. God had now exalted them, making
them great and high, and therefore they will exalt him, by speaking of
his infinite height and grandeur. Note, Our constant endeavour should
be, by praising his name and serving his interests, to exalt God; and it
is an advancement to us to be so employed. \[2.\] In order to encourage
them to trust in God. So confident is this Psalmist of the happy issue
of the salvation which was so gloriously begun that he looks upon it as
in effect finished already: "Thou hast guided them to thy holy
habitation, [Exo 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#013). Thou hast thus
put them into the way to it, and wilt in due time bring them to the end
of that way," for God's work is perfect; or, "Thou hast guided them to
attend thy holy habitation in heaven with their praises." Note, Those
whom God takes under his direction he will guide to his holy habitation
in faith now, and in fruition shortly. Two ways this great deliverance
was encouraging: - First, It was such an instance of God's power as
would terrify their enemies, and quite dishearten them, [Exo
15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014). The very report of the
overthrow of the Egyptians would be more than half the over throw of all
their other enemies; it would sink their spirits, which would go far
towards the sinking of their powers and interests; he Philistines,
Moabites, Edomites, and Canaanites (with each of which nations Israel
was to grapple), would be alarmed by it, would be quite dispirited, and
would conclude it was in vain to fight against Israel, when a God of
such power fought for them. It had this effect; the Edomites were afraid
of them ([Deu 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#004)), so were the
Moabites ([Num 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#003)), and the
Canaanites, [Jos 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009), [Jos
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#010); [Jos
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001). Thus God sent his fear before
them ([Exo 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027)), and cut off the
spirit of princes. Secondly, It was such a beginning of God's favour to
them as gave them an earnest of he perfection of his kindness. This was
but in order to something further: Thou shalt bring them in, [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017). If he thus bring them out of
Egypt, notwithstanding their unworthiness, and the difficulties that lay
in the way of their escape, doubtless he will bring them into Canaan;
for has he begun (so begun), and will he not make an end? Note, Our
experiences of God's power and favour should be improved for the support
of our expectations. "Thou hast, therefore, not only thou canst, but we
trust thou wilt," is good arguing. Thou wilt plant them in the place
which thou has made for thee to dwell in. Note, It is good dwelling
where God dwells, in his church on earth ([Psa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)), in his church in heaven, [Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024). Where he says, "This is my rest
for ever," we should say, "Let it be ours." Lastly, The great ground of
the encouragement which they draw from this work of wonder is, The Lord
shall reign for ever and ever, [Exo
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#018). They had now seen an end of
Pharaoh's reign; but time itself shall not put a period to Jehovah's
reign, which, like himself, is eternal, and not subject to change. Note,
It is the unspeakable comfort of all God's faithful subjects, not only
that he does reign universally and with an incontestable sovereignty,
but that he will reign eternally, and there shall be no end of his
dominion.

II\. The solemn singing of this song, [Exo
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020), [Exo
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021). Miriam (or Mary, it is the same
name) presided in an assembly of the women, who (according to the
softness of their sex, and the common usage of those times for
expressing joy, with timbrels and dances) sang this song. Moses led the
psalm, and gave it out for the men, and then Miriam for the women.
Famous victories were wont to be applauded by the daughters of Israel
([Sa1 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006), [Sa1
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#007)); so was this. When God brought
Israel out of Egypt, it is said ([Mic
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004)), He sent before them Moses,
Aaron, and Miriam, though we read not of any thing memorable that Miriam
did but this. But those are to be reckoned great blessings to a people
who assist them, and go before them, in praising God.

[Exodus 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 15:22</span></span>

It should seem, it was with some difficulty that Moses prevailed with
Israel to leave that triumphant shore on which they sang the foregoing
song. They were so taken up with the sight, or with the song, or with
the spoiling of the dead bodies, that they cared not to go forward, but
Moses with much ado brought them from the Red Sea into a wilderness. The
pleasures of our way to Canaan must not retard our progress, but quicken
it, though we have a wilderness before us. Now here we are told,

I. That in the wilderness of Shur they had no water, [Exo
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022). This was a sore trial to the
young travellers, and a diminution to their joy; thus God would train
them up to difficulties. David, in a dry and thirsty land where no water
is, reaches forth towards God, [Psa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001).

II\. That at Marah they had water, but it was bitter, so that though
they had been three days without water they could not drink it, because
it was extremely unpleasant to the taste or was likely to be prejudicial
to their health, or was so brackish that it rather increased their
thirst than quenched it, [Exo 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023).
Note, God can embitter that to us from which we promise ourselves most
satisfaction, and often does so in the wilderness of this world, that
our wants and disappointments in the creature may drive us to the
Creator, in whose favour alone true comfort is to be had. Now in this
distress, 1. The people fretted and quarrelled with Moses, as if he had
done ill by them. What shall we drink? is all their clamour, [Exo
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#024). Note, The greatest joys and
hopes are soon turned into the greatest griefs and fears with those that
live by sense only, and not by faith. 2. Moses prayed: He cried unto the
Lord, [Exo 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#025). The complaints which
they brought to him he brought to God, on whom, notwithstanding his
elevation, Moses owned a constant dependence. Note, It is the greatest
relief of the cares of magistrates and ministers, when those under their
charge make them uneasy, that they may have recourse to God by prayer:
he is the guide of the church's guides and to him, as the Chief
Shepherd, the under-shepherds must upon all occasions apply. 3. God
provided graciously for them. He directed Moses to a tree, which he cast
into the waters, in consequence of which, all of a sudden, they were
made sweet. Some think this wood had a peculiar virtue in it for this
purpose, because it is said, God showed him the tree. God is to be
acknowledged, not only in the creating of things useful for man, but in
discovering their usefulness. Or perhaps this was only a sign, and not
at all a means, of the cure, any more than the brazen serpent, or
Elisha's casting one cruse full of salt into the waters of Jericho. Some
make this tree typical of the cross of Christ, which sweetens the bitter
waters of affliction to all the faithful, and enables them to rejoice in
tribulation. The Jews' tradition is that the wood of this tree was
itself bitter, yet it sweetened the waters of Marah; the bitterness of
Christ's sufferings and death alters the property of ours. 4. Upon this
occasion, God came upon terms with them, and plainly told them, now that
they had got clear of the Egyptians, and had entered into the
wilderness, that they were upon their good behaviour, and that according
as they carried themselves so it would be well or ill with them: There
he made a statute and an ordinance, and settled matters with them. There
he proved them, that is, there he put them upon the trial, admitted them
as probationers for his favour. In short, he tells them, [Exo
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026), (1.) What he expected from
them, and that was, in one word, obedience. They must diligently hearken
to his voice, and give ear to his commandments, that they might know
their duty, and not transgress through ignorance; and they must take
care in every thing to do that which was right in God's sight, and to
keep all his statutes. They must not think, now that they were delivered
from their bondage in Egypt, that they had no lord over them, but were
their own masters; no, therefore they must look upon themselves as God's
servants, because he had loosed their bonds, [Psa
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016); [Luk
1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074), [Luk
1:75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075). (2.) What they might then expect
from him: I will put none of these diseases upon thee, that is, "I will
not bring upon thee any of the plagues of Egypt." This intimates that,
if they were rebellious and disobedient, the very plagues which they had
seen inflicted upon their enemies should be brought upon them; so it is
threatened, [Deu 28:60](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#060). God's
judgments upon Egypt, as they were mercies to Israel, opening the way to
their deliverance, so they were warnings to Israel, and designed to awe
them into obedience. Let not the Israelites think, because God had thus
highly honoured them in the great things he had done for them, and had
proclaimed them to all the world his favourites, that therefore he would
connive at their sins and let them do as they would. No, God is no
respecter of persons; a rebellious Israelite shall fare no better than a
rebellious Egyptian; and so they found, to their cost, before the got to
Canaan. "But, if thou wilt be obedient, thou shalt be safe and happy;"
the threatening is implied only, but the promise is expressed: "I am the
Lord that healeth thee, and will take care of thy comfort wherever thou
goest." Note, God is the great physician. If we be kept well, it is he
that keeps us; if we be made well, it is he that restores us; he is our
life, and the length of our days.

III\. That at Elim they had good water, and enough of it, [Exo
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#027). Though God may, for a time,
order his people to encamp by the waters of Marah, yet that shall not
always be their lot. See how changeable our condition is in this world,
from better to worse, from worse to better. Let us therefore learn both
how to be abased and how to abound, to rejoice as though we rejoiced not
when we are full, and to weep as though we wept not when we are emptied.
Here were twelve wells for their supply, one for every tribe, that they
might not strive for water, as their fathers had sometimes done; and,
for their pleasure, there were seventy palm-trees, under the shadow of
which their great men might repose themselves. Note, God can find places
of refreshment for his people even in the wilderness of this world,
wells in the valley of Baca, lest they should faint in their mind with
perpetual fatigue: yet, whatever our delights may be in the land of our
pilgrimage, we must remember that we do but encamp by them for a time,
that here we have no continuing city.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 16](exo016)

</div>
