<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo023)  [Next](exo025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 24:0</span></span>

Moses, as mediator between God and Israel, having received divers laws
and ordinances from God privately in the three foregoing chapters, in
this chapter, I. Comes down to the people, acquaints them with the laws
he had received, and takes their consent to those laws ([Exo
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003)), writes the laws, and reads them
to the people, who repeat their consent ([Exo
24:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004)), and then by sacrifice, and
the sprinkling of blood, ratifies the covenant between them and God
([Exo 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#005), [Exo
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006), [Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008)). II. He returns to God again, to
receive further directions. When he was dismissed from his former
attendance, he was ordered to attend again ([Exo
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001), [Exo
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002)). He did so with seventy of the
elders, to whom God made a discovery of his glory ([Exo
24:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#009)). Moses is ordered up into the
mount ([Exo 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012), [Exo
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#013)); the rest are ordered down to
the people ([Exo 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#014)). The cloud of
glory is seen by all the people on the top of mount Sinai ([Exo
24:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#015)), and Moses is therewith God
forty days and forty nights ([Exo
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018)).

[Exodus 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 24:1</span></span>

The first two verses record the appointment of a second session upon
mount Sinai, for the making of laws, when an end was put to the first.
When a communion is begun between God and us, it shall never fail on his
side, if it do not first fail on ours. Moses is directed to bring Aaron
and his sons, and the seventy elders of Israel, that they might be
witnesses of the glory of God, and that communion with him to which
Moses was admitted; and that their testimony might confirm the people's
faith. In this approach, 1. They must all be very reverent: Worship you
afar off, [Exo 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001). Before they came
near, they must worship. Thus we must enter into God's gates with humble
and solemn adorations, draw near as those that know our distance, and
admire the condescensions of God's grace in admitting us to draw near.
Are great princes approached with the profound reverences of the body?
And shall not the soul that draws near to God be bowed before him? 2.
They must none of them come so near as Moses, [Exo
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002). They must come up to the Lord
(and those that would approach to God must ascend), but Moses alone must
come near, being therein a type of Christ, who, as the high priest,
entered alone into the most holy place.

In the following verses, we have the solemn covenant made between God
and Israel, and the exchanging of the ratifications; and a very solemn
transaction it was, typifying the covenant of grace between God and
believers through Christ.

I. Moses told the people the words of the Lord, [Exo
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003). He did not lead them blindfold
into the covenant, nor teach them a devotion that was the daughter of
ignorance; but laid before them all the precepts, general and
particular, in the foregoing chapters; and fairly put it to them whether
they were willing to submit to these laws or no.

II\. The people unanimously consented to the terms proposed, without
reservation or exception: All the words which the Lord hath said will we
do. They had before consented in general to be under God's government
([Exo 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008)); here they consent in
particular to these laws now given. O that there had been such a heart
in them! How well were it if people would but be always in the same good
mind that sometimes they seem to be in! Many consent to the law, and yet
do not live up to it; they have nothing to except against it, and yet
will not persuade themselves to be ruled by it.

This is the tenour of the covenant, That, if they would observe the
foregoing precepts, God would perform the foregoing promises. "Obey, and
be happy." Here is the bargain made. Observe,

1\. How it was engrossed in the book of the covenant: Moses wrote the
words of the Lord ([Exo 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004)), that
there might be no mistake; probably he had written them as God dictated
them on the mount. As soon as ever God had separated to himself a
peculiar people in the world, he governed them by a written word, as he
has done ever since, and will do while the world stands and the church
in it. Moses, having engrossed the articles of agreement concluded upon
between God and Israel, read them in the audience of the people ([Exo
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007)), that they might be perfectly
apprised of the thing, and might try whether their second thoughts were
the same with their first, upon the whole matter. And we may suppose
they were so; for their words ([Exo
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007)) are the same with what they were
([Exo 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003)), but something stronger:
All that the Lord hath said (be it good, or be it evil, to flesh and
blood, [Jer 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#006)) we will do; so they
had said before, but now they add, "And will be obedient; not only we
will do what has been commanded, but in every thing which shall further
be ordained we will be obedient." Bravely resolved! if they had but
stuck to their resolution. See here that God's covenants and commands
are so incontestably equitable in themselves, and so highly advantageous
to us, that the more we think of them, and the more plainly and fully
they are set before us, the more reason we shall see to comply with
them.

2\. How it was sealed by the blood of the covenant, that Israel might
receive strong consolations from the ratifying of God's promises to
them, and might lie under strong obligations from the ratifying of their
promises to God. Thus has Infinite Wisdom devised means that we may be
confirmed both in our faith and in our obedience, may be both encouraged
in our duty and engaged to it. The covenant must be made by sacrifice
([Psa 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#005)), because, since man has
sinned, and forfeited his Creator's favour, there can be no fellowship
by covenant till there be first friendship and atonement by sacrifice.

(1.) In preparation therefore for the parties interchangeably putting
their seals to this covenant, \[1.\] Moses builds an altar, to the
honour of God, which was principally intended in all the altars that
were built, and which was the first thing to be looked at in the
covenant they were now to seal. No addition to the perfections of the
divine nature can be made by any of God's dealings with the children of
men, but in them his perfections are manifested and magnified, and his
honour is shown forth; therefore he will not be represented by an altar,
to signify that all he expected from them was that they should do him
honour, and that, being his people, they should be to him for a name and
a praise. \[2.\] He erects twelve pillars, according to the number of
the tribes. These were to represent the people, the other party to the
covenant; and we may suppose that they were set up against the altar,
and that Moses, as mediator, passed to and fro between them. Probably
each tribe set up and knew its own pillar, and their elders stood by it.
\[3.\] He appointed sacrifices to be offered upon the altar ([Exo
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#005)), burnt-offerings and
peace-offerings, which yet were designed to be expiatory. We are not
concerned to enquire who these young men were that were employed in
offering these sacrifices; for Moses was himself the priest, and what
they did was purely as his servants, by his order and appointment. No
doubt they were men who by their bodily strength were qualified for the
service, and by their station among the people were fittest for the
honour.

(2.) Preparation being thus made, the ratifications were very solemnly
exchanged. \[1.\] The blood of the sacrifice which the people offered
was (part of it) sprinkled upon the altar ([Exo
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006)), which signifies the people's
dedicating themselves, their lives, and beings, to God, and to his
honour. In the blood (which is the life) of the dead sacrifices all the
Israelites were presented unto God as living sacrifices, [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001). \[2.\] The blood of the
sacrifice which God had owned and accepted was (the remainder of it)
sprinkled either upon the people themselves ([Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008)) or upon the pillars that
represented them, which signified God's graciously conferring his favour
upon them and all the fruits of that favour, and his giving them all the
gifts they could expect or desire from a God reconciled to them and in
covenant with them by sacrifice. This part of the ceremony was thus
explained: "Behold the blood of the covenant; see here how God has
sealed to you to be a people; his promises to you, and yours to him, are
both yea and amen." Thus our Lord Jesus, the Mediator of the new
covenant (of whom Moses was a type), having offered up himself a
sacrifice upon the cross, that his blood might be indeed the blood of
the covenant, sprinkled it upon the altar in his intercession ([Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012)), and sprinkles it upon his
church by his word and ordinances and the influences and operations of
the Spirit of promise, by whom we are sealed. He himself seemed to
allude to this solemnity when, in the institution of the Lord's supper,
he said, This cup is the New Testament (or covenant) in my blood.
Compare with this, [Heb 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019), [Heb
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#020).

[Exodus 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 24:9</span></span>

The people having, besides their submission to the ceremony of the
sprinkling of blood, declared their well-pleasedness in their God and
his law, again and again, God here gives to their representatives some
special tokens of his favour to them (for God meets him that rejoices
and works righteousness), and admits them nearer to him than they could
have expected. Thus, in the New Testament church, we find the four
living creatures, and the four and twenty elders, honoured with places
round the throne, being redeemed unto God by the blood of the Lamb which
is in the midst of the throne, [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004), [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006); [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008), [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009). Observe, 1. They saw the God of
Israel ([Exo 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#010)), that is, they had
some glimpse of his glory, in light and fire, though they saw no manner
of similitude, and his being no man hath seen nor can see, [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016). They saw the place where the God
of Israel stood (so the Septuagint), something that came near a
similitude, but was not; whatever they saw, it was certainly something
of which no image nor picture could be made, and yet enough to satisfy
them that God was with them of a truth. Nothing is described but that
which was under his feet; for our conceptions of God are all below him,
and fall infinitely short of being adequate. They saw not so much as
God's feet; but at the bottom of the brightness, and as the footstool or
pedestal of it, they saw a most rich and splendid pavement, such as they
never saw before nor after, as it had been of sapphires, azure or
sky-coloured. The heavens themselves are the pavement of God's palace,
and his throne is above the firmament. See how much better wisdom is
than the precious onyx or the sapphires, for wisdom was from eternity
God's delight ([Pro 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030)), and lay in
his bosom, but the sapphires are the pavement under his feet; there let
us put all the wealth of this world, and not in our hearts. 2. Upon the
nobles (or elders) of Israel, he laid not his hand, [Exo
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#011). Though they were men, the
dazzling splendour of his glory did not overwhelm them; but it was so
moderated ([Job 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#009)), and they were
so strengthened ([Dan 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019)), that
they were able to bear it. Nay, though they were sinful men, and
obnoxious to God's justice, yet he did not lay his punishing avenging
hand upon them, as they feared he would. When we consider what a
consuming fire God is, and what stubble we are before him, we shall have
reason to say, in all our approaches to him, It is of the Lord's mercies
that we are not consumed. 3. They saw God, and did eat and drink. They
had not only their lives preserved, but their vigour, courage, and
comfort; it cast no damp upon their joy, but rather increased and
elevated it. They feasted upon the sacrifice, before God, in token of
their cheerful consent to the covenant now made, their grateful
acceptance of the benefits of it, and their communion with God, in
pursuance of that covenant. Thus believers eat and drink with Christ at
his table, [Luk 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030). Blessed are
those that shall eat bread in the kingdom of our Father, and drink of
the wine new there.

[Exodus 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 24:12</span></span>

The public ceremony of sealing the covenant being over, Moses is called
up to receive further instructions, which we have in the following
chapters.

I. He is called up into the mount, and there he remains six days at some
distance. Orders are given him ([Exo
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012)): Come up to the mount, and be
there, that is, "Expect to continue there for some considerable time."
Those that would have communion with God must not only come to
ordinances, but they must abide by them. Blessed are those that dwell in
his house, not that merely call there. "Come up, and I will give thee a
law, that thou mayest teach them." Moses taught them nothing but what he
had received from the Lord, and he received nothing from the Lord but
what he taught them; for he was faithful both to God and Israel, and did
neither add nor diminish, but kept close to his instructions. Having
received these orders, 1. He appointed Aaron and Hur to be as
lords-justices in his absence, to keep the peace and good order in the
congregation, [Exo 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#014). The care of
his government he would leave behind him when he went up into the mount,
that he might not have that to distract his mind; and yet he would not
leave the people as sheep having no shepherd, no, not for a few days.
Good princes find their government a constant care, and their people
find it a constant blessing. 2. He took Joshua up with him into the
mount, v. 13. Joshua was his minister, and it would be a satisfaction to
him to have him with him as a companion, during the six days that he
tarried in the mount, before God called to him. Joshua was to be his
successor, and therefore thus he was honoured before the people, above
the rest of the elders, that they might afterwards the more readily take
him for their governor; and thus he was prepared for service, by being
trained up in communion with God. Joshua was a type of Christ, and (as
the learned bishop Pearson well observes) Moses takes him with him into
the mount, because without Jesus, in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, there is no looking into the secrets of heaven,
nor approaching the glorious presence of God. 3. A cloud covered the
mount six days, a visible token of God's special presence there, for he
so shows himself to us as at the same time to conceal himself from us.
He lets us know so much as to assure us of his presence, power, and
grace, but intimates to us that we cannot find him out to perfection.
During these six days Moses staid waiting upon the mountain for a call
into the presence-chamber, [Exo 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#015),
[Exo 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016). God thus tried the
patience of Moses, and his obedience to that command ([Exo
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012)), Be there. If Moses had been
tired before the seventh day (as Saul, [Sa1
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#008), [Sa1
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#009)), and had said, What should I
wait for the Lord any longer? he would have lost the honour of entering
into the cloud; but communion with God is worth waiting for. And it is
fit we should address ourselves to solemn ordinances with a solemn
pause, taking time to compose ourselves, [Psa
108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001).

II\. He is called up into a cloud on the seventh day, probably on the
sabbath day, [Exo 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016). Now, 1. The
thick cloud opened in the sight of all Israel, and the glory of the Lord
broke forth like devouring fire, [Exo
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#017). God, even our God, is a
consuming fire, and so he was pleased to manifest himself in the giving
of the law, that, knowing the terrors of the Lord, we may be persuaded
to obey, and may by them be prepared for the comforts of the gospel, and
that the grace and truth which come by Jesus Christ may be the more
acceptable. 2. The entrance of Moses into the cloud was very wonderful:
Moses went into the midst of the cloud, [Exo
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018). It was an extraordinary
presence of mind which the grace of God furnished him with by his six
day's' preparation, else he durst not have ventured into the cloud,
especially when it broke out in devouring fire. Moses was sure that he
who called him would protect him; and even those glorious attributes of
God which are most terrible to the wicked the saints with a humble
reverence rejoice in. He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly,
is able to dwell even with this devouring fire, as we are told, [Isa
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#014), [Isa
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#015). There are persons and works
that will abide the fire, [Co1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012),
etc., and some that will have confidence before God. 3. His continuance
in the cloud was no less wonderful; he was there forty days and forty
nights. It should seem, the six days ([Exo
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016)) were not part of the forty;
for, during those six days, Moses was with Joshua, who did eat of the
manna, and drink of the brook, mentioned, [Deu
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021), and while they were together it
is probable that Moses did eat and drink with him; but when Moses was
called into the midst of the cloud he left Joshua without, who continued
to eat and drink daily while he waited for Moses's return, but
thenceforward Moses fasted. Doubtless God could have said what he had
now to say to Moses in one day, but, for the greater solemnity of the
thing, he kept him with him in the mount forty days and forty nights. We
are hereby taught to spend much time in communion with God, and to think
that time best spent which is so spent. Those that would get the
knowledge of God's will must meditate thereon day and night.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 25](exo025)

</div>
