<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo001)  [Next](exo003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 2:0</span></span>

This chapter begins the story of Moses, that man of renown, famed for
his intimate acquaintance with Heaven and his eminent usefulness on
earth, and the most remarkable type of Christ, as a prophet, saviour,
lawgiver, and mediator, in all the Old Testament. The Jews have a book
among them of the life of Moses, which tells a great many stories
concerning him, which we have reason to think are mere fictions; what he
has recorded concerning himself is what we may rely upon, for we know
that his record is true; and it is what we may be satisfied with, for it
is what Infinite Wisdom thought fit to preserve and transmit to us. In
this chapter we have, I. The perils of his birth and infancy ([Exo
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)). II. His preservation through
those perils, and the preferment of his childhood and youth ([Exo
2:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#005)). III. The pious choice of his
riper years, which was to own the people of God. 1. He offered them his
service at present, if they would accept it ([Exo
2:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011)). 2. He retired, that he might
reserve himself for further service hereafter ([Exo
2:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)). IV. The dawning of the day
of Israel's deliverance ([Exo 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023),
etc.).

[Exodus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 2:1</span></span>

Moses was a Levite, both by father and mother. Jacob left Levi under
marks of disgrace ([Gen 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005)); and
yet, soon after, Moses appears a descendant from him, that he might
typify Christ, who came in the likeness of sinful flesh and was made a
curse for us. This tribe began to be distinguished from the rest by the
birth of Moses, as afterwards it became remarkable in many other
instances. Observe, concerning this newborn infant,

I. How he was hidden. It seems to have been just at the time of his
birth that the cruel law was made for the murder of all the male
children of the Hebrews; and many, no doubt, perished by the execution
of it. The parents of Moses had Miriam and Aaron, both older than he,
born to them before this edict came out, and had nursed them without
that peril: but those that begin the world in peace know not what
troubles they may meet with before they have got through it. Probably
the mother of Moses was full of anxiety in the expectation of his birth,
now that this edict was in force, and was ready to say, Blessed are the
barren that never bore, [Luk 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#029).
Better so than bring forth children to the murderer, [Hos
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#013). Yet this child proves the glory
of his father's house. Thus that which is most our fear often proves, in
the issue, most our joy. Observe the beauty of providence: just at the
time when Pharaoh's cruelty rose to this height the deliverer was born,
though he did not appear for many years after. Note, When men are
projecting the church's ruin God is preparing for its salvation. Moses,
who was afterwards to bring Israel out of this house of bondage, was
himself in danger of falling a sacrifice to the fury of the oppressor,
God so ordering it that, being afterwards told of this, he might be the
more animated with a holy zeal for the deliverance of his brethren out
of the hands of such bloody men. 1. His parents observed him to be a
goodly child, more than ordinarily beautiful; he was fair to God, [Act
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020). They fancied he had a lustre in
his countenance that was something more than human, and was a specimen
of the shining of his face afterwards, [Exo
34:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029). Note, God sometimes gives early
earnests of his gifts, and manifests himself betimes in those for whom
and by whom he designs to do great things. Thus he put an early strength
into Samson ([Jdg 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#024), [Jdg
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#025)), an early forwardness into
Samuel ([Sa1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018)), wrought an early
deliverance for David ([Sa1 17:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#037)),
and began betimes with Timothy, [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015). 2. Therefore they were the more
solicitous for his preservation, because they looked upon this as an
indication of some kind purpose of God concerning him, and a happy omen
of something great. Note, A lively active faith can take encouragement
from the least intimation of the divine favour; a merciful hint of
Providence will encourage those whose spirits make diligent search,
Three months they hid him in some private apartment of their own house,
though probably with the hazard of their own lives, had he been
discovered. Herein Moses was a type of Christ, who, in his infancy, was
forced to abscond, and in Egypt too ([Mat
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013)), and was wonderfully preserved,
when many innocents were butchered. It is said ([Heb
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#023)) that the parents of Moses hid
him by faith; some think they had a special revelation to them that the
deliverer should spring from their loins; however they had the general
promise of Israel's preservation, which they acted faith upon, and in
that faith hid their child, not being afraid of the penalty annexed to
the king's commandment. Note, Faith in God's promise is so far from
superseding that it rather excites and quickens to the use of lawful
means for the obtaining of mercy. Duty is ours, events are God's. Again,
Faith in God will set us above the ensnaring fear of man.

II\. How he was exposed. At three months' end, probably when the
searchers came about to look for concealed children, so that they could
not hide him any longer (their faith perhaps beginning now to fail),
they put him in an ark of bulrushes by the river's brink ([Exo
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#003)), and set his little sister at
some distance to watch what would become of him, and into whose hands he
would fall, [Exo 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#004). God put it into
their hearts to do this, to bring about his own purposes, that Moses
might by this means be brought into the hands of Pharaoh's daughter, and
that by his deliverance from this imminent danger a specimen might be
given of the deliverance of God's church, which now lay thus exposed.
Note, 1. God takes special care of the outcasts of Israel ([Psa
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002)); they are his outcasts, [Isa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#004). Moses seemed quite abandoned by
his friends; his own mother durst not own him: but now the Lord took him
up and protected him, [Psa 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#010). 2.
In times of extreme difficulty it is good to venture upon the providence
of God. Thus to have exposed their child while they might have preserved
it, would have been to tempt Providence; but, when they could not, it
was to trust to Providence. "Nothing venture, nothing win." If I perish,
I perish.

[Exodus 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 2:5</span></span>

Here is, I. Moses saved from perishing. Come see the place where that
great man lay when he was a little child; he lay in a bulrush-basket by
the river's side. Had he been left to lie there, he must have perished
in a little time with hunger, if he had not been sooner washed into the
river or devoured by a crocodile. Had he fallen into any other hands
than those he did fall into, either they would not, or durst not, have
done otherwise than have thrown him straightway into the river; but
Providence brings no less a person thither than Pharaoh's daughter, just
at that juncture, guides her to the place where this poor forlorn infant
lay, and inclines her heart to pity it, which she dares do when none
else durst. Never did poor child cry so seasonably, so happily, as this
did: The babe wept, which moved the compassion of the princess, as no
doubt his beauty did, [Exo 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#005), [Exo
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#006). Note, 1. Those are hard-hearted
indeed that have not a tender compassion for helpless infancy. How
pathetically does God represent his compassion for the Israelites in
general considered in this pitiable state! [Eze
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#005), [Eze
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006). 2. It is very commendable in
persons of quality to take cognizance of the distresses of the meanest,
and to be helpful and charitable to them. 3. God's care of us in our
infancy ought to be often made mention of by us to his praise. Though we
were not thus exposed (that we were not was God's mercy) yet many were
the perils we were surrounded with in our infancy, out of which the Lord
delivered us, [Psa 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009), [Psa
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010). 4. God often raises up friends
for his people even among their enemies. Pharaoh cruelly seeks Israel's
destruction, but his own daughter charitably compassionates a Hebrew
child, and not only so, but, beyond her intention, preserves Israel's
deliverer. O Lord, how wonderful are thy counsels!

II\. Moses well provided with a good nurse, no worse than his own dear
mother, [Exo 2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#007). Pharaoh's daughter
thinks it convenient that he should have a Hebrew nurse (pity that so
fair a child should be suckled by a sable Moor), and the sister of
Moses, with art and good management, introduces the mother into the
place of a nurse, to the great advantage of the child; for mothers are
the best nurses, and those who receive the blessings of the breasts with
those of the womb are not just if they give them not to those for whose
sake they received them: it was also an unspeakable satisfaction to the
mother, who received her son as life from the dead, and now could enjoy
him without fear. The transport of her joy, upon this happy turn, we may
suppose sufficient to betray her to be the true mother (had there been
any suspicion of it) to a less discerning eye than that of Solomon, [Kg1
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#027).

III\. Moses preferred to be the son of Pharaoh's daughter ([Exo
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010)), his parents herein perhaps not
only yielding to necessity, having nursed him for her, but too much
pleased with the honour thereby done to their son; for the smiles of the
world are stronger temptations than its frowns, and more difficult to
resist. The tradition of the Jews is that Pharaoh's daughter had no
child of her own, and that she was the only child of her father, so that
when he was adopted for her son he stood fair for the crown: however it
is certain he stood fair for the best preferments of the court in due
time, and in the mean time had the advantage of the best education and
improvements of the court, with the help of which, having a great
genius, he became master of all the lawful learning of the Egyptians,
[Act 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022). Note, 1. Providence pleases
itself sometimes in raising the poor out of the dust, to set them among
princes, [Psa 113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007), [Psa
113:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#008). Many who, by their birth, seem
marked for obscurity and poverty, by surprising events of Providence are
brought to sit at the upper end of the world, to make men know that the
heavens do rule. 2. Those whom God designs for great services he find
out ways to qualify and prepare beforehand. Moses, by having his
education in a court, is the fitter to be a prince and king in Jeshurun;
by having his education in a learned court (for such the Egyptian then
was) is the fitter to be an historian; and by having his education in
the court of Egypt is the fitter to be employed, in the name of God, as
an ambassador to that court.

IV\. Moses named. The Jews tell us that his father, at his circumcision,
called him Joachim, but Pharaoh's daughter called him Moses, Drawn out
of the water, so it signifies in the Egyptian language. The calling of
the Jewish lawgiver by an Egyptian name is a happy omen to the Gentile
world, and gives hopes of that day when it shall be said, Blessed be
Egypt my people, [Isa 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025). And his
tuition at court was an earnest of the performance of that promise, [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023), Kings shall be thy nursing
fathers, and queens thy nursing mothers.

[Exodus 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 2:11</span></span>

Moses had now passed the first forty years of his life in the court of
Pharaoh, preparing himself for business; and now it was time for him to
enter upon action, and,

I. He boldly owns and espouses the cause of God's people: When Moses was
grown he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens, [Exo
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011). The best exposition of these
words we have from an inspired pen, [Heb
11:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#024), where we are told that by
this he expressed, 1. His holy contempt of the honours and pleasures of
the Egyptian court; he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's
daughter, for he went out. The temptation was indeed very strong. He had
a fair opportunity (as we say) to make his fortune, and to have been
serviceable to Israel too, with his interest at court. He was obliged,
in gratitude as well as interest, to Pharaoh's daughter, and yet he
obtained a glorious victory by faith over his temptation. He reckoned it
much more his honour and advantage to be a son of Abraham than to be the
son of Pharaoh's daughter. 2. His tender concern for his poor brethren
in bondage, with whom (though he might easily have avoided it) he chose
to suffer affliction; he looked on their burdens as one that not only
pitied them, but was resolved to venture with them, and, if occasion
were, to venture for them.

II\. He gives a specimen of the great things he was afterwards to do for
God and his Israel in two little instances, related particularly by
Stephen ([Act 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#023), etc.) with design
to show how their fathers had always resisted the Holy Ghost (v. 51),
even in Moses himself, when he first appeared as their deliverer,
wilfully shutting their eyes against this day-break of their
enlargement. He found himself, no doubt, under a divine direction and
impulse in what he did, and that he was in an extraordinary manner
called of God to do it. Now observe,

1\. Moses was afterwards to be employed in plaguing the Egyptians for
the wrongs they had done to God's Israel; and, as a specimen of that, he
killed the Egyptian who smote the Hebrew ([Exo
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011), [Exo
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#012)); probably it was one of the
Egyptian taskmasters, whom he found abusing his Hebrew slave, a relation
(as some think) of Moses, a man of the same tribe. It was by special
warrant from Heaven (which makes not a precedent in ordinary cases) that
Moses slew the Egyptian, and rescued his oppressed brother. The Jew's
tradition is that he did not slay him with any weapon, but, as Peter
slew Ananias and Sapphira, with the word of his mouth. His hiding him in
the sand signified that hereafter Pharaoh and all his Egyptians should,
under the control of the rod of Moses, be buried in the sand of the Red
Sea. His taking care to execute this justice privately, when no man saw,
was a piece of needful prudence and caution, it being but an assay; and
perhaps his faith was as yet weak, and what he did was with some
hesitation. Those who come to be of great faith, yet began with a
little, and at first spoke tremblingly.

2\. Moses was afterwards to be employed in governing Israel, and as a
specimen of this, we have him here trying to end a controversy between
two Hebrews, in which he is forced (as he did afterwards for forty
years) to suffer their manners. Observe here,

(1.) The unhappy quarrel which Moses observed between two Hebrews, [Exo
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#013). It does not appear what was the
occasion; but, whatever it was, it was certainly very unseasonable for
Hebrews to strive with one another when they were all oppressed and
ruled with rigour by the Egyptians. Had they not beating enough from the
Egyptians, but they must beat one another? Note, \[1.\] Even sufferings
in common do not always unite God's professing people to one another, so
much as one might reasonably expect. \[2.\] When God raises up
instruments of salvation for the church they will find enough to do, not
only with oppressing Egyptians, to restrain them, but with quarrelsome
Israelites, to reconcile them.

(2.) The way he took of dealing with them; he marked him that caused the
division, that did the wrong, and mildly reasoned with him: Wherefore
smitest thou thy fellow? The injurious Egyptian was killed, the
injurious Hebrew was only reprimanded; for what the former did was from
a rooted malice, what the latter did we may suppose was only upon a
sudden provocation. The wise God makes, and, according to his example,
all wise governors make, a difference between one offender and another,
according to the several qualities of the same offence. Moses
endeavoured to make them friends, a good office; thus we find Christ
often reproving his disciples' strifes ([Luk
9:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#046), etc.; [Luk
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#024), etc.), for he was a prophet
like unto Moses, a healing prophet, a peacemaker, who visited his
brethren with a design to slay all enmities. The reproof Moses gave on
this occasion may still be of use, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?
Note, Smiting our fellows is bad in any, especially in Hebrews, smiting
with tongue or hand, either in a way of persecution or in a way of
strife and contention. Consider the person thou smitest; it is thy
fellow, thy fellow-creature, thy fellow-christian, it is thy
fellow-servant, thy fellow-sufferer. Consider the cause, Wherefore
smitest? Perhaps it is for no cause at all, or no just cause, or none
worth speaking of.

(3.) The ill success of his attempt (v. 14): He said, Who made thee a
prince? He that did the wrong thus quarrelled with Moses; the injured
party, it should seem, was inclinable enough to peace, but the
wrong-doer was thus touchy. Note, It is a sign of guilt to be impatient
of reproof; and it is often easier to persuade the injured to bear the
trouble of taking wrong than the injurious to bear the conviction of
having done wrong. [Co1 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007), [Co1
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#008). It was a very wise and mild
reproof which Moses gave to this quarrelsome Hebrew, but he could not
bear it, he kicked against the pricks ([Act
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005)), and crossed questions with his
reprover. \[1.\] He challenges his authority: Who made thee a prince? A
man needs no great authority for the giving of a friendly reproof, it is
an act of kindness; yet this man needs will interpret it an act of
dominion, and represents his reprover as imperious and assuming. Thus
when people dislike good discourse, or a seasonable admonition, they
will call it preaching, as if a man could not speak a work for God and
against sin but he took too much upon him. Yet Moses was indeed a prince
and a judge, and knew it, and thought the Hebrews would have understood
it, and struck in with him; but they stood in their own light, and
thrust him away, [Act 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#025), [Act
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#027). \[2.\] He upbraids him with what
he had done in killing the Egyptian: Intendest thou to kill me? See what
base constructions malice puts upon the best words and actions. Moses,
for reproving him is immediately charged with a design to kill him. An
attempt upon his sin was interpreted an attempt upon his life; and his
having killed the Egyptian was thought sufficient to justify the
suspicion; as if Moses made no difference between an Egyptian and a
Hebrew. If Moses, to right an injured Hebrew, had put his life in his
hand, and slain an Egyptian, he ought therefore to have submitted to
him, not only as a friend to the Hebrews, but as a friend that had more
than ordinary power and zeal. But he throws that in his teeth as a crime
which was bravely done, and was intended as a specimen of the promised
deliverance; if the Hebrews had taken the hint, and come in to Moses as
their head and captain, it is probable that they would have been
delivered now; but, despising their deliverer, their deliverance was
justly deferred, and their bondage prolonged forty years, as afterwards
their despising Canaan kept them out of it forty years more. I would,
and you would not. Note, Men know not what they do, nor what enemies
they are to their own interest, when they resist and despise faithful
reproofs and reprovers. When the Hebrews strove with Moses, God sent him
away into Midian, and they never heard of him for forty years; thus the
things that belonged to their peace were hidden from their eyes, because
they knew not the day of their visitation. As to Moses, we may look on
it as a great damp and discouragement to him. He was now choosing to
suffer affliction with the people of God, and embracing the reproach of
Christ; and now, at his first setting out, to meet with this affliction
and reproach from them was a very sore trial of his resolution. He might
have said, "If this be the spirit of the Hebrews, I will go to court
again, and be the son of Pharaoh's daughter." Note, First, We must take
heed of being prejudiced against the ways and people of God by the
follies and peevishness of some particular persons that profess
religion. Secondly, It is no new thing for the church's best friends to
meet with a great deal of opposition and discouragement in their
healing, saving attempts, even from their own mother's children; Christ
himself was set at nought by the builders, and is still rejected by
those he would save.

(4.) The flight of Moses to Midian, in consequence. The affront given
him thus far proved a kindness to him; it gave him to understand that
his killing the Egyptian was discovered, and so he had time to make his
escape, otherwise the wrath of Pharaoh might have surprised him and
taken him off. Note, God can overrule even the strife of tongues, so as,
one way or other, to bring good to his people out of it. Information was
brought to Pharaoh (and it is well if it was not brought by the Hebrew
himself whom Moses reproved) of his killing the Egyptian; warrants are
presently out for the apprehending of Moses, which obliged him to shift
for his own safety, by flying into the land of Midian, [Exo
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015). \[1.\] Moses did this out of a
prudent care of his own life. If this be his forsaking of Egypt which
the apostle refers to as done by faith ([Heb
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#027)), it teaches us that when we are
at any time in trouble and danger for doing our duty the grace of faith
will be of good use to us in taking proper methods for our own
preservation. Yet there it is said, He feared not the wrath of the king;
here it is said he feared, [Exo 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#014).
He did not fear with a fear of diffidence and amazement, which weakens
and has torment, but with a fear of diligence, which quickened him to
take that way which Providence opened to him for his own preservation.
\[2.\] God ordered it for wise and holy ends. Things were not yet ripe
for Israel's deliverance: the measure of Egypt's iniquity was not yet
full; the Hebrews were not sufficiently humbled, nor were they yet
increased to such a multitude as God designed; Moses is to be further
fitted for the service, and therefore is directed to withdraw for the
present, till the time to favour Israel, even the set time, should come.
God guided Moses to Midian because the Midianites were of the seed of
Abraham, and retained the worship of the true God among them, so that he
might have not only a safe but a comfortable settlement among them. And
through this country he was afterwards to lead Israel, with which (that
he might do it the better) he now had opportunity of making himself
acquainted. Hither he came, and sat down by a well, tired and
thoughtful, at a loss, and waiting to see which way Providence would
direct him. It was a great change with him, since he was but the other
day at ease in Pharaoh's court: thus God tried his faith, and it was
found to praise and honour.

[Exodus 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 2:16</span></span>

Moses here gains a settlement in Midian, just as his father Jacob had
gained one in Syria, [Gen 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#002), etc.
And both these instances should encourage us to trust Providence, and to
follow it. Events that seem inconsiderable, and purely accidental,
afterwards appear to have been designed by the wisdom of God for very
good purposes, and of great consequence to his people. A casual
transient occurrence has sometimes occasioned the greatest and happiest
turns of a man's life. Observe,

I. Concerning the seven daughters of Reuel the priest or prince of
Midian. 1. They were humble, and very industrious, according as the
employment of the country was: they drew water for their father's flock,
[Exo 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016). If their father was a
prince, it teaches us that even those who are honourably born, and are
of quality and distinction in their country, should yet apply themselves
to some useful business, and what their hand finds to do do it with all
their might. Idleness can be no one's honour. If their father was a
priest, it teaches us that ministers' children should, in a special
manner, be examples of humility and industry. 2. They were modest, and
would not ask this strange Egyptian to come home with them (though
handsome and a great courtier), till their father sent for him. Modesty
is the ornament of woman.

II\. Concerning Moses. He was taken for an Egyptian ([Exo
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#019)); and strangers must be content
to be the subjects of mistake; but it is observable, 1. How ready he was
to help Reuel's daughters to water their flocks. Though bred in learning
and at court, yet he knew how to turn his hand to such an office as this
when there was occasion; nor had he learned of the Egyptians to despise
shepherds. Note, Those that have had a liberal education yet should not
be strangers to servile work, because they know not what necessity
Providence may put them in of working for themselves, or what
opportunity Providence may give them of being serviceable to others.
These young women, it seems, met with some opposition in their
employment, more than they and their servants could conquer; the
shepherds of some neighbouring prince, as some think, or some idle
fellows that called themselves shepherds, drove away their flocks; but
Moses, though melancholy and in distress, stood up and helped them, not
only to get clear of the shepherds, but, when that was done, to water
the flocks. This he did, not only in complaisance to the daughters of
Reuel (though that also did very well become him), but because, wherever
he was, as occasion offered itself, (1.) He loved to be doing justice,
and appearing in the defence of such as he saw injured, which every man
ought to do as far as it is in the power of his hand to do it. (2.) He
loved to be doing good. Wherever the Providence of God casts us we
should desire and endeavour to be useful; and, when we cannot do the
good we would, we must be ready to do the good we can. And he that is
faithful in a little shall be entrusted with more. 2. How well he was
paid for his serviceableness. When the young women acquainted their
father with the kindnesses they had received from this stranger, he sent
to invite him to his house, and made much of him, [Exo
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#020). Thus God will recompense the
kindnesses which are at any time shown to his children; they shall in no
wise lose their reward. Moses soon recommended himself to the esteem and
good affection of this prince of Midian, who took him into his house,
and, in process of time, married one of his daughters to him ([Exo
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#021)), by whom he had a son, whom he
called Gershom, a stranger there ([Exo
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#022)), that if ever God should give
him a home of his own he might keep in remembrance the land in which he
had been a stranger. Now this settlement of Moses in Midian was designed
by Providence, (1.) To shelter him for the present. God will find
hiding-places for his people in the day of their distress; nay, he will
himself be to them a little sanctuary, and will secure them, either
under heaven or in heaven. But, (2.) It was also designed to prepare him
for the great services he was further designed for. His manner of life
in Midian, where he kept the flock of his father-in-law (having none of
his own to keep), would be of use to him, \[1.\] To inure him to
hardship and poverty, that he might learn how to want as well as how to
abound. Those whom God intends to exalt he first humbles. \[2.\] To
inure him to contemplation and devotion. Egypt accomplished him as a
scholar, a gentleman, a statesman, a soldier, all which accomplishments
would be afterwards of use to him; but yet he lacked one thing, in which
the court of Egypt could not befriend him. He that was to do all by
divine revelation must know, by a long experience, what it was to live a
life of communion with God; and in this he would be greatly furthered by
the solitude and retirement of a shepherd's life in Midian. By the
former he was prepared to rule in Jeshurun, but by the latter he was
prepared to converse with God in Mount Horeb, near which mount he had
spent much of his time. Those that know what it is to be alone with God
in holy exercises are acquainted with better delights than ever Moses
tasted in the court of Pharaoh.

[Exodus 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 2:23</span></span>

Here is, 1. The continuance of the Israelites' bondage in Egypt, [Exo
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023). Probably the murdering of their
infants did not continue; this part of their affliction attended only
the period immediately connected with the birth of Moses, and served to
signalize it. The Egyptians now were content with their increase,
finding that Egypt was enriched by their labour; so that they might have
them for slaves, they cared not how many they were. On this therefore
they were intent, to keep them all at work, and make the best hand they
could of their labour. When one Pharaoh died, another rose up in his
place that was governed by the same maxims, and was as cruel to Israel
as his predecessors. If there was sometimes a little relaxation, yet it
presently revived again with as much rigour as ever; and probably, as
the more Israel were oppressed the more they multiplied, so the more
they multiplied the more they were oppressed. Note, Sometimes God
suffers the rod of the wicked to lie very long and very heavily on the
lot of the righteous. If Moses, in Midian, at any time began to think
how much better his condition might have been had he staid among the
courtiers, he must of himself think this also, how much worse it would
have been if he had had his lot with brethren: it was a great
degradation to him to be keeping sheep in Midian, but better so than
making brick in Egypt. The consideration of our brethren's afflictions
would help to reconcile us to our own. 2. The preface to their
deliverance at last. (1.) They cried, [Exo
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023). Now, at last, they began to
think of God under their troubles, and to return to him from the idols
they had served, [Eze 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#008). Hitherto
they had fretted at the instruments of their trouble, but God was not in
all their thoughts. Thus hypocrites in heart heap up wrath; they cry not
when he binds them, [Job 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#013). But
before God unbound them he put it into their hearts to cry unto him, as
it is explained, [Num 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016). Note, It
is a good sign that God is coming towards us with deliverance when he
inclines and enables us to cry to him for it. (2.) God heard, [Exo
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#024), [Exo
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#025). The name of God is here
emphatically prefixed to four different expressions of a kind intention
towards them. \[1.\] God heard their groaning; that is, he made it to
appear that he took notice of their complaints. The groans of the
oppressed cry aloud in the ears of the righteous God, to whom vengeance
belongs, especially the groans of God's spiritual Israel; he knows the
burdens they groan under and the blessings they groan after, and that
the blessed Spirit, by these groanings, makes intercession in them.
\[2.\] God remembered his covenant, which he seemed to have forgotten,
but of which he is ever mindful. This God had an eye to, and not to any
merit of theirs, in what he did for them. See [Lev
26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042). (3.) God looked upon the
children of Israel. Moses looked upon them and pitied them ([Exo
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011)); but now God looked upon them
and helped them. (4.) God had a respect unto them, a favourable respect
to them as his own. The frequent repetition of the name of God here
intimates that now we are to expect something great, Opus Deo dignum - A
work worthy of God. His eyes, which run to and fro through the earth,
are now fixed upon Israel, to show himself strong, to show himself a God
in their behalf.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 3](exo003)

</div>
