<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo016)  [Next](exo018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 17:0</span></span>

Two passages of story are recorded in this chapter, I. The watering of
the host of Israel. 1. In the wilderness they wanted water ([Exo
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)). 2. In their want they chided
Moses ([Exo 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002), [Exo
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#003)). 3. Moses cried to God ([Exo
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004)). 4. God ordered him to smite the
rock, and fetch water out of that; Moses did so ([Exo
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#005), [Exo
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006)). 5. The place named from it
([Exo 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007)). II. The defeating of the
host of Amalek. 1. The victory obtained by the prayer of Moses ([Exo
17:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008)). 2. By the sword of Joshua
([Exo 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#013)). 3. A record kept of it
([Exo 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014), [Exo
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#016)). And these things which
happened to them are written for our instruction in our spiritual
journey and warfare.

[Exodus 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 17:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The strait that the children of Israel were in for want of
water; once before the were in the like distress, and now, a second
time, [Exo 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001). They journeyed
according to the commandment of the Lord, led by the pillar of cloud and
fire, and yet they came to a place where there was no water for them to
drink. Note, We may be in the way of our duty, and yet may meet with
troubles, which Providence brings us into for the trial of our faith,
and that God may be glorified in our relief.

II\. Their discontent and distrust in this strait. It is said ([Exo
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#003)), They thirsted there for water.
If they had no water to drink, they must needs thirst; but this
intimates, not only that they wanted water and felt the inconvenience of
that want, but that their passion sharpened their appetites and they
were violent and impatient in their desire; their thirst made them
outrageous. Natural desires, and those that are most craving, have need
to be kept under the check and control of religion and reason. See what
was the language of this inordinate desire. 1. They challenged Moses to
supply them ([Exo 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002)): Give us
water, that we may drink, demanding it as a debt, and strongly
suspecting that he was not able to discharge it. Because they were
supplied with bread, they insist upon it that they must be supplied with
water too; and indeed to those that by faith and prayer live a life of
dependence upon God one favour is an earnest of another, and may be
humbly pleaded; but the unthankful and unbelieving have reason to think
that the abuse of former favours is the forfeiture of further favours:
Let not them think that they shall receive any thing ([Jam
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#007)), yet they are ready to demand
every thing. 2. They quarrelled with him for bringing them out of Egypt,
as if, instead of delivering them, he designed to murder them, than
which nothing could be more base and invidious, [Exo
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#003). Many that have not only designed
well, but done well, for their generation, have had their best services
thus misconstrued, and their patience thereby tried, by unthinking
unthankful people. To such a degree their malice against Moses rose that
they were almost ready to stone him, [Exo
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004). Many good works he had shown
them; and for which of these would they stone him? [Joh
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#032). Ungoverned passions, provoked
by the crossing of unbridled appetites, sometimes make men guilty of the
greatest absurdities, and act like madmen, that cast firebrands, arrows,
and death, among their best friends. 3. They began to question whether
God were with them or not: They tempted the Lord, saying, "Is the Lord
among us or not? [Exo 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007). Is Jehovah
among us by that name by which he made himself known to us in Egypt?"
They question his essential presence - whether there was a God or not;
his common providence - whether that God governed the world; and his
special promise - whether he would be as good as his word to them. This
is called their tempting God, which signifies, not only a distrust of
God in general, but a distrust of him after they had received such
proofs of his power and goodness, for the confirmation of his promise.
They do, in effect, suppose that Moses was an impostor, Aaron a
deceiver, the pillar of cloud and fire a mere sham and illusion, which
imposed upon their senses, that long series of miracles which had
rescued them, served them, and fed them, a chain of cheats, and the
promise of Canaan a banter upon them; it was all so, if the Lord was not
among them. Note, It is a great provocation to God for us to question
his presence, providence, or promise, especially for his Israel to do
it, who are so peculiarly bound to trust him.

III\. The course that Moses took, when he was thus set upon, and
insulted. 1. He reproved the murmurers ([Exo
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002)): Why chide you with me? Observe
how mildly he answered them; it was well that he was a man of
extraordinary meekness, else their tumultuous conduct would have made
him lose the possession of himself: it is folly to answer passion with
passion, for that makes bad worse; but soft answers turn away wrath. He
showed them whom their murmurings reflected upon, and that the
reproaches they cast on him fell on God himself: You tempt the Lord;
that is, "By distrusting his power, you try his patience, and so provoke
his wrath." 2. He made his complaint to God ([Exo
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004)): Moses cried unto the Lord. This
servant came, and showed his Lord all these things, [Luk
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#021). When men unjustly censure us
and quarrel with us, it will be a great relief to us to go to God, and
by prayer lay the case before him and leave it with him: if men will not
hear us, God will; if their bad conduct towards us ruffle our spirits,
God's consolations will compose them. Moses begs of God to direct him
what he should do, for he was utterly at a loss; he could not of himself
either supply their want or pacify their tumult; God only could do it.
He pleads his own peril: "They are almost ready to stone me; Lord, if
thou hast any regard to the life of thy poor servant, interpose now."

IV\. God's gracious appearance for their relief, [Luk
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#005), [Luk
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#006). He orders Moses to go on before
the people, and venture himself in his post, though they spoke of
stoning him. He must take his rod with him, not (as God might justly
have ordered) to summon some plague or other to chastise them for their
distrust and murmuring, but to fetch water for their supply. O the
wonderful patience and forbearance of God towards provoking sinners! He
loads those with benefits that make him to serve with their sins,
maintains those that are at war with him, and reaches out the hand of
his bounty to those that lift up the heel against him. Thus he teaches
us, if our enemy hunger, to feed him, and if he thirst, as Israel did
now, to give him drink, [Rom 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020);
[Mat 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044), [Mat
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045). Will he fail those that trust
him, when he was so liberal even to those that tempted him? If God had
only shown Moses a fountain of water in the wilderness, as he did Hagar
not far hence ([Gen 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#019)), that would
have been a great favour; but that he might show his power as well as
his pity, and make it a miracle of mercy, he gave them water out of a
rock. He directed Moses whither to go, and appointed him to take some of
the elders of Israel with him, to be witnesses of what was done, that
they might themselves be satisfied, and might satisfy others, of the
certainty of God's presence with them. He promised to meet him there in
the cloud of glory (to encourage him), and ordered him to smite the
rock; Moses obeyed, and immediately water came out of the rock in great
abundance, which ran throughout the camp in streams and rivers ([Psa
78:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015), [Psa
78:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#016)), and followed them wherever
they went in that wilderness: it is called a fountain of waters, [Psa
114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008). God showed the care he took of
his people in giving them water when they wanted it; he showed his power
in fetching the water out of a rock; and he put an honour upon Moses in
appointing the water to flow out upon his smiting the rock. This fair
water, that came out of the rock, is called honey and oil ([Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)), because the people's thirst
made it doubly pleasant; coming when they were in extreme want, it was
like honey and oil to them. It is probable that the people digged canals
for the conveyance of it, and pools for the reception of it, in like
manner as, long afterwards, passing through the valley of Baca, they
made it a well, [Psa 84:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006); [Num
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#018). Let this direct us to live in a
dependence, 1. Upon God's providence, even in the greatest straits and
difficulties. God can open fountains for our supply where we least
expect them, waters in the wilderness ([Isa
43:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#020)), because he makes a way in the
wilderness, v. 19. Those who, in this wilderness, keep to God's way, may
trust him to provide for them. While we follow the pillar of cloud and
fire, surely goodness and mercy shall follow us, like the water out of
the rock. 2. Upon Christ's grace: That rock was Christ, [Co1
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004). The graces and comforts of the
Spirit are compared to rivers of living water, [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038), [Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039); [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014). These flow from Christ, who is
the rock smitten by the law of Moses, for he was made under the law.
Nothing will supply the needs, and satisfy the desires, of a soul, but
water out of this rock, this fountain opened. The pleasures of sense are
puddle-water; spiritual delights are rock-water, so pure, so clear, so
refreshing - rivers of pleasure.

V. A new name was, upon this occasion, given to the place, preserving
the remembrance, not of the mercy of their supply (the water that
followed them was sufficient to do that), but of the sin of their
murmuring - Massah, temptation, because they tempted God; Meribah,
strife, because they chid with Moses, [Exo
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007). There was thus a remembrance
kept of sin, both for the disgrace of the sinners themselves (sin leaves
a blot upon the name) and for warning to their seed to take heed of
sinning after the similitude of their transgression.

[Exodus 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 17:8</span></span>

We have here the story of the war with Amalek, which, we may suppose,
was the first that was recorded in the book of the wars of the Lord,
[Num 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#014). Amalek was the first of
the nations that Israel fought with, [Num
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020). Observe,

I. Amalek's attempt: They came out, and fought with Israel, [Exo
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008). The Amalekites were the
posterity of Esau, who hated Jacob because of the birthright and
blessing, and this was an effort of the hereditary enmity, a malice that
ran in the blood, and perhaps was now exasperated by the working of the
promise towards an accomplishment. Consider this, 1. As Israel's
affliction. They had been quarrelling with Moses ([Exo
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002)), and now God sends Amalekites to
quarrel with them; wars abroad are the just punishment of strifes and
discontents at home. 2. As Amalek's sin; so it is reckoned, [Deu
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#017), [Deu
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#018). They did not boldly front them
as a generous enemy, but without any provocation given by Israel, or
challenge given to them, basely fell upon their rear, and smote those
that were faint and feeble and could neither make resistance nor escape.
Herein they bade defiance to that power which had so lately ruined the
Egyptians; but in vain did they attack a camp guarded and victualled by
miracles: verily they knew not what they did.

II\. Israel's engagement with Amalek, in their own necessary defence
against the aggressors. Observe,

1\. The post assigned to Joshua, of whom this is the first mention: he
is nominated commander-in-chief in this expedition, that he might be
trained up to the services he was designed for after the death of Moses,
and be a man of war from his youth. He is ordered to draw out a
detachment of choice men from the thousands of Israel and to drive back
the Amalekites, [Exo 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009). When the
Egyptians pursued them Israel must stand still and see what God would
do; but now it was required that they should bestir themselves. Note,
God is to be trusted in the use of means.

2\. The post assumed by Moses: I will stand on the top of the hill with
the rod of God in my hand, [Exo 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009).
See how God qualifies his people for, and calls them to, various
services for the good of his church: Joshua fights, Moses prays, and
both minister to Israel. Moses went up to the top of the hill, and
placed himself, probably, so as to be seen by Israel; there he held up
the rod of God in his hand, that wonder-working rod which had summoned
the plagues of Egypt, and under which Israel had passed out of the house
of bondage. This rod Moses held up to Israel, to animate them; the rod
was held up as the banner to encourage the soldiers, who might look up,
and say, "Yonder is the rod, and yonder the hand that used it, when such
glorious things were wrought for us." Note, It tends much to the
encouragement of faith to reflect upon the great things God has done for
us, and review the monuments of his favours. Moses also held up this rod
to God, by way of appeal to him: "Is not the battle the Lord's? Is not
he able to help, and engaged to help? Witness this rod, the voice of
which, thus held up, is ([Isa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009),
[Isa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#010)), Put on strength, O arm of
the Lord; art not thou it that hath cut Rahab?" Moses was not only a
standard-bearer, but an intercessor, pleading with God for success and
victory. Note, When the host goes forth against the enemy earnest
prayers should be made to the God of hosts for his presence with them.
It is here the praying legion that proves the thundering legion. There,
in Salem, in Sion where prayers were made, there the victory was won,
there broke the arrows of the bow, [Psa
76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002), [Psa
76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003). Observe, (1.) How Moses was
tired ([Exo 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012)): His hands were
heavy. The strongest arm will fail with being long extended; it is God
only whose hand is stretched out still. We do not find that Joshua's
hands were heavy in fighting, but Moses's hands were heavy in praying.
The more spiritual any service is the more apt we are to fail and flag
in it. Praying work, if done with due intenseness of mind and vigour of
affection, will be found hard work, and, though the spirit be willing,
the flesh will be weak. Our great Intercessor in heaven faints not, nor
is he weary, though he attends continually to this very thing. (2.) What
influence the rod of Moses had upon the battle (v. 11): When Moses held
up his hand in prayer (so the Chaldee explains it) Israel prevailed,
but, when he let down his hand from prayer, Amalek prevailed. To
convince Israel that the hand of Moses (with whom they had just now been
chiding) contributed more to their safety than their own hands, his rod
than their sword, the success rises and falls as Moses lifts up or lets
down his hands. It seems, the scale wavered for some time, before it
turned on Israel's side. Even the best cause must expect disappointments
as an alloy to its successes; though the battle be the Lord's, Amalek
may prevail for a time. The reason was, Moses let down his hands. Note,
The church's cause is, commonly, more or less successful according as
the church's friends are more or less strong in faith and fervent in
prayer. (3.) The care that was taken for the support of Moses. When he
could not stand any longer he sat down, not in a chair of state, but
upon a stone (v. 12); when he could not hold up his hands, he would have
them held up. Moses, the man of God, is glad of the assistance of Aaron
his brother, and Hur, who, some think, was his brother-in-law, the
husband of Miriam. We should not be shy either of asking help from
others or giving help to others, for we are members one of another.
Moses's hands, thus stayed, were steady till the going down of the sun;
and, though it was with much ado that he held out, yet his willing mind
was accepted. No doubt it was a great encouragement to the people to see
Joshua before them in the field of battle and Moses above them upon the
top of the hill: Christ is both to us - our Joshua, the captain of our
salvation who fights our battles, and our Moses, who, in the upper
world, ever lives making intercession, that our faith fail not.

III\. The defeat of Amalek. Victory had hovered awhile between the
camps; sometimes Israel prevailed and sometimes Amalek, but Israel
carried the day, v. 13. Though Joshua fought with great disadvantages -
his soldiers undisciplined, ill-armed, long inured to servitude, and apt
to murmur; yet by them God wrought a great salvation, and made Amalek
pay dearly for his insolence. Note, Weapons formed against God's Israel
cannot prosper long, and shall be broken at last. The cause of God and
his Israel will be victorious. Though God gave the victory, yet it is
said, Joshua discomfited Amalek, because Joshua was a type of Christ,
and of the same name, and in him it is that we are more than conquerors.
It was his arm alone that spoiled principalities and powers, and routed
all their force.

IV\. The trophies of this victory set up. 1. Moses took care that God
should have the glory of it (v. 15); instead of setting up a triumphal
arch, to the honour of Joshua (though it had been a laudable policy to
put marks of honour upon him), he builds an altar to the honour of God,
and we may suppose it was not an altar without sacrifice; but that which
is most carefully recorded is the inscription upon the altar,
Jehovah-nissi - The Lord is my banner, which probably refers to the
lifting up of the rod of God as a banner in this action. The presence
and power of Jehovah were the banner under which they enlisted, by which
they were animated and kept together, and therefore which they erected
in the day of their triumph. In the name of our God we must always lift
up our banners, [Psa 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005). It is fit
that he who does all the work should have all the praise. 2. God took
care that posterity should have the comfort and benefit of it: "Write
this for a memorial, not in loose papers, but in a book, write it, and
then rehearse it in the ears of Joshua, let him be entrusted with this
memorial, to transmit it to the generations to come." Moses must now
begin to keep a diary or journal of occurrences; it is the first mention
of writing that we find in scripture, and perhaps the command was not
given till after the writing of the law upon the tables of stone: "Write
it in perpetuam rei memoriam - that the event may be had in perpetual
remembrance; that which is written remains." (1.) "Write what has been
done, what Amalek has done against Israel; write in gall their bitter
hatred, write in blood their cruel attempts, let them never be
forgotten, nor yet what God has done for Israel in saving them from
Amalek. Let ages to come know that God fights for his people, and he
that touches them touches the apple of his eye." (2.) Write what shall
be done. \[1.\] That in process of time Amalek shall be totally ruined
and rooted out ([Exo 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014)), that he
shall be remembered only in history." Amalek would have cut off the name
of Israel, that it might be no more in remembrance ([Psa
83:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#004), [Psa
83:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#007)); and therefore God not only
disappoints him in this, but cuts off his name. "Write it for the
encouragement of Israel, whenever the Amalekites are an annoyance to
them, that Israel will at last undoubtedly triumph in the fall of
Amalek." This sentence was executed in part by Saul (1 Sa. 15), and
completely by David (ch. 30; [Sa2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001);
[Sa2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012)); after his time we never
read so much as of the name of Amalek. \[2.\] This is the mean time God
would have a continual controversy with him (v. 16): Because his hand is
upon the throne of the Lord, that is, against the camp of Israel in
which the Lord ruled, which was the place of his sanctuary, and is
therefore called a glorious high throne from the beginning ([Jer
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)); therefore the Lord will have
war with Amalek from generation to generation. This was written for
direction to Israel never to make any league with the Amalekites, but to
look upon them as irreconcilable enemies, doomed to ruin. Amalek's
destruction was typical of the destruction of all the enemies of Christ
and his kingdom. Whoever make war with the Lamb, the Lamb will overcome
them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 18](exo018)

</div>
