<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo012)  [Next](exo014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 13:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The commands God gave to Israel, 1. To
sanctify all their firstborn to him ([Exo
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001), [Exo
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002)). 2. To be sure to remember their
deliverance out of Egypt ([Exo 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003),
[Exo 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#004)), and, in remembrance of it,
to keep the feast of unleavened bread ([Exo
13:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005)). 3. To transmit the knowledge
of it with all possible care to their children ([Exo
13:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#008)). 4. To set apart unto God the
firstlings of their cattle ([Exo
13:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011)), and to explain that also to
their children ([Exo 13:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#014)). II.
The care God took of Israel, when he had brought them out of Egypt. I.
Choosing their way for them ([Exo
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017), [Exo
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018)). 2. Guiding them in the way
([Exo 13:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020)). And III. Their care
of Joseph's bones ([Exo 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019)).

[Exodus 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 13:1</span></span>

Care is here taken to perpetuate the remembrance,

I. Of the preservation of Israel's firstborn, when the firstborn of the
Egyptians were slain. In memory of that distinguishing favour, and in
gratitude for it, the firstborn, in all ages, were to be consecrated to
God, as his peculiars ([Exo 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002)), and
to be redeemed, [Exo 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#013). God, who
by the right of creation is proprietor and sovereign of all the
creatures, here lays claim in particular to the firstborn of the
Israelites, by right of protection: Sanctify to me all the firstborn.
The parents were not to look upon themselves as interested in their
firstborn, till they had first solemnly presented them to God,
recognized his title to them, and received them back, at a certain rate,
from him again. Note, 1. That which is by special distinguishing mercy
spared to us should be in a peculiar manner dedicated to God's honour;
at least some grateful acknowledgment, in works of piety and charity,
should be made, when our lives, or the lives of our children, have been
given us for a prey. 2. God, who is the first and best, should have the
first and best, and to him we should resign that which is most dear to
us, and most valuable. The firstborn were the joy and hope of their
families. Therefore they shall be mine, says God. By this is will appear
that we love God best (as we ought) if we are willing to part with that
to him which we love best in this world. 3. It is the church of the
firstborn that is sanctified to God, [Heb
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023). Christ it the firstborn among
many brethren ([Rom 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)), and, by
virtue of their union with him, all that are born again, and born from
above, are accounted as firstborn. There is an excellency of dignity and
power belonging to them; and, if children, then heirs.

II\. The remembrance of their coming out of Egypt must also be
perpetuated: "Remember this day, [Exo
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003). Remember it by a good token, as
the most remarkable day of your lives, the birthday of your nation, or
the day of its coming of age, to be no longer under the rod." Thus the
day of Christ's resurrection is to be remembered, for in it we were
raised up with Christ out of death's house of bondage. The scripture
tells us not expressly what day of the year Christ rose (as Moses told
the Israelites what day of the year they were brought out of Egypt, that
they might remember it yearly), but very particularly what day of the
week it was, plainly intimating that, as the more valuable deliverance,
and of greater importance, it should be remembered weekly. Remember it,
for by strength of hand the Lord brought you out. Note, The more of God
and his power appears in any deliverance, the more memorable it is. Now,
that it might be remembered,

1\. They must be sure to keep the feast of unleavened bread, [Exo
13:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005). It was not enough that they
remembered it, but they must celebrate the memorial of it in that way
which God had appointed, and use the instituted means of preserving the
remembrance of it. So, under the gospel, we must not only remember
Christ, but do this in remembrance of him. Observe, How strict the
prohibition of leaven is ([Exo 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#007));
not only no leaven must be eaten, but none must be seen, no, not in all
their quarters. Accordingly, the Jews' usage was, before the feast of
the passover, to cast all the leavened bread out of their houses: they
burnt it, or buried it, or broke it small and scattered it in the wind;
they searched diligently with lighted candles in all the corners of
their houses, lest any leaven should remain. The care and strictness
enjoined in this matter were designed, (1.) To make the feast the more
solemn, and consequently the more taken notice of by their children, who
would ask, "Why is so much ado made?" (2.) To teach us how solicitous we
should be to put away from us all sin, [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007).

2\. They must instruct their children in the meaning of it, and relate
to them the story of their deliverance out of Egypt, [Exo
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#008). Note, (1.) Care must be taken
betimes to instruct children in the knowledge of God. Here is an ancient
law for catechising. (2.) It is particularly of great use to acquaint
children betimes with the stories of the scripture, and to make them
familiar to them. (3.) It is a debt we owe to the honour of God, and to
the benefit of our children's souls, to tell them of the great works God
has done for his church, both those which we have seen with our eyes
done in our day and which we have heard with our ears and our fathers
have told us: Thou shalt show thy son in that day (the day of the feast)
these things. When they were celebrating the ordinance, they must
explain it. Every thing is beautiful in its season. The passover is
appointed for a sign, and for a memorial, that the Lord's law may be in
thy mouth. Note, We must retain the remembrance of God's works, that we
may remain under the influence of God's law. And those that have God's
law in their heart should have it in their mouth, and be often speaking
of it, the more to affect themselves and to instruct others.

[Exodus 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 13:11</span></span>

Here we have,

I. Further directions concerning the dedicating of their firstborn to
God. 1. The firstlings of their cattle were to be dedicated to God, as
part of their possessions. Those of clean beasts - calves, lambs, and
kids - if males, were to be sacrificed, [Exo
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030); [Num
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#017), [Num
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#018). Those of unclean beasts, as
colts, were to be redeemed with a lamb, or knocked on the head. For
whatsoever is unclean (as we all are by nature), if it be not redeemed,
will be destroyed, [Exo 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011), [Exo
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#013). 2. The firstborn of their
children were to be redeemed, and by no means sacrificed, as the
Gentiles sacrificed their children to Moloch. The price of the
redemption of the firstborn was fixed by the law ([Num
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#016)) at five sheckles. We were all
obnoxious to the wrath and curse of God; by the blood of Christ we are
redeemed, that we may be joined to the church of the firstborn. They
were to redeem their children, as well as the firstlings of the unclean
beasts, for our children are by nature polluted. Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean?

II\. Further directions concerning the catechising of their children,
and all those of the rising generation, from time to time, in this
matter. It is supposed that, when they saw all the firstlings thus
devoted, they would ask the meaning of it, and their parents and
teachers must tell them ([Exo
13:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#014)) that God's special propriety
in their firstborn, and all their firstlings, was founded in his special
preservation of them from the sword of the destroying angel. Being thus
delivered, they must serve him. Note, 1. Children should be directed and
encouraged to ask their parents questions concerning the things of God,
a practice which would be perhaps of all others the most profitable way
of catechising; and parents must furnish themselves with useful
knowledge, that they may be ready always to give an answer to their
enquiries. If ever the knowledge of God cover the earth, as the waters
do the sea, the fountains of family-instruction must first be broken up.
2. We should all be able to show cause for what we do in religion. As
sacraments are sanctified by the word, so they must be explained and
understood by it. God's service is reasonable, and it is then acceptable
when we perform it intelligently, knowing what we do and why we do it.
3. It must be observed how often it is said in this chapter that by
strength of hand ([Exo 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003), [Exo
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#014), [Exo
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016)), with a strong hand ([Exo
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#009)), the Lord brought them out of
Egypt. The more opposition is given to the accomplishment of God's
purposes the more is his power magnified therein. It is a strong hand
that conquers hard hearts. Sometimes God is said to work deliverance not
by might nor power ([Zac 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#006)), not by
such visible displays of his power as that recorded here. 4. Their
posterity that should be born in Canaan are directed to say, The Lord
brought us out of Egypt, [Exo 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#014),
[Exo 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016). Mercies to our fathers are
mercies to us; we reap the benefit of them, and therefore must keep up a
grateful remembrance of them. We stand upon the bottom of former
deliverances, and were in the loins of our ancestors when they were
delivered. Much more reason have we to say that in the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ we were redeemed.

[Exodus 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 13:17</span></span>

Here is, I. The choice God made of their way, [Exo
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017), [Exo
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018). He was their guide. Moses gave
them direction but as he received it from the Lord. Note, The way of man
is not in himself, [Jer 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023). He may
devise his way, and design it; but, after all, it is God that directs
his steps, [Pro 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#009). Man proposes,
but God disposes, and in his disposal we must acquiesce, and set
ourselves to follow providence. There were two ways from Egypt to
Canaan. One was a short cut from the north of Egypt to the south of
Canaan, perhaps about four or five days' journey; the other was much
further about, through the wilderness, and that was the way in which God
chose to lead his people Israel, [Exo
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018). 1. There were many reasons why
God led them through the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea. The
Egyptians were to be drowned in the Red Sea. The Israelites were to be
humbled and proved in the wilderness, [Deu
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002). God had given it to Moses for a
sign ([Exo 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012)), You shall serve God
in this mountain. They had again and again told Pharaoh that they must
go three days' journey into the wilderness to do sacrifice, and
therefore it was requisite that they should bend their march that way,
else they would justly have been exclaimed against as notorious
dissemblers. Before they entered the lists with their enemies, matters
must be settled between them and their God, laws must be given,
ordinances instituted, covenants sealed, and the original contract
ratified, for the doing of which it was necessary that they should
retire into the solitudes of a wilderness, the only closet for such a
crowd; the high road would be no proper place for these transactions. It
is said ([Deu 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010)), He led them
about, some hundreds of miles about, and yet ([Psa
107:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#007)), He led them forth by the right
way. God's way is the right way, though it seem about. If we think he
leads not his people the nearest way, yet we may be sure he leads them
the best way, and so it will appear when we come to our journey's end.
Judge nothing before the time. 2. There was one reason why God did not
lead them the nearest way, which would have brought them after a few
days' march to the land of the Philistines (for it was that part of
Canaan that lay next to Egypt), namely, because they were not as yet fit
for war, much less for war with the Philistines, [Exo
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017). Their spirits were broken with
slavery; it was not easy for them to turn their hands of a sudden from
the trowel to the sword. The Philistines were formidable enemies, too
fierce to be encountered by raw recruits; it was more suitable that they
should begin with the Amalekites, and be prepared for the wars of Canaan
by experiencing the difficulties of the wilderness. Note, God
proportions his people's trials to their strength, and will not suffer
them to be tempted above what they are able, [Co1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013). That promise, if compared with
the foregoing verses, will seem to refer to this event, as an instance
of it. God knows our frame, and considers our weakness and
faintheartedness, and by less trials will prepare us for greater. God is
said to bring Israel out of Egypt as the eagle brings up her young ones
([Deu 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)), teaching them by degrees
to fly. Orders being thus given which way they should go, we are told,
(1.) That they went up themselves, not as a confused rout, but in good
order, rank and file: they went up harnessed, [Exo
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018). They went up by five in a rank
(so some), in five squadrons, so others. They marched like an army with
banners, which added much to their strength and honour. (2.) That they
took the bones of Joseph along with them ([Exo
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019)), and probably the bones of the
rest of Jacob's sons, unless (as some think) they had been privately
carried to Canaan ([Act 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016)),
severally as they died. Joseph had particularly appointed that his bones
should be carried up when God should visit the ([Gen
50:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#025), [Gen
50:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#026)), so that their carrying up his
bones was not only a performance of the oath their fathers had sworn to
Joseph, but an acknowledgment of the performance of God's promise to
them by Joseph that he would visit them and bring them out of the land
of Egypt, and an encouragement to their faith and hope that he would
fulfil the other part of the promise, which was to bring them to Canaan,
in expectation of which they carried these bones with them while they
wandered in the desert. They might think, "Joseph's bones must rest at
last, and then we shall." Moses is said to take these bones with him.
Moses was now a very great man; so had Joseph been in his day, yet he
was now but a box full of dry bones; this was all that remained of him
in this world, which might serve for a monitor to Moses to remember his
mortality. I have said, You are gods; it was said so to Moses expressly
([Exo 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)); but you shall die like
men.

II\. Here is the guidance they were blessed with in the way: The Lord
went before them in a pillar, [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021), [Exo
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#022). In the first two stages it was
enough that God directed Moses whither to march: he knew the country and
the road well enough; but now that they had come to the edge of the
wilderness ([Exo 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020)) they would
have occasion for a guide; and a very good guide they had, one that was
infinitely wise, kind, and faithful: The Lord went before them, the
shechinah (or appearance of the divine Majesty, which was typical of
Christ) or a previous manifestation of the eternal Word, which, in the
fulness of time, was to be made flesh, and dwell among us. Christ was
with the church in the wilderness, [Co1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009). Now their King passed before
them, even the Lord on the head of them, [Mic
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#013). Note, Those whom God brings into
a wilderness he will not leave nor lose there, but will take care to
lead them through it; we may well think it was a very great satisfaction
to Moses and the pious Israelites to be sure that they were under divine
guidance. Those needed not to fear missing their way who were thus led,
nor being lost who were thus directed; those needed not to fear being
benighted who were thus illuminated, nor being robbed who were thus
protected. Those who make the glory of God their end, and the word of
God their rule, the Spirit of God the guide of their affections, and the
providence of God the guide of their affairs, may be confident that the
Lord goes before them, as truly as he went before Israel in the
wilderness, though not so sensibly; we must live by faith. 1. They had
sensible evidences of God's going before them. They all saw an
appearance from heaven of a pillar, which in the bright day appeared
cloudy, and in the dark night appeared fiery. We commonly see that that
which is a flame in the night is a smoke in the day; so was this. God
gave them this ocular demonstration of his presence, in compassion to
the infirmity of their faith, and in compliance with that infant state
of the church, which needed to be thus lisped to in their own language;
but blessed are those that have not seen and yet have believed God's
gracious presence with them, according to his promise. 2. They had
sensible effects of God's going before them in this pillar. For, (1.) It
led the way in that vast howling wilderness, in which there was no road,
no track, no way-mark, of which they had no maps, through which they had
no guides. When they marched, this pillar went before them, at the rate
that they could follow, and appointed the place of their encampment, as
Infinite Wisdom saw fit, which both eased them from care, and secured
them from danger, both in moving and in resting. (2.) It sheltered them
by day from the heat, which, at some times of the year, was extreme.
(3.) It gave them light by night when they had occasion for it, and at
all times made their camp pleasant and the wilderness they were in less
frightful.

III\. These were constant standing miracles ([Exo
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#022)): He took not away the pillar of
cloud; no, not when they seemed to have less occasion for it, travelling
through inhabited countries, no, not when they murmured and were
provoking; it never left them, till it brought them to the borders of
Canaan. It was a cloud which the wind could not scatter. This favour is
acknowledged with thankfulness long afterwards, [Neh
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#019); [Psa
78:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#014). There was something spiritual
in this pillar of cloud and fire. 1. The children of Israel were
baptized unto Moses in this cloud, which, some think, distilled dew upon
them, [Co1 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002). By coming under this
cloud, they signified their putting themselves under the divine guidance
and command by the ministry of Moses. Protection draws allegiance; this
cloud was the badge of God's protection, and so became the bond of their
allegiance. Thus they were initiated, and admitted under that
government, now when they were entering upon the wilderness. 2. Some
make this cloud a type f Christ. The cloud of his human nature was a
veil to the light and fire of his divine nature; we find him ([Rev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001)) clothed with a cloud, and his
feet as pillars of fire. Christ is our way, the light of our way and the
guide of it. 3. It signified the special guidance and protection which
the church of Christ is under in this world. God himself is the keeper
of Israel, and he neither slumbers nor sleeps, [Psa
121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004); [Isa
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003). There is a defence created, not
only on Sion's assemblies, but on every dwelling-place in Sion. See [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005), [Isa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006). Nay, every Israelite indeed is
hidden under the shadow of God's wings ([Psa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)); angels, whose ministry was made
use of in this cloud, are employed for their good, and pitch their tents
about them. Happy art thou, O Israel! who is like unto thee, O people?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 14](exo014)

</div>
