<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo030)  [Next](exo032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 31:0</span></span>

God is here drawing towards a conclusion of what he had to say to Moses
upon the mount, where he had now been with him forty days and forty
nights; and yet no more is recorded of what was said to him in all that
time than what we have read in the six chapters foregoing. In this, I.
He appoints what workmen should be employed in the building and
furnishing of the tabernacle ([Exo
31:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#001)). II. He repeats the law of
the sabbath, and the religious observance of it ([Exo
31:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#012)). III. He delivers to him the
two tables of the testimony at parting ([Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018)).

[Exodus 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 31:1</span></span>

A great deal of fine work God had ordered to be done about the
tabernacle; the materials the people were to provide, but who must put
them into form? Moses himself was learned in all the learning of the
Egyptians, nay, he was well acquainted with the words of God, and the
visions of the Almighty; but he knew not how to engrave or embroider. We
may suppose that there were some very ingenious men among the
Israelites; but, having lived all their days in bondage in Egypt, we
cannot think they were any of them instructed in these curious arts.
They knew how to make brick and work in clay, but to work in gold and in
cutting diamonds was what they had never been brought up to. How should
the work be done with the neatness and exactness that were required when
they had no goldsmiths or jewellers but what must be made out of masons
and bricklayers? We may suppose that there were a sufficient number who
would gladly be employed, and would do their best; but it would be hard
to find out a proper person to preside in this work. Who was sufficient
for these things? But God takes care of this matter also.

I. He nominates the persons that were to be employed, that there might
be no contest about the preferment, nor envy at those that were
preferred, God himself having made the choice. 1. Bezaleel was to be the
architect, or master workman, [Exo
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#002). He was of the tribe of Judah, a
tribe that God delighted to honour; the grandson of Hur, probably that
Hur who had helped to hold up Moses's hands (ch. 17), and was at this
time in commission with Aaron for the government of the people in the
absence of Moses ([Exo 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#014)); out of
that family which was of note in Israel was the workman chosen, and it
added no little honour to the family that a branch of it was employed,
though but as a mechanic, or handicraft tradesman, for the service of
the tabernacle. The Jews' tradition is that Hur was the husband of
Miriam; and, if so, it was requisite that God should appoint him to this
service, lest, if Moses himself had done it, he should be thought
partial to his own kindred, his brother Aaron also being advanced to the
priesthood. God will put honour upon Moses's relations, and yet will
make it to appear that he takes not the honour to himself or his own
family, but that it is purely the Lord's doing. 2. Aholiab, of the tribe
of Dan, is appointed next to Bezaleel, and partner with him, [Exo
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#006). Two are better than one. Christ
sent forth his disciples who were to rear the gospel tabernacle, two and
two, and we read of his two witnesses. Aholiab was of the tribe of Dan,
which was one of the less honourable tribes, that the tribes of Judah
and Levi might not be lifted up, as if they were to engross all the
preferments; to prevent a schism in the body, God gives honour to that
part which lacked, [Co1 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#024). The
head cannot say to the foot, I have no need of thee. Hiram, who was the
head workman in the building of Solomon's temple, was also of the tribe
of Dan, [Ch2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#014). 3. There were
others that were employed by and under these in the several operations
about the tabernacle, [Exo 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#006). Note,
When God has work to do he will never want instruments to do it with,
for all hearts and heads too are under his eye, and in his hand; and
those may cheerfully go about any service for God, and go on in it, who
have reason to think that, one way or other, he has called them to it;
for whom he calls he will own and bear out.

II\. He qualifies these persons for the service ([Exo
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#003)): I have filled him with the
Spirit of God; and ([Exo 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#006)) in the
hearts of all that are wise-hearted I have put wisdom. Note, 1. Skill in
common arts and employments is the gift of God; from him are derived
both the faculty and the improvement of the faculty. It is he that puts
even this wisdom into the inward parts, [Job
38:36](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#036). He teaches the husbandman
discretion ([Isa 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#026)), and the
tradesman too; and he must have the praise of it. 2. God dispenses his
gifts variously, one gift to one, another to another, and all for the
good of the whole body, both of mankind and of the church. Moses was
fittest of all to govern Israel, but Bezaleel was fitter than he to
build the tabernacle. The common benefit is very much supported by the
variety of men's faculties and inclinations; the genius of some leads
them to be serviceable one way, of others another way, and all these
worketh that one and the self-same Spirit, [Co1
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011). This forbids pride, envy,
contempt, and carnal emulation, and strengthens the bond of mutual love.
3. Those whom God calls to any service he will either find, or make, fit
for it. If God give the commission, he will in some measure give the
qualifications, according as the service is. The work, that was to be
done here was to make the tabernacle and the utensils of it, which are
here particularly reckoned up, [Exo
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#007), etc. And for this the persons
employed were enabled to work in gold, and silver, and brass. When
Christ sent his apostles to rear the gospel tabernacle, he poured out
his Spirit upon them, to enable them to speak with tongues the wonderful
works of God; not to work upon metal, but to work upon men; so much more
excellent were the gifts, as the tabernacle to be pitched was a greater
and more perfect tabernacle, as the apostle calls it, [Heb
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011).

[Exodus 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 31:12</span></span>

Here is, I. A strict command for the sanctification of the sabbath day,
[Exo 31:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013). The law of the sabbath
had been given them before any other law, by was of preparation ([Exo
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#023)); it had been inserted in the
body of the moral law, in the fourth commandment; it had been annexed to
the judicial law ([Exo 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#012)); and
here it is added to the first part of the ceremonial law, because the
observance of the sabbath is indeed the hem and hedge of the whole law;
where no conscience is made of that, farewell both godliness and
honesty; for, in the moral law, it stands in the midst between the two
tables. Some suggest that it comes in here upon another account. Orders
were now given that a tabernacle should be set up and furnished for the
service of God with all possible expedition; but lest they should think
that the nature of the work, and the haste that was required, would
justify them in working at it on sabbath days, that they might get it
done the sooner, this caution is seasonably inserted, Verily, or
nevertheless, my sabbaths you shall keep. Though they must hasten the
work, yet they must not make more haste than good speed; they must not
break the law of the sabbath in their haste: even tabernacle-work must
give way to the sabbath-rest; so jealous is God for the honour of his
sabbaths. Observe what is here said concerning the sabbath day.

1\. The nature, meaning, and intention, of the sabbath, by the
declaration of which God puts an honour upon it, and teaches us to value
it. Divers things are here said of the sabbath. (1.) It is a sign
between me and you ([Exo 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013)), and
again, [Exo 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#017). The institution of
the sabbath was a great instance of God's favour to them, and a sign
that he had distinguished them from all other people; and their
religious observance of the sabbath was a great instance of their duty
and obedience to him. God, by sanctifying this day among them, let them
know that he sanctified them, and set them apart for himself and his
service; otherwise he would not have revealed to them his holy sabbaths,
to be the support of religion among them. Or it may refer to the law
concerning the sabbath, Keep my sabbaths, that you may know that I the
Lord do sanctify you. Note, If God by his grace incline our hearts to
keep the law of the fourth commandment, it will be an evidence of a good
work wrought in us by his Spirit. If we sanctify God's day, it is a sign
between him and us that he has sanctified our hearts: hence it is the
character of the blessed man that he keepeth the sabbath from polluting
it, [Isa 56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002). The Jews, by observing
one day in seven, after six days' labour, testified and declared that
they worshipped the God who made the world in six days, and rested the
seventh; and so distinguished themselves from other nations, who, having
first lost the sabbath, which was instituted to be a memorial of the
creation, by degrees lost the knowledge of the Creator, and gave that
honour to the creature which was due to him alone. (2.) It is holy unto
you ([Exo 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014)), that is, "It is
designed for your benefit as well as for God's honour;" the sabbath was
made for man. Or, "It shall be accounted holy by you, and shall so be
observed, and you shall look upon it a sacrilege to profane it." (3.) It
is the sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord, [Exo
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#015). It is separated from common
use, and designed for the honour and service of God, and by the
observance of it we are taught to rest from worldly pursuits and the
service of the flesh, and to devote ourselves, and all we are, have, and
can do, to God's glory. (4.) It was to be observed throughout their
generations, in every age, for a perpetual covenant. [Exo
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#016). This was to be one of the most
lasting tokens of that covenant which was between God and Israel.

2\. The law of the sabbath. They must keep it ([Exo
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013), [Exo
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014), [Exo
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#016)), keep it as a treasure, as a
trust, observe it and preserve it, keep it from polluting it, keep it up
as a sign between God and them, keep it and never part with it. The
Gentiles had anniversary-feasts, to the honour of their gods; but it was
peculiar to the Jews to have a weekly festival; this therefore they must
carefully observe.

3\. The reason of the sabbath; for God's laws are not only backed with
the highest authority, but supported with the best reason. God's own
example is the great reason, [Exo
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#017). As the work of creation is
worthy to be thus commemorated, so the great Creator is worthy to be
thus imitated, by a holy rest, the seventh day, after six days' labour,
especially since we hope, in further conformity to the same example,
shortly to rest with him from all our labours.

4\. The penalty to be inflicted for the breach of this law: "Every one
that defileth the sabbath, by doing any work therein but works of piety
and mercy, shall be cut off from among his people ([Exo
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014)); he shall surely be put to
death. [Exo 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#015). The magistrate must
cut him off the sword of justice if the crime can be proved; if it
cannot, or if the magistrate be remiss, and do not do his duty, God will
take the work into his own hands, and cut him off by a stroke from
heaven, and his family shall be rooted out of Israel." Note, The
contempt and profanation of the sabbath day is an iniquity to be
punished by the judges; and, if men do not punish it, God will, here or
hereafter, unless it be repented of.

II\. The delivering of the two tables of testimony to Moses. God had
promised him these tables when he called him up into the mount ([Exo
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012)), and now, when he was sending
him down, he delivered them to him, to be carefully and honourably
deposited in the ark, [Exo 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018). 1.
The ten commandments which God had spoken upon mount Sinai in the
hearing of all the people were now written, in perpetuam rei memoriam -
for a perpetual memorial, because that which is written remains. 2. They
were written in tables of stone, prepared, not by Moses, as it should
seem (for it is intimated, [Exo 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012),
that he found them ready written when he went up to the mount), but, as
some think, by the ministry of angels. The law was written in tables of
stone, to denote the perpetual duration of it (what can be supposed to
last longer than that which is written in stone, and laid up?), to
denote likewise the hardness of our hearts; one might more easily write
in stone than write any thing that is good in our corrupt and sinful
hearts. 3. They were written with the finger of God, that is, by his
will and power immediately, without the use of any instrument. It is God
only that can write his law in the heart; he gives a heart of flesh, and
then, by his Spirit, which is the finger of God, he writes his will in
the fleshly tables of the heart, [Co2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003). 4. They were written in two
tables, being designed to direct us in our duty both towards God and
towards man. 5. They are called tables of testimony, because this
written law testified both the will of God concerning them and his
good-will towards them, and would be a testimony against them if they
were disobedient. 6. They were delivered to Moses, probably with a
charge, before he laid them up in the ark, to show them publicly, that
they might be seen and read of all men, and so what they had heard with
the hearing of the ear might now be brought to their remembrance. Thus
the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 32](exo032)

</div>
