<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze012)  [Next](eze014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 13:0</span></span>

Mention had been made, in the chapter before, of the vain visions and
flattering divinations with which the people of Israel suffered
themselves to be imposed upon (v. 24); now this whole chapter is
levelled against them. God's faithful prophets are nowhere so sharp upon
any sort of sinners as upon the false prophets, not because they were
the most spiteful enemies to them, but because the put the highest
affront upon God and did the greatest mischief to his people. The
prophet here shows the sin and punishment, I. Of the false prophets (v.
1-16). II. Of the false prophetesses ([Eze
13:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#017)). Both agreed to sooth men up
in their sins, and, under pretence of comforting God's people, to
flatter them with hopes that they should yet have peace; but the
prophets shall be proved liars, their prophecies mere shams, and the
expectations of the people illusions; for God will let them know that
"the deceived and the deceiver are his," are both accountable to him,
[Job 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#016).

[Ezekiel 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 13:1</span></span>

The false prophets, who are here prophesied against, were some of them
at Jerusalem ([Jer 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014)): I have seen
in the prophets at Jerusalem a horrible thing; some of them among the
captives in Babylon, for to them Jeremiah writes ([Jer
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#008)), Let not your diviners, that be
in the midst of you, deceive you. And as God's prophets, though at a
distance from each other in place or time, yet preached the same truths,
which was an evidence that they were guided by one and the same good
Spirit, so the false prophets prophesied the same lies, being actuated
by one and the same spirit of error. There were little hopes of bringing
them to repentance, they were so hardened in their sin; yet Ezekiel must
prophesy against them, in hopes that the people might be cautioned not
to hearken to them; and thus a testimony will be left upon record
against them, and they will thereby be left inexcusable.

Ezekiel had express orders to prophesy against the prophets of Israel;
so they called themselves, as if none but they had been worthy of the
name of Israel's prophets, who were indeed Israel's deceivers. But it is
observable that Israel was never imposed upon by pretenders to prophecy
till after they had rejected and abused the true prophets; as,
afterwards, they were never deluded by counterfeit messiahs till after
they had refused the true Messiah and rejected him. These false prophets
must be required to hear the word of the Lord. They took upon them to
speak what concerned others as from God; let them now hear what
concerned themselves as from him. And two things the prophet is directed
to do: -

I. To discover their sin to them, and to convince them of that if
possible, or thereby to prevent their proceeding any further, by making
manifest their folly unto all men, [Ti2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009). They are here called foolish
prophets ([Eze 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#003)), men that did not
at all understand the business they pretended to; to make fools of the
people they made fools of themselves, and put the greatest cheat upon
their own souls. Let us see what is here laid to their charge. 1. They
pretend to have a commission from God, whereas he never sent them. They
thrust themselves into the prophetic office, without warrant from him
who is the Lord God of the holy prophets, which was a foolish thing; for
how could they expect that God should own them in a work to which he
never called them? They are prophets out of their own hearts (so the
margin reads it, [Eze 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#002)), prophets
of their own making, [Eze 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#006). They
say, The Lord saith; they pretend to be his messengers, but the Lord has
not sent them, has not given them any orders. They counterfeit the broad
seal of heaven, than which they cannot do a greater indignity to
mankind, for hereby they put a reproach upon divine revelation, lessen
its credit, and weaken its credibility. When these pretenders are found
to be deceivers atheists and infidels will thence infer, They are all
so. The Lord has not sent them; for though crafty enough in other things
like the foxes, and very wise for the world, yet they are foolish
prophets and have no experimental acquaintance with the things of God.
Note, Foolish prophets are not of God's sending, for whom he sends he
either finds fit or makes fit. Where he gives warrant he gives wisdom.
2. They pretend to have instructions from God, whereas he never made
himself and his mind known to them: They followed their own spirit ([Eze
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#003)); they delivered that as a
message from God which was the product either of their subtle invention,
to serve a turn for themselves, or of their own crazed and heated
imagination, to give vent to a fancy. For they have seen nothing, they
have not really had any heavenly vision; they pretend that what they say
the Lord saith it, but God disowns it: "I have not spoken it, I never
said it, never meant any such thing." What they delivered was not what
they had seen or heard, as that is which the ministers of Christ deliver
([Jo1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)), but either what they had
dreamed or what they thought would please those they coveted to make an
interest in; this is called their seeing vanity and lying divination
([Eze 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#006)); they pretended to have
seen that which they did not see, and produced that as a divine truth
which they knew to be false. To the same purport ([Eze
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#007)): You have see a vain vision and
spoken a lying divination, which had no divine original and would have
no effect, but would certainly be disproved by the event; the words are
changed ([Eze 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#008)): You have spoken
vanity and seen lies; what they saw and what they said was all alike, a
mere sham; they saw nothing, they said nothing, to the purpose, nothing
that could be relied on or that deserved regard. Again ([Eze
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009)), They see vanity and divine
lies; they pretended to have had visions, as the true prophets had,
whereas really they had none, but either it was the creature of their
own fancy (they thought they had a vision, as men in a delirium do, that
was seeing vanity) or it was a fiction of their own politics, and they
knew they had none, and then they saw lies, and divined lies. See [Jer
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#016), etc. Note, Since the devil is
universally know to be the father of lies, those put the highest affront
imaginable upon God who tell lies, and then father them upon him. But
those that had put God's character upon Satan, in worshipping devils,
arrived at length at such a pitch of impiety as to put Satan's character
upon God. 3. They took no care to prevent the judgments of God that were
breaking in upon the kingdom. They are like the foxes in the deserts,
running to and fro, and seeming to be in a great hurry, but it was to
get away and shift for their own safety, not to do any good: The
hireling flees, and leaves the sheep. They are like foxes that are
greedy of prey for themselves, crafty and cruel to feed themselves. But
([Eze 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#005)), "You have not gone up
into the gaps, nor made up the hedge of the house of Israel. A breach is
made in their fences, at which judgments are ready to pour in upon them,
and then, if ever, is the time to do them service; but you have done
nothing to help them." They should have made intercession for them, to
turn away the wrath of God; but they were not praying prophets, had no
interest in heaven nor intercourse with heaven (as prophets used to
have, [Gen 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007)) and so could do them
no service that way. They should have made it their business by
preaching and advice to bring people to repentance and reformation, and
so have made up the hedge, and put a stop to the judgments of God; but
this was none of their care: they contrived how to pleased people, not
how to profit them. They saw a deluge of profaneness and impiety
breaking in upon the land, waging war with virtue and holiness, and
threatening to crush them and bear them down, and then they should have
come in to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the
mighty, by witnessing against the wickedness of the time and place they
lived in; but they thought that would be as dangerous a piece of service
as standing in a breach to make it good against the besiegers, and
therefore they declined it, did nothing to stem the tide, stood not in
the battle against vice and immorality, but basely deserted the cause of
religion and reformation, in the day of the Lord, when it was
proclaimed, Who is on the Lord's side? Who will rise up for me against
the evil-doers? [Psa 94:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#016). Those were
unworthy the name of prophets that could think so favourably of sin, and
had so little zeal for God and the public welfare. 4. They flattered
people into a vain hope that the judgments God had threatened would
never come, whereby they hardened those in sin whom they should have
endeavoured to turn from sin ([Eze
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#006)): They have made others to hope
that all should be well, and they should have peace, though they went on
still in their trespasses, and that the event would confirm the word.
They were still ready to say, "We will warrant you that these troubles
will be at an end quickly, and we shall be in prosperity again." as if
their warrants would confirm false prophecies, in defiance of God
himself.

II\. He is directed to denounce the judgments of God against them for
these sins, from which their pretending to the character of prophets
would not exempt them. 1. In general, here is a woe against them ([Eze
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#003)), and what that woe is we are
told ([Eze 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#008)). Behold, I am against
you, saith the Lord God. Note, Those are in a woeful condition that have
God against them. Woe, and a thousand woes, to those that have made him
their enemy. 2. In particular, they are sentenced to be excluded from
all the privileges of the commonwealth of Israel, for they are adjudged
to have forfeited them all ([Eze
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009)): God's hand shall be upon them,
to seize them and bring them to his bar, to shut them out from his
presence, and they will find it a fearful thing to fall into his hands.
They pretend to be prophets, particular favourites of heaven, and
authorized to preside in the congregation of his church on earth; but,
by pretending to the honours they were not entitled to, they lost those
that otherwise they might have enjoyed, [Mat
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019). Their doom is, (1.) To be
expelled from the communion of saints, and not to be looked upon as
belonging to it: They shall not be in the secret of my people; their
folly shall be so clearly manifested that they shall never be consulted,
nor their advice asked; they shall not be present at any debates about
public affairs. Or, rather, they shall not be in the assembly of God's
people for religious worship, for they shall be ashamed to show their
heads there, when they are proved by the events to be false prophets,
and, like Cain, shall go out from the presence of the Lord. The people
that are deceived by them shall abandon them, and resolve to have no
more to do with them. Those that usurped Moses's chair shall not be
allowed so much as a door-keeper's place. In the great day they shall
not stand in the congregation of the righteous ([Psa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)), when God gathers his saints
together to him ([Psa 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#005), [Psa
50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016)), to be for ever with him. (2.)
To be expunged out of the book of the living. They shall die in their
captivity, and shall die childless, shall leave no posterity to take
their denomination from them, and so their names shall not be found
among those who either themselves or their posterity returned out of
Babylon, of whom a particular account was kept in a public register,
which was called the writing of the house of Israel, such as we have
Ezra 2. They shall not be found among the living in Jerusalem, [Isa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003). Or they shall not be found
written among those whom God has from eternity chosen to be vessels of
his mercy to eternity. We read of those who prophesied in Christ's name,
and yet he will tell them that he never knew them ([Mat
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022), [Mat
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)), because they were not among
those that were given to him. The Chaldee paraphrase reads it, They
shall not be written in the writing of eternal life, which is written
for the righteous of the house of Israel. See [Psa
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028). (3.) To be for ever excluded
from the land of Israel. God has sworn in his wrath concerning them that
they shall never enter with the returning captives into the land of
Canaan, which a second time remains a rest for them. Note, Those who
oppose the design of God's threatenings, and will not be awed and
influenced by them, forfeit the benefit of his promises, and cannot
expect to be comforted and encouraged by them.

[Ezekiel 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 13:10</span></span>

We have here more plain dealing with the false prophets, and some
further articles of their doom. We have seen the people made ashamed of
the false prophets (though sometimes they had been fond of them) and
casting them away, as they shall do their false gods, with indignation;
now here we find them as much ashamed of their false prophecies, which
they had sometimes depended upon with much assurance. Observe,

I. How the people are deceived by the false prophets. Those flatterers
seduce them, saying, Peace, and there was no peace, [Eze
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#010). They pretended to have seen
visions of peace, [Eze 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#016). But that
could not be, for there was no peace, saith the Lord God. There was no
prosperity designed for them, and therefore there could be no ground for
their security; yet they told them that God was at peace with them, and
had mercy in reserve for them, and that the war they were engaged in
with the Chaldeans should soon end in an honourable peace, and their
land should enjoy a happy repose and tranquillity. They told the
idolaters and other sinners that there was neither harm nor danger in
the way they were in. Thus they seduced God's people; they put a cheat
upon them, led them into mistakes, and drew them aside out of that way
of repentance and reformation which the other prophets were endeavouring
to bring them into. Note, Those are the most dangerous seducers who
suggest to sinners that which tends to lessen their dread of sin and
their fear of God. Now this is compared to the building of a slight
rotten wall, or, according to our Saviour's similitude, which is to the
same purport with this ([Mat 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#026)),
the building of a house upon the sand, which seems to be a shelter and
protection for a while, but will fall when a storm comes. One false
prophet built the wall, set up the notion that God was not at all
displeased with Jerusalem, but that the city should be confirmed in its
flourishing state, and be victorious over the powers that now threatened
it. This notion was very pleasing, and he that started it made himself
very acceptable by it and was caressed by every body, which invited
others to say the same. They made the matter look yet more plausible and
promising; they daubed the wall, which the first had built, but it was
with untempered mortar, sorry stuff, that will not bind nor hold the
bricks together; they had no ground for what they said, nor had it any
consistency with itself, but was like ropes of sand. They did not
strengthen the wall, were in no care to make it firm, to see that they
went upon sure grounds; they only daubed it to hide the cracks and make
it look well to the eye. And the wall thus built, when it comes to any
stress, much more to any distress, will bulge and totter, and come down
by degrees. Note, Doctrines that are groundless, though ever so
grateful, that are not built upon a scripture foundation nor fastened
with a scripture cement, though ever so plausible, ever so pleasing, are
not of any worth, nor will stand men in any stead; and those hopes of
peace and happiness which are not warranted by the word of God will but
cheat men, like a wall that is well daubed indeed, but ill-built.

II\. How they will be soon undeceived by the judgment of God, which, we
are sure, is according to truth. 1. God will in anger bring a terrible
storm that shall beat fiercely and furiously upon the wall. The descent
which the Chaldean army shall make upon Judah, and the siege which they
shall lay to Jerusalem, will be as an overflowing shower, or inundation
(such as Solomon calls a sweeping rain that leaves no food, [Pro
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#003)), will bear down all before it,
as the deluge did in Noah's time: You, O great hailstones! shall fall,
the artillery of heaven, every hailstone like a cannon-ball, battering
this wall, and with these a stormy wind, which is sometimes so strong as
to rend the rocks ([Kg1 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011)), much
more an ill-built wall, [Eze 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#011).
But that which makes this rain, and hail, and wind, most terrible is
that they arise from the wrath of God, and are enforced by that; it is
that which sends them; it is that which gives them the setting on ([Eze
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#013)); it is a stormy wind in my
fury, and an overflowing shower in my anger, and great hailstones in my
fury. The fury of Nebuchadnezzar and his princes, who highly resented
Zedekiah's treachery, made the invasion very formidable, but that was
nothing in comparison with God's displeasure. The staff in their hand is
my indignation, [Isa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005). Note, An
angry God has winds and storms at command wherewith to alarm secure
sinners; and his wrath makes them frightful and forcible indeed; for who
can stand before him when he is angry? 2. This storm shall overturn the
wall: it shall fall, and the wind shall rend it ([Eze
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#011)), the hailstones shall consume
it ([Eze 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#013)); I will break it down
([Eze 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#014)) and bring it to the
ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered; it will
appear how false, how rotten it was, to the prophetical reproach of the
builders. When the Chaldean army has made Judah and Jerusalem desolate
then this credit of the prophets, and the hopes of the people, will both
sink together; the former will be found false in flattering the people
and the latter foolish in suffering themselves to be imposed upon by
them, and so exposed to so much the greater confusion, when the judgment
shall surprise them in their security. Note, Whatever men think to
shelter themselves with against the judgments of God, while they
continue unreformed, will prove but a refuge of lies and will not profit
them in the day of wrath. See [Isa
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#017). Men's anger cannot shake that
which God has built (for the blast of the terrible ones is but as a
storm against the wall, which makes a great noise, but never stirs the
wall; see [Isa 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#004)), but God's anger
will overthrow that which men have built in opposition to him. They and
all their attempts, they and all the securities wherein they intrench
themselves, shall be as a bowing wall and as a tottering fence ([Psa
62:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003), [Psa
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#010)); and when their vain
predictions are disproved, and their vain expectations disappointed,
then it will be discovered that there was no ground for either, [Hab
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013). The day will declare what every
man's work is, and the fire will try it, [Co1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013). 3. The builders of the wall, and
those that daubed it, will themselves be buried in the ruins of it: It
shall fall, and you shall be consumed in the midst thereof, [Eze
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#014). And thus the threatenings of
God's wrath, and all the just intentions of it, shall be accomplished to
the uttermost, both upon the wall and upon those that have daubed it,
[Eze 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#015). The same judgments that
will prove the false prophets to be false will punish them for their
falsehood; and they themselves shall be involved in the calamity which
they made the people believe there was no danger of, and become
monuments of that justice which they bade defiance to. Thus, if the
blind lead the blind, both the blind leaders and the blind followers
will fall together into the ditch. Note, Those that deceive others will
in the end prove to have deceived themselves; and no doom will be more
fearful than that of unfaithful ministers, that flattered sinners in
their sins. 4. Both the deceivers and the deceived, when they thus
perish together, will justly be ridiculed and triumphed over ([Eze
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#012)): When the wall has fallen shall
it not be said unto you, by those that gave credit to the true prophets,
and feared the word of the Lord, "Now where is the daubing wherewith you
have daubed the wall? What has become of all the fine soft words and
fair promises wherewith you flattered your wicked neighbours, and all
the assurances you gave them that the troubles of the nation should soon
be at an end?" The righteous shall laugh at them, the righteous God
shall, righteous men shall, saying, Lo, this is the man that made not
God his strength, [Psa 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006), [Psa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007). I also will laugh at your
calamity, [Pro 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026). They will say
unto you ([Eze 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#015)), "The wall is no
more, neither he that daubed it; your hopes have vanished, and those
that supported them, even the prophets of Israel," [Eze
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#016). Note, Those that usurp the
honours that do not belong to them will shortly be filled with the shame
that does.

[Ezekiel 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 13:17</span></span>

As God has promised that when he pours out his Spirit upon his people
both their sons and their daughters shall prophesy, so the devil, when
he acts as a spirit of lies and falsehood, is so in the mouth not only
of false prophets, but of false prophetesses too, and those are the
deceivers whom the prophet is here directed to prophesy against; for
they are not such despicable enemies to God's truths as deserve not to
be taken notice of, nor yet will either the weakness of their sex excuse
their sin or the tenderness and respect that are owing to it exempt them
from the reproaches and threatenings of the word of God. No: Son of man,
set they face against the daughters of thy people, [Eze
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#017). God takes no pleasure in owning
them for his people. They are thy people, as [Exo
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007). The women pretend to a spirit of
prophecy, and are in the same song with the men, as Ahab's prophets
were: Go on, and prosper. They prophesy out of their own heart too; they
say what comes uppermost and what they know nothing of. Therefore
prophesy against them from God's own mouth. The prophet must set his
face against them, and try if they can look him in the face and stand to
what they say. Note, When sinners grow very impudent it is time for
reprovers to be very bold. Now observe,

I. How the sin of these false prophetesses is described, and what are
the particulars of it. 1. They told deliberate lies to those who
consulted them, and came to them to be advised, and to be told their
fortune: "You do mischief by your lying to my people that hear your lies
([Eze 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#019)); they come to be told the
truth, but you tell them lies; and, because you humour them in their
sins, they are willing to hear you." Note, It is ill with those people
who can better hear pleasing lies than unpleasing truths; and it is a
temptation to those who lie in wait to deceive to tell lies when they
find people willing to hear them and to excuse themselves with this, Si
populus vult decipi, decipiatur - If the people will be deceived, let
them. 2. They profaned the name of God by pretending to have received
those lies from him ([Eze 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#019)): "You
pollute my name among my people, and make use of that for the
patronising of your lies and the gaining of credit to them." Note, Those
greatly pollute God's holy name that make use of it to give countenance
to falsehood and wickedness. Yet this they did for handfuls of barley
and pieces of bread. They did it for gain; they cared not what dishonour
they did to God's name by their lying, so they could but make a hand of
it for themselves. There is nothing so sacred which men of mercenary
spirits, in whom the love of this world reigns, will not profane and
prostitute, if they can but get money by the bargain. But they did it
for poor gain; if they could get no more for it, rather than break they
would sell you a false prophecy that should please you to a nicety for
the beggar's dole, a piece of bread or a handful of barley; and yet that
was more than it was worth. Had they asked it as an alms, for God's
sake, surely they might have had it, and God would have been honoured;
but, taking it as a fee for a false prophecy, God's name if polluted,
and the smallness of the reward heightens the offence. For a piece of
bread that man will transgress, [Pro
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#021). Had their poverty been their
temptation to steal, and so to take the name of the Lord in vain, it
would not have been nearly so bad as when it tempted them to prophesy
lies in his name and so to profane it. 3. They kept people in awe, and
terrified them with their pretensions: "You hunt the souls of my people
([Eze 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#018)), hunt them to make them
flee ([Eze 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#020)), hunt them into
gardens (so the margin reads it); you use all the arts you have to court
or compel them into those places where you deliver your pretended
predictions, or you have got such an influence upon them that you make
them do just as you would have them to do, and tyrannise over them." It
was indeed the people's fault that they did regard them, but it was
their fault by lies and falsehoods to command that regard; they
pretended to save the souls alive that came to them, [Eze
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#018). If they would but be hearers of
them, and contributors to them, they might be sure of salvation; thus
they beguiled unstable souls that had a concern about salvation as their
end but did not rightly understand the way, and therefore hearkened to
those who were most confident in promising it to them. "But will you
pretend to save souls, or secure salvation to your party?" Those are
justly suspected that make such pretensions. 4. They discouraged those
that were honest and good, and encouraged those that were wicked and
profane: You slay the souls that should not die, and save those alive
that should not live, [Eze 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#019). This
is explained ([Eze 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#022)): You have
made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; because
they would not, they durst not, countenance your pretensions, you
thundered out the judgments of God against them, to their great grief
and trouble; you put them under invidious characters, to make them
either despicable or odious to the people, and pretended to do it in
God's name, which made them go many a time with a sad heart; whereas it
was the will of God that they should be comforted, and by having respect
put upon them should have encouragement given them. But on the other
side, and which is still worse, you have strengthened the hands of the
wicked and emboldened them to go on in their wicked ways and not to
return from them, which was the thing the true prophets with earnestness
called them to. "You have promised sinners life in their sinful ways,
have told them that they shall have peace though they go on, by which
their hands have been strengthened and their hearts hardened." Some
think this refers to the severe censures they passed upon those who had
already gone into captivity (who were humbled under their affliction, by
which their hearts were made sad), and the commendations they gave to
those who rebelled against the king of Babylon, who were hardened in
their impieties, by which their hands were strengthened; or by their
polluting the name of God they saddened the hearts of good people who
have a value and veneration for the word of God, and confirmed atheists
and infidels in their contempt of divine revelation and furnished them
with arguments against it. Note, Those have a great deal to answer for
who grieve the spirits, and weaken the hands, of good people, and who
gratify the lusts of sinners, and animate them in their opposition to
God and religion. Nor can any thing strengthen the hands of sinners more
than to tell them that they may be saved in their sins without
repentance, or that there may be repentance though they do not return
from their wicked ways. 5. They mimicked the true prophets, by giving
signs for the illustrating of their false predictions (as Hananiah did,
[Jer 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#010)), and they were signs
agreeable to their sex; they sewed little pillows to the people's
arm-holes, to signify that they might be easy and repose themselves, and
needed not be disquieted with the apprehensions of trouble approaching.
And they made kerchiefs upon the head of every stature, of persons of
every age, young and old, distinguishable by their stature, [Eze
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#018). These kerchiefs were badges of
liberty or triumph, intimating that they should not only be delivered
from the Chaldeans, but be victorious over them. Some think these were
some superstitious rites which they used with those to whom they
delivered their divinations, preparing them for the reception of them by
putting enchanted pillows under their arms and handkerchiefs on their
heads, to raise their fancies and their expectations of something great.
Or perhaps the expressions are figurative: they did all they could to
make people secure, which is signified by laying them easy, and to make
people proud, which is signified by dressing them fine with
handkerchiefs, perhaps laid or embroidered on their heads.

II\. How the wrath of God against them is expressed. Here is a woe to
them ([Eze 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#018)), and God declares
himself against the methods they took to delude and deceive, [Eze
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#020). But what course will God take
with them? 1. They shall be confounded in their attempts, and shall
proceed no further; for ([Eze 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#023))
you shall see no more vanity nor divine revelations; not that they shall
themselves lay down their pretensions in a way of repentance, but when
the event gives them the lie they shall be silent for shame; or their
fancies and imaginations shall not be disposed to receive impressions
which assist them in their divinations as they have been; or they
themselves shall be cut off. 2. God's people shall be delivered out of
their hands. When they see themselves deluded by them into a false peace
and a fool's paradise, and that though they would not leave their sin
their sin has left them, and they see no more vanity nor divine
divinations, they shall turn their back upon them, shall slight their
predictions. The righteous shall be no more saddened by them, no, nor
the wicked strengthened: The pillows shall be torn from their arms, and
the kerchiefs from their heads; the fallacies shall be discovered, their
frauds detected, and the people of God shall no more be in their hand,
to be hunted as they had been. Note, It is a great mercy to be delivered
from a servile regard to, and fear of, those who, under colour of a
divine authority, impose upon and tyrannise over the consciences of men,
and say to their souls, Bow down, that we may go over. But it is a sore
grief to those who delight in such usurpations to have their power
broken and the prey delivered; such was the reformation to the church of
Rome. And, when God does this, he makes it to appear that he is the
Lord, that it is his prerogative to give law to souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 14](eze014)

</div>
