<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze029)  [Next](eze031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 30:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. A continuation of the prophecy against
Egypt, which we had in the latter part of the foregoing chapter, just
before the desolation of that once flourishing kingdom was completed by
Nebuchadnezzar, in which is foretold the destruction of all her allies
and confederates, all her interests and concerns, and the several steps
which the king of Babylon should take in pushing on this destruction (v.
1-19). II. A repetition of a former prophecy against Egypt, just before
the desolation of it begun by their own bad conduct, which gradually
weakened them and prepared the way for the king of Babylon ([Eze
30:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#020)). It is all much to the same
purport with what we had before.

[Ezekiel 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 30:1</span></span>

The prophecy of the destruction of Egypt is here very full and
particular, as well as, in the general, very frightful. What can protect
a provoking people when the righteous God comes forth to contend with
them?

I. It shall be a very lamentable destruction, and such as shall occasion
great sorrow ([Eze 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#002), [Eze
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#003)): "Howl you; you may justly
shriek now that it is coming, for you will be made to shriek and make
hideous outcries when it comes. Cry out, Woe worth the day! or, Ah the
day! alas because of the day! the terrible day! Woe and alas! For the
day is near; the day we have so long dreaded, so long deserved. It is
the day of the Lord, the day in which he will manifest himself as a God
of vengeance. You have your day now, when you carry all before you, and
trample on all about you, but God will have his day shortly, the day of
the revelation of his righteous judgment," [Psa
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013). It will be a cloudy day, that
is, dark and dismal, without the shining forth of any comfort; and it
shall threaten a storm - fire, and brimstone, and a horrible tempest. It
shall be the time of the heathen, of reckoning with the heathen for all
their heathenish practices, that time which David spoke of when God
would pour out his fury upon the heathen ([Psa
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006)), when they should sink, [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015).

II\. It shall be the destruction of Egypt, and of all the states and
countries in confederacy with her and in her neighbourhood. 1. Egypt
herself shall fall ([Eze 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#004)): The
sword shall come upon Egypt, the sword of the Chaldeans, and it shall be
a victorious sword, for the slain shall fall in Egypt, fall by it, fall
before it. Is the country populous? They shall take away her multitude.
Is it strong, and well-fixed? Her foundations shall be broken down, and
then the fabric, though built ever so fine, ever so high, will fall of
course. 2. Her neighbours and inmates shall fall with her. When the
slain fall so thickly in Egypt great pain shall be in Ethiopia, both
that in Africa, which is in the neighbourhood of Egypt on one side, and
that in Asia, which is near to it on the other side. When their
neighbour's house was on fire they could not but apprehend their own in
danger; nor were their fears groundless, for they shall all fall with
them by the sword, [Eze 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005). Ethiopia
and Libya (Cush and Phut, so the Hebrew names are, two of the sons of
Ham who are mentioned, and Mizraim, that is, Egypt, between them, [Gen
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)), and the Lydians (who were
famous archers, and are spoken of as confederates with Egypt, [Jer
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009)), these shall fall with Egypt and
Chub (the Chaldeans, the inhabitants of the inner Libya); these and
others were the mingled people; there were those of all these and other
countries who upon some account or other resided in Egypt, as did also
the men of the land that is in league, some of the remains of the people
of Israel and Judah, the children of the covenant, or league, as they
are called ([Act 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025)), the children
of the promise, [Gal 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#028). These
sojourned in Egypt contrary to God's command, and these shall fall with
them. Note, Those that will take their lot with God's enemies shall have
their lot with them, yea, though they be in profession the men of the
land that is in league with God.

III\. All that pretend to support the sinking interests of Egypt shall
come down under her, shall come down with her ([Eze
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#006)): Those that uphold Egypt shall
fall, and then Egypt must fall of course. See the justice of God; Egypt
pretended to uphold Jerusalem when that was tottering, but proved a
deceitful reed; and now those that pretended to uphold Egypt shall prove
no better. Those that deceive others are commonly paid in their own
coin; they are themselves deceived. 1. Does Egypt think herself upheld
by the absolute authority and dominion of her king? The pride of her
power shall come down, [Eze 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#006). The
power of the king of Egypt was his pride; but that shall be broken, and
humbled. 2. Is the multitude of her people her support? These shall fall
by the sword, even from the tower of Syene, which is in the utmost
corner of the land, from that side of it by which the enemy shall enter.
Both the countries and the cities, the husbandmen and the merchants,
shall be desolate, [Eze 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#007), as
before, [Eze 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#012). Even the multitude
of Egypt shall be made to cease, [Eze
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#010). That populous country shall be
depopulated. The land shall be even filled with the slain, [Eze
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#011). 3. Is the river Nile her
support, and are the several channels of it a defence to her? "I will
make the rivers dry ([Eze 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#012)), so
that those natural fortifications which were thought impregnable,
because impassable, shall stand them in no stead." 4. Are her idols a
support to her? They shall be destroyed; those imaginary upholders shall
appear more than ever to be imaginary, for so images are when they
pretend to be deliverers and strongholds ([Eze
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#013)): I will cause their images to
cease out of Noph. 5. Is her royal family her support? There shall be no
more a prince in the land of Egypt; the royal family shall be extirpated
and extinguished, which had continued so long. 6. Is her courage her
support, and does she think to uphold herself by the bravery of her men
of war, who have now of late been inured to service? That shall fail: I
will put a fear in the land of Egypt. 7. Is the rising generation her
support? is she upheld by her children, and does she think herself happy
because she has her quiver full of them? Alas! the young men shall fall
by the sword ([Eze 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#017)) and the
daughters shall go into captivity ([Eze
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#018)), and so she shall be robbed of
all her hopes.

IV\. God shall inflict these desolating judgments on Egypt ([Eze
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#008)): They shall know that I am the
Lord, and greater than all gods, than all their gods, when I have set a
fire in Egypt. The fire that consumes nations is of God's kindling; and,
when he sets fire to a people, all their helpers shall be destroyed.
Those that go about to quench the fire shall themselves be devoured by
it; for who can stand before him when he is angry? When he pours out his
fury upon a place, when he sets fire to it ([Eze
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#015), [Eze
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#016)), neither its strength nor its
multitude can stand it in any stead.

V. The king of Babylon and his army shall be employed as instruments of
this destruction: The multitude of Egypt shall be made to cease and be
quite cut off by the hand of the king of Babylon, [Eze
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#010). Those that undertook to protect
Israel from the king of Babylon shall not be able to protect themselves.
It is said of the Chaldeans, who should destroy Egypt, 1. That they are
strangers ([Eze 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#012)), who therefore
shall show no compassion for old acquaintance-sake, but shall behave
strangely towards them. 2. That they are the terrible of the nations
([Eze 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#011)), both in respect of force
and in respect of fierceness; and, being terrible, they shall make
terrible work. (3.) That they are the wicked, who will not be restrained
by reason and conscience, the laws of nature or the laws of nations, for
they are without law: I will sell the land into the hand of the wicked.
They do violence unjustly, as they are wicked; yet, so far as they are
instruments in God's hand of executing his judgments, it is on his part
justly done. Note, God often makes one wicked man a scourge to another;
and even wicked men acquire a title to prey, jure belli - by the laws of
war, for God sells it into their hands.

VI\. No place in the land of Egypt shall be exempted from the fury of
the Chaldean army, not the strongest, not the remotest: The sword shall
go through the land. Various places are here named: Pathros, Zoan, and
No ([Eze 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#014)), Sin and Noph ([Eze
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#015), [Eze
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#016)), Aven and Pi-beseth ([Eze
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#017)), and Tehaphnehes, [Eze
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#018). These shall be made desolate,
shall be fired, and God's judgments shall be executed upon them, and his
fury poured out upon them. Their strength and multitude shall be cut
off; they shall have great pain, shall be rent asunder with fear, and
shall have distresses daily. Their day shall be darkened; their honours,
comforts, and hopes, shall be extinguished. Their yokes shall be broken,
so that they shall no more oppress and tyrannize as they have done. The
pomp of their strength shall cease, and a cloud shall cover them, a
cloud so thick that through it they shall not see any hopes, nor shall
their glory be seen, or shine further. And, lastly, the Ethiopians, who
are at a distance from them, as well as those who are mingled with them,
shall share in their pain and terror. God will by his providence spread
the rumour, and the careless Ethiopians shall be made afraid, [Eze
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#009). Note, God can strike a terror
upon those that are most secure; fearfulness shall, when he pleases,
surprise the most presumptuous hypocrites.

The close of this prediction leaves, 1. The land of Egypt mortified:
Thus will I execute judgments on Egypt, [Eze
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#019). The destruction of Egypt is the
executing of judgments, which intimates not only that it is done justly,
for its sins, but that it is done regularly and legally, by a judicial
sentence. All the executions God does are according to his judgments. 2.
The God of Israel herein glorified: They shall know that I am the Lord.
The Egyptians shall be made to know it and the people of God shall be
made to know it better. The Lord is known by the judgments which he
executes.

[Ezekiel 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 30:20</span></span>

This short prophecy of the weakening of the power of Egypt was delivered
about the time that the army of the Egyptians, which attempted to raise
the siege of Jerusalem, was frustrated in its enterprises, and returned
re infect - without accomplishing their purpose; whereupon the king of
Babylon renewed the siege and carried his point. The kingdom of Egypt
was very ancient, and had been for many ages considerable. That of
Babylon had but lately arrived at its great pomp and power, being built
upon the ruins of the kingdom of Assyria. Now it is with them as it is
with families and states, some are growing up, others are declining and
going back; one must increase and the others must of course decrease.

I. It is here foretold that the king of Egypt shall grow weaker and
weaker. The extent of his territories shall be abridged, his wealth and
power shall be diminished, and he shall become less able than ever to
help either himself or his friend. 1. This was in part done already
([Eze 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#021)): I have broken the arm of
Pharaoh, some time ago. One arm of that kingdom might well be reckoned
broken when the king of Babylon routed the forces of Pharaoh-Necho at
Carchemish ([Jer 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002)), and made
himself master of all that pertained to Egypt from the river of Egypt to
Euphrates, [Kg2 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007). Egypt had been
long in gathering strength and extending its dominions, and therefore,
that there may be a proportion observed in providence, it loses its
strength slowly and by degrees. It was soon after the king of Egypt slew
good king Josiah, and in the same reign, that its arm was thus broken,
and it received that fatal blow which it never recovered. Before Egypt's
heart and neck were broken its arm was. God's judgments come upon a
people by steps, that they may meet him repenting. When the arm of Egypt
is broken it shall not be bound up to be healed, for none can heal the
wounds that God gives but he himself. Those whom he disarms, whom he
disables, cannot again hold the sword. 2. This was to be done again. One
arm was broken before, and something was done towards the setting of it,
towards the healing of the deadly wound that was given to the beast. But
now ([Eze 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#022)), I am against
Pharaoh, and will break both his arms, both the strong and that which
was broken and set again. Note, If less judgments do not prevail to
humble and reform sinners, God will send greater. Now God will cause the
sword to fall out of his hand, which he caught hold of as thinking
himself strong enough to hold it. It is repeated ([Eze
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#024)), I will break Pharaoh's arms.
He had been a cruel oppressor to the people of God formerly, and of late
the staff of a broken rod to them; and now God by breaking his arms
reckons with him for both. God justly breaks that power which is abused
either to put wrongs upon people or to put cheats upon them. But this is
not all; (1.) The king of Egypt shall be dispirited when he finds
himself in danger of the king of Babylon's forces: he shall groan before
him with the groaning of a deadly wounded man. Note, It is common for
those that are most elated in their prosperity to be most dejected and
disheartened in their adversity. Pharaoh, even before the sword touches
him, shall groan as if he had received his death's wound. (2.) The
people of Egypt shall be dispersed ([Eze
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#023) and again [Eze
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#026)): I will scatter them among the
nations. Other nations had mingled with them ([Eze
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005)); now they shall be mingled with
other nations, and seek shelter in them, and so be made to know that the
Lord is righteous.

II\. It is here foretold that the king of Babylon shall grow stronger
and stronger, [Eze 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#024), [Eze
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#025). Put strength into the king of
Babylon's arms, that he may be able to go through the service he is
designed for. 2. That he will put a sword, his sword, into the king of
Babylon's hand, which signified his giving him a commission and
furnishing him with arms for carrying on a war, particularly against
Egypt. Note, As judges on the bench, like Pilate ([Joh
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011)), so generals in the field, like
Nebuchadnezzar, have no power but what is given them from above.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 31](eze031)

</div>
