<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze018)  [Next](eze020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 19:0</span></span>

The scope of this chapter is much the same with that of the 17th, to
foretel and lament the ruin of the house of David, the royal family of
Judah, in the calamitous exit of the four sons and grandsons of Josiah -
Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, and Zedekiah, in whom that illustrious
line of kings was cut off, which the prophet is here ordered to lament
([Eze 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001)). And he does it by
similitudes. I. The kingdom of Judah and house of David are here
compared to a lioness, and those princes to lions, that were fierce and
ravenous, but were hunted down and taken in nets ([Eze
19:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#002)). II. That kingdom and that
house are here compared to a vine, and these princes to branches, which
had been strong and flourishing, but were now broken off and burnt ([Eze
19:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#010)). This ruin of that monarchy
was now in the doing, and this lamentation of it was intended to affect
the people with it, that they might not flatter themselves with vain
hopes of the lengthening out of their tranquility.

[Ezekiel 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 19:1</span></span>

Here are, I. Orders given to the prophet to bewail the fall of the royal
family, which had long made so great a figure by virtue of a covenant of
royalty made with David and his seed, so that the eclipsing and
extinguishing of it are justly lamented by all who know what value to
put upon the covenant of our God, as we find, after a very large account
of that covenant with David ([Psa
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003), [Psa
89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020), etc.), a sad lamentation for
the decays and desolations of his family (v. 38, 39): But thou hast cast
off and abhorred, hast made void the covenant of thy servant and
profaned his crown, etc. The kings of Judah are here called princes of
Israel; for their glory was diminished and they had become but as
princes, and their purity was lost; they had become corrupt and
idolatrous as the kings of Israel, whose ways they had learned. The
prophet must take up a lamentation for them; that is, he must describe
their lamentable fall as one that did himself lay it to heart, and
desired that those he preached and wrote to might do so to. And how can
we expect that others should be affected with that which we ourselves
are not affected with? Ministers, when they boldly foretel, must yet
bitterly lament the destruction of sinners, as those that have not
desired the woeful day. He is not directed to give advice to the princes
of Israel (that had been long and often done in vain), but, the decree
having gone forth, he must take up a lamentation for them.

II\. Instructions given him what to say. 1. He must compare the kingdom
of Judah to a lioness, so wretchedly degenerated was it from what it had
been formerly, when it sat as a queen among the nations, [Eze
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#002). What is thy mother? thine, O
king? (we read of Solomon's crown wherewith his mother crowned him, that
is, his people, [Sol 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011)), thine, O
Judah? The royal family is as a mother to the kingdom, a nursing mother.
She is a lioness, fierce, and cruel, and ravenous. When they had left
their divinity they soon lost their humanity too; and, when they feared
not God, neither did they regard man. She lay down among lions. God had
said, The people shall dwell alone, but they mingled with the nations
and learned their works. She nourished her whelps among young lions,
taught the young princes the way of tyrants, which was then used by the
arbitrary kings of the east, filled their heads betimes with notions of
their absolute despotic power, and possessed them with a belief that
they had a right to enslave their subjects, that their liberty and
property lay at their mercy: thus she nourished her whelps among young
lions. 2. He must compare the kings of Judah to lions' whelps, [Eze
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#003). Jacob had compared Judah, and
especially the house of David, to a lion's whelp, for its being strong
and formidable to its enemies abroad ([Gen
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009), He is an old lion; who shall
stir him up?) and, if they had adhered to the divine law and promise,
God would have preserved to them the might, and majesty, and dominion of
a lion, and does it in Christ, the Lion of the tribe of Judah. But these
lions' whelps were so to their own subjects, were cruel and oppressive
to them, preyed upon their estates and liberties; and, when they thus by
their tyranny made themselves a terror to those whom they ought to have
protected, it was just with God to make those a terror to them whom
otherwise they might have subdued. Here is lamented, (1.) The sin and
fall of Jehoahaz, one of the whelps of this lioness. He became a young
lion ([Eze 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#003)); he was made king,
and thought he was made so that he might do what he pleased, and gratify
his own ambition, covetousness, and revenge, as he had a mind; and so he
was soon master of all the arts of tyranny; he learned to catch the prey
and devoured men. When he got power into his hand, all that had before
in any thing disobliged him were made to feel his resentments and become
a sacrifice to his rage. But what came of it? He did not prosper long in
his tyranny: The nations heard of him ([Eze
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#004)), heard how furiously he drove at
his first coming to the crown, how he trampled upon all that is just and
sacred, and violated all his engagements, so that they looked upon him
as a dangerous neighbour, and prosecuted him accordingly, as a multitude
of shepherds is called forth against a lion roaring on his prey, [Isa
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#004). And he was taken, as a beast of
prey, in their pit. His own subjects durst not stand up in defence of
their liberties, but God raised up a foreign power that soon put an end
to his tyranny, and brought him in chains to the land of Egypt. Thither
Jehoahaz was carried captive, and never heard of more. (2.) The like sin
and fall of his successor Jehoiakim. The kingdom of Judah for some time
expected the return of Jehoahaz out of Egypt, but at length despaired of
it, and then took another of the lion's whelps, and made him a young
lion, [Eze 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#005). And he, instead of
taking warning by his brother's fate to use his power with equity and
moderation, and to seek the good of his people, trod in his brother's
steps: He went up and down among the lions, [Eze
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#006). He consulted and conversed with
those that were fierce and furious like himself, and took his measures
from them, as Rehoboam took the advice of the rash and hot-headed young
men. And he soon learned to catch the prey, and he devoured men ([Eze
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#006)); he seized his subjects'
estates, fined and imprisoned them, filled his treasury by rapine and
injustice, sequestrations and confiscations, fines and forfeitures, and
swallowed up all that stood in his way. He had got the art of
discovering what effects men had that lay concealed, and where the
treasures were which they had hoarded up; he knew their desolate places
([Eze 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#007)), where they his their
money and sometimes hid themselves; he knew where to find both out; and
by his oppression he laid waste their cities, depopulated them by
forcing the inhabitants to remove their families to some place of
safety. The land was desolate, and the country villages were deserted;
and though there was great plenty, and a fulness of all good things, yet
people quitted it all for fear of the noise of his roaring. He took a
pride in making all his subjects afraid of him, as the lion makes all
the beasts of the forest to tremble ([Amo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008)), and by his terrible roaring so
astonished them that they fell down for fear, and, having not spirit to
make their escape, became an easy prey to him, as they say the lions do.
He hectored, and threatened, and talked big, and bullied people out of
what they had. Thus he thought to establish his own power, but it had a
contrary effect, it did but hasten his own ruin ([Eze
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#008)): The nations set against him on
every side, to restrain and reduce his exorbitant power, which they
joined in confederacy to do for their common safety; and they spread
their net over him, formed designs against him. God brought against
Jehoiakim bands of the Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites, with the
Chaldees ([Kg2 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002)), and he was taken
in their pit. Nebuchadnezzar bound him in fetters to carry him to
Babylon, [Ch2 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006). They put this lion
within grates, bound him in chains, and brought him to the king of
Babylon, [Ch2 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#009). What became of him
we know not; but his voice was nowhere heard roaring upon the mountains
of Israel. There was an end of his tyranny: he was buried with the
burial of an ass ([Jer 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019)), though
he had been as a lion, the terror of the mighty in the land of the
living. Note, The righteousness of God is to be acknowledged when those
who have terrified and enslaved others are themselves terrified and
enslaved, when those who by the abuse of their power to destruction
which was given them for edification make themselves as wild beasts, as
roaring lions and ranging bears (for such, Solomon says, wicked rulers
are over the poor people, [Pro 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#015)),
are treated as such - when those who, like Ishmael, have their hand
against every man, come at last to have every man's hand against them.
It was long since observed that bloody tyrants seldom die in peace, but
have blood given them to drink, for they are worthy.

Ad generum Cereris sine caede et sanguine pauci

Descendunt reges et sicca morte tyranni -

How few of all the boastful men that reign

Descend in peace to Pluto's dark domain!

\- Juvenal

[Ezekiel 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 19:10</span></span>

Jerusalem, the mother-city, is here represented by another similitude;
she is a vine, and the princes are her branches. This comparison we had
before, [Eze 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#001). Jerusalem is as a
vine; the Jewish nation is so: Like a vine in they blood ([Eze
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#010)), the blood-royal, like a vine
set in blood and watered with blood, which contributes very much to the
flourishing and fruitfulness of vines, as if the blood which had been
shed had been designed for the fattening and improving of the soil, in
such plenty was it shed; and for a time it seemed to have that effect,
for she was fruitful and full of branches by reason of the waters, the
many waters near which she was planted. Places of great wickedness may
prosper for a while; and a vine set in blood may be full of branches.
Jerusalem was full of able magistrates, men of sense, men of learning
and experience, that were strong rods, branches of this vine of uncommon
bulk and strength, or poles for the support of this vine, for such
magistrates are. The boughs of this vine had grown to such maturity that
they were fit to make white staves of for the sceptres of those that
bore rule, [Eze 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#011). And those are
strong rods that are fit for sceptres, men of strong judgments and
strong resolutions that are fit for magistrates. When the royal family
of Judah was numerous, and the courts of justice were filled with men of
sense and probity, then Jerusalem's stature was exalted among thick
branches; when the government is in good able hands a nation is thereby
made considerable Then she was not taken for a weak and lowly vine, but
she appeared in her height, a distinguished city, with the multitude of
her branches. Tanquam lenta solent inter viburna cupressi - Midst humble
withies thus the cypress soars. "In thy quietness" (so some read that,
[Eze 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#010), which we translate in thy
blood) "thou wast such a vine as this." When Zedekiah was quiet and easy
under the king of Babylon's yoke his kingdom flourished thus. See how
slow God is to anger, how he defers his judgments, and waits to be
gracious. 2. This vine is now quite destroyed. Nebuchadnezzar, being
highly provoked by Zedekiah's treachery, plucked it up in fury ([Eze
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#012)), ruined the city and kingdom,
and cut off all the branches of the royal family that fell in his way.
The vine was cut off close to the ground, though not plucked up by the
roots. The east wind dried up the fruit that was blasted. The young
people fell by the sword, or were carried into captivity. The aspect of
it had nothing that was pleasing, the prospect nothing that was
promising. Her strong rods were broken and withered; her great men were
cut off, judges and magistrates deposed. The vine itself is planted in
the wilderness, [Eze 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#013). Babylon
was as a wilderness to those of the people that were carried captives
thither; the land of Judah was as a wilderness to Jerusalem, now that
the whole country was ravaged and laid waste by the Chaldean army - a
fruitful land turned into barrenness. "It is burnt with fire ([Psa
80:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#016)) and that fire has gone out of a
rod of her branches ([Eze 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#014)); the
king himself, by rebelling against the king of Babylon, has given
occasion to all this mischief. She may thank herself for the fire that
consumes her; she has by her wickedness made herself like tinder to the
sparks of God's wrath, so that her own branches serve as fuel for her
own consumption; in them the fire is kindled which devoured the fruit,
the sins of the elder being the judgments which destroy the younger; her
fruit is burned with her own branches, so that she has no strong rod to
be a sceptre to rule, none to be found now that are fit for the
government or dare take this ruin under their hand, as the complaint is
([Isa 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#006), [Isa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#007)), none of the house of David left
that have a right to rule, no wise men, or men of sense, that are able
to rule." It goes ill with any state, and is likely to go worse, when it
is thus deprived of the blessings of government and has no strong rods
for sceptres. Woe unto thee, O land! when thy king is a child, for it is
as well to have no rod as not a strong rod. Those strong rods, we have
reason to fear, had been instruments of oppression, assistant to the
king in catching the prey and devouring men, and now they are destroyed
with him. Tyranny is the inlet to anarchy; and, when the rod of
government is turned into the serpent of oppression, it is just with God
to say, "There shall be no strong rod to be a sceptre to rule; but let
men be as are the fishes of the sea, where the greater devour the less."
Note, This is a lamentation and shall be for a lamentation. The prophet
was bidden ([Eze 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001)) to take up a
lamentation; and, having done so, he leaves it to be made use of by
others. "It is a lamentation to us of this age, and, the desolations
continuing long, it shall be for a lamentation to those that shall come
after us; the child unborn will rue the destruction made of Judah and
Jerusalem by the present judgments. They were a great while in coming;
the bow was long in the drawing; but now that they have come they will
continue, and the sad effects of them will be entailed upon posterity."
Note, Those who fill up the measure of their fathers' sins are laying up
in store for their children's sorrows and furnishing them with matter
for lamentation; and nothing is more so than the overthrow of
government.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 20](eze020)

</div>
