<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze000)  [Next](eze002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

In this chapter we have, I. The common circumstances of the prophecy now
to be delivered, the time when it was delivered ([Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)), the place where ([Eze
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002)), and the person by whom ([Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)). II. The uncommon introduction to
it by a vision of the glory of God, 1. In his attendance and retinue in
the upper world, where his throne is surrounded with angels, here called
"living creatures," ([Eze 1:4-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)). 2.
In his providences concerning the lower world, represented by the wheels
and their motions ([Eze 1:15-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015)). 3.
In the face of Jesus Christ sitting upon the throne ([Eze
1:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026)). And the more we are
acquainted, and the more intimately we converse, with the glory of God
in these three branches of it, the more commanding influence will divine
revelation have upon us and the more ready shall we be to submit to it,
which is the thing aimed at in prefacing the prophecies of this book
with these visions. When such a God of glory speaks, it concerns us to
hear with attention and reverence; it is at our peril if we do not.

[Ezekiel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 1:1</span></span>

The circumstances of the vision which Ezekiel saw, and in which he
received his commission and instructions, are here very particularly set
down, that the narrative may appear to be authentic and not romantic. It
may be of use to keep an account when and where God has been pleased to
manifest himself to our souls in a peculiar manner, that the return of
the day, and our return to the place of the altar ([Gen
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#004)), may revive the pleasing
grateful remembrance of God's favour to us. "Remember, O my soul! and
never forget what communications of divine love thou didst receive at
such a time, at such a place; tell others what God did for thee."

I. The time when Ezekiel had this vision is here recorded. It was in the
thirtieth year, v. 1. Some make it the thirtieth year of the prophet's
age; being a priest, he was at that age to enter upon the full execution
of the priestly office, but being debarred from that by the iniquity and
calamity of the times, now that they had neither temple nor altar, God
at that age called him to the dignity of a prophet. Others make it to be
the thirtieth year from the beginning of the reign of Nabopolassar, the
father of Nebuchadnezzar, from which the Chaldeans began a new
computation of time, as they had done from Nabonassar 123 years before.
Nabopolassar reigned nineteen years, and this was the eleventh of his
son, which makes the thirty. And it was proper enough for Ezekiel, when
he was in Babylon, to use the computation they there used, as we in
foreign countries date by the new style; and he afterwards uses the
melancholy computation of his own country, observing ([Eze
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002)) that it was the fifth year of
Jehoiachin's captivity. But the Chaldee paraphrase fixes upon another
era, and says that this was the thirtieth year after Hilkiah the priest
found the book of the law in the house of the sanctuary, at midnight,
after the setting of the moon, in the days of Josiah the king. And it is
true that this was just thirty years from that time; and that was an
event so remarkable (as it put the Jewish state upon a new trial) that
it was proper enough to date form it; and perhaps therefore the prophet
speaks indefinitely of thirty years, as having an eye both to that event
and to the Chaldean computation, which were coincident. It was in the
fourth month, answering to our June, and in the fifth day of the month,
that Ezekiel had this vision, [Eze
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002). It is probably that it was on the
sabbath day, because we read ([Eze
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#016)) that at the end of seven days,
which we may well suppose to be the next sabbath, the word of the Lord
came to him again. Thus John was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, when
he saw the visions of the Almighty, [Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010). God would hereby put an honour
upon his sabbaths, when the enemies mocked at them, [Lam
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007). And he would thus encourage his
people to keep up their attendance on the ministry of his prophets every
sabbath day, by the extraordinary manifestations of himself on some
sabbath days.

II\. The melancholy circumstances he was in when God honoured him, and
thereby favoured his people, with this vision. he was in the land of the
Chaldeans, among the captives, by the river of Chebar, and it was in the
fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity. Observe,

1\. The people of God were now, some of them, captives in the land of
the Chaldeans. The body of the Jewish nation yet remained in their own
land, but these were the first-fruits of the captivity, and they were
some of the best; for in Jeremiah's vision these were the good figs,
whom God had sent into the land of the Chaldeans for their good ([Jer
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#005)); and, that it might be for their
good, God raised up a prophet among them, to teach them out of the law,
then when he chastened them, [Psa
94:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012). Note, It is a great mercy to
have the word of God brought to us, and a great duty to attend to it
diligently, when we are in affliction. The word of instruction and the
rod of correction may be of great service to us, in concert and
concurrence with each other, the word to explain the rod and the rod to
enforce the word: both together give wisdom. It is happy for a man, when
he is sick and in pain, to have a messenger with him, an interpreter,
one among a thousand, if he have but his ear open to discipline, [Job
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#010). One of the quarrels God had
with the Jews, when he sent them into captivity, we for mocking his
messengers and misusing his prophets; and yet, when they were suffering
for this sin, he favoured them with this forfeited mercy. It were ill
with us if God did not sometimes graciously thrust upon us those means
of grace and salvation which we have foolishly thrust from us. In their
captivity they were destitute of ordinary helps for their souls, and
therefore God raised them up these extraordinary ones; for God's
children, if they be hindered in their education one way, shall have it
made up another way. But observe, It was in the fifth year of the
captivity that Ezekiel was raised up amongst them, and not before. So
long God left them without any prophet, till they began to lament after
the Lord and to complain that they saw not their signs and there was
none to tell them how long ([Psa
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009)), and then they would know how to
value a prophet, and God's discoveries of himself to them by him would
be the more acceptable and comfortable. The Jews that remained in their
own land had Jeremiah with them, those that had gone into captivity had
Ezekiel with them; for wherever the children of God are scattered abroad
he will find out tutors for them.

2\. The prophet was himself among the captives, those of them that were
posted by the river Chebar; for it was by the rivers of Babylon that
they sat down, and on the willow-trees by the river's side that they
hanged their harps, [Psa 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), [Psa
137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002). The planters in America keep
along by the sides of the rivers, and perhaps those captives were
employed by their masters in improving some parts of the country by the
rivers' sides that were uncultivated, the natives being generally
employed in war; or they employed them in manufactures, and therefore
chose to fix them by the sides of rivers, that the good they made might
the more easily be conveyed by water-carriage. Interpreters agree not
what river this of Chebar was, but among the captives by that river
Ezekiel was, and himself a captive. Observe here, (1.) The best men, and
those that are dearest to God, often share, not only in the common
calamities of this life, but in the public and national judgments that
are inflicted for sin; those feel the smart who contributed nothing to
the guilt, by which it appears that the difference between good and bad
arises not from the events that befal them, but from the temper and
disposition of their spirits under them. And since not only righteous
men, but prophets, share with the worst in present punishments, we may
infer thence, with the greatest assurance, that there are rewards
reserved for them in the future state. (2.) Words of conviction,
counsel, and comfort, come best to those who are in affliction from
their fellow sufferers. The captives will be best instructed by one who
is a captive among them and experimentally knows their sorrows. (3.) The
spirit of prophecy was not confined to the land of Israel, but some of
the brightest of divine revelations were revealed in the land of the
Chaldeans, which was a happy presage of the carrying of the church, with
that divine revelation upon which it is built, into the Gentile world;
and, as now, so afterwards, when the gospel kingdom was to be set up,
the dispersion of the Jews contributed to the spreading of the knowledge
of God. (4.) Wherever we are we may keep up our communion with God.
Undique ad coelos tantundem est viae - From the remotest corners of the
earth we may find a way open heavenward. (5.) When God's ministers are
bound the word of the Lord is not bound, [Ti2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009). When St. Paul was a prisoner the
gospel had a free course. When St. John was banished into the Isle of
Patmos Christ visited him there. Nay, God's suffering servants have
generally been treated as favourites, and their consolations have much
more abounded when affliction has abounded, [Co2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#005).

III\. The discovery which God was pleased to make of himself to the
prophet when he was in these circumstances, to be by him communicated to
his people. He here tells us what he saw, what he heard, and what he
felt. 1. He saw visions of God, [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001). No man can see God and live; but
many have seen visions of God, such displays of the divine glory as have
both instructed and affected them; and commonly, when God first revealed
himself to any prophet, he did it by an extraordinary vision, as to
Isaiah ([Isa 6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)), to Jeremiah (ch.
1), to Abraham ([Act 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002)), to settle a
correspondence and a satisfactory way of intercourse, so that there
needed not afterwards a vision upon ever revelation. Ezekiel was
employed in turning the hearts of the people to the Lord their God, and
therefore he must himself see the visions of God. Note, It concerns
those to be well acquainted with God themselves, and much affected with
what they know of him, whose business it is to bring others to the
knowledge and love of him. That he might see the visions of God the
heavens were opened; the darkness and distance which hindered his
visions were conquered, and he was let into the light of the glories of
the upper world, as near and clear as if heaven had been opened to him.
2. He heard the voice of God ([Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)): The word of the Lord came
expressly to him, and what he saw was designed to prepare him for what
he was to hear. The expression is emphatic. Essendo fuit verbum Dei -
The word of the Lord was as really it was to him. There was no mistake
in it; it came to him in the fulness of its light and power, in the
evidence and demonstration of the Spirit; it came close to him, nay, it
came into him, took possession of him and dwelt in him richly. It came
expressly, or accurately, to him; he did himself clearly understand what
he said and was abundantly satisfied f the truth of it. The essential
Word (so we may take it), the Word who is, who is what he is, came to
Ezekiel, to send him on his errand. 3. He felt the power of God opening
his eyes to see the visions, opening his ear to hear the voice, and
opening his heart to receive both: The hand of the Lord was there upon
him. Note, The hand of the Lord goes along with the word f the Lord, and
so it becomes effectual; those only understand and believe the report to
whom the arm of the Lord is revealed. The hand of God was upon him, as
upon Moses, to cover him, that he should not be overcome by the dazzling
light and lustre of the visions he saw, [Exo
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#022). It was upon him (as upon St.
John, [Rev 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017)), to revive and
support him, that he might bear up, and not faint, under these
discoveries, that he might neither be lifted up nor cast down with the
abundance of the revelations. God's grace is sufficient for him, and, in
token of that, his hand is upon him.

[Ezekiel 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 1:4</span></span>

The visions of God which Ezekiel here saw were very glorious, and had
more particulars than those which other prophets saw. It is the scope
and intention of these vision, 1. To possess the prophet's mind with
very great, and high, and honourable thoughts of that God by whom he was
commissioned and for whom he was employed. It is the likeness of the
glory of the Lord that he sees ([Eze
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028)), and hence he may infer that it
is his honour to serve him, for he is one whom angels serve. He may
serve him with safety, for he has power sufficient to bear him out in
his work. It is at his peril to draw back from his service, for he has
power to pursue him, as he did Jonah. So great a God as this must be
served with reverence and godly fear; and with assurance may Ezekiel
foretel what this God will do, for he is able to make his words good. 2.
To strike a terror upon the sinners who remained in Zion, and those who
had already come to Babylon, who were secure, and bade defiance to the
threatenings of Jerusalem's ruin, as we have found in Jeremiah's
prophecy, and shall find in this, many did. "Let those who said, We
shall have peace though we go on, know that our God is a consuming fire,
whom they cannot stand before." That this vision had a reference to the
destruction of Jerusalem seems plain from [Jer
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#003), where he says that it was the
vision which he saw when he came to destroy the city, that is, to
prophesy the destruction of it. 3. To speak comfort to those that feared
God, and trembled at his word, and humbled themselves under his mighty
hand. "Let them know that, though they are captives in Babylon, yet they
have God nigh unto them; though they have not the place of the sanctuary
to be their glorious high throne, they have the God of the sanctuary."
Dr. Lightfoot observes, "Now that the church is to be planted for a long
time in another country, the Lord shows a glory in the midst of them, as
he had done at their first constituting into a church in the wilderness;
and out of a cloud and fire, as he had done there, he showed himself;
and from between living creatures, as from between the cherubim, he
gives his oracles." This put an honour upon them, by which they might
value themselves when the Chaldeans insulted over them, and this might
encourage their hopes of deliverance in due time.

Now, to answer these ends, we have in these verses the first part of the
vision, which represents God as attended and served by an innumerable
company of angels, who are all his messengers, his ministers, doing his
commandments and hearkening to the voice of his word. This denotes his
grandeur, as it magnifies an earthly prince to have a splendid retinue
and numerous armies at his command, which engages his allies to trust
him and his enemies to fear him.

I. The introduction to this vision of the angels is very magnificent and
awakening, [Eze 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004). The prophet,
observing the heavens to open, looked, looked up (as it was time), to
see what discoveries God would make to him. Note, When the heavens are
opened it concerns us to have our eyes open. To clear the way, behold, a
whirlwind came out of the north, which would drive away the interposing
mists of this lower region. Fair weather comes out of the north, and
thence the wind comes that drives away rain. God can by a whirlwind
clear the sky and air, and produce that serenity of mind which is
necessary to our communion with Heaven. Yet this whirlwind was attended
with a great cloud. When we think that the clouds which arise from this
earth are dispelled and we can see beyond them, yet still there is a
cloud which heavenly things are wrapped in, a cloud from above, so that
we cannot order our speech concerning them by reason of darkness. Christ
here descended, as he ascended, in a cloud. Some by this whirlwind and
cloud understand the Chaldean army coming out of the north against the
land of Judah, bearing down all before them as a tempest; and so it
agrees with that which was signified by one of the first of Jeremiah's
visions ([Jer 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014), Out of the north
an evil shall break forth); but I take it here as an introduction rather
to the vision than to the sermons. This whirlwind came to Ezekiel (as
that to Elijah, [Kg1 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011)), to
prepare the way of the Lord, and to demand attention. He that has eyes,
that has ears, let him see, let him hear.

II\. The vision itself. A great cloud was the vehicle of this vision, in
which it was conveyed to the prophet; for God's pavilion in which he
rests, his chariot in which he rides, is darkness and thick clouds, [Psa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011); [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003). Thus he holds back the face of
his throne, lest its dazzling light and lustre should overpower us, by
spreading a cloud upon it. Now,

1\. The cloud is accompanied with a fire, as upon Mount Sinai, where God
resided in a thick cloud; but the sight of his glory was like a
devouring fire ([Exo 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016), [Exo
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#017)), and his first appearance to
Moses was in a flame of fire in the bush; for our God is a consuming
fire. This was a fire enfolding itself, a globe, or orb, or wheel of
fire. God being his own cause, his own rule, and his own end, if he be
as a fire, he is as a fire enfolding itself, or (as some read it)
kindled by itself. The fire of God's glory shines forth, but it quickly
enfolds itself; for he lets us know but part of his ways; the fire of
God's wrath breaks forth, but it also quickly enfolds itself, for the
divine patience suffers not all his wrath to be stirred up. If it were
not a fire thus enfolding itself, O Lord! who shall stand?

2\. The fire is surrounded with a glory: A brightness was about it, in
which it enfolded itself, yet it made some discovery of itself. Though
we cannot see into the fire, cannot by searching find out God to
perfection, yet we see the brightness that is round about it, the
reflection of this fire from the thick cloud. Moses might see God's back
parts, but not his face. We have some light concerning the nature of
God, from the brightness which encompasses it, though we have not an
insight into it, by reason of the cloud spread upon it. Nothing is more
easy than to determine that God is, nothing more difficult than to
describe what he is. When God displays his wrath as fire, yet there is a
brightness about it; for his holiness and justice appear very
illustrious in the punishment of sin and sinners: even about the
devouring fire there is a brightness, which glorified saints will for
ever admire.

3\. Out of this fire there shines the colour of amber. We are not told
who or what it was that had this colour of amber, and therefore I take
it to be the whole frame of the following vision, which came into
Ezekiel's view out of the midst of the fire and brightness; and the
first thing he took notice of before he viewed the particulars was that
it was of the colour of amber, or the eye of amber; that is, it looked
as amber does to the eye, of a bright flaming fiery colour, the colour
of a burning coal; so some think it should be read. The living creatures
which he saw coming out of the midst of the fire were seraphim -
burners; for he maketh his angels spirits, his ministers a flaming fire.

4\. That which comes out of the fire, of a fiery amber colour, when it
comes to be distinctly viewed, is the likeness of four living creatures;
not the living creatures themselves (angels are spirits, and cannot be
seen), but the likeness of them, such a hieroglyphic, or representation,
as God saw fit to make use of for the leading of the prophet, and us
with him, into some acquaintance with the world of angels (a matter
purely of divine revelation), so far as is requisite to possess us with
an awful sense of the greatness of that God who has angels for his
attendants, and the goodness of that God who has appointed them to be
attendants on his people. The likeness of these living creatures came
out of the midst of the fire; for angels derive their being and power
from God; they are in themselves, and to us, what he is pleased to make
them; their glory is a ray of his. The prophet himself explains this
vision ([Eze 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#020)): I knew that the
living creatures were the cherubim, which is one of the names by which
the angels are known in scripture. To Daniel was made known their
number, ten thousand times ten thousand, [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010). But, though they are many, yet
they are one, and that is made known to Ezekiel here; they are one in
nature and operation, as an army, consisting of thousands, is yet called
a body of men. We have here an account of,

(1.) Their nature. They are living creatures; they are the creatures of
God, the work of his hands; their being is derived; they have not life
in and of themselves, but receive it from him who is the fountain of
life. As much as the living creatures of this lower world excel the
vegetables that are the ornaments of earth, so much do the angels, the
living creatures of the upper world, excel the sun, moon, and stars, the
ornaments of the heavens. The sun (say some) is a flame of fire
enfolding itself, but it is not a living creature, as angels, those
flames of fire, are. Angels are living creatures, living beings,
emphatically so. Men on earth are dying creatures, dying daily (in the
midst of life we are in death), but angels in heaven are living
creatures; they live indeed, live to good purpose; and, when saints come
to be equal unto the angels, they shall not die any more, [Luk
20:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036).

(2.) Their number. They are four; so they appear here, though they are
innumerable; not as if these were four particular angels set up above
the rest, as some have fondly imagined, Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and
Uriel, but for the sake of the four faces they put on, and to intimate
their being sent forth towards the four winds of heaven, [Mat
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031). Zechariah saw them as four
chariots going forth east, west, north, and south, [Zac
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001). God has messengers to send every
way; for his kingdom is universal, and reaches to all parts of the
world.

(3.) Their qualifications, by which they are fitted for the service of
their Maker and Master. These are set forth figuratively and by
similitude, as is proper in visions, which are parables to the eye.
Their description here is such, and so expressed, that I think it is not
possible by it to form an exact idea of them in our fancies, or with the
pencil, for that would be a temptation to worship them; but the several
instances of their fitness for the work they are employed in are
intended in the several parts of this description. Note, It is the
greatest honour of God's creatures to be in a capacity of answering the
end of their creation; and the more ready we are to every good work the
nearer we approach to the dignity of angels. These living creatures are
described here, \[1.\] By their general appearance: They had the
likeness of a man; they appeared, for the main, in a human shape, First,
To signify that these living creatures are reasonable creatures,
intelligent beings, who have the spirit of a man which is the candle of
the Lord. Secondly, To put an honour upon the nature of man, who is made
lower, yet but a little lower, than the angels, in the very next rank of
beings below them. When the invisible intelligences of the upper world
would make themselves visible, it is in the likeness of man. Thirdly, To
intimate that their delights are with the sons of men, as their Master's
are ([Pro 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#031)), that they do service
to men, and men may have spiritual communion with them by faith, hope,
and holy love. Fourthly, The angels of God appear in the likeness of man
because in the fulness of time the Son of God was not only to appear in
that likeness, but to assume that nature; they therefore show this love
to it. \[2.\] By their faces: Every one had four faces, looking four
several ways. In St. John's vision, which has a near affinity with this,
each of the four living creatures has one of these faces here mentioned
([Rev 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007)); here each of them has all
four, to intimate that they have all the same qualifications for
service; though, perhaps, among the angels of heaven, as among the
angels of the churches, some excel in one gift and others in another,
but all for the common service. Let us contemplate their faces till we
be in some measure changed into the same image, that we may do the will
of God as the angels do it in heaven. They all four had the face of a
man (for in that likeness they appeared, [Eze
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005)), but, besides that, they had the
face of a lion, an ox, and an eagle, each masterly in its kind, the lion
among wild beasts, the ox among tame ones, and the eagle among fowls,
[Eze 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010). Does God make use of them
for the executing of judgments upon his enemies? They are fierce and
strong as the lion and the eagle in tearing their prey. Does he make use
of them for the good of his people? They are as oxen strong for labour
and inclined to serve. And in both they have the understanding of a man.
The scattered perfections of the living creatures on earth meet in the
angels of heaven. They have the likeness of man; but, because there are
some things in which man is excelled even by the inferior creatures,
they are therefore compared to some of them. They have the understanding
of a man, and such as far exceeds it; they also resemble man in
tenderness and humanity. But, First, A lion excels man in strength and
boldness, and is much more formidable; therefore the angels, who in this
resemble them, put on the face of a lion. Secondly, An ox excels man in
diligence, and patience, and painstaking, and an unwearied discharge of
the work he has to do; therefore the angels, who are constantly employed
in the service of God and the church, put on the face of an ox. Thirdly,
An eagle excels man in quickness and piercingness of sight, and in
soaring high; and therefore the angels, who seek things above, and see
far into divine mysteries, put on the face of a flying eagle. \[3.\] By
their wings: Every one had four wings, [Eze
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006). In the vision Isaiah had of them
they appeared with six, now with four; for they appeared above the
throne, and had occasion for two to cover their faces with. The angels
are fitted with wings to fly swiftly on God's errands; whatever business
God sends them upon they lose no time. Faith and hope are the soul's
wings, upon which it soars upward; pious and devout affections are its
wings on which it is carried forward with vigour and alacrity. The
prophet observes here, concerning their wings, First, That they were
joined one to another, [Eze 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009) and
again [Eze 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011). They did not make use
of their wings for fighting, as some birds do; there is no contest among
the angels. God makes peace, perfect peace, in his high places. But
their wings were joined, in token of their perfect unity and unanimity
and the universal agreement there is among them. Secondly, That they
were stretched upward, extended, and ready for use, not folded up, or
flagging. Let an angel receive the least intimation of the divine will,
and he has nothing to seek, but is upon the wings immediately; while our
poor dull souls are like the ostrich, that with much difficulty lifts up
herself on high. Thirdly, That two of their wings were made use of in
covering their bodies, the spiritual bodies they assumed. The clothes
that cover us are our hindrance in work; angels need no other covering
than their own wings, which are their furtherance. They cover their
bodies from us, so forbidding us needless enquiries concerning them. Ask
not after them, for they are wonderful, [Jdg
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#018). They cover them before God, so
directing us, when we approach to God, to see to it that we be so
clothed with Christ's righteousness that the shame of our nakedness may
not appear. \[4.\] By their feet, including their legs and thighs: They
were straight feet ([Eze 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007)); they
stood straight, and firm, and steady; no burden of service could make
their legs to bend under them. The spouse makes this part of the
description of her beloved, that his legs were as pillars of marble set
upon sockets of fine gold ([Sol 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#015));
such are the angels' legs. The sole of their feet was like that of a
calf's foot, which divides the hoof and is therefore clean: as it were
the sole of a round foot (as the Chaldee words it); they were ready for
motion any way. Their feet were winged (so the Septuagint); they went so
swiftly that it was as if they flew. And their very feet sparkled like
the colour of burnished brass; not only the faces, but the very feet, of
those are beautiful whom God sends on his errands ([Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)); every step the angels take is
glorious. In the vision John had of Christ it is said, His feet were
like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace, [Rev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015). \[5.\] By their hands ([Eze
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#008)): They had the hands of a man
under their wings on their four sides, an arm and a hand under every
wing. They had not only wings for motion, but hands for action. Many are
quick who are not active; they hurry about a great deal, but do nothing
to purpose, bring nothing to pass; they have wings, but no hands:
whereas God's servants, the angels, not only go when he sends them and
come when he calls them, but do what he bids them. They are the hands of
a man, which are wonderfully made and fitted for service, which are
guided by reason and understanding; for what angles do they do
intelligently and with judgment. They have calves' feet; this denotes
the swiftness of their motion (the cedars of Lebanon are said to skip
like a calf, [Psa 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006)); but they have
a man's hand, which denotes the niceness and exactness of their
performances, as the heavens are said to be the work of God's fingers.
Their hands were under their wings, which concealed them, as they did
the rest of their bodies. Note, The agency of angels is a secret thing
and their work is carried on in an invisible way. In working for God,
though we must not, with the sluggard, hide our hand in our bosom, yet
we must, with the humble, not let our left hand know what our right hand
doeth. We may observe that where these wings were their hands were under
their wings; wherever their wings carried them they carried hands along
with them, to be still doing something suitable something that the duty
of the place requires.

(4.) Their motions. The living creatures are moving. Angels are active
beings; it is not their happiness to sit still and do nothing, but to be
always well employed; and we must reckon ourselves then best when we are
doing good, doing it as the angels do it, or whom it is here observed,
\[1.\] That whatever service they went about they went every one
straight forward ([Eze 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009), [Eze
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012)), which intimates, First, That
they sincerely aimed at the glory of God, and had a single eye to that,
in all they did. Their going straight forward supposes that they looked
straight forward, and never had any sinister intentions in what they
did. And, if thus our eye be single, our whole body will be full of
light. The singleness of the eye is the sincerity of the heart.
Secondly, That they were intent upon the service they were employed in,
and did it with a close application of mind. They went forward with
their work; for what their hand found to do they did with all their
might and did not loiter in it. Thirdly, That they were unanimous in it:
They went straight forward, every one about his own work; they did not
thwart or jostle one another, did not stand in one another's light, in
one another's way. Fourthly, That they perfectly understood their
business, and were thoroughly apprised of it, so that they needed not to
stand still, to pause of hesitate, but pursue their work with readiness,
as those that knew what they had to do and how to do it. Fifthly, They
were steady and constant in their work. They did not fluctuate, did not
tire, did not vary, but were of a piece with themselves. They moved in a
direct line, and so went the nearest way to work in all they did and
lost no time. When we go straight we go forward; when we serve God with
one heart we rid ground, we rid work. \[2.\] They turned not when they
went, [Eze 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009), [Eze
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012). First, They made no blunders or
mistakes, which would give them occasion to turn back to rectify them;
their work needed no correction, and therefore needed not to be gone
over again. Secondly, They minded no diversions; as they turned not
back, so they turned not aside, to trifle with any thing that was
foreign to their business. \[3.\] They went whither the Spirit was to go
([Eze 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012)), either, First, Whither
their own spirit was disposed to go; thither they went, having no
bodies, as we have, to clog or hinder them. It is our infelicity and
daily burden that, when the spirit if willing, yet the flesh is weak and
cannot keep pace with it, so that the good which we would do we do it
not; but angels and glorified saints labour under no such impotency;
whatever they incline or intend to do they do it, and never come short
of it. Or, rather, Secondly, Whithersoever the Spirit of God would have
them go, thither they went. Though they had so much wisdom of their own,
yet in all their motions and actions they subjected themselves to the
guidance and government of the divine will. Whithersoever the divine
Providence was to go they went, to serve its purposes and to execute its
orders. The Spirit of God (says Mr. Greenhill) is the great agent that
sets angels to work, and it is their honour that they are led, they are
easily led, by the Spirit. See how tractable and obsequious these noble
creatures are. Whithersoever the Spirit is to go they go immediately,
with all possible alacrity. Note, Those that walk after the Spirit do
the will of God as the angels do it. \[4.\] They ran and returned like a
flash of lightning, [Eze 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#014). This
intimates, First, That they made haste; they were quick in their
motions, as quick as lightning. Whatever business they went about they
despatched it immediately, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye.
Happy they that have no bodies to retard their motion in holy exercises.
And happy shall we be when we come to have spiritual bodies for
spiritual work. Satan falls like lightning into his own ruin, [Luk
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018). Angels fly like lightning in
their Master's work. The angel Gabriel flew swiftly. Secondly, That they
made haste back: They ran and returned; ran to do their work and execute
their orders, and then returned to give an account of what they had done
and receive new instructions, that they might be always doing. They ran
into the lower world, to do what was to be done there; but, when they
had done it, they returned like flash of lightning to the upper world
again, to the beatific vision of their God, which they could not with
any patience be longer from than their service did require. Thus we
should be in the affairs of this world as out of our element. Though we
run into them, we must not repose in them, but our souls must quickly
return like lightning to God their rest and centre.

5\. We have an account of the light by which the prophet saw these
living creatures, or the looking-glass in which he saw them, [Eze
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013). (1.) He saw them by their own
light, for their appearance was like burning coals of fire; they are
seraphim-burners, denoting the ardour of their love to God, their
fervent zeal in his service, their splendour and brightness, and their
terror against God's enemies. When God employs them to fight his battles
they are as coals of fire ([Psa 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012))
to devour the adversaries, as lightnings shot out to discomfit them.
(2.) He saw them by the light of some lamps, which went up and down
among them, the shining whereof was very bright. Satan's works are works
of darkness; he is the ruler of the darkness of this world. But the
angels of light are in the light, and, though they conceal their
working, they show their work, for it will bear the light. But we see
them and their works only by candle-light, but the dim light of lamps
that go up and down among them; when the day breaks, and the shadows
flee away, we shall see them clearly. Some make the appearance of these
burning coals, and of the lightning that issues out of the fire, to
signify the wrath of God, and his judgments, that were now to be
executed upon Judah and Jerusalem for their sins, in which angels were
to be employed; and accordingly we find afterwards coals of fire
scattered upon the city to consume it, which were fetched from between
the cherubim, [Eze 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002). But by the
appearance of the lamps then we may understand the light of comfort
which shone forth to the people of God in the darkness of this present
trouble. If the ministry of the angels is as a consuming fire to God's
enemies, it is as a rejoicing light to his own children. To the one this
fire is bright, it is very reviving and refreshing; to the other, out of
the fire comes fresh lightning to destroy them. Note, Good angels are
our friends, or enemies, according as God is.

[Ezekiel 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 1:15</span></span>

The prophet is very exact in making and recording his observations
concerning this vision. And here we have,

I. The notice he took of the wheels, [Eze
1:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015). The glory of God appears not
only in the splendour of his retinue in the upper world, but in the
steadiness of his government here in this lower world. Having seen how
God does according to his will in the armies of heaven, let us now see
how he does according to it among the inhabitants of the earth; for
there, on the earth, the prophet saw the wheels, [Eze
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015). As he beheld the living
creatures, and was contemplating the glory of that vision and receiving
instruction from it, this other vision presented itself to his view.
Note, Those who make a good use of the discoveries God has favoured them
with may expect further discoveries; for to him that hath shall be
given. We are sometimes tempted to think there is nothing glorious but
what is in the upper world, whereas, could we with an eye of faith
discern the beauty of Providence and the wisdom, power, and goodness,
which shine in the administration of that kingdom, we should see, and
say, Verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth and acts like himself.
There are many things in this vision which give us some light concerning
the divine Providence. 1. The dispensations of Providence are compared
to wheels, either the wheels of a chariot, in which the conqueror rides
in triumph, or rather the wheels of a clock or watch, which all
contribute to the regular motion of the machine. We read of the course
or wheel of nature ([Jam 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006)), which
is here set before us as under the direction of the God of nature.
Wheels, though they move not of themselves, as the living creatures do,
are yet made movable and are almost continually kept in action.
Providence, represented by these wheels, produces changes; sometimes one
spoke of the wheel is uppermost and sometimes another; but the motion of
the wheel on its own axletree, like that of the orbs above, is very
regular and steady. The motion of the wheels is circular; by the
revolutions of Providence things are brought to the same posture and
pass which they were in formerly; for the thing that is is that which
has been, and there is no new thing under the sun, [Ecc
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009), [Ecc
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#010). 2. The wheel is said to be by
the living creatures, who attended it to direct its motion; for the
angels are employed as the ministers of God's providence, and have a
greater hand in directing the motions of second causes to serve the
divine purpose than we think they have. Such a close connexion is there
between the living creatures and the wheels that they moved and rested
together. Were angels busily employed? Men were busily employed as
instruments in their hand, whether of mercy or judgment, though they
themselves were not aware of it. Or, Are men active to compass their
designs? Angels at the same time are acting to control and overrule
them. This is much insisted on here ([Eze
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019)): When the living creatures went,
to bring about any business, the wheels went by them; when God has work
to do by the ministry of angels second causes are all found, or made,
ready to concur in it; and ([Eze 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#021))
when those stood these stood; when the angels had done their work the
second causes had done theirs. If the living creatures were lifted up
from the earth, were elevated to any service above the common course of
nature and out of the ordinary road (as suppose in the working of
miracles, the dividing of the water, the standing still of the sun), the
wheels, contrary to their own natural tendency, which is towards the
earth, move in concert with them, and are lifted up over against them;
this is thrice mentioned, [Eze
1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019). Note, All inferior creatures
are, and move, and act, as the Creator, by the ministration of angels,
directs and influences them. Visible effects are managed and governed by
invisible causes. The reason given of this is because the spirit of the
living creatures was in the wheels; the same wisdom, power, and holiness
of God, the same will and counsel of his, that guides and governs the
angels and all their performances, does, by them, order and dispose of
all the motions of the creatures in this lower world and the events and
issues of them. God is the soul of the world, and animates the whole,
both that above and that beneath, so that they move in perfect harmony,
as the upper and lower parts of the natural body do, so that
whithersoever the Spirit is to go (whatever God wills and purposes to be
done and brought to pass) thither their spirit is to go; that is, the
angels, knowingly and designedly, set themselves to bring it about. And
their spirit is in the wheels, which are therefore lifted up over
against them; that is, both the powers of nature and the wills of men
are all made to serve the intention, which they infallibly and
irresistibly effect, though perhaps they mean not so, neither doth their
heart think so, [Isa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007); [Mic
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011), [Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012). Thus, though the will of God's
precept be not done on earth as it is done in heaven, yet the will of
his purpose and counsel is, and shall be. 3. The wheel is said to have
four faces, looking four several ways ([Eze
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015)), denoting that the providence of
God exerts itself in all parts of the world, east, west, north, and
south, and extends itself to the remotest corners of it. Look which way
you will upon the wheel of Providence, and it has a face towards you, a
beautiful one, which you may admire the features and complexion of; it
looks upon you as ready to speak to you, if you be but ready to hear the
voice of it; like a well-drawn picture, it has an eye upon all that have
an eye upon it. The wheel had so four faces that it had in it four
wheels, which went upon their four sides, [Eze
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#017). At first Ezekiel saw it as one
wheel ([Eze 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015)), one sphere; but
afterwards he saw it was four, but they four had one likeness ([Eze
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016)); not only they were like one
another, but they were as if they had been one. This intimates, (1.)
That one event of providence is like another; what happens to us is that
which is common to men and what we are not to think strange. (2.) That
various events have a tendency to the same issue and concur to answer
the same intention. 4. Their appearance and their work are said to be
like the colour of a beryl ([Eze
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016)), the colour of Tarshish (so the
word is), that is, of the sea; the beryl is of that colour, sea-green;
blue Neptune we call it. The nature of things in this world is like that
of the sea, which is in a continual flux and yet there is a constant
coherence and succession of its parts. There is a chain of events which
is always drawing one way or other. The sea ebbs and flows, so does
Providence in its disposals, but always in the stated appointed times
and measures. The sea looks blue, as the air does, because of the
shortness and feebleness of our sight, which can see but a little way of
either; to that colour therefore are the appearance and work of
Providence fitly compared, because we cannot find out that which God
does from the beginning to the end, [Ecc
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011). We see but parts of his ways
([Job 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#014)), and all beyond looks
blue, which gives us to understand no more concerning it but that in
truth we know it not; it is far above out of our sight. 5. Their
appearance and their work are likewise said to be as it were a wheel in
the middle of a wheel. Observe here again, Their appearance to the
prophet is designed to set forth what their work really is. Men's
appearance and their work often differ, but the appearance of God's
providence and its work agree; if they seem to differ, it is through our
ignorance and mistake. Now both were as a wheel in a wheel, a less wheel
moved by a greater. We pretend not to give a mathematical description of
it. The meaning is that the disposals of Providence seem to us
intricate, perplexed, and unaccountable, and yet that they will appear
in the issue to have been all wisely ordered for the best; so that
though what God does we know not now, yet we shall know hereafter, [Joh
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007). 6. The motion of these wheels,
like that of the living creatures, was steady, regular, and constant:
They returned not when they went ([Eze
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#017)), because they never went amiss,
nor otherwise than they should do. God, in his providence, takes his
work before him, and he will have it forward; and it is going on even
when it seems to us to be going backward. They went as the Spirit
directed them, and therefore returned not. We should not have occasion
to return back as we have, and to undo that by repentance which we have
done amiss, and to do it over again, if we were but led by the Spirit
and followed his direction. The Spirit of life (so some read it) was in
the wheels, which carried them on with ease and evenness, and then they
returned not when they went. 7. The rings, or rims, of the wheels were
so high that they were dreadful, [Eze
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018). They were of a vast
circumference, so that when they were reared, and put in motion, the
prophet was even afraid to look upon them. Note, The vast compass of
God's thought, and the vast reach of his design, are really astonishing;
when we go about to describe the circle of Providence we are struck with
amazement and are even swallowed up. O the height and depth of God's
councils! The consideration of them should strike an awe upon us. 8.
They were full of eyes round about. This circumstance of the vision is
most surprising of all, and yet most significant, plainly denoting that
the motions of Providence are all directed by infinite wisdom. The
issues of things are not determined by a blind fortune, but by those
eyes of the Lord which run to and fro through the earth, and are in
every place, beholding the evil and the good. Note, It is a great
satisfaction to us, and ought to be so, that, though we cannot account
for the springs and tendencies of events, yet they are all under the
cognizance and direction of an all-wise all-seeing God.

II\. The notice he took of the firmament above over the heads of the
living creatures. When he saw the living creatures moving, and the
wheels by them, he looked up, as it is proper for us to do when we
observe the various motions of providence in this lower world; looking
up, he saw the firmament stretched forth over the heads of the living
creatures, [Eze 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022). What is done on
earth is done under the heaven (as the scripture often speaks), under
its inspection and influence. Observe, 1. What he saw: The firmament was
as the colour of the terrible crystal, truly glorious, but terribly so;
the vastness and brightness of it put the prophet into an amazement and
struck him with an awful reverence. The terrible ice, or frost (so it
may be read), the colour of snow congealed, or as mountains of ice in
the northern seas, which are very frightful. Daring sinners ask, Can God
judge through the dark cloud? [Job
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#013). But that which we take to be a
dark cloud is to him transparent as crystal, through which, from the
place of his habitation, he looks upon all the inhabitants of the earth,
[Psa 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#014). Under the firmament he saw
the wings of the living creatures erect, [Eze
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#023). When they pleased they used them
either for flight or for covering. God is on high, above the firmament;
the angels are under the firmament, which denotes their subjection to
God's dominion and their readiness to fly on his errands in the open
firmament of heaven, and to serve him unanimously. 2. What he heard.
(1.) He heard the noise of the angels' wings, [Eze
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024). Bees and other insects make a
great noise with the vibration of their wings; here the angels do so, to
awaken the attention of the prophet to that which God was about to say
to him from the firmament, [Eze 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025).
Angels, by the providences they are employed in, sound God's alarms to
the children of men and stir them up to hear his voice; for that is it
that cries in the city and is heard and understood by the men of wisdom.
The noise of their wings was loud and terrible, as the noise of great
waters (like the rout or roaring of the sea), and as the noise of a
host, the noise of war; but it was articulate and intelligible, and did
not give an uncertain sound; for it was the voice of speech; nay, it was
as the voice of the Almighty, for God, by his providences, speaks once,
yea, twice, if we could by perceive it, [Job
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014). The Lord's voice cries, [Mic
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009). (2.) He heard a voice from the
firmament, from him that sits upon the throne there, [Eze
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025). When the angels moved they made
a noise with their wings; but, when with that they had roused a careless
world, they stood still, and let down their wings, that there might be a
profound silence, and so God's voice might be the better heard. The
voice of Providence is designed to open men's ears to the voice of the
word, to do the office of the crier, who with a loud voice charges
silence while the judge passes sentence. He that has ears to hear, let
him hear. Note, Noises on earth should awaken our attention to the voice
from the firmament; for how shall we escape if we turn away from him
that speaks from heaven!

[Ezekiel 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 1:26</span></span>

All the other parts of this vision were but a preface and introduction
to this. God in them had made himself known as Lord of angels and
supreme director of all the affairs of this lower world, whence it is
easy to infer that whatever God by his prophets either promises or
threatens to do he is able to effect it. Angels are his servants; men
are his tools. But now that a divine revelation is to be given to a
prophet, and by him to the church, we must look higher than the living
creatures or the wheels, and must expect that from the eternal Word, of
whom we have an account in these verses. Ezekiel, hearing a voice from
the firmament, looked up, as John did, to see the voice that spoke with
him, and he saw one like unto the Son of man, [Rev
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012), [Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013). The second person sometimes
tried the fashion of a man occasionally before he clothed himself with
it for good and all; and the Spirit of prophecy is called the Spirit of
Christ ([Pe1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)) and the testimony
of Jesus, [Rev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010). 1. This glory of
Christ that the prophet saw was above the firmament that was over the
heads of the living creatures, [Eze
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026). Note, The heads of angels
themselves are under the feet of the Lord Jesus; for the firmament that
is over their heads is under his feet. Angels, principalities, and
powers are made subject to him, [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022). This dignity and dominion of the
Redeemer before his incarnation magnify his condescension in his
incarnation, when he was made a little lower than the angels, [Heb
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009). 2. The first thing he observed
was a throne; for divine revelation comes backed and supported with a
royal authority. We must have an eye of faith to God and Christ as upon
a throne. The first thing that John discovered in his visions was a
throne set in heaven ([Rev 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002)), which
commands reverence and subjection. It is a throne of glory, a throne of
grace, a throne of triumph, a throne of government, a throne of
judgment. The Lord has prepared his throne in the heavens, has prepared
it for his Son, whom he has set King on his holy hill of Zion. 3. On the
throne he saw the appearance of a man. This is good new to the children
of men, that the throne above the firmament is filled with one that is
not ashamed to appear, even there, in the likeness of man. Daniel, in
vision, saw the kingdom and dominion given to one like the Son of man,
who therefore has authority given him to execute judgment because he is
the Son of man ([Joh 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027)), so
appearing in these visions. 4. He saw him as a prince and judge upon
this throne. Though he appeared in fashion as a man, yet he appeared in
more than human glory, [Eze 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027). (1.)
Is God a shining light? So is he: when the prophet saw him he saw as the
colour of amber, that is, a brightness round about; for God dwells in
light, and covers himself with light as with a garment. How low did the
Redeemer stoop for us when, to bring about our salvation, he suffered
his glory to be eclipsed by the veil of his humanity! (2.) Is God a
consuming fire? So is he: from his loins, both upward and downward,
there was the appearance of fire. The fire above the loins was round
about within the amber; it was inward and involved. That below the loins
was more outward and open, and yet that also had brightness round about.
Some make the former to signify Christ's divine nature, the glory and
virtue of which are hidden within the colour of amber; it is what no man
has seen nor can see. The latter they suppose to be his human nature,
the glory of which there were those who saw; the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014). He had rays coming out of his
hand, and yet there was the hiding of his power, [Hab
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004). The fire in which the Son of man
appeared here might be intended to signify the judgments that were ready
to be executed upon Judah and Jerusalem, coming form that fiery
indignation of the Almighty which devours the adversaries. Nothing is
more dreadful to the most daring sinners than the wrath of him that sits
upon the throne, and of the Lamb, [Rev
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016). The day is coming when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed in flaming fire, [Th2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007), [Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008). It concerns us therefore to kiss
the Son lest he be angry. 5. The throne is surrounded with a rainbow,
[Eze 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028). It is so in St. John's
vision, [Rev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). The brightness about
it was of divers colours, as the bow that is in the cloud in the day of
rain, which, as it is a display of majesty, and looks very great, so it
is a pledge of mercy, and looks very kind; for it is a confirmation of
that gracious promise God has made that he will not drown the world
again, and he has said, I will look upon the bow and remember the
covenant, [Gen 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#016). This intimates
that he who sits upon the throne is the Mediator of the covenant, that
his dominion is for our protection, not our destruction, that he
interposes between us and the judgments our sins have deserved, and that
all the promises of God are in him yea and amen. Now that the fire of
God's wrath was breaking out against Jerusalem bounds should be set to
it, and he would not make an utter destruction of it, for he would look
upon the bow and remember the covenant, as he promised in such a case,
[Lev 26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042).

Lastly, We have the conclusion of this vision. Observe, 1. What notion
the prophet himself had of it: This was the appearance of the likeness
of the glory of the Lord. Here, as all along, he is careful to guard
against all gross corporeal thoughts of God, which might derogate from
the transcendent purity of his nature. he does not say, This was the
Lord (for he is invisible), but, This was the glory of the Lord, in
which he was pleased to manifest himself a glorious being; yet it is not
the glory of the Lord, but the likeness of that glory, some faint
resemblance of it; nor is it any adequate likeness of that glory, but
only the appearance of that likeness, a shadow of it, and not the very
image of the thing, [Heb 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001). 2. What
impressions it made upon him: When I saw it, I fell upon my face. (1.)
He was overpowered by it; the dazzling lustre of it conquered him and
threw him upon his face; for who is able to stand before this holy Lord
God? Or, rather, (2.) He prostrated himself in a humble sense of his own
unworthiness of the honour now done him, and of the infinite distance
which he now, more than ever, perceived to be between him and God; he
fell upon his face in token of that holy awe and reverence of God with
which his mind was possessed and filled. Note, The more God is pleased
to make known of himself to us the more low we should be before him. He
fell upon his face to adore the majesty of God, to implore his mercy and
to deprecate the wrath he saw ready to break out against the children of
his people. 3. What instructions he had from it. All he saw was only to
prepare him for that which he was to hear; for faith comes by hearing.
He therefore heard a voice of one that spoke; for we are taught by
words, not merely by hieroglyphics. When he fell on his face, ready to
received the word, then he heard the voice of one that spoke; for God
delights to teach the humble.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 2](eze002)

</div>
