<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze035)  [Next](eze037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 36:0</span></span>

We have done with Mount Seir, and left it desolate, and likely to
continue so, and must now turn ourselves, with the prophet, to the
mountains of Israel, which we find desolate too, but hope before we have
done with the chapter to leave in better plight. Here are two distinct
prophecies in this chapter: - I. Here is one that seems chiefly to
relate to the temporal estate of the Jews, wherein their present
deplorable condition is described and the triumphs of their neighbours
in it; but it is promised that their grievances shall be all redressed
and that in due time they shall be settled again in their own land, in
the midst of peace and plenty ([Eze
36:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001)). II. Here is another that
seems chiefly to concern their spiritual estate, wherein they are
reminded of their former sins and God's judgments upon them, to humble
them for their sins and under God's mighty hand ([Eze
36:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#016)). But it is promised, 1. That
God would glorify himself in showing mercy to them ([Eze
36:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#021)). 2. That he would sanctify
them, by giving them his grace and fitting them for his service; and
this for his own name's sake and in answer to their prayers ([Eze
36:25-38](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025)).

[Ezekiel 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 36:1</span></span>

The prophet had been ordered to set his face towards the mountains of
Israel and prophesy against them, [Eze
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#002). Then God was coming forth to
contend with his people; but now that God is returning in mercy to them
he must speak good words and comfortable words to these mountains, [Eze
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001) and again [Eze
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#004). You mountains of Israel, hear
the word of the Lord; and what he says to them he says to the hills, to
the rivers, to the valleys, to the desolate wastes in the country, and
to the cities that are forsaken, [Eze
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#004). and again [Eze
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#006). The people were gone, some one
way and some another; nothing remained there to be spoken to but the
places, the mountains and valleys; these the Chaldeans could not carry
away with them. The earth abides for ever. Now, to show the mercy God
had in reserve for the people, he is to speak of him as having a dormant
kindness for the place, which, if the Lord had been pleased for ever to
abandon, he would not have called upon to hear the word of the Lord, nor
would he as at this time have shown it such things as these. Here is,

I. The compassionate notice God takes of the present deplorable
condition of the land of Israel. It has become both a prey and a
derision to the heathen that are round about, [Eze
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#004). 1. It has become a prey to them;
and they are all enriched with the plunder of it. When the Chaldeans had
conquered them all their neighbours flew to the spoil as to a shipwreck,
every one thinking all his own that he could lay his hands on ([Eze
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#003)): They have made you desolate,
and swallowed you up on every side, that you might be a possession to
the heathen, to the residue of them, even such as had themselves
narrowly escaped the like desolation. No one thought it any crime to
strip an Israelite. Turba Romae sequitur fortunam ut semper - The mob of
Rome still praise the elevated and despise the fallen. It is the common
dry, when a man is down, Down with him. 2. It has become a derision to
them. They took all they had and laughed at them when they had done. The
enemy said, "Aha! even the ancient high places are ours in possession,
[Eze 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#002). Neither the antiquity, nor
the dignity, neither the sanctity nor the fortifications, of the land of
Israel, are its security, but we have become masters of it all." The
more honours that land had been adorned with, and the greater figure it
had made among the nations, the more pride and pleasure did they take in
making a spoil of it, which is an instance of a base and sordid spirit;
for the more glorious and prosperity was the more piteous is the
adversity. God takes notice of it here as an aggravation of the present
calamity of Israel: You are taken up in the lips of talkers and are an
infamy of the people, [Eze 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#003). All
the talk of the country about was concerning the overthrow of the Jewish
nation; and every one that spoke of it had some peevish ill-natured
reflection or other upon them. They were the scorning of those that were
at ease and the contempt of the proud, [Psa
123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004). There are some that are noted
for talkers, that have something to say of every body, but cannot find
in their hearts to speak well of any body; God's people, among such
people, were sure to be a reproach when the crown had fallen from their
head. Thus it was the lot of Christianity, in its suffering days, to be
every where spoken against.

II\. The expressions of God's just displeasure against those who
triumphed in the desolations of the land of Israel, as many of its
neighbours did, even the residue of the brethren, and Idumea
particularly. Let us see, 1. How they dealt with the Israel of God. They
carved out large possessions to themselves out of their land, out of
God's land; for so indeed it was: "They have appointed my land into
their possession ([Eze 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#005)), and so
not only invaded their neighbour's property, but intrenched upon God's
prerogative." It was the holy land which they laid their sacrilegious
hands upon. They did not own any dependence upon God, as the God of that
land, nor acknowledge any remaining interest that Israel had in it, but
cast it out for a prey, as if they had won it in a lawful war. And this
they did without any dread of God and his judgments and without any
compassion for Israel and their calamities, but with the joy of all
their hearts, because they got by it, and with despiteful minds to
Israel that lost by it. Increasing wealth, by right or wrong, is all the
joy of a worldly heart; and the calamities of God's people are all the
joy of a despiteful mind. And those that had not an opportunity of
making a prey of God's people made a reproach of them; so that they were
the shame of the heathen, [Eze 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#006).
Every body ridiculed them and made a jest of them; and the truth is they
had by their own sin made themselves vile; so that God was righteous
herein, but men were unrighteous and very barbarous. 2. How God would
deal with those who were thus in word and deed abusive to his people. He
has spoken against the heathen; he has passed sentence upon them; he has
determined to reckon with them for it, and this in the fire of his
jealousy, both for his own honour and for the honour of his people, [Eze
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#005). Having a love for both as strong
as death, he has a jealousy for both as cruel as the grave. They spoke
in their malice against God's people, and he will speak in his jealousy
against them; and it is easy to say which will speak most powerfully.
God will speak in his jealousy and in his fury, [Eze
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#006). Fury is not in God; but he will
exert his power against them and handle them as severely as men do when
they are in a fury. He will so speak to them in his wrath as to vex them
in his sore displeasure. What he says he will stand to, for it is backed
with an oath. He has lifted up his hand and sworn by himself, has sworn
and will not repent. And what is it that is said with so much heat, and
yet with so much deliberation? It is this ([Eze
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#007)), Surely the heathen that are
about you, they shall bear their shame. Note, The righteous God, to whom
vengeance belongs, will render shame for shame. Those that put contempt
and reproach upon God's people will, sooner or later, have it burned
upon themselves, perhaps in this world (either their follies or their
calamities, their miscarriages or their mischances, shall be their
reproach), at furthest in that day when all the impenitent shall rise to
shame and everlasting contempt.

III\. The promises of God's favour to his Israel and assurances given of
great mercy God had in store for them. God takes occasion from the
outrage and insolence of their enemies to show himself so much the more
concerned for them and ready to do them good, as David hoped that God
would recompense him good for Shimei's cursing him. Let them curse, but
bless thou. In this way, as well as others, the enemies of God's people
do them real service, even by the injuries they do them, against their
will and beyond their intention. We shall have no reason to complain if,
the more unkind men are, the more kind God is - if, the more kindly he
speaks to us by his word and Spirit, the more kindly he acts for us in
his providence. The prophet must say so to the mountains of Israel,
which were now desolate and despised, that God is for them and will burn
to them, [Eze 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#009). As the curse of
God reaches the ground for man's sake, so does the blessing. Now that
which is promised is, 1. That their rightful owners should return to the
possession of them: My people Israel are at hand to come, [Eze
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#008). Though they are at a great
distance from their own country, though they are dispersed in many
countries, and though they are detained by the power of their enemies,
yet they shall come again to their own border, [Jer
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017). The time is at hand for their
return. Though there were above forty years of the seventy (perhaps
fifty) yet remaining, it is spoken of as near, because it is sure, and
there were some among them that should live to see it. A thousand years
are with God but as one day. The mountains of Israel are now desolate;
but God will cause men to walk upon them again, even his people Israel,
not as travellers passing over them, but as inhabitants - not tenants,
but freeholders: They shall possess thee, not for term of life, but for
themselves and their heirs; thou shalt be their inheritance. It was a
type of the heavenly Canaan, to which all God's children are heirs,
every Israelite indeed, and into which they shall shortly be all brought
together, out of the countries where they are now scattered. 2. That
they should afford a plentiful comfortable maintenance for their owners
at their return. When the land had enjoyed her sabbaths for so many
years, it should be so much the more fruitful afterwards, as we should
be after rest, especially a sabbath rest: You shall be tilled and sown
([Eze 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#009)) and shall yield your fruit
to my people Israel, [Eze 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#008). Note,
It is a blessing to the earth to be made serviceable to men, especially
to good men, that will serve God with cheerfulness in the use of those
good things which the earth serves up to them. 3. That the people of
Israel should have not only a comfortable sustenance, but a comfortable
settlement, in their own land: The cities shall be inhabited; the wastes
shall be builded, [Eze 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#010) And I
will settle you after your old estates, [Eze
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#011). Their own sin had unsettled
them, but now God's favour shall resettle them. When the prodigal son
has become a penitent he is settled again in his father's house,
according to his former estate. Bring hither the first robe, and put it
on him. Nay, I will do better unto you now than at your beginnings.
There is more joy for the sheep that is brought back than there would
have been if it had never gone astray. And God sometimes multiplies his
people's comforts in proportion to the time that he has afflicted them.
Thus God blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning, and
doubled to him all he had. 4. That the people, after their return,
should be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the land, so that it
should not only be inhabited again, but as thickly inhabited, and as
well peopled, as ever. God will bring back to it all the house of
Israel, even all of it (observe what an emphasis is laid upon that, [Eze
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#010)), all whose spirits God stirred
up to return; and those only were reckoned of the house of Israel, the
rest had cut themselves off from it; or, though but few, in comparison,
returned at first, yet afterwards, at divers times, they all returned;
and then (says God) I will multiply these men ([Eze
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#010)), multiply man and beast; and
they shall increase, [Eze 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#011). Note,
God's kingdom in the world is a growing kingdom; and his church, though
for a time it may be diminished, shall recover itself and be again
replenished. 5. That the reproach long since cast upon the land of
Israel by the evil spies, and of late revived, that it was a land that
ate up the inhabitants of it by famine, sickness, and the sword, should
be quite rolled away, and there should never be any more occasion for
it. Canaan had got into a bad name. It had of old spued out the
inhabitants ([Lev 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#028)), the natives,
the aborigines, which was turned to its reproach by those that should
have put another construction upon it, [Num
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#032). It had of late devoured the
Israelites, and spued them out too; so that it was commonly said of it,
It is a land which, instead of supporting its nations or tribes that
inhabit it, bereaves them, overthrows them, and causes them to fall; it
is a tenement which breaks all the tenants that come upon it. This
character it had got among the neighbours; but God now promises that it
shall be so no more: Thou shalt no more bereave them of men ([Eze
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#012)), shalt devour men no more, [Eze
36:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#014). But the inhabitants shall live
to a good old age, and not have the number of their months cut off in
the midst. Compare this with that promise, [Zac
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#004). Note, God will take away the
reproach of his people by taking away that which was the occasion of it.
When the nation is made to flourish in peace, plenty, and power, then
they hear no more the shame of the heathen ([Eze
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#015)), especially when it is
reformed; when sin, which is the reproach of any people, particularly of
God's professing people, is taken away, then they hear no more the
reproach of the people. Note, When God returns in mercy to a people that
return to him in duty, all their grievances will be soon redressed and
their honour retrieved.

[Ezekiel 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 36:16</span></span>

When God promised the poor captives a glorious return, in due time, to
their own land, it was a great discouragement to their hopes that they
were unworthy, utterly unworthy, of such a favour; therefore, to remove
that discouragement, God here shows them that he would do it for them
purely for his own name's sake, that he might be glorified in them and
by them, that he might manifest and magnify his mercy and goodness, that
attribute which of all others is most his glory. And, the restoration of
that people being typical of our redemption by Christ, this is intended
further to show that the ultimate end aimed at in our salvation, to
which all the steps of it were made subservient, was the glory of God.
To this end Christ directed all he did in that short prayer, Father,
glorify thy name; and God declared it was his end in all he did in the
immediate answer given to that prayer, by a voice from heaven: I have
glorified it, and I will glorify it yet again, [Joh
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028). Now observe here,

I. How God's name had suffered both by the sins and by the miseries of
Israel; and this was more to be regretted than all their sorrow, which
they had brought upon themselves; for the honour of God lies nearer the
hearts of good men than any interests of their own. 1. God's glory had
been injured by the sin of Israel when they were in their own land, [Eze
36:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#017). It was a good land, a holy
land, a land that had the eye of God upon it. But they defiled it by
their own way, their wicked way; that is our own way, the way of our own
choice; and we ourselves must bear the blame and shame of it. The sin of
a people defiles their land, renders it abominable to God and
uncomfortable to themselves; so that they cannot have any holy communion
with him nor with one another. What was unclean might not be made use
of. By the abuse of the gifts of God's bounty to us we forfeit the use
of them; and, the mind and conscience being defiled with guilt, no
comfort is allowed us, nothing is pure to us. Their way in the eye of
God was like the pollution of a woman during the days of her separation,
which shut her out from the sanctuary and made very things she touched
ceremonially unclean, [Lev 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019). Sin
is that abominable thing which the Lord hates, and which he cannot
endure to look upon. They shed blood and worshipped idols ([Eze
36:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#018)) and with those sins defiled the
land. For this God poured out his fury upon them, scattered them among
the heathen. Their own land was sick of them, and they were sent into
other lands. Herein God was righteous, and was justified in what he did;
none could say that he did them any wrong, nay, he did justice to his
own honour, for he judged them according to their way and according to
their doings, [Eze 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#019). And yet, the
matter being not rightly understood, he was not glorified in it; for the
enemies did say, as Moses pleaded the Egyptians would say if he had
destroyed them in the wilderness, that for mischief he brought them
forth. Their neighbours considered them rather as a holy people than as
a sinful people, and therefore took occasion from the calamities they
were in, instead of glorifying God, as they might justly have done, to
reproach him and put contempt upon him; and God's name was continually
every day blasphemed by their oppressors, [Isa
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005). 2. When they entered into the
land of the heathen God had no glory by them there; but, on the
contrary, his holy name was profaned, [Eze
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#020). (1.) It was profaned by the
sins of Israel; they were no credit to their profession wherever they
went, but, on the contrary, a reproach to it. The name of God and his
holy religion was blasphemed through them, [Rom
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024). When those that pretended to be
in relation to God, in covenant and communion with him, were found
corrupt in their morals, slaves to their appetites and passions,
dishonest in their dealings, and false to their words and the trust
reposed in them, the enemies of the Lord had thereby great occasion
given them to blaspheme, especially when they quarrelled with their God
for correcting them, than which nothing could be more scandalous. (2.)
It was profaned by the sufferings of Israel; for from them the enemies
of God took occasion to reproach God, as unable to protect his own
worshippers and to make good his own grants. They said, in scorn, "These
are the people of the land, these wicked people (you see he could not
keep them in their obedience to his precepts), these miserable people -
you see he could not keep them in the enjoyment of his favours. These
are the people that came out of Jehovah's land, they are the very scum
of the nations. Are these those that had statues so righteous whose
lives are so unrighteous? Is this the nation that is so much celebrated
for a wise and understanding people, and that is said to have God so
nigh unto them? Do these belong to that brave, that holy nation, who
appear here so vile, so abject?" Thus God sold his people and did not
increase his wealth by their price, [Psa
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#012). The reproach they were under
reflected upon him.

II\. Let us now see how God would retrieve his honour, secure it, and
advance it, by working a great reformation upon them and then working a
great salvation for them. He would have scattered them among the
heathen, were it not that he feared the wrath of the enemy, [Deu
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#026), [Deu
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027). But, though they were unworthy
of his compassion, yet he had pity for his own holy name, and a thousand
pities it was that that should be trampled upon and abused. He looked
with compassion on his own honour, which lay bleeding among the heathen,
on that jewel which was trodden into the dirt, which the house of
Israel, even in the land of their captivity, had profaned, [Eze
36:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#021). In pity to that God brought
them out from the heathen, because their sins were more scandalous there
than they had been in their own land. "Therefore I will gather you out
of all countries and bring you into your own land, [Eze
36:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#024). Not for your sake, because you
are worthy of such a favour, for you are most unworthy, but for my holy
name's sake ([Eze 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#022)), that I may
sanctify my great name," [Eze 36:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#023).
Observe, by the way, God's holy name is his great name. His holiness is
his greatness; so he reckons it himself. Nor does any thing make a man
truly great but being truly good, and partaking of God's holiness. God
will magnify his name as a holy name, for he will sanctify it: I will
sanctify my name which you have profaned. When God performs that which
he has sworn by his holiness, then he sanctifies his name. The effect of
this shall be very happy: The heathen shall know that I am the Lord when
I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes and yours. When God
proves his own holy name, and his saints praise it, then he is
sanctified in them, and this contributes to the propagating of the
knowledge of him. Observe, 1. God's reasons of mercy are all fetched
from within himself; he will bring his people out of Babylon, not for
their sakes, but for his own name's sake, because he will be glorified.
2. God's goodness takes occasion from man's badness to appear so much
the more illustrious; therefore he will sanctify his name by the pardon
of sin, because it has been profaned by the commission of sin.

[Ezekiel 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 36:25</span></span>

The people of God might be discouraged in their hopes of a restoration
by the sense not only of their unworthiness of such a favour (which was
answered, in the foregoing verses, with this, that God, in doing it,
would have an eye to his own glory, not to their worthiness), but of
their unfitness for such a favour, being still corrupt and sinful; and
that is answered in these verses, with a promise that God would by his
grace prepare and qualify them for the mercy and then bestow it on them.
And this was in part fulfilled in that wonderful effect which the
captivity in Babylon had upon the Jews there, that it effectually cured
them of their inclination to idolatry. But it is further intended as a
draught of the covenant of grace, and a specimen of those spiritual
blessings with which we are blessed in heavenly things by that covenant.
As (ch. 34) after a promise of their return the prophecy insensibly slid
into a promise of the coming of Christ, the great Shepherd, so here it
insensibly slides into a promise of the Spirit, and his gracious
influences and operations, which we have as much need of for our
sanctification as we have of Christ's merit for our justification.

I. God here promises that he will work a good work in them, to qualify
them for the good work he intended to bring about for them, [Eze
36:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025). We had promises to the same
purport, [Eze 11:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#018). 1. That God
would cleanse them from the pollutions of sin ([Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025)): I will sprinkle clean water
upon you, which signifies both the book of Christ sprinkled upon the
conscience to purify that and to take away the sense of guilt (as those
that were sprinkled with the water of purification were thereby
discharged from their ceremonial uncleanness) and the grace of the
Spirit sprinkled on the whole soul to purify it from all corrupt
inclinations and dispositions, as Naaman was cleansed from his leprosy
by dipping in Jordan. Christ was himself clean, else his blood could not
have been cleansing to us; and it is a Holy Spirit that makes us holy:
From all your filthiness and from all your idols will I cleanse you. And
([Eze 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#029)) I will save you from all
your uncleannesses. Sin is defiling, idolatry particularly is so; it
renders sinners odious to God and burdensome to themselves. When guilt
is pardoned, and the corrupt nature sanctified, then we are cleansed
from our filthiness, and there is no other way of being saved from it.
This God promises his people here, in order to his being sanctified in
them, [Eze 36:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#023). We cannot sanctify
God's name unless he sanctify our hearts, nor live to his glory, but by
his grace. 2. That God would give them a new heart, a disposition of
mind excellent in itself and vastly different from what it was before.
God will work an inward change in order to a universal change. Note, All
that have an interest in the new covenant, and a title to the new
Jerusalem, have a new heart and a new spirit, and these are necessary in
order to their walking in newness of life. This is that divine nature
which believers are by the promises made partakers of. 3. That, instead
of a heart of stone, insensible and inflexible, unapt to receive any
divine impressions and to return any devout affections, God would give a
heart of flesh, a soft and tender heart, that has spiritual senses
exercised, conscious to itself of spiritual pains and pleasures, and
complying in every thing with the will of God. Note, Renewing grace
works as great a change in the soul as the turning of a dead stone into
living flesh. 4. That since, besides our inclination to sin, we complain
of an inability to do our duty, God will cause them to walk in his
statutes, will not only show them the way of his statutes before them,
but incline them to walk in it, and thoroughly furnish them with wisdom
and will, and active powers, for every good work. In order to this he
will put his Spirit within them, as a teacher, guide, and sanctifier.
Note, God does not force men to walk in his statutes by external
violence, but causes them to walk in his statutes by an internal
principle. And observe what use we ought to make of this gracious power
and principle promised us, and put within us: You shall keep my
judgments. If God will do his part according to the promise, we must do
ours according to the precept. Note, The promise of God's grace to
enable us for our duty should engage and quicken our constant care and
endeavour to do our duty. God's promises must drive us to his precepts
as our rule, and then his precepts must send us back to his promises for
strength, for without his grace we can do nothing.

II\. God here promises that he will take them into covenant with
himself. The sum of the covenant of grace we have, [Eze
36:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#028). You shall be my people, and I
will be your God. It is not, "If you will be my people, I will be your
God" (though it is very true that we cannot expect to have God to be to
us a God unless we be to him a people), but he has chosen us, and loved
us, first, not we him; therefore the condition is of grace, is by
promise, as well as the reward; not of merit, not of works: "You shall
be my people; I will make you so; I will give you the nature and spirit
of my people, and then I will be your God." And this is the foundation
and top-stone of a believer's happiness; it is heaven itself, [Rev
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003), [Rev
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#007).

III\. He promises that he will bring about all that good for them which
the exigence of their case calls for. When they are thus prepared for
mercy, 1. Then they shall return to their possessions and be settled
again in them ([Eze 36:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#028)): You shall
dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers. God will, in bringing
them back to it, have an eye not to any merit of theirs, but to the
promise made to the fathers; for therefore he gave it to them at first,
[Deu 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007), [Deu
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008). Therefore he is gracious, because
he has said that he will be so. This shall follow upon the blessed
reformation God would work among them ([Eze
36:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#033)): "In the day that I shall have
cleansed you from all your iniquities, and so shall have made you meet
for the inheritance, I will cause you to dwell in the cities, and so put
you in possession of the inheritance." This is God's method of mercy
indeed, first to part men from their sins, and then to restore them to
their comforts. 2. Then they shall enjoy a plenty of all good things.
When they are saved from their uncleanness, from their sins which kept
good things from them, then I will call for the corn and will increase
it, [Eze 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#029). Plenty comes at God's
call, and the plenty he calls for shall be still growing; and when he
speaks the word the fruit both of the tree and of the field shall
multiply. As the inhabitants multiply the productions shall multiply for
their maintenance; for he that sends mouths will send meat. Famine was
one of the judgments which they had laboured under, and it had been as
much as any a reproach to them, that they should be starved in a land so
famed for fruitfulness. But now I will lay no famine upon you; and none
are under that rod without having it laid on by him. Then they shall
receive no more reproach of famine, shall never be again upbraided with
that, nor shall it ever be said that God is a Master that keeps his
servants to short allowance. Nay, they shall not only be cleared from
the reproach of famine, but they shall have the credit of abundance. The
land that had long lain desolate in the sight of all that passed by,
that looked upon it, some with contempt and some with compassion, shall
again be tilled ([Eze 36:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#034)), and,
having long lain fallow, it will now be the more fruitful. Observe, God
will call for the corn and yet they must till the ground for it. Note,
Even promised mercies must be laboured for; for the promise is not to
supersede, but to quicken and encourage our industry and endeavour. And
such a blessing will God command on the hand of the diligent that all
who pass by shall take notice of it, with wonder, [Eze
36:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#035). They shall say, "See what a
blessed change here is, how this land that was desolate has become like
the garden of Eden, the desert turned again into a paradise," Note, God
has honours in reserve for his people to be crowned with sufficient to
counterbalance the contempt they are now loaded with, and in them he
will be honoured. This wonderful increase both of the people of the land
and of its products is compared ([Eze
36:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#038)) to the large flocks of cattle
that are brought to Jerusalem, to be sacrificed at one of the solemn
feasts. Even the cities that now lie waste shall be filled with flocks
of men, not like the flocks with which the pastures are covered over
([Psa 65:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#013)), but like the holy flock
which is brought to the courts of the Lord's house. Note, Then the
increase of the numbers of a people is honourable and comfortable indeed
when they are all dedicated to God as a holy flock, to be presented to
him for living sacrifices. Crowds are a lovely sight in God's temple.

IV\. He shows what shall be the happy effects of this blessed change. 1.
It shall have a happy effect upon the people of God themselves, for it
shall bring them to an ingenuous repentance for their sins ([Eze
36:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#031)): Then shall you remember your
own evil ways and shall loathe yourselves. See here what sin is; it is
an abomination, a loathsome thing, that abominable thing which the Lord
hates. See what is the first step towards repentance; it is remembering
our own evil ways, reflecting seriously upon the sins we have committed
and being particular in recapitulating them. We must remember against
ourselves not only our gross enormities, our own evil ways, but our
defects and infirmities, our doings that were not good, not so good as
they should have been; not only our direct violations of the law, but
our coming short of it. See what is evermore a companion of true
repentance, and that is self-loathing, a holy shame and confusion of
face: "You shall loathe yourselves in your own sight, seeing how
loathsome you have made yourselves in the sight of God." Self-love is at
the bottom of sin, which we cannot but blush to see the absurdity of;
but our quarrelling with ourselves is in order to our being, upon good
grounds, reconciled to ourselves. And, lastly, see what is the most
powerful inducement to an evangelical repentance, and that is a sense of
the mercy of God; when God settles them in the midst of plenty, then
they shall loathe themselves for their iniquities. Note, The goodness of
God should overcome our badness and lead us to repentance. The more we
see of God's readiness to receive us into favour upon our repentance the
more reason we shall see to be ashamed of ourselves that we could ever
sin against so much love. That heart is hard indeed that will not be
thus melted. 2. It shall have a happy effect upon their neighbours, for
it shall bring them to a more clear knowledge of God ([Eze
36:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#036)): "Then the heathen that are
left round about you, that spoke ignorantly of God (for so all those do
that speak ill of him) when they saw the land of Israel desolate, shall
begin to know better, and to speak more intelligently of God, being
convinced that he is able to rebuild the most desolate cities and to
replant the most desolate countries, and that, though the course of his
favours to his people may be obstructed for a time, they shall not be
cut off for ever." They shall be made to know the truth of divine
revelation by the exact agreement which they shall discern between God's
word which he has spoken to Israel and his works which he has done for
them: I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. With us saying and
doing are two things, but they are not so with God.

V. He proposes these things to them, not as the recompence of their
merits, but as the return of their prayers.

1\. Let them not think that they have deserved it: Not for your sakes do
I this, be it known to you ([Eze
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#022), [Eze
36:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#032)); no, be you ashamed and
confounded for your own ways. God is doing this, all this which he has
promised; it is as sure to be done as if it were done already, and
present events have a tendency towards it. But then, (1.) They must
renounce the merit of their own good works, and be brought to
acknowledge that it is not for their sakes that it is done; so, when God
brought Israel into Canaan the first time, an express caveat was entered
against this thought. [Deu 9:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#004), It
is not for thy righteousness. It is not for the sake of any of their
good qualities or good deeds, not because God had any need of them, or
expected any benefit by them. No, in showing mercy he acts by
prerogative, not for our deserts, but for his own honour. See how
emphatically this is expressed: Be it known to you, it is not for your
sakes, which intimates that we are apt to entertain a high conceit of
our own merits and are with difficulty persuaded to disclaim a
confidence in them. But, one way or other, God will make all his
favourites to know and own that it is his grace, and not their goodness,
his mercy, and not their merit, that made them so; and that therefore
not unto them, not unto them, but unto him, is all the glory due. (2.)
They must repent of the sin of their own evil ways. They must own that
the mercies they receive from God are not only not merited, but that
they are a thousand times forfeited; and therefore they must be so far
from boasting of their good works that they must be ashamed and
confounded for their evil ways, and then they are best prepared for
mercy.

2\. Yet let them know that they must desire and expect it ([Eze
36:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#037)): I will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel. God has spoken, and he will do it,
and he will be sought unto for it. He requires that his people should
seek unto him, and he will incline their hearts to do it, when he is
coming towards them in ways of mercy. (1.) They must pray for it, for by
prayer God is sought unto, and enquired after. What is the matter of
God's promises must be the matter of our prayers. By asking for the
mercy promised we must give glory to the donor, express a value for the
gift, own our dependence, and put honour upon prayer which God has put
honour upon. Christ himself must ask, and then God will give him the
heathen for his inheritance, must pray the Father, and then he will send
the Comforter; much more must we ask that we may receive. (2.) They must
consult the oracles of God, and thus also God is sought unto and
enquired after. The mercy must be, not an act of providence only, but a
child of promise; and therefore the promise must be looked at, and
prayer made for it with an eye of faith fastened upon the promise, which
must be both the guide and the ground of our expectations. Both these
ways we find God enquired of by Daniel, in the name of the house of
Israel, when he was about to do those great things for them; he
consulted the oracles of God, for he understood by books, the book of
the prophet Jeremiah, both what was to be expected and when; and then he
set his face to seek God by prayer, [Dan
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002), [Dan
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#003). Note, Our communion with God must
be kept up by the word and prayer in all the operations of his
providence concerning us and in both he must be enquired of.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 37](eze037)

</div>
