<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze037)  [Next](eze039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 38:0</span></span>

This chapter, and that which follows it, are concerning Gog and Magog, a
powerful enemy to the people of Israel, that should make a formidable
descent upon them, and put them into a consternation, but their army
should be routed and their design defeated; and this prophecy, it is
most probable, had its accomplishment some time after the return of the
people of Israel out of their captivity, whether in the struggles they
had with the kings of Syria, especially Antiochus Epiphanes, or perhaps
in some other way not recorded, we cannot tell. If the sacred history of
the Old Testament had reached as far as the prophecy, we should have
been better able to understand these chapters, but, for want of that
key, we are locked out of the meaning of them. God had by the prophet
assured his people of happy times after their return to their own land;
but lest they should mistake the promises which related to the kingdom
of the Messiah and the spiritual privileges of that the kingdom of the
Messiah and the spiritual privileges of that kingdom, as if from them
they might promise themselves an uninterrupted temporal prosperity, he
here tells them, as Christ told his disciples to prevent the like
mistake, that in the world they shall have tribulation, but they may be
of good cheer, for they shall be victorious at last. This prophecy here
of Gog and Magog is without doubt alluded to in that prophecy which
relates to the latter days, and which seems to be yet unfulfilled ([Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008)), that Gog and Magog shall be
gathered to battle against the camp of the saints, as the Old Testament
prophecies of the destruction of Babylon are alluded to, Rev. 18. But,
in both, the Old Testament prophecies had their accomplishment in the
Jewish church as the New Testament prophecies shall have when the time
comes in the Christian church. In this chapter we have intermixed, I.
The attempt that Gog and Magog should make upon the land of Israel, the
vast army they should bring into the field, and their vast preparations
([Eze 38:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004)), their project and
design in it ([Eze 38:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#008)), God's
hand in it ([Eze 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004)). II. The great
terror that this should strike upon the land of Israel ([Eze
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#015), [Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016), [Eze
38:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#018)). III. The divine restraint
that these enemies should be under, and the divine protection that
Israel should be under ([Eze 38:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#002)
and [Eze 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#014)). IV. The defeat that
should be given to those enemies by the immediate hand of God ([Eze
38:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#021)), which we shall hear more of
in the next chapter.

[Ezekiel 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 38:1</span></span>

The critical expositors have enough to do here to enquire out Gog and
Magog. We cannot pretend either to add to their observations or to
determine their controversies. Gog seems to be the king and Magog the
kingdom; so that Gog and Magog are like Pharaoh and the Egyptians. Some
think they find them afar off, in Scythia, Tartary, and Russia. Others
think they find them nearer the land of Israel, in Syria, and Asia the
Less. Ezekiel is appointed to prophesy against Gog, and to tell him that
God is against him, [Eze 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#002), [Eze
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#003). Note, God does not only see
those that are now the enemies of his church and set himself against
them, but he foresees those that will be so and lets them know by his
word that he is against them too, and yet is pleased to make use of them
to serve his own purposes, for the glory of his own name; surely their
wrath shall praise him, and the remainder thereof he will restrain, [Psa
76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010). Let us observe here,

I. The confusion which God designed to put this enemy to. It is
remarkable that this is put first in the prophecy; before it is foretold
that God will bring him forth against Israel it is foretold that God
will put hooks into his jaws and turn him back ([Eze
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004)), that they might have assurance
of their deliverance before they had the prospect given them of their
danger. Thus tender is God of the comfort of his people, thus careful
that they may not be frightened; even before the trouble begins he tells
them it will end well.

II\. The undertaking which he designed to engage him in, in order to
this defeat and disappointment. 1. The nations that shall be confederate
in this enterprise against Israel are many, and great, and mighty ([Eze
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#005), [Eze
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006)), Persia, Ethiopia, etc.
Antiochus had an army made up of all the nations here named, and many
others. These people had been at variance with one another, and yet in
combination against Israel. How are those increased that trouble God's
people! 2. They are well furnished with arms and ammunition, and bring a
good train of artillery into the field - horses and horsemen ([Eze
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004)) bravely equipped with all sorts
of armour, bucklers and shields for defence, and all handling swords for
offence. Orders are given to make all imaginable preparation for this
expedition ([Eze 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#007)): "Be thou
prepared, and do thou prepare. See what warlike preparations thou hast
already in store, and, lest that should not suffice, make further
preparation, thou and all thy company," Let Gog himself be a guard to
the rest of the confederates. As commander-in-chief, let him engage to
take care of them and their safety; let him pass his word for their
security, and take them under his particular protection. The leaders of
an army, instead of exposing their soldiers needlessly and
presumptuously, and throwing away their lives upon desperate
undertakings, should study to be a guard to them, and, whenever they
send them forth in danger, should contrive to support and cover them.
This call to prepare seems to be ironical - Do thy worst, but I will
turn thee back; like that [Isa 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009).
Gird yourselves, and you shall be broken in pieces. 3. Their design is
against the mountains of Israel ([Eze
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#008)), against the land that is
brought back from the sword. It is not long since it was harassed with
the sword of war, and it has been always wasted, more or less, with one
judgment or other; it is but newly gathered out of many people, and
brought forth out of the nations; it has enjoyed comparatively but a
short breathing-time, has scarcely recovered any strength since it was
brought down by war and captivity; and therefore its neighbours need not
fear its being too great, nay, and therefore it is very barbarous to
pick a quarrel with it so soon. It is a people that dwell safely, all of
them, in unwalled villages, very secure, and having neither bars nor
gates, [Eze 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#011). It is a certain
sign that they intend no mischief to their neighbours, for they fear no
mischief from them. It cannot be thought that those will offend others
who do not take care to defend themselves; and this aggravates the sin
of these invaders. It is base and barbarous to devise evil against thy
neighbour while he dwells securely by thee, and has no distrust of thee,
[Pro 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#029). But see here how the clouds
return after the rain in this world, and what little reason we have ever
to be secure till we come to heaven. It is not long since Israel was
brought back from the sword of one enemy, and behold the sword of
another is drawn against it. Former troubles will not excuse us from
further troubles; but when we think we have put off the harness, at
least for some time, by a fresh and sudden alarm we may be called to
gird it on again; and therefore we must never boast nor be off our
guard. 4. That which the enemy has in view, in forming this project, is
to enrich himself and to make himself master, not of the country, but of
the wealth of it, to spoil and plunder it, and make a prey of it: At the
same time that God intends to bring this matter about things shall come
into the mind of this enemy, and he shall think an evil thought, [Eze
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#010). Note, All the mischief men do,
and particularly the mischief they do to the church of God, arises from
evil thoughts that come into their mind, ambitious thoughts, covetous
thoughts, spiteful thoughts against those that are good, for the sake of
their goodness. It came into Antiochus's mind what a singular people
these religious Jews were, and how their worship witnessed against and
condemned the idolatries of their neighbours, and therefore, in enmity
to their religion, he would plague them. It came into his mind what a
wealthy people they were, that they had gotten cattle and goods in the
midst of the land ([Eze 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#012)), and
withal how weak they were, how unable to make any resistance, how easy
it would be to carry off what they had, and how much glory this rapine
would add to his victorious sword; these things coming into his mind,
and one evil thought drawing on another, he came at last to this resolve
([Eze 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#011), [Eze
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#012)): "I will go up to the land of
unwalled villages; yea, that I will; it will cost me nothing to make
them all my own. I will go and disturb those that are at rest, without
giving them any notice, not to crush their growing greatness, or
chastise their insolence, or make reprisals upon them for any wrong they
have done us (they had none of these pretences to make war upon them),
but purely to take a spoil and to take a prey" ([Eze
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#012)), in open defiance to all the
laws of justice and equity, as much as the highwayman's killing the
traveller that he may take his money. These were the thoughts that came
into the mind of this wicked prince, and God knew them; nay, he knew
them before they came into his mind, for he understands our thoughts
afar off, [Psa 139:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#002). 5. According to
the project thus formed he pours in all his forces upon the land of
Israel, and finds those that are ready to come in to his assistance with
the same prospects ([Eze 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#009)): "Thou
shalt ascent and come like a storm, with all the force, and fury, and
fierceness imaginable, and thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land,
to darken it, and to threaten it, thou and not only all thy bands, all
the force thou canst bring into the field, but many people with thee"
(such as are spoken of [Eze 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#013)),
"Sheba and Dedan, the Arabians and the Edomites, and the merchants of
Tarshish, of Tyre and Sidon and other maritime cities, they and their
young lions that are greedy of spoil and live upon it, shall say, Hast
thou come to take the spoil of this land?" Yes he has; and therefore
they wish him success. Or perhaps they envy him, or grudge it to him.
"Hast thou come for riches who art thyself so rich already?" Or, knowing
that God was on Israel's side, they thus ridicule his attempts,
foreseeing that they would be baffled and that he would be disappointed
of the prey he promised himself. Or, if he come to take the prey, they
will come and join with him, and add to his forces. When Lysias, who was
general of Antiochus's army, came against the Jews, the neighbouring
nations joined with him (1 Macc. 3:41), to share in the guilt, in hopes
to share in the prey. When thou sawest a thief then thou consentedst
with him.

[Ezekiel 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 38:14</span></span>

This latter part of the chapter is a repetition of the former; the dream
is doubled, for the thing is certain and to be very carefully regarded.

I. It is here again foretold that this spiteful enemy should make a
formidable descent upon the land of Israel ([Eze
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#015)): "Thou shalt come out of the
north parts (Syria lay on the north of Canaan) with a mighty army, shalt
come like a cloud, and cover the land of my people Israel," [Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016). These words ([Eze
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#014)), When my people Israel dwell
safely, shalt thou not know it? may be taken two ways: - 1. As
intimating his inducements to this attempt. "Thou shalt have
intelligence brought thee how securely, and therefore how carelessly,
the people of Israel dwell, which shall give rise to thy project against
them; for when thou knowest not only what a rich, but what an easy prey
they are likely to be, thou wilt soon determine to fall upon them" Note,
God's providence is to be acknowledged in the occasion, the small
occasion perhaps, that is given, and that not designedly neither, to
those first thoughts from which great enterprises take their original.
God, to bring about his own purposes, lets men know that which yet he
knows they will make a bad use of, as here. Or, 2. As intimating his
disappointment in this attempt, which here, as before, the prophecy
begins with: "When my people Israel dwell safely, not in their own
apprehension only, but in reality, forasmuch as they dwell safely under
the divine protection, shalt not thou be made to know it by the
fruitlessness of thy endeavours to destroy them?" Thou shalt soon find
that there is no enchantment against Jacob, that no weapon formed
against them shall prosper; thou shalt know to thy cost, shalt know to
thy shame, that though they have no walls, nor bars, nor gates, they
have God himself, a wall of fire, round about them, and that he who
touches them touches the apple of his eye; whosoever meddles with them
meddles to his own hurt. And it is for the demonstrating of this to all
the world that God will bring this mighty enemy against his people.
Those that gathered themselves against Israel said, Let us take the
spoil and take they prey, but they knew not the thoughts of the Lord,
[Mic 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011), [Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012). I will bring thee against my
land. This is strange news, that God will not only permit his enemies to
come against his own children, but will himself bring them; but, if we
understand what he aims at, we shall be well reconciled even to this: it
is "that the heathen may know me to be the only living and true God when
I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog! that is, in thy defeat and
destruction before their eyes, that all the nations may see, and say,
There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, that rides on the heavens
for the help of his people." Note, God brings his people into danger and
distress that he may have the honour of bringing about their
deliverance, and suffers the enemies of his church to prevail awhile,
though they profane his name by their sin, that he may have the honour
of prevailing at last and sanctifying his own name in their ruin. Now it
is said, This shall be in the latter days, namely, in the latter days of
the Old Testament church; so the mischief that Antiochus did to Israel
was; but in the latter days of the New Testament church another like
enemy should arise, that should in like manner be defeated. Note,
Effectual securities are treasured up in the word of God against the
troubles and dangers the church may be brought into a great while hence,
even in the latter days.

II\. Reference is herein had to the predictions of the former prophets
([Eze 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#017)): Art thou he of whom I
have spoken in old time, of whom Moses spoke in his prophecy of the
latter days ([Deu 32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043), He will
render vengeance to his adversaries), and David, [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015) (The heathen are sunk down into
the pit that they made) and often elsewhere in the Psalms? This is the
leviathan of whom Isaiah spoke ([Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)), that congress of the nations of
which Joel spoke, [Joe 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001). Many of
the prophets had perhaps spoken particularly of this event, though it be
not written, as they all had spoken and written too that which is
applicable to it. Note, There is an amiable admirable harmony and
agreement between the Lord's prophets, though they lived in several
ages, for they were all guided by one and the same Spirit.

III\. It is here foretold that this furious formidable enemy should be
utterly cut off in this attempt upon Israel, and that it should issue in
his own ruin. This is supposed by many to have its accomplishment in the
many defeats given by the Maccabees to the forces of Antiochus and the
remarkable judgments of God executed upon his own person, for he died of
sore diseases. But these things are here foretold, as usual, in
figurative expressions, which we are not to look for the literal
accomplishment of, and yet they might be fulfilled nearer the letter
than we know of. 1. God will be highly displeased with this bold
invader: When he comes up in pride and anger against the land of Israel,
and thinks to carry all before him with a high hand, then God's fury
shall come up in his face, which is an allusion to the manner of men,
whose colour rises in their faces when some high affront is offered them
and they are resolved to show their resentment of it, [Eze
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#018). God will speak against them in
his jealousy for his people and in the fire of his wrath against his and
their enemies, [Eze 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#019). See how
God's permitting sin, his laying occasions of sin before men, and his
making use of it to serve his own purposes, consist with his hatred of
sin and his displeasure against it. God brings this enemy against his
land, letting him know what an easy prey it might be and determining
thereby to glorify himself; and yet, when he comes against the land,
God's fury comes up, and he speaks to him in the fire of his wrath. If
any ask, Why does he thus find fault? for who has resisted his will? It
is easy to answer, Nay, but, O man! who art thou that repliest against
God? 2. His forces shall be put into the greatest confusion and
consternation imaginable ([Eze 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#019)):
There shall be a great shaking of them in the land of Israel, a
universal concussion ([Eze 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#020)),
such as shall affect the fishes and fowls, the beasts and creeping
things, and much more the men that are upon the face of the earth, who
sooner receive impressions of fear. There shall be such an earthquake as
shall throw down the mountains, those natural heights, and the steep
places, towers and walls, those artificial heights; they shall all fall
to the ground. Some understand this of the fright which the land of
Israel should be put into by the fury of the enemy. But it is rather to
be understood of the fright which the enemy should be put into by the
wrath of God; all those things which they both raise themselves and stay
themselves upon shall be shaken down, and their hearts shall fail them.
3. He shall be routed and utterly ruined; both earth and heaven shall be
armed against him (1.) The earth shall muster up its forces to destroy
him. If the people of Israel have not strength and courage to resist
him, God will call for a sword against him, [Eze
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#021). And he has swords always at
command, that are bathed in heaven, [Isa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005). Throughout all the mountains of
Israel, where he hoped to meet with spoil to enrich him, he shall meet
with swords to destroy him, and, rather than fail, every man's sword
shall be against his brother, as in the day of Midian, [Psa
83:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#009). The great men of Syria shall
undermine and overthrow one another, shall accuse one another, shall
fight duels with one another. Note, God can, and often does, make the
destroyers of his people to be their own destroyers and the destroyers
of one another. However, he will himself be their destroyer, will take
the work into his own hand, that it may be done thoroughly ([Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022)): I will plead against him with
pestilence and blood. Note, Whom God acts against he pleads against; he
shows them the ground of his controversy with them, that their mouths
may be stopped, and he may be clear when he judges. (2.) The artillery
of heaven shall also be drawn out against them: I will rain upon him an
overflowing rain, [Eze 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022). He comes
like a storm upon Israel, [Eze 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#009).
But God will come like a storm upon him, will rain upon him great
hailstones as upon the Canaanites ([Jos
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#011)), fire and brimstone as upon
Sodom, and a horrible tempest, [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006). Thus the Gog and Magog in the
New Testament shall be devoured with fire from heaven, and cast into the
lake of brimstone, [Rev 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009), [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010). That will be the everlasting
portion of all the impenitent implacable enemies of God's church and
people. 4. God, in all this, will be glorified. The end he aimed at
([Eze 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016)) shall be accomplished
([Eze 38:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#023)): Thus will I magnify
myself and sanctify myself. Note, In the destruction of sinners God
makes it to appear that he is a great and holy God, and he will do so to
eternity. And, if men do not magnify and sanctify him as they ought, he
will magnify himself, and sanctify himself; and this we should desire
and pray for daily, Father, glorify thy own name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 39](eze039)

</div>
