<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze047)  [Next](dan000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 48:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have particular directions given for the distribution
of the land, of which we had the metes and bounds assigned in the
foregoing chapter. I. The portions of the twelve tribes, seven to the
north of the sanctuary ([Eze 48:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#001))
and five to the south ([Eze 48:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#023)).
II. The allotment of land for the sanctuary, and the priests ([Eze
48:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#008)), for the Levites ([Eze
48:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#012)), for the city ([Eze
48:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#015)), and for the prince ([Eze
48:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#021), [Eze
48:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#022)). Much of this we had before,
ch. 45. III. A plan of the city, its gates, and the new name given to it
(v. 30-35), which seals up, and concludes, the vision and prophecy of
this book.

[Ezekiel 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 48:31</span></span>

We have here a further account of the city that should be built for the
metropolis of this glorious land, and to be the receptacle of those who
would come from all parts to worship in the sanctuary adjoining. It is
nowhere called Jerusalem, nor is the land which we have had such a
particular account of the dividing of any where called the land of
Canaan; for the old names are forgotten, to intimate that the old things
are done away, behold all things have become new. Now, concerning this
city, observe here, 1. The measures of its out-lets, and the grounds
belonging to it, for its several conveniences; each way its
appurtenances extended 4500 measures 18,000 in all, [Eze
48:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#035). But what these measures were is
uncertain. It is never said, in all this chapter, whether so many reeds
(as our translation determines by inserting that word, [Eze
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#008), each reed containing six cubits
and span, [Eze 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005), and why should
the measurer appear with the measuring reed in his hand of that length
if he did not measure with that, except where it is expressly said he
measured by cubits?) or whether, as others think, it is so many cubits,
because those are mentioned [Eze 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#002)
and [Eze 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#003). Yet that makes me
incline rather to think that where cubits are not mentioned must be
intended so many lengths of the measuring reed. But those who understand
it of so many cubits are not agreed whether it be meant of the common
cubit, which was half a yard, or the geometrical cubit, which, for
better expedition, is supposed to be mostly used in surveying lands,
which, some say, contained six cubits, others about three cubits and a
half, so making 1000 cubits the same with 1000 paces, that is, an
English mile. But our being left at this uncertainty is an intimation
that these things are to be understood spiritually, and that what is
principally meant is that there is an exact and just proportion observed
by Infinite Wisdom in modelling the gospel church, which though now we
cannot discern we shall when we come to heaven. 2. The number of its
gates. It had twelve gates in all, three on each side, which was very
agreeable when it lay four square; and these twelve gates were inscribed
to the twelve tribes. Because the city was to be served out of all the
tribes of Israel ([Eze 48:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#019)) it was
fit that each tribe should have its gate; and, Levi being here taken in,
to keep to the number twelve Ephraim and Manasseh are made one in
Joseph, [Eze 48:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#032). On the north side
were the gates of Reuben, Judah, and Levi ([Eze
48:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#031)), on the east the gates of
Joseph, Benjamin, and Dan ([Eze
48:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#032)), on the south the gates of
Simeon, Issachar, and Zebulun ([Eze
48:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#033)), and on the west the gates of
Gad, Asher, and Naphtali, [Eze 48:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#034).
Conformable to this, in St. John's vision, the new Jerusalem (for so the
holy city is called there, though not here) has twelve gates, three on a
side, and on them are written the names of the twelve tribes of the
children of Israel, [Rev 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012), [Rev
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#013). Note, Into the church of
Christ, both militant and triumphant, there is a free access by faith
for all that come of every tribe, from every quarter. Christ has opened
the kingdom of heaven for all believers. Whoever will may come and take
of the water of life, of the tree of life, freely. 3. The name given to
this city: From that day, when it shall be newly-erected according to
this model, the name of it shall be, not, as before, Jerusalem - The
vision of peace, but which is the original of that, and more than
equivalent to it, Jehovah Shammah - The Lord is there, [Eze
48:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#035). This intimated, (1.) That the
captives, after their return, should have manifest tokens of God's
presence with them and his residence among them, both in his ordinances
and his providences. They shall have no occasion to ask, as their
fathers did, Is the Lord among us, or is he not? for they shall see and
say that he is with them of a truth. And then, though their troubles
were many and threatening, they were like the bush which burned but was
not consumed, because the Lord was there. But when God departed from
their temple, when he said, Migremus hinc - Let us go hence, their house
was soon left unto them desolate. Being no longer his, it was not much
longer theirs. (2.) That the gospel-church should likewise have the
presence of God in it, though not in the Shechinah, as of old, yet in a
token of it no less sure, that of his Spirit. Where the gospel is
faithfully preached, gospel ordinances are duly administered, and God is
worshipped in the name of Jesus Christ only, it may truly be said, The
Lord is there; for faithful is he that has said, and he will be as good
as his word, Lo, I am with you always even unto the end of the world.
The Lord is there in his church, to rule and govern it, to protect and
defend it, and graciously to accept and own his sincere worshippers, and
to be nigh unto them in all that they call upon him for. This should
engage us to keep close to the communion of saints, for the Lord is
there; and then whither shall we go to better ourselves? Nay, it is true
of every good Christian; he dwells in God, and God in him; whatever soul
has in it a living principle of grace, it may be truly said, The Lord is
There. (3.) That the glory and happiness of heaven should consist
chiefly in this, that the Lord is there. St. John's representation of
that blessed state does indeed far exceed this in many respects. That is
all gold, and pearls, and precious stones; it is much larger than this,
and much brighter, for it needs not the light of the sun. But, in making
the presence of God the principal matter of its bliss, they both agree.
There the happiness of the glorified saints is made to be that God
himself shall be with them ([Rev
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003)), that he who sits on the throne
shall dwell among them, [Rev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015). And
here it is made to crown the bliss of this holy city that the Lord is
there. Let us therefore give all diligence to make sure to ourselves a
place in that city, that we may be for ever with the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Introduction](dan000)

</div>
