<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr003)  [Next](ezr005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 4:0</span></span>

The good work of rebuilding the temple was no sooner begun than it met
with opposition from those that bore ill will to it; the Samaritans were
enemies to the Jews and their religion, and they set themselves to
obstruct it. I. They offered to be partners in the building of it, that
they might have it in their power to retard it; but they were refused
([Ezr 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)). II. They discouraged
them in it, and dissuaded them from it ([Ezr
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004), [Ezr
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005)). III. They basely misrepresented
the undertaking, and the undertakers, to the king of Persia, by a
memorial they sent him ([Ezr 4:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)).
IV. They obtained from him an order to stop the building ([Ezr
4:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017)), which they immediately put
in execution ([Ezr 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023), [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024)).

[Ezra 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 4:1</span></span>

We have here an instance of the old enmity that was put between the seed
of the woman and the seed of the serpent. God's temple cannot be built,
but Satan will rage, and the gates of hell will fight against it. The
gospel kingdom was, in like manner, to be set up with much struggling
and contention. In this respect the glory of the latter house was
greater than the glory of the former, and it was more a figure of the
temple of Christ's church, in that Solomon built his temple when there
was no adversary nor evil occurrent, ([Kg1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#004)); but this second temple was built
notwithstanding great opposition, in the removing and conquering of
which, and the bringing of the work to perfection at last in spite of
it, the wisdom, power, and goodness of God were much glorified, and the
church was encouraged to trust in him.

I. The undertakers are here called the children of the captivity ([Ezr
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)), which makes them look very
little. They had newly come out of captivity, were born in captivity,
had still the marks of their captivity upon them; though they were not
now captives, they were under the control of those whose captives they
had lately been. Israel was God's son, his first-born; but by their
iniquity the people sold and enslaved themselves, and so became children
of the captivity. But, it should seem, the thought of their being so
quickened them to this work, for it was by their neglect of the temple
that they lost their freedom.

II\. The opposers of the undertaking are here said to be the adversaries
of Judah and Benjamin, not the Chaldeans or Persians (they gave them no
disturbance - "let them build and welcome"), but the relics of the ten
tribes, and the foreigners that had joined themselves to them, and
patched up that mongrel religion we had an account of, [Kg2
17:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#033). They feared the Lord, and
served their own gods too. They are called the people of the land, [Ezr
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004). The worst enemies Judah and
Benjamin had were those that said they were Jews and were not, [Rev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009).

III\. The opposition they gave had in it much of the subtlety of the old
serpent. When they heard that the temple was in building they were
immediately aware that it would be a fatal blow to their superstition,
and set themselves to oppose it. They had not power to do it forcibly,
but they tried all the ways they could to do it effectually.

1\. They offered their service to build with the Israelites only that
thereby they might get an opportunity to retard the work, while they
pretended to further it. Now, (1.) Their offer was plausible enough, and
looked kind: "We will build with you, will help you to contrive, and
will contribute towards the expense; for we seek your God as you do,"
[Ezr 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002). This was false, for, though
they sought the same God, they did not seek him only, nor seek him in
the way he appointed, and therefore did not seek him as they did. Herein
they designed, if it were possible, to hinder the building of it, at
least to hinder their comfortable enjoyment of it; as good almost not
have it as not have it to themselves, for the pure worship of the true
God and him only. Thus are the kisses of an enemy deceitful; his words
are smoother than butter when war is in his heart. But, (2.) The refusal
of their proffered service was very just, [Ezr
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#003). The chief of the fathers of
Israel were soon aware that they meant them no kindness, whatever they
pretended, but really designed to do them a mischief, and therefore
(though they had need enough of help if it had been such as they could
confide in) told them plainly, "You have nothing to do with us, have no
part nor lot in this matter, are not true-born Israelites nor faithful
worshippers of God; you worship you know not what, [Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022). You are none of those with whom
we dare hold communion, and therefore we ourselves will build it." They
plead not to them the law of their God, which forbade them to mingle
with strangers (though that especially they had an eye to), but that
which they would take more notice of, the king's commission, which was
directed to them only: "The king of Persia has commanded us to build
this house, and we shall distrust and affront him if we call in foreign
aid." Note, In doing good there is need of the wisdom of the serpent, as
well as the innocency of the dove, and we have need, as it follows
there, to beware of men, [Mat 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016),
[Mat 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017). We should carefully
consider with whom we are associated and on whose hand we lean. While we
trust God with a pious confidence we must trust men with a prudent
jealousy and caution.

2\. When this plot failed they did what they could to divert them from
the work and discourage them in it. They weakened their hands by telling
them it was in vain to attempt it, calling them foolish builders, who
began what they were not able to finish, and by their insinuations
troubled them, and made them drive heavily in the work. All were not
alike zealous in it. Those that were cool and indifferent were by these
artifices drawn off from the work, which wanted their help, [Ezr
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004). And because what they themselves
said the Jews would suspect to be ill meant, and not be influenced by,
they, underhand, hired counsellors against them, who, pretending to
advise them for the best, should dissuade them from proceeding, and so
frustrate their purpose ([Ezr 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005)), or
dissuade the men of Tyre and Sidon from furnishing them with the timber
they had bargained for ([Ezr 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#007)); or
whatever business they had at the Persian court, to solicit for any
particular grants or favours, pursuant to the general edict for their
liberty, there were those that were hired and lay ready to appear of
counsel against them. Wonder not at the restlessness of the church's
enemies in their attempts against the building of God's temple. He whom
they serve, and whose work they are doing, is unwearied in walking to
and fro through the earth to do mischief. And let those who discourage a
good work, and weaken the hands of those that are employed in it, see
whose pattern they follow.

[Ezra 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 4:6</span></span>

Cyrus stedfastly adhered to the Jews' interest, and supported his own
grant. It was to no purpose to offer any thing to him in prejudice of
it. What he did was from a good principle, and in the fear of God, and
therefore he adhered to it. But, though his reign in all was thirty
years, yet after the conquest of Babylon, and his decree for the release
of the Jews, some think that he reigned but three years, others seven,
and then either died or gave up that part of his government, in which
his successor was Ahasuerus ([Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)), called also Artaxerxes ([Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007)), supposed to be the same that in
heathen authors is called Cambyses, who had never taken such cognizance
of the despised Jews as to concern himself for them, nor had he that
knowledge of the God of Israel which his predecessor had. To him these
Samaritans applied by letter for an order to stop the building of the
temple; and they did it in the beginning of his reign, being resolved to
lose no time when they thought they had a king for their purpose. See
how watchful the church's enemies are to take the first opportunity of
doing it a mischief; let not its friends be less careful to do it a
kindness. Here is,

I. The general purport of the letter which they sent to the king, to
inform him of this matter. It is called ([Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)) an accusation against the
inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem. The devil is the accuser of the
brethren ([Rev 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010)), and he carries
on his malicious designs against them, not only by accusing them himself
before God, as he did Job, but by acting as a lying spirit in the mouths
of his instruments, whom he employs to accuse them before magistrates
and kings and to make them odious to the many and obnoxious to the
mighty. Marvel not if the same arts be still used to depreciate serious
godliness.

II\. The persons concerned in writing this letter. The contrivers are
named ([Ezr 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007)) that plotted the
thing, the writers ([Ezr 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008)) that put
it into form, and the subscribers ([Ezr
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009)) that concurred in it and joined
with them in this representation, this misrepresentation I should call
it. Now see here, 1. How the rulers take counsel together against the
Lord and his temple, with their companions. The building of the temple
would do them no harm, yet they appear against it with the utmost
concern and virulence, perhaps because the prophets of the God of Israel
had foretold the famishing and perishing of all the gods of the heathen,
[Zep 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#011); [Jer
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011). 2. How the people concurred
with them in imagining this vain thing. They followed the cry, though
ignorant of the merits of the cause. All the several colonies of that
plantation (nine are here mentioned), who had their denomination from
the cities or countries of Assyria, Chaldea, Persia, etc., whence they
came, set their hands, by their representatives, to this letter. Perhaps
they were incensed against these returned Jews because many of the ten
tribes were among them, whose estates they had got into their
possession, and of whom they were therefore jealous, lest they should
attempt the recovery of them hereafter.

III\. A copy of the letter itself, which Ezra inserts here out of the
records of the kingdom of Persia, into which it had been entered; and it
is well we have it, that we may see whence the like methods, still taken
to expose good people and baffle good designs, are copied.

1\. They represent themselves as very loyal to the government, and
greatly concerned for the honour and interest of it, and would have it
thought that the king had no such loving faithful subjects in all his
dominions as they were, none so sensible of their obligations to him,
[Ezr 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#014). Because we are salted with
the salt of the palace (so it is in the margin), "we have our salary
from the court, and could no more live without it than flesh could be
preserved without salt;" or, as some think, their pay or pension was
sent them in salt; or "Because we had our education in the palace, and
were brought up at the king's table," as we find, [Dan
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005). These were those whom he intended
to prefer; they did eat their portion of the king's meat. "Now, in
consideration of this, it is not meet for us to see the king's
dishonour;" and therefore they urge him to stop the building of the
temple, which would certainly be the king's dishonour more than any
thing else. Note, A secret enmity to Christ and his gospel is often
gilded over with a pretended affection to Caesar and his power. The Jews
hated the Roman government, and yet, to serve a turn, could cry, We have
no king but Caesar. But (to allude to this), if those that lived upon
the crown thought themselves bound in gratitude thus to support the
interest of it, much more reason have we thus to argue ourselves into a
pious concern for God's honour; we have our maintenance from the God of
heaven and are salted with his salt, live upon his bounty and are the
care of his providence; and therefore it is not meet for us to see his
dishonour without resenting it and doing what we can to prevent it.

2\. They represent the Jews as disloyal, and dangerous to the
government, that Jerusalem was the rebellious and bad city ([Ezr
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012)), hurtful to kings and provinces,
[Ezr 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015). See how Jerusalem, the joy
of the whole earth ([Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)), is
here reproached as the scandal of the whole earth. The enemies of the
church could not do the bad things they design against it if they did
not first give it a bad name. Jerusalem had been a loyal city to its
rightful princes, and its present inhabitants were as well affected to
the king and his government as any of his provinces whatsoever. Daniel,
who was a Jew, had lately approved himself so faithful to his prince
that his worst enemies could find no fault in his management, [Dan
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#004). But thus was Elijah most unjustly
charged with troubling Israel, the apostles with turning the world
upside down, and Christ himself with perverting the nation and
forbidding to give tribute to Caesar; and we must not think it strange
if the same game be still played. Now here,

(1.) Their history of what was past was invidious, that within this city
sedition had been moved of old time, and, for that cause, it was
destroyed, [Ezr 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015). It cannot be
denied but that there was some colour given for this suggestion by the
attempts of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah to shake off the yoke of the king of
Babylon, which, if they had kept close to their religion and the temple
they were now rebuilding, they would never have come under. But it must
be considered, \[1.\] That they were themselves, and their ancestors,
sovereign princes, and their efforts to recover their rights, if there
had not been in them the violation of an oath, for aught I know, would
have been justifiable, and successful too, had they taken the right
method and made their peace with God first. \[2.\] Though these Jews,
and their princes, had been guilty of rebellion, yet it was unjust
therefore to fasten this as an indelible brand upon this city, as if
that must for ever after go under the name of the rebellious and bad
city. The Jews, in their captivity, had given such specimens of good
behaviour as were sufficient, with any reasonable men, to roll away that
one reproach; for they were instructed (and we have reason to hope that
they observed their instructions) to seek the peace of the city where
they were captives and pray to the Lord for it, [Jer
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#007). It was therefore very unfair,
though not uncommon, thus to impute the iniquity of the fathers to the
children.

(2.) Their information concerning what was now doing was grossly false
in matter of fact. Very careful they were to inform the king that the
Jews had set up the walls of this city, nay, had finished them (so it is
in the margin) and joined the foundations ([Ezr
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012)), when this was far from being
the case. They had only begun to build the temple, which Cyrus commanded
them to do, but, as for the walls, there was nothing done nor designed
towards the repair of them, as appears by the condition they were in
many years after ([Neh 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#003)), all in
ruins. What shall be given, and what done, to these false tongues, nay,
which is worse, these false pens? sharp arrows, doubtless, of the
mighty, and coals of juniper, [Psa
120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003), [Psa
120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004). If they had not been perfectly
lost to all virtue and honour they would not, and if they had not been
very secure of the king's countenance they durst not, have written that
to the king which all their neighbours knew to be a notorious lie. See
[Pro 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#012).

(3.) Their prognostics of the consequences were altogether groundless
and absurd. They were very confident, and would have the king believe it
upon their word, that if this city should be built, not only the Jews
would pay no toll, tribute, or custom ([Ezr
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#013)), but (since a great lie is as
soon spoken as a little one) that the king would have no portion at all
on this side the river ([Ezr 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#016)),
that all the countries on this side Euphrates would instantly revolt,
drawn in to do so by their example; and, if the prince in possession
should connive at this, he would wrong, not only himself, but his
successors: Thou shalt endamage the revenue of the kings. See how every
line in this letter breathes both the subtlety and malice of the old
serpent.

[Ezra 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ezr 4:17</span></span>

Here we have,

I. The orders which the king of Persia gave, in answer to the
information sent him by the Samaritans against the Jews. He suffered
himself to be imposed upon by their fraud and falsehood, took no care to
examine the allegations of their petition concerning that which the Jews
were now doing, but took it for granted that the charge was true, and
was very willing to gratify them with an order of council to stay
proceedings. 1. He consulted the records concerning Jerusalem, and found
that it had indeed rebelled against the king of Babylon, and therefore
that it was, as they called it, a bad city ([Ezr
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#019)), and withal that in times past
kings had reigned there, to whom all the countries on that side the
river had been tributaries ([Ezr
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#020)), and that therefore there was
danger that if ever they were able (which they were never likely to be)
they would claim them again. Thus he says as they said, and pretends to
give a reason for so doing. See the hard fate of princes, who must see
and hear with other men's eyes and ears, and give judgment upon things
as they are represented to them, though often represented falsely. God's
judgment is always just because he sees things as they are, and it is
according to truth. 2. He appointed these Samaritans to stop the
building of the city immediately, till further orders should be given
about it, [Ezr 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#021), [Ezr
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#022). Neither they, in their letter,
nor he, in his order, make any mention of the temple, and the building
of that, because both they and he knew that they had not only a
permission, but a command, from Cyrus to rebuild that, which even these
Samaritans had not the confidence to move for the repeal of. They spoke
only of the city: "Let not that be built," that is, as a city with walls
and gates; "whatever you do, prevent that, lest damage grow to the hurt
of the kings:" he would not that the crown should lose by his wearing
it.

II\. The use which the enemies of the Jews made of these orders, so
fraudulently obtained; upon the receipt of them they went up in haste to
Jerusalem, [Ezr 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023). Their feet ran
to evil, [Pro 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#016). They were
impatient till the builders were served with this prohibition, which
they produced as their warrant to make them cease by force and power. As
they abused the king in obtaining this order by their mis-informations,
so they abused him in the execution of it; for the order was only to
prevent the walling of the city, but, having force and power on their
side, they construed it as relating to the temple, for it was that to
which they had an ill will, and which they only wanted some colour to
hinder the building of. There was indeed a general clause in the order,
to cause these men to cease, which had reference to their complaint
about building the walls; but they applied it to the building of the
temple. See what need we have to pray, not only for kings, but for all
in authority under them, and the governors sent by them, because the
quietness and peaceableness of our lives, in all godliness and honesty,
depend very much upon the integrity and wisdom of inferior magistrates,
as well as the supreme. The consequence was that the work of the house
of God ceased for a time, through the power and insolence of its
enemies; and so, through the coldness and indifference of its friends,
it stood still till the second year of Darius Hystaspes, for to me it
seems clear by the thread of this sacred history that it was that
Darius, [Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024). Though now a stop
was put to it by the violence of the Samaritans, yet that they might
soon after have gone on by connivance, if they had had a due affection
to the work, appears by this, that before they had that express warrant
from the king for doing it (ch. 6) they were reproved by the prophets
for not doing it, [Ezr 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001), compared
with [Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001), etc. If they had taken
due care to inform Cambyses of the truth of this case, perhaps he would
have recalled his order; but, for aught I know, some of the builders
were almost as willing it should cease as the adversaries themselves
were. At some periods the church has suffered more by the coldness of
its friends than by the heat of its enemies; but both together commonly
make church-work slow work.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 5](ezr005)

</div>
