<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr008)  [Next](ezr010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 9:0</span></span>

The affairs of the church were in a very good posture, we may well
suppose, now that Ezra presided in them. Look without; the government
was kind to them. We hear no complaints of persecution and oppression;
their enemies had either their hearts turned or at least their hands
tied; their neighbours were civil, and we hear of no wars nor rumours of
wars; there were none to make them afraid; all was as well as could be,
considering that they were few, and poor, and subjects to a foreign
prince. Look at home; we hear nothing of Baal, or Ashtaroth, nor Moloch,
no images, nor groves, nor golden calves, no, nor so much as high places
(not only no idolatrous altars, but no separate ones), but the temple
was duly respected and the temple service carefully kept up. Yet all was
not well either. The purest ages of the church have had some
corruptions, and it will never be presented "without spot or wrinkle"
till it is "a glorious church," a church "triumphant," [Eph
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027). We have here, I. A complaint
brought to Ezra of the many marriages that had been made with strange
wives ([Ezr 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001), [Ezr
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002)). II. The great trouble which he,
and others influenced by his example, were in upon this information
([Ezr 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003), [Ezr
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#004)). III. The solemn confession which
he made of this sin to God, with godly sorrow, and shame ([Ezr
9:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005)).

[Ezra 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 9:1</span></span>

Ezra, like Barnabas when he came to Jerusalem and saw the grace of God
to his brethren there, no doubt was glad, and exhorted them all that
with purpose of heart they would cleave to the Lord, [Act
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#023). He saw nothing amiss (many
corruptions lurk out of the view of the most vigilant rulers); but here
is a damp upon his joys: information is brought him that many of the
people, yea, and some of the rulers, had married wives out of heathen
families, and joined themselves in affinity with strangers. Observe,

I. What the sin was that they were guilty of: it was mingling with the
people of those lands ([Ezr 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002)),
associating with them both in trade and in conversation, making
themselves familiar with them, and, to complete the affinity, taking
their daughters in marriages to their sons. We are willing to hope that
they did not worship their gods, but that their captivity had cured them
of their idolatry: it is said indeed that they did according to their
abominations; but that (says bishop Patrick) signifies here only the
imitation of the heathen in promiscuous marriages with any nation
whatsoever, which by degrees would lead them to idolatry. Herein, 1.
They disobeyed the express command of God, which forbade all intimacy
with the heathen, and particularly in matrimonial contracts, [Deu
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003). 2. They profaned the crown of
their peculiarity, and set themselves upon a level with those above whom
God had by singular marks of his favour, of late as well as formerly,
dignified them. 3. They distrusted the power of God to protect and
advance them, and were led by carnal policy, hoping to strengthen
themselves and make an interest among their neighbours by these
alliances. A practical disbelief of God's all-sufficiency is at the
bottom of all the sorry shifts we make to help ourselves. 4. They
exposed themselves, and much more their children, to the peril of
idolatry, the very sin, and introduced by this very way, that had cone
been the ruin of their church and nation.

II\. Who were the persons that were guilty of this sin, not only some of
the unthinking people of Israel, that knew no better, but many of the
priests and Levites, whose office it was to teach the law, and this law
among the rest, and in whom, by reason of their elevation above common
Israelites, it was a greater crime. It was a diminution to the sons of
that tribe to match into any other tribe, and they seldom did except
into the royal tribe; but for them to match with heathen, with
Canaanites, and Hittites, and I know not whom, was such a disparagement
as, if they had had any sense, though not of duty, yet of honour, one
would think, they would never have been guilty of. Yet this was not the
worst: The hand of the princes and rulers, who by their power should
have prevented or reformed this high misdemeanour, was chief in this
trespass. If princes be in a trespass, they will be charged as chief in
it, because of the influence their examples will have upon others. Many
will follow their pernicious ways. But miserable is the case of that
people whose leaders debauch them and cause them to err.

III\. The information that was given of this to Ezra. It was given by
the persons that were most proper to complain, the princes, those of
them that had kept their integrity and with it their dignity; they could
not have accused others if they themselves had not been free from blame.
It was given to the person who had power to mend the matter, who, as a
ready scribe in the law of God, could argue with them, and, as king's
commissioner, could awe them. It is probable that these princes had
often endeavoured to redress this grievance and could not; but now they
applied to Ezra, hoping that his wisdom, authority, and interest, would
prevail to do it. Those that cannot of themselves reform public abuses
may yet do good service by giving information to those that can.

IV\. The impression this made upon Ezra ([Ezr
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003)): He rent his clothes, plucked off
his hair, and sat down astonished. Thus he expressed the deep sense he
had, 1. Of the dishonour hereby done to God. It grieved him to the heart
to think that a people called by his name should so grossly violate his
law, should be so little benefited by his correction, and make such bad
returns for his favours. 2. Of the mischief the people had hereby done
to themselves and the danger they were in of the wrath of God breaking
out against them. Note, (1.) The sins of others should be our sorrow,
and the injury done by them to God's honour and the souls of men is what
we should lay to heart. (2.) Sorrow for sin must be great sorrow; such
Ezra's was, as for an only son or a first-born. (3.) The scandalous sins
of professors are what we have reason to be astonished at. We may stand
amazed to see men contradict, disparage, prejudice, ruin, themselves.
Strange that men should act so inconsiderately and so inconsistently
with themselves! Upright men are astonished at it.

V. The influence which Ezra's grief for this had upon others. We may
suppose that he went up to the house of the Lord, there to humble
himself, because he had an eye to God in his grief and that was the
proper place for deprecating his displeasure. Public notice was soon
taken of it, and all the devout serious people that were at hand
assembled themselves to him, it should seem of their own accord, for
nothing is said of their being sent, to, [Ezr
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#004). Note, 1. It is the character of
good people that they tremble at God's word; they stand in awe of the
authority of its precepts and the severity and justice of its
threatenings, and to those that do so will God look, [Isa
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002). 2. Those that tremble at the
word of God cannot but tremble at the sins of men, by which the law of
God is broken and his wrath and curse are incurred. 3. The pious zeal of
one against sin may perhaps provoke very many to the like, as the
apostle speaks in another case, [Co2
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002). Many will follow who have not
consideration, talent, and courage, enough to lead in a good work. 4.
All good people ought to own those that appear and act in the cause of
God against vice and profaneness, to stand by them, and do what they can
to strengthen their hands.

[Ezra 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 9:5</span></span>

What the meditations of Ezra's heart were, while for some hours he sat
down astonished, we may guess by the words of his mouth when at length
he spoke with his tongue; and a most pathetic address he here makes to
Heaven upon this occasion. Observe,

I. The time when he made this address - at the evening sacrifice, [Ezr
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005). Then (it is likely) devout people
used to come into the courts of the temple, to grace the solemnity of
the sacrifice and to offer up their own prayers to God in concurrence
with it. In their hearing Ezra chose to make this confession, that they
might be made duly sensible of the sins of their people, which hitherto
they had either not taken notice of or had made light of. Prayer may
preach. The sacrifice, and especially the evening sacrifice, was a type
of the great propitiation, that blessed Lamb of God which in the evening
of the world was to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself, to which
we may suppose Ezra had an eye of faith in this penitential address to
God; he makes confession with his hand, as it were, upon the head of
that great sacrifice, through which we receive the atonement. Certainly
Ezra was no stranger to the message which the angel Gabriel had some
years ago delivered to Daniel, at the time of the evening sacrifice, and
as it were in explication of it, concerning Messiah the Prince ([Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021), [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)); and perhaps he had regard to
that in choosing this time.

II\. His preparation for this address. 1. He rose up from his heaviness,
and so far shook off the burden of his grief as was necessary to the
lifting up of his heart to God. He recovered from his astonishment, got
the tumult of his troubled spirits somewhat stilled and his spirit
composed for communion with God. 2. He fell upon his knees, put himself
into the posture of a penitent humbling himself and a petitioner suing
for mercy, in both representing the people for whom he was now an
intercessor. 3. He spread out his hands, as one affected with what he
was going to say, offering it up unto God, waiting, and reaching out, as
it were, with an earnest expectation, to receive a gracious answer. In
this he had an eye to God as the Lord, and as his God, a God of power,
but a God of grace.

III\. The address itself. It is not properly to be called a prayer, for
there is not a word of petition in it; but, if we give prayer its full
latitude, it is the offering up of pious and devout affections to God,
and very devout, very pious, are the affections which Ezra here
expresses. His address is a penitent confession of sin, not his own
(from a conscience burdened with its own guilt and apprehensive of his
own danger), but the sin of his people, from a gracious concern for the
honour of God and the welfare of Israel. Here is a lively picture of
ingenuous repentance. Observe in this address,

1\. The confession he makes of the sin and the aggravations of it, which
he insists upon, to affect his own heart and theirs that joined with him
with holy sorrow and shame and fear, in the consideration of it, that
they might be deeply humbled for it. And it is observable that, though
he himself was wholly clear from this guilt, yet he puts himself into
the number of the sinners, because he was a member of the same community
- our sins and our trespass. Perhaps he now remembered it against
himself, as his fault, that he had staid so long after his brethren in
Babylon, and had not separated himself so soon as he might have done
from the people of those lands. When we are lamenting the wickedness of
the wicked, it may be, if we duly reflect upon ourselves and give our
own hearts leave to deal faithfully with us, we may find something of
the same nature, though in a lower degree, that we also have been guilty
of. However, he speaks that which was, or should have been, the general
complaint.

(1.) He owns their sins to have been very great: "Our iniquities are
increased over our heads ([Ezr 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006));
we are ready to perish in them as in keep waters;" so general was the
prevalency of them, so violent the power of them, and so threatening
were they of the most pernicious consequences. "Iniquity has grown up to
such a height among us that it reaches to the heavens, so very impudent
that it dares heaven, so very provoking that, like the sin of Sodom, it
cries to heaven for vengeance." But let this be the comfort of true
penitents that though their sins reach to the heavens God's mercy is in
the heavens, [Psa 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005). Where sin
abounds grace will much more abound.

(2.) Their sin had been long persisted in ([Ezr
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#007)): Since the days of our fathers
have we been in a great trespass. The example of those that had gone
before them he thought so far from excusing their fault that it
aggravated it. "We should have taken warning not to stumble at the same
stone. The corruption is so much the worse that it has taken deep root
and begins to plead prescription, but by this means we have reason to
fear that the measure of the iniquity is nearly full."

(3.) The great and sore judgments which God had brought upon them for
their sins did very much aggravate them: "For our iniquities we have
been delivered to the sword and to captivity ([Ezr
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#007)), and yet not reformed, yet not
reclaimed - brayed in the mortar, and yet the folly not gone ([Pro
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#022)) - corrected, but not
reclaimed."

(4.) The late mercies God had bestowed upon them did likewise very much
aggravate their sins. This he insists largely upon, [Ezr
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#008), [Ezr
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#009). Observe, \[1.\] The time of
mercy: Now for a little space, that is, "It is but a little while since
we had our liberty, and it is not likely to continue long." This greatly
aggravated their sin, that they were so lately in the furnace and that
they knew not how soon they might return to it again; and could they yet
be secure? \[2.\] The fountain of mercy: Grace has been shown us from
the Lord. The kings of Persia were the instruments of their enlargement;
but he ascribes it to God and to his grace, his free grace, without any
merit of theirs. \[3.\] The streams of mercy, - that they were not
forsaken in their bondage, but even in Babylon had the tokens of God's
presence, - that they were a remnant of Israelites left, a few out of
many, and those narrowly escaped out of the hands of their enemies, by
the favour of the kings of Persia, - and especially that they had a nail
in his holy place, that is (as it is explained, [Ezr
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#009)), that they had set up the house
of God. They had their religion settled and the service of the temple in
a constant method. We are to reckon it a great comfort and advantage to
have stated opportunities of worshipping God. Blessed are those that
dwell in God's house, like Anna that departed not from the temple. This
is my rest for ever, says the gracious soul. \[4.\] The effects of all
this. It enlightened their eyes, and it revived their hearts; that is,
it was very comfortable to them, and the more sensibly so because it was
in their bondage: it was life from the dead to them. Though but a little
reviving, it was a great favour, considering that they deserved none and
the day of small things was an earnest of greater. "Now," says Ezra,
"how ungrateful are we to offend a God that has been so kind to us! how
disingenuous to mingle in sin with those nations from whom we have been,
in wonderful mercy, delivered! how unwise to expose ourselves to God's
displeasure when we are tried with the returns of his favour and are
upon our good behaviour for the continuance of it!"

(5.) It was a great aggravation of the sin that it was against an
express command: We have forsaken thy commandments, [Ezr
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#010). It seems to have been an ancient
law of the house of Jacob not to match with the families of the
uncircumcised, [Gen 34:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#014). But,
besides that, God had strictly forbidden it. He recites the command,
[Ezr 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#011), [Ezr
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#012). For sin appears sin, appears
exceedingly sinful, when we compare it with the law which is broken by
it. Nothing could be more express: Give not your daughters to their
sons, nor take their daughters to your sons. The reason given is
because, if they mingled with those nations, they would pollute
themselves. It was an unclean land, and they were a holy people; but if
they kept themselves distinct from them it would be their honour and
safety, and the perpetuating of their prosperity. Now to violate a
command so express, backed with such reasons, and a fundamental law of
their constitution, was very provoking to the God of heaven.

(6.) That in the judgments by which they had already smarted for their
sins God had punished them less than their iniquities deserved, so that
he looked upon them to be still in debt upon the old account. "What! and
yet shall we run up a new score? Has God dealt so gently with us in
correcting us, and shall we thus abuse his favour and turn his grace
into wantonness?" God, in his grace and mercy, had said concerning
Sion's captivity, She hath received of the Lord's hand double for all
her sins ([Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)); but Ezra, in a
penitential sense of the great malignity that was in their sin,
acknowledged that, though the punishment was very great, it was less
than they deserved.

2\. The devout affections that were working in him, in making this
confession. Speaking of sin,

(1.) He speaks as one much ashamed. With this he begins ([Ezr
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006)), O my God! I am ashamed and
blush, O my God! (so the words are placed) to lift up my face unto thee.
Note, \[1.\] Sin is a shameful thing; as soon as ever our first parents
had eaten forbidden fruit they were ashamed of themselves. \[2.\] Holy
shame is as necessary an ingredient in true and ingenuous repentance as
holy sorrow. \[3.\] The sins of others should be our shame, and we
should blush for those who do not blush for themselves. We may well be
ashamed that we are any thing akin to those who are so ungrateful to God
and unwise for themselves. This is clearing ourselves, [Co2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011). \[4.\] Penitent sinners never
see so much reason to blush and be ashamed as when they come to lift up
their faces before God. A natural sense of our own honour which we have
injured will make us ashamed, when we have done a wrong thing, to look
men in the face; but a gracious concern for God's honour will make us
much more ashamed to look him in the face. The publican, when he went to
the temple to pray, hung down his head more than ever, as one ashamed,
[Luk 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013). \[5.\] An eye to God as
our God will be of great use to us in the exercise of repentance. Ezra
begins, O my God! and again in the same breath, My God. The
consideration of our covenant-relation to God as ours will help to
humble us, and break our hearts for sin, that we should violate both his
precepts to us and our promises to him; it will also encourage us to
hope for pardon upon repentance. "He is my God, notwithstanding this;"
and every transgression in the covenant does not throw us out of
covenant.

(2.) He speaks as one much amazed ([Ezr
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#010)) "What shall we say after this?
For my part I know not what to say: if God do not help us, we are
undone." The discoveries of guilt excite amazement: the more we think of
sin the worse it looks. The difficulty of the case excites amazement.
How shall we recover ourselves? Which way shall we make our peace with
God? \[1.\] True penitents are at a loss what to say. Shall we say, We
have not sinned, or, God will not require it? If we do, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us. Shall we say, Have patience with
us and we will pay thee all, with thousands of rams, or our first-born
for our transgression? God will not thus be mocked: he knows we are
insolvent. Shall we say, There is no hope, and let come on us what will?
That is but to make bad worse. \[2.\] True penitents will consider what
to say, and should, as Ezra, beg of God to teach them. What shall we
say? Say, "I have sinned; I have done foolishly; God be merciful to me a
sinner;" and the like. See [Hos 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002).

(3.) He speaks as one much afraid, [Ezr
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#013), [Ezr
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#014). "After all the judgments that
have come upon us to reclaim us from sin, and all the deliverances that
have been wrought for us to engage us to God and duty, if we should
again break God's commandments, by joining in affinity with the children
of disobedience and learning their ways, what else could we expect but
that God should be angry with us till he had consumed us, and there
should not be so much as a remnant left, nor any to escape the
destruction?" There is not a surer nor sadder presage of ruin to any
people than revolting to sin, to the same sins again, after great
judgments and great deliverances. Those that will be wrought upon
neither by the one nor by the other are fit to be rejected, as reprobate
silver, for the founder melteth in vain.

(4.) He speaks as one much assured of the righteousness of God, and
resolved to acquiesce in that and to leave the matter with him whose
judgment is according to truth ([Ezr
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#015)): "Thou art righteous, wise,
just, and good; thou wilt neither do us wrong nor be hard upon us; and
therefore behold we are before thee, we lie at thy feet, waiting our
doom; we cannot stand before thee, insisting upon any righteousness of
our own, having no plea to support us or bring us off, and therefore we
fall down before thee, in our trespass, and cast ourselves on thy mercy.
Do unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee, [Jdg
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#015). We have nothing to say, nothing
to do, but to make supplication to our Judge," [Job
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015). Thus does this good man lay his
grief before God and then leave it with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 10](ezr010)

</div>
