<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen030)  [Next](gen032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 31:0</span></span>

Jacob was a very honest good man, a man of great devotion and integrity,
yet he had more trouble and vexation than any of the patriarchs. He left
his father's house in a fright, went to his uncle's in distress, very
hard usage he met with there, and now is going back surrounded with
fears. Here is, I. His resolution to return (v. 1-16). II. His
clandestine departure, ([Gen
31:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#017)). III. Laban's pursuit of him
in displeasure ([Gen 31:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#022)). IV.
The hot words that passed between them (v. 26-42). V. Their amicable
agreement at last ([Gen 31:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#043), etc.).

[Genesis 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 31:1</span></span>

Jacob is here taking up a resolution immediately to quit his uncle's
service, to take what he had and go back to Canaan. This resolution he
took up upon a just provocation, by divine direction, and with the
advice and consent of his wives.

I. Upon a just provocation; for Laban and his sons had become very cross
and ill-natured towards him, so that he could not stay among them with
safety or satisfaction.

1\. Laban's sons showed their ill-will in what they said, [Gen
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001). It should seem they said it in
Jacob's hearing, with a design to vex him. The last chapter began with
Rachel's envying Leah; this begins with Laban's sons envying Jacob.
Observe, (1.) How greatly they magnify Jacob's prosperity: He has gotten
all this glory. And what was this glory that they made so much ado
about? It was a parcel of brown sheep and speckled goats (and perhaps
the fine colours made them seem more glorious), and some camels and
asses, and such like trading; and this was all this glory. Note, Riches
are glorious things in the eyes of carnal people, while to all those
that are conversant with heavenly things they have no glory in
comparison with the glory which excelleth. Men's over-valuing worldly
wealth is that fundamental error which is the root of covetousness,
envy, and all evil. (2.) How basely they reflect upon Jacob's fidelity,
as if what he had he had not gotten honestly: Jacob has taken away all
that was our father's. Not all, surely. What had become of those cattle
which were committed to the custody of Laban's sons, and sent three
days' journey off? [Gen 30:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#035), [Gen
30:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#036). They mean all that was
committed to him; but, speaking invidiously, they express themselves
thus generally. Note, \[1.\] Those that are ever so careful to keep a
good conscience cannot always be sure of a good name. \[2.\] This is one
of the vanities and vexations which attend outward prosperity, that it
makes a man to be envied of his neighbors ([Ecc
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004)), and who can stand before envy?
[Pro 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004). Whom Heaven blesses hell
curses, and all its children on earth.

2\. Laban himself said little, but his countenance was not towards Jacob
as it used to be; and Jacob could not but take notice of it, [Gen
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#002), [Gen
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#005). He was but a churl at the best,
but now he was more churlish than formerly. Note, Envy is a sin that
often appears in the countenance; hence we read of an evil eye, [Pro
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#006). Sour looks may do a great deal
towards the ruin of peace and love in a family, and the making of those
uneasy of whose comfort we ought to be tender. Laban's angry countenance
lost him the greatest blessing his family ever had, and justly.

II\. By divine direction and under the convoy of a promise: The Lord
said unto Jacob, Return, and I will be with thee, [Gen
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#003). Though Jacob had met with very
hard usage here, yet he would not quit his place till God bade him. He
came thither by orders from Heaven, and there he would stay till he was
ordered back. Note, It is our duty to set ourselves, and it will be our
comfort to see ourselves, under God's guidance, both in our going out
and in our coming in. The direction he had from Heaven is more fully
related in the account he gives of it to his wives ([Gen
31:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#010)), where he tells them of a
dream he had about the cattle, and the wonderful increase of those of
his colour; and how the angel of God, in that dream (for I suppose the
dream spoken of [Gen 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#010) and that
[Gen 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#011) to be the same), took
notice of the workings of his fancy in his sleep, and instructed him, so
that it was not by chance, or by his own policy, that he obtained that
great advantage; but, 1. by the providence of God, who had taken notice
of the hardships Laban had put upon him, and took this way to recompense
him: "For I have seen all the Laban doeth unto thee, and herein I have
an eye to that." Note, There is more of equity in the distributions of
the divine providence than we are aware of, and by them the injured are
recompensed really, though perhaps insensibly. Nor was it only by the
justice of providence that Jacob was thus enriched, but, 2. In
performance of the promise intimated in what is said [Gen
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#013), I am the God of Beth-el, This
was the place where the covenant was renewed with him. Note, Worldly
prosperity and success are doubly sweet and comfortable when we see them
flowing, not from common providence, but from covenant-love, to perform
the mercy promised - when we have them from God as the God of Beth-el,
from those promises of the life which now is that belong to godliness.
Jacob, even when he had this hopeful prospect of growing rich with
Laban, must think of returning. When the world begins to smile upon us
we must remember it is not our home. Now arise ([Gen
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#013)) and return, (1.) To thy
devotions in Canaan, the solemnities of which had perhaps been much
intermitted while he was with Laban. The times of this servitude God had
winked at; but now, "Return to the place where thou anointedst the
pillar and vowedst the vow. Now that thou beginnest to grow rich it is
time to think of an altar and sacrifices again." (2.) To thy comforts in
Canaan: Return to the land of thy kindred. He was here among his near
kindred; but those only he must look upon as his kindred in the best
sense, the kindred he must live and die with, to whom pertained the
covenant. Note, The heirs of Canaan must never reckon themselves at home
till they come thither, however they may seem to take root here.

III\. With the knowledge and consent of his wives. Observe,

1\. He sent for Rachel and Leah to him to the field ([Gen
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#004)), that he might confer with them
more privately, or because one would not come to the other's apartment
and he would willingly talk with them together, or because he had work
to do in the field which he would not leave. Note, Husbands that love
their wives will communicate their purposes and intentions to them.
Where there is a mutual affection there will be a mutual confidence. And
the prudence of the wife should engage the heart of her husband to trust
in her, [Pro 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#011). Jacob told his
wives, (1.) How faithfully he had served their father, [Gen
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#006). Note, If others do not do their
duty to us, yet we shall have the comfort of having done ours to them.
(2.) How unfaithfully their father had dealt with him [Gen
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007). He would never keep to any
bargain that he made with him, but, after the first year, still as he
saw Providence favour Jacob with the colour agreed on, every half year
of the remaining five he changed it for some other colour, which made it
ten times; as if he thought not only to deceive Jacob, but the divine
Providence, which manifestly smiled upon him. Note, Those that deal
honestly are not always honestly dealt with. (3.) How God had owned him
notwithstanding. He had protected him from Laban's ill-will: God
suffered him not to hurt me. Note, Those that keep close to God shall be
kept safely by him. He had also provided plentifully for him,
notwithstanding Laban's design to ruin him: God has taken away the
cattle of your father, and given them to me, [Gen
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#009). Thus the righteous God paid
Jacob for his hard service out of Laban's estate; as afterwards he paid
the seed of Jacob for their serving the Egyptians, with their spoils.
Note, God is not unrighteous to forget his people's work and labour of
love, though men be so, [Heb 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#010).
Providence has ways of making those honest in the event that are not so
in their design. Note, further, The wealth of the sinner is laid up for
the just, [Pro 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#022). (4.) He told
them of the command God had given him, in a dream, to return to his own
country ([Gen 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#013)), that they might
not suspect his resolution to arise from inconstancy, or any
disaffection to their country or family, but might see it to proceed
from a principle of obedience to his God, and dependence on him.

2\. His wives cheerfully consented to his resolution. They also brought
forward their grievances, complaining that their father had been not
only unkind, but unjust, to them ([Gen
31:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#014)), that he looked upon them as
strangers, and was without natural affection towards them; and, whereas
Jacob had looked upon the wealth which God had transferred from Laban to
him as his wages, they looked upon it as their portions; so that, both
ways, God forced Laban to pay his debts, both to his servant and to his
daughters. So then it seemed, (1.) They were weary of their own people
and their father's house, and could easily forget them. Note, This good
use we should make of the unkind usage we meet with from the world, we
should sit the more loose to it, and be willing to leave it and desirous
to be at home. (2.) They were willing to go along with their husband,
and put themselves with him under the divine direction: Whatsoever God
hath said unto thee do. Note, Those wives that ar their husband's meet
helps will never be their hindrances in doing that to which God calls
them.

[Genesis 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 31:17</span></span>

Here is, I. Jacob's flight from Laban. We may suppose he had been long
considering of it, and casting about in his mind respecting it; but when
now, at last, God had given him positive orders to go, he made no delay,
nor was he disobedient to the heavenly vision. The first opportunity
that offered itself he laid hold of, when Laban was shearing his sheep
([Gen 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019)), that part of his flock
which was in the hands of his sons three days' journey off. Now, 1. It
is certain that it was lawful for Jacob to leave his service suddenly,
without giving a quarter's warning. It was not only justified by the
particular instructions God gave him, but warranted by the fundamental
law of self-preservation, which directs us, when we are in danger, to
shift for our own safety, as far as we can do it without wronging our
consciences. 2. It was his prudence to steal away unawares to Laban,
lest, if Laban had known, he should have hindered him or plundered him.
3. It was honestly done to take no more than his own with him, the
cattle of his getting, [Gen 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#018). He
took what Providence gave him, and was content with that, and would not
take the repair of his damages into his own hands. Yet Rachel was not so
honest as her husband; she stole her father's images ([Gen
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019)) and carried them away with her.
The Hebrew calls them teraphiam. Some think they were only little
representations of the ancestors of the family, in statues or pictures,
which Rachel had a particular fondness for, and was desirous to have
with her, now that she was going into another country. It should rather
seem that they were images for a religious use, penates, household-gods,
either worshipped or consulted as oracles; and we are willing to hope
(with bishop Patrick) that she took them away not out of covetousness of
the rich metal they were made of, much less for her own use, or out of
any superstitious fear lest Laban, by consulting his teraphim, might
know which way they had gone (Jacob, no doubt, dwelt with his wives as a
man of knowledge, and they were better taught than so), but out of a
design hereby to convince her father of the folly of his regard to those
as gods which could not secure themselves, [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001), [Isa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002).

II\. Laban's pursuit of Jacob. Tidings were brought him, on the third
day, that Jacob had fled; he immediately raises the whole clan, takes
his brethren, that is, the relations of his family, that were all in his
interests, and pursues Jacob (as Pharaoh and his Egyptians afterwards
pursued the seed of Jacob), to bring him back into bondage again, or
with design to strip him of what he had. Seven days' journey he marched
in pursuit of him, [Gen 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#023). He
would not have taken half the pains to have visited his best friends.
But the truth is bad men will do more to serve their sinful passions
than good men will to serve their just affections, and are more vehement
in their anger than in their love. Well, at length Laban, overtook him,
and the very night before he came up with him God interposed in the
quarrel, rebuked Laban and sheltered Jacob, charging Laban not to speak
unto him either good or bad ([Gen
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#024)), that is, to say nothing
against his going on with his journey, for that it proceeded from the
Lord. The same Hebraism we have, [Gen
24:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#050). Laban, during his seven day's
march, had been full of rage against Jacob, and was now full of hopes
that his lust should be satisfied upon him ([Exo
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009)); but God comes to him, and with
one word ties his hands, though he does not turn his heart. Note, 1. In
a dream, and in slumberings upon the bed, God has ways of opening the
ears of men, and sealing their instruction, [Job
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015), [Job
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#016). Thus he admonishes men by their
consciences, in secret whispers, which the man of wisdom will hear and
heed. 2. The safety of good men is very much owing to the hold God has
of the consciences of bad men and the access he has to them. 3. God
sometimes appears wonderfully for the deliverance of his people when
they are upon the very brink of ruin. The Jews were saved from Haman's
plot when the king's decree drew hear to be put in execution, [Est
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001).

[Genesis 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 31:25</span></span>

We have here the reasoning, not to say the rallying, that took place
between Laban and Jacob at their meeting, in that mountain which was
afterwards called Gilead, [Gen 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#025).
Here is,

I. The high charge which Laban exhibited against him. He accuses him,

1\. As a renegade that had unjustly deserted his service. To represent
Jacob as a criminal, he will have it thought that he intended kindness
to his daughters ([Gen 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#027), [Gen
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#028)), that he would have dismissed
them with all the marks of love and honour that could be, that he would
have made a solemn business of it, would have kissed his little
grandchildren (and that was all he would have given them), and,
according to the foolish custom of the country, would have sent them
away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp: not as
Rebekah was sent away out of the same family, above 120 years before,
with prayers and blessings ([Gen
24:60](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#060)), but with sport and merriment,
which was a sign that religion had very much decayed in the family, and
that they had lost their seriousness. However, he pretends they would
have been treated with respect at parting. Note, It is common for bad
men, when they are disappointed in their malicious projects, to pretend
that they designed nothing but what was kind and fair. When they cannot
do the mischief they intended, they are loth it should be thought that
they ever did intend it. When they have not done what they should have
done they come off with this excuse, that they would have done it. Men
may thus be deceived, but God cannot. He likewise suggests that Jacob
had some bad design in stealing away thus ([Gen
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#026)), that he took his wives away as
captives. Note, Those that mean ill themselves are most apt to put the
worst construction upon what others do innocently. The insinuating and
the aggravating of faults are the artifices of a designing malice, and
those must be represented (though never so unjustly) as intending ill
against whom ill is intended. Upon the whole matter, (1.) He boasts of
his own power ([Gen 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#029)): It is in
the power of my hand to do you hurt. He supposes that he had both right
on his side (a good action, as we say, against Jacob) and strength on
his side, either to avenge the wrong or recover the right. Note, Bad
people commonly value themselves much upon their power to do hurt,
whereas a power to do good is much more valuable. Those that will do
nothing to make themselves amiable love to be thought formidable. And
yet, (2.) He owns himself under the check and restraint of God's power;
and, though it redounds much to the credit and comfort of Jacob, he
cannot avoid telling him the caution God had given him the night before
in a dream, Speak not to Jacob good nor bad. Note, As God has all wicked
instruments in a chain, so when he pleases he can make them sensible of
it, and force them to own it to his praise, as protector of the good, as
Balaam did. Or we may look upon this as an instance of some
conscientious regard felt by Laban for God's express prohibitions. As
bad as he was he durst not injure one whom he saw to be the particular
care of Heaven. Note, A great deal of mischief would be prevented if men
would but attend to the caveats which their own consciences give them in
slumberings upon the bed, and regard the voice of God in them.

2\. As a thief, [Gen 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#030). Rather
than own that he had given him any colour of provocation to depart, he
is willing to impute it to a foolish fondness for his father's house,
which made him that he would needs begone; but then (says he) wherefore
hast thou stolen my gods? Foolish man! to call those his gods that could
be stolen! Could he expect protection from those that could neither
resist nor discover their invaders? Happy are those who have the Lord
for their God, for they have a God that they cannot be robbed of.
Enemies may steal our goods, but not our God. Here Laban lays to Jacob's
charge things that he knew not, the common distress of oppressed
innocency.

II\. Jacob's apology for himself. Those that commit their cause to God,
yet are not forbidden to plead it themselves with meekness and fear. 1.
As to the charge of stealing away his own wives he clears himself by
giving the true reason why he went away unknown to Laban, [Gen
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#031). He feared lest Laban would by
force take away his daughters, and so oblige him, by the bond of his
affection to his wives, to continue in his service. Note, Those that are
unjust in the least, it may be suspected, will be unjust also in much,
[Luk 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#010). If Laban deceive Jacob in
his wages, it is likely he will make no conscience of robbing him of his
wives, and putting those asunder whom God has joined together. What may
not be feared from men that have no principle of honesty? 2. As to the
charge of stealing Laban's gods he pleads not guilty, [Gen
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#032). He not only did not take them
himself (he was not so fond of them), but he did not know that they were
taken. Yet perhaps he spoke too hastily and inconsiderately when he
said, "Whoever had taken them, let him not live;" upon this he might
reflect with some bitterness when, not long after, Rachel who had taken
them died suddenly in travail. How just soever we think ourselves to be,
it is best to forbear imprecations, lest they fall heavier than we
imagine.

III\. The diligent search Laban made for his gods ([Gen
31:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#033)), partly out of hatred to
Jacob, whom he would gladly have an occasion to quarrel with, partly out
of love to his idols, which he was loth to part with. We do not find
that he searched Jacob's flocks for stolen cattle; but he searched his
furniture for stolen gods. He was of Micah's mind, You have taken away
my gods, and what have I more? [Jdg
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#024). Were the worshippers of false
gods so set upon their idols? did they thus walk in the name of their
gods? and shall not we be as solicitous in our enquires after the true
God? When he has justly departed from us, how carefully should we ask,
Where is God my Maker? O that I knew where I might find him! [Job
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#003). Laban, after all his searches,
missed of finding his gods, and was baffled in his enquiry with a sham;
but our God will not only by found of those that seek him, but they
shall find him their bountiful rewarder.

[Genesis 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">gen 31:36</span></span>

See in these verses,

I. The power of provocation. Jacob's natural temper was mild and calm,
and grace had improved it; he was a smooth man, and a plain man; and yet
Laban's unreasonable carriage towards him put him into a heat that
transported him into a heat that transported him into some vehemence,
[Gen 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#036), [Gen
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#037). His chiding with Laban, though
it may admit of some excuse, was not justifiable, nor is it written for
our imitation. Grievous words stir up anger, and commonly do but make
bad worse. It is a very great affront to one that bears an honest mind
to be charged with dishonesty, and yet even this we must learn to bear
with patience, committing our cause to God.

II\. The comfort of a good conscience. This was Jacob's rejoicing, that
when Laban accused him his own conscience acquitted him, and witnessed
for him that he had been in all things willing and careful to live
honestly, [Heb 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#018). Note, Those that
in any employment have dealt faithfully, if they cannot obtain the
credit of it with men, yet shall have the comfort of it in their own
bosoms.

III\. The character of a good servant, and particularly of a faithful
shepherd. Jacob had approved himself such a one, [Gen
31:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#038). 1. He was very careful, so
that, through his oversight or neglect, the ewes did not cast their
young. His piety also procured a blessing upon his master's effects that
were under his hands. Note, Servants should take no less care of what
they are entrusted with for their masters than if they were entitled to
it as their own. 2. He was very honest, and took none of that for his
own eating which was not allowed him. He contented himself with mean
fare, and coveted not to feast upon the rams of the flock. Note,
Servants must not be dainty in their food, nor covet what is forbidden
them, but in that, and other instances, show all good fidelity. 3. He
was very laborious, [Gen 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040). He
stuck to his business, all weathers; and bore both heat and cold with
invincible patience. Note, Men of business, that intend to make
something of it, must resolve to endure hardness. Jacob is here an
example to ministers; they also are shepherds, of whom it is required
that hey be true to their trust and willing to take pains.

IV\. The character of a hard master. Laban had been such a one to Jacob.
Those are bad masters, 1. Who exact from their servants that which is
unjust, by obliging them to make good that which is not damaged by any
default of theirs. This Laban did, [Gen
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#039). Nay, if there has been a
neglect, yet it is unjust to punish above the proportion of the fault.
That may be an inconsiderable damage to the master which would go near
to ruin a poor servant. 2. Those also are bad masters who deny to their
servants that which is just and equal. This Laban did, [Gen
31:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#041). It was unreasonable for him to
make Jacob serve fro his daughters, when he had in reversion so great an
estate secured to him by the promise of God himself; as it was also to
give him his daughters without portions, when it was in the power of his
hands to do well for them. Thus he robbed the poor because he was poor,
as he did also by changing his wages.

V. The care of providence for the protection of injured innocence, [Gen
31:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#042). God took cognizance of the
wrong done to Jacob, and repaid him whom Laban would otherwise have sent
empty away, and rebuked Laban, who otherwise would have swallowed him
up. Note, God is the patron of the oppressed; and those who are wronged
and yet not ruined, cast down and yet not destroyed, must acknowledge
him in their preservation and give him the glory of it. Observe, 1.
Jacob speaks of god as the God of his father, intimating that he thought
himself unworthy to be thus regarded, but was beloved for the father's
sake. 2. He calls him the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac; for
Abraham was dead, and had gone to that world where perfect love casts
out fear; but Isaac was yet alive, sanctifying the Lord in his heart, as
his fear and his dread

[Genesis 31:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">gen 31:43</span></span>

We have here the compromising of the matter between Laban and Jacob.
Laban had nothing to say in reply to Jacob's remonstrance: he could
neither justify himself nor condemn Jacob, but was convicted by his own
conscience of the wrong he had done him; and therefore desires to hear
no more of the matter He is not willing to own himself in a fault, nor
to ask Jacob's forgiveness, and make him satisfaction, as he ought to
have done. But,

I. He turns it off with a profession of kindness for Jacob's wives and
children ([Gen 31:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#043)): These daughters
are my daughters. When he cannot excuse what he has done, he does, in
effect, own what he should have done; he should have treated them as his
own, but he had counted them as strangers, [Gen
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#015). Note, It si common for those
who are without natural affection to pretend much to it when it will
serve a turn. Or perhaps Laban said this in a vain-glorious say, as one
that loved to talk big, and use great swelling words of vanity: "All
that thou seest is mine." It was not so, it was all Jacob's, and he had
paid dearly for it; yet Jacob let him have his saying, perceiving him
coming into a better humour. Note, Property lies near the hearts of
worldly people. They love to boast of it, "This is mine, and the other
is mine," as Nabal, [Sa1 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#011), my
bread and my water.

II\. He proposes a covenant of friendship between them, to which Jacob
readily agrees, without insisting upon Laban's submission, much less his
restitution. Note, When quarrels happen, we should be willing to be
friends again upon any terms: peace and love are such valuable jewels
that we can scarcely buy them too dearly. Better sit down losers than go
on in strife. Now observe here,

1\. The substance of this covenant. Jacob left it wholly to Laban to
settle it. The tenour of it was, (1.) That Jacob should be a good
husband to his wives, that he should not afflict them, nor marry other
wives besides them, [Gen 31:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#050). Jacob
had never given him any cause to suspect that he would be any other than
a kind husband; yet, as if he had, he was willing to come under this
engagement. Though Laban had afflicted them himself, yet he will bind
Jacob that he shall not afflict them. Note, Those that are injurious
themselves are commonly most jealous of others, and those that do not do
their own duty are most peremptory in demanding duty from others. (2.)
That he should never be a bad neighbour to Laban, [Gen
31:52](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#052). It was agreed that no act of
hostility should ever pass between them, that Jacob should forgive and
forget all the wrongs he had received and not remember them against
Laban or his family in after-times. Note, We may resent an injury which
yet we may not revenge.

2\. The ceremony of this covenant. It was made and ratified with great
solemnity, according to the usages of those times. (1.) A pillar was
erected ([Gen 31:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#045)), and a heap of
stones raised ([Gen 31:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#046)), to
perpetuate the memory or the ting, the way of recording agreements by
writing being then either not known or not used. (2.) A sacrifice was
offered ([Gen 31:54](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#054)), a sacrifice of
peace-offerings. Note, Our peace with God is that which puts true
comfort into our peace with our friends. If parties contend, the
reconciliation of both to him will facilitate their reconciliation one
to another. (3.) They did eat bread together ([Gen
31:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#046)), jointly partaking of the feast
upon the sacrifice, [Gen 31:54](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#054). This
was in token of a hearty reconciliation. Covenants of friendship were
anciently ratified by the parties eating and drinking together. It was
in the nature of a love-feast. (4.) They solemnly appealed to God
concerning their sincerity herein, \[1.\] As a witness ([Gen
31:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#049)): The Lord watch between me and
thee, that is, "The Lord take cognizance of every thing that shall be
done on either side in violation of this league. When we are out of one
another's sight, let his be a restraint upon us, that wherever we are we
are under God's eye." This appeal is convertible into a prayer. Friends
at a distance from each other may take the comfort of this, that when
they cannot know or succour one another God watches between them, and
has his eye on them both. \[2.\] As a Judge, [Gen
31:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#053). The God of Abraham (from whom
Jacob descended), and the God of Nahor (from whom Laban descended), the
God of their father (the common ancestor, form whom they both
descended), judge betwixt us. God's relation to them is thus expressed
to intimate that they worshipped one and the same God, upon which
consideration there ought to be no enmity between them. Note, Those that
have one God should have one heart: those that agree in religion should
strive to agree in every thing else. God is Judge between contending
parties, and he will judge righteously; whoever does wrong, it is at his
peril. (5.) They gave a new name to the place, [Gen
31:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#047), [Gen
31:48](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#048). Laban called it in Syriac, and
Jacob in Hebrew, the heap of witness; and ([Gen
31:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#049)) it was called Mizpah, a
watch-tower. Posterity being included in the league, care was taken that
thus the memory of it should be preserved. These names are applicable to
the seals of the gospel covenant, which are witnesses to us if we be
faithful, but witnesses to us if we be faithful, but witnesses against
us if we be false. The name Jacob gave this heap (Galeed) stuck by it,
not the name Laban gave it. In all this rencounter, Laban was noisy and
full of words, affecting to say much; Jacob was silent, and said little.
When Laban appealed to God under many titles, Jacob only swore by the
fear of his father Isaac, that is, the God whom his father Isaac feared,
who had never served other gods, as Abraham and Nahor had done. Two
words of Jacob's were more memorable than all Laban's speeches and vain
repetitions: for the words of wise men are heard in quiet, more than the
cry of him that ruleth among fools, [Ecc
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#017).

Lastly, After all this angry parley, they part friends, [Gen
31:55](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#055). Laban very affectionately
kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them, and then went back
in peace. Note, God is often better to us than our fears, and strangely
overrules the spirits of men in our favour, beyond what we could have
expected; for it is not in vain to trust in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 32](gen032)

</div>
