<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen033)  [Next](gen035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 34:0</span></span>

At this chapter begins the story of Jacob's afflictions in his children,
which were very great, and are recorded to show, 1. The vanity of this
world. That which is dearest to us may prove our greatest vexation, and
we may meet with the greatest crosses in those things of which we said,
"This same shall comfort us." 2. The common griefs of good people.
Jacob's children were circumcised, were well taught, and prayed for, and
had very good examples set them; yet some of them proved very untoward.
"The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong." Grace does
not run in the blood, and yet the interrupting of the entail of grace
does not cut off the entail of profession and visible church-privileges:
nay, Jacob's sons, though they were his grief in some things, yet were
all taken into covenant with God. In this chapter we have, I. Dinah
debauched ([Gen 34:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001)). II. A treaty
of marriage between her and Shechem who had defiled her ([Gen
34:6-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#006)). III. The circumcision of the
Shechemites, pursuant to that treaty ([Gen
34:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#020)). IV. The perfidious and
bloody revenge which Simeon and Levi took upon them ([Gen
34:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025).

[Genesis 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 34:1</span></span>

Dinah was, for aught that appears, Jacob's only daughter, and we may
suppose her therefore the mother's fondling and the darling of the
family, and yet she proves neither a joy nor a credit to them; for those
children seldom prove either the best or the happiest that are most
indulged. She is reckoned now but fifteen or sixteen years of age when
she here occasioned so much mischief. Observe, 1. Her vain curiosity,
which exposed her. She went out, perhaps unknown to her father, but by
the connivance of her mother, to see the daughters of the land ([Gen
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001)); probably it was at a ball, or
on some public day. Being an only daughter, she thought herself solitary
at home, having none of her own age and sex to converse with; and
therefore she must needs go abroad to divert herself, to keep off
melancholy, and to accomplish herself by conversation better than she
could in her father's tents. Note, It is a very good thing for children
to love home; it is parents' wisdom to make it easy to them, and
children's duty then to be easy in it. Her pretence was to see the
daughters of the land, to see how they dressed, and how they danced, and
what was fashionable among them. She went to see, yet that was not all,
she went to be seen too; she went to see the daughters of the land, but,
it may be, with some thoughts of the sons of the land too. I doubt she
went to get an acquaintance with those Canaanites, and to learn their
way. Note, The pride and vanity of young people betray them into many
snares. 2. The loss of her honour by this means ([Gen
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#002)): Shechem, the prince of the
country, but a slave to his own lusts, took her, and lay with her, it
should seem, not so much by force as by surprise. Note, Great men think
they may do any thing; and what more mischievous than untaught and
ungoverned youth? See what came of Dinah's gadding: young women must
learn to be chaste, keepers at home; these properties are put together,
[Tit 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#005), for those that are not
keepers at home expose their chastity. Dinah went abroad to look about
her; but, if she had looked about her as she ought, she would not have
fallen into this snare. Note, The beginning of sin is as the letting
forth of water. How great a matter does a little fire kindle! We should
therefore carefully avoid all occasions of sin and approaches to it. 3.
The court Shechem made to her, after he had defiled her. This was fair
and commendable, and made the best of what was bad; he loved her (not as
Amnon, [Sa2 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#015)), and he engaged his
father to make a match for him with her, [Gen
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#004). 4. The tidings brought to poor
Jacob, [Gen 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#005). As soon as his
children grew up they began to be a grief to him. Let not godly parents,
that are lamenting the miscarriages of their children, think their case
singular or unprecedented. The good man held his peace, as one
astonished, that knows not what to say: or he said nothing, for fear of
saying amiss, as David ([Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001),
[Psa 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002)); he smothered his
resentments, lest, if he had suffered them to break out, they should
have transported him into any decencies. Or, it should seem, he had left
the management of his affairs very much (too much I doubt) to his sons,
and he would do nothing without them: or, at least, he knew they would
make him uneasy if he did, they having shown themselves, of late, upon
all occasions, bold, forward, and assuming. Note, Things never go well
when the authority of a parent runs low in a family. Let every man bear
rule in his own house, and have his children in subjection with all
gravity.

[Genesis 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 34:6</span></span>

Jacob's sons, when they heard of the injury done to Dinah, showed a very
great resentment of it, influenced perhaps rather by jealousy for the
honour of their family than by a sense of virtue. Many are concerned at
the shamefulness of sin that never lay to heart the sinfulness of it. It
is here called folly in Israel ([Gen
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#007)), according to the language of
after-times; for Israel was not yet a people, but a family only. Note,
1. Uncleanness is folly; for it sacrifices the favour of God, peace of
conscience, and all the soul can pretend to that is sacred and
honourable, to a base and brutish lust. 2. This folly is most shameful
in Israel, in a family of Israel, where God is known and worshipped, as
he was in Jacob's tents, by the name of the God of Israel. Folly in
Israel is scandalous indeed. 3. It is a good thing to have sin stamped
with a bad name: uncleanness is here proverbially called folly in
Israel, [Sa2 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#012). Dinah is here
called Jacob's daughter, for warning to all the daughters of Israel,
that they betray not themselves to this folly.

Hamor came to treat with Jacob himself, but he turns him over to his
sons; and here we have a particular account of the treaty, in which, it
is a shame to say, the Canaanites were more honest than the Israelites.

I. Hamor and Shechem fairly propose this match, in order to a coalition
in trade. Shechem is deeply in love with Dinah; he will have her upon
any terms, [Gen 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#011), [Gen
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#012). His father not only consents,
but solicits for him, and gravely insists upon the advantages that would
follow from the union of the families, [Gen
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#009), [Gen
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#010). He shows no jealousy of Jacob,
though he was a stranger, but rather an earnest desire to settle a
correspondence with him and his family, making him that generous offer,
The land shall be before you, trade you therein.

II\. Jacob's sons basely pretend to insist upon a coalition in religion,
when really they designed nothing less. If Jacob had taken the
management of this affair into his own hands, it is probable that he and
Hamor would soon have concluded it; but Jacob's sons meditate only
revenge, and a strange project they have for the compassing of it - the
Shechemites must be circumcised; not to make them holy (they never
intended that), but to make them sore, that they might become an easier
prey to their sword. 1. The pretence was specious. "It is the honour of
Jacob's family that they carry about with them the token of God's
covenant with them; and it will be a reproach to those that are thus
dignified and distinguished to enter into such a strict alliance with
those that are uncircumcised ([Gen
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#014)); and therefore, if you will be
circumcised, then we will become one people with you," [Gen
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#015), [Gen
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#016). Had they been sincere herein
their proposal of these terms would have had in it something
commendable; for Israelites should not intermarry with Canaanites,
professors with profane; it is a great sin, or at least the cause and
inlet of a great deal, and has often been of pernicious consequence. The
interest we have in any persons, and the hold we have of them, should be
wisely improved by us, to bring them to the love and practice of
religion (He that winneth souls is wise); but then we must not, like
Jacob's sons, think it enough to persuade them to submit to the external
rites of religion, but must endeavour to convince them of its
reasonableness, and to bring them acquainted with the power of it. 2.
The intention was malicious, as appears by the sequel of the story; all
they aimed at was to prepare them for the day of slaughter. Note, Bloody
designs have often been covered, and carried on, with a pretence of
religion; thus they have been accomplished most plausibly and most
securely: but this dissembled piety is, doubtless, double iniquity.
Religion is never more injured, nor are God's sacraments more profaned,
than when they are thus used for a cloak of maliciousness. Nay, if
Jacob's sons had not had this bloody design, I do not see how they could
justify their offering the sacred sign of circumcision, the seal of
God's covenant, to these devoted Canaanites, who had no part nor lot in
the matter. Those had no right to the seal that had no right to the
promise. It is not meet to take the children's bread, and cast it to
dogs: but Jacob's sons valued not this, while they could make it serve
their turn.

[Genesis 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 34:18</span></span>

Here, 1. Hamor and Shechem gave consent themselves to be circumcised,
[Gen 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#018), [Gen
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#019). To this perhaps they were
moved, not only by the strong desire they had to bring about this match,
but by what they might have heard of the sacred and honourable
intentions of this sign, in the family of Abraham, which, it is
probable, they had some confused notions of, and of the promises
confirmed by it, which made them the more desirous to incorporate with
the family of Jacob, [Zac 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023). Note,
Many who know little of religion, yet know so much of it as makes them
willing to join themselves with those that are religious. Again, If a
man would take upon him a form of religion to gain a good wife, much
more should we embrace the power of it to gain the favour of a good God,
even circumcise our hearts to love him, and, as Shechem here, not defer
to do the thing. 2. They gained the consent of the men of their city,
Jacob's sons requiring that they also should be circumcised. (1.) They
themselves had great influences upon them by their command and example.
Note, Religion would greatly prevail if those in authority, who, like
Shechem, are more honourable than their neighbours, would appear forward
and zealous for it. (2.) They urged an argument which was very cogent
([Gen 34:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#023)), Shall not their cattle
and their substance be ours? They observed that Jacob's sons were
industrious thriving people, and promised themselves and their
neighbours advantage by an alliance with them; it would improve ground
and trade, and bring money into their country. Now, \[1.\] It was bad
enough to marry upon this principle: yet we see covetousness the
greatest matchmaker in the world, and nothing designed so much, with
many, as the laying of house to house, and field to field, without
regard had to any other consideration. \[2.\] It was worse to be
circumcised upon this principle. The Shechemites will embrace the
religion of Jacob's family only in hopes of interesting themselves
thereby in the riches of that family. Thus there are many with whom gain
is godliness, and who are more governed and influenced by their secular
interest than by any principle of their religion.

[Genesis 34:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 34:25</span></span>

Here, we have Simeon and Levi, two of Jacob's sons, young men not much
above twenty years old, cutting the throats of the Shechemites, and
thereby breaking the heart of their good father.

I. Here is the barbarous murder of the Shechemites. Jacob himself was
used to the sheep-hook, but his sons had got swords by their sides, as
if they had been the seed of Esau, who was to live by his sword; we have
them here,

1\. Slaying the inhabitants of Shechem - all the males, Hamor and
Shechem particularly, with whom they had been treating in a friendly
manner but the other day, yet with a design upon their lives. Some think
that all Jacob's sons, when they wheedled the Shechemites to be
circumcised, designed to take advantage of their soreness, and to rescue
Dinah from among them; but that Simeon and Levi, not content with that,
would themselves avenge the injury - and they did it with a witness.
Now, (1.) It cannot be denied but that God was righteous in it. Had the
Shechemites been circumcised in obedience to any command of God, their
circumcision would have been their protection; but when they submitted
to that sacred rite only to serve a turn, to please their prince and to
enrich themselves, it was just with God to bring this upon them. Note,
As nothing secures us better than true religion, so nothing exposes us
more than religion only pretended to. (2.) But Simeon and Levi were most
unrighteous. \[1.\] It was true that Shechem had wrought folly against
Israel, in defiling Dinah; but it ought to have been considered how far
Dinah herself had been accessory to it. Had Shechem abused her in her
own mother's tent, it would have been another matter; but she went upon
his ground, and perhaps by her indecent carriage had struck the spark
which began the fire: when we are severe upon the sinner we ought to
consider who was the tempter. \[2.\] It was true that Shechem had done
ill; but he was endeavouring to atone for it, and was as honest and
honourable, ex post facto - after the deed, as the case would admit: it
was not the case of the Levite's concubine that was abused to death; nor
does he justify what he has done, but courts a reconciliation upon any
terms. \[3.\] It was true that Shechem had done ill; but what was that
to all the Shechemites? Does one man sin, and will they be wroth with
all the town? Must the innocent fall with the guilty? This was barbarous
indeed. \[4.\] But that which above all aggravated the cruelty was the
most perfidious treachery that was in it. The Shechemites had submitted
to their conditions, and had done that upon which they had promised to
become one people with them ([Gen
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#016)); yet they act as sworn enemies
to those to whom they had lately become sworn friends, making as light
of their covenant as they did of the laws of humanity. And are these the
sons of Israel? Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce. \[5.\] This
also added to the crime, that they made a holy ordinance of God
subservient to their wicked design, so making that odious; as if it were
not enough for them to shame themselves and their family, they bring a
reproach upon that honourable badge of their religion; justly would it
be called a bloody ordinance.

2\. Seizing the prey of Shechem, and plundering the town. They rescued
Dinah ([Gen 34:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#026)), and, if that was
all they came for, they might have done that without blood, as appears
by their own showing ([Gen 34:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#017)); but
they aimed at the spoil; and, though Simeon and Levi only were the
murderers, yet it is intimated that others of the sons of Jacob came
upon the slain and spoiled the city ([Gen
34:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#027)), and so became accessory to the
murder. In them it was manifest injustice; yet here we may observe the
righteousness of God. The Shechemites were willing to gratify the sons
of Jacob by submitting to the penance of circumcision, upon this
principle, Shall not their cattle and their substance be ours? ([Gen
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#023)), and see what was the issue;
instead of making themselves masters of the wealth of Jacob's family,
Jacob's family become masters of their wealth. Note, Those who unjustly
grasp at that which is another's justly lose that which is their own.

II\. Here is Jacob's resentment of this bloody deed of Simeon and Levi,
[Gen 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030). Two things he bitterly
complains of: - 1. The reproach they had brought upon him thereby: You
have troubled me, put me into a disorder, for you have made me to stink
among the inhabitants of the land, that is, "You have rendered me and my
family odious among them. What will they say of us and our religion? We
shall be looked upon as the most perfidious barbarous people in the
world." Note, The gross misconduct of wicked children is the grief and
shame of their godly parents. Children should be the joy of their
parents; but wicked children are their trouble, sadden their hearts,
break their spirits, and make them go mourning from day to day. Children
should be an ornament to their parents; but wicked children are their
reproach, and are as dead flies in the pot of ointment: but let such
children know that, if they repent not, the grief they have caused to
their parents, and the damage religion has sustained in its reputation
through them, will come into the account and be reckoned for. 2. The
ruin they had exposed him to. What could be expected, but that the
Canaanites, who were numerous and formidable, would confederate against
him, and he and his little family would become an easy prey to them? I
shall be destroyed, I and my house. If all the Shechemites must be
destroyed for the offence of one, why not all the Israelites for the
offence of two? Jacob knew indeed that God had promised to preserve and
perpetuate his house; but he might justly fear that these vile practices
of his children would amount to a forfeiture, and cut off the entail.
Note, When sin is in the house, there is reason to fear ruin at the
door. The tender parents foresee those bad consequences of sin which the
wicked children have no dread of. One would think this should have made
them to relent, and they should have humbled themselves to their good
father, and begged his pardon; but, instead of this, they justify
themselves, and give him this insolent reply, Should he deal with our
sister as with a harlot? No, he should not; but, if he do, must they be
their own avengers? Will nothing less than so many lives, and the ruin
of a whole city, serve to atone for an abuse done to one foolish girl?
By their question they tacitly reflect upon their father, as if he would
have been content to let them deal with his daughter as with a harlot.
Note, It is common for those who run into one extreme to reproach and
censure those who keep the mean as if they ran into the other. Those who
condemn the rigour of revenge shall be misrepresented, as if they
countenanced and justified the offence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 35](gen035)

</div>
