<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen009)  [Next](gen011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 10:0</span></span>

This chapter shows more particularly what was said in general ([Gen
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#019)), concerning the three sons of
Noah, that "of them was the whole earth overspread;" and the fruit of
that blessing ([Gen 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001), [Gen
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#007)), "replenish the earth." Is is the
only certain account extant of the origin of nations; and yet perhaps
there is no nation but that of the Jews that can be confident from which
of these seventy fountains (for so many there are here) it derives its
streams. Through the want of early records, the mixtures of people, the
revolutions of nations, and distance of time, the knowledge of the
lineal descent of the present inhabitants of the earth is lost; nor were
any genealogies preserved but those of the Jews, for the sake of the
Messiah, only in this chapter we have a brief account, I. Of the
posterity of Japheth ([Gen 10:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002)).
II. The posterity of Ham ([Gen
10:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)), and in this particular
notice is taken of Nimrod ([Gen
10:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008)). III. The posterity of Shem
([Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021), etc.).

[Genesis 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 10:1</span></span>

Moses begins with Japheth's family, either because he was the eldest, or
because his family lay remotest from Israel and had least concern with
them at the time when Moses wrote, and therefore he mentions that race
very briefly, hastening to give an account of the posterity of Ham, who
were Israel's enemies and of Shem, who were Israel's ancestors; for it
is the church that the scripture is designed to be the history of, and
of the nations of the world only as they were some way or other related
to Israel and interested in the affairs of Israel. Observe, 1. Notice is
taken that the sons of Noah had sons born to them after the flood, to
repair and rebuild the world of mankind which the flood had ruined. He
that had killed now makes alive. 2. The posterity of Japheth were
allotted to the isles of the Gentiles ([Gen
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005)), which were solemnly, by lot,
after a survey, divided among them, and probably this island of ours
among the rest; all places beyond the sea from Judea are called isles
([Jer 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#022)), and this directs us to
understand that promise ([Isa 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004)),
the isles shall wait for his law, of the conversion of the Gentiles to
the faith of Christ.

[Genesis 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 10:6</span></span>

That which is observable and improvable in these verses is the account
here given of Nimrod, [Gen 10:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008). He
is here represented as a great man in his day: He began to be a mighty
one in the earth, that is, whereas those that went before him were
content to stand upon the same level with their neighbours, and though
every man bore rule in his own house yet no man pretended any further,
Nimrod's aspiring mind could not rest here; he was resolved to tower
above his neighbours, not only to be eminent among them, but to lord it
over them. The same spirit that actuated the giants before the flood
(who became mighty men, and men of renown, [Gen
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004)), now revived in him, so soon was
that tremendous judgment which the pride and tyranny of those mighty men
brought upon the world forgotten. Note, There are some in whom ambition
and affectation of dominion seem to be bred in the bone; such there have
been and will be, notwithstanding the wrath of God often revealed from
heaven against them. Nothing on this side hell will humble and break the
proud spirits of some men, in this like Lucifer, [Isa
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014), [Isa
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#015). Now,

I. Nimrod was a great hunter; with this he began, and for this became
famous to a proverb. Every great hunter is, in remembrance of him,
called a Nimrod. 1. Some think he did good with his hunting, served his
country by ridding it of the wild beasts which infested it, and so
insinuated himself into the affections of his neighbours, and got to be
their prince. Those that exercise authority either are, or at least
would be called, benefactors, [Luk
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#025). 2. Others think that under
pretence of hunting he gathered men under his command, in pursuit of
another game he had to play, which was to make himself master of the
country and to bring them into subjection. He was a mighty hunter, that
is, he was a violent invader of his neighbours' rights and properties,
and a persecutor of innocent men, carrying all before him, and
endeavouring to make all his own by force and violence. He thought
himself a mighty prince, but before the Lord (that is, in God's account)
he was but a mighty hunter. Note, Great conquerors are but great
hunters. Alexander and Caesar would not make such a figure in
scripture-history as they do in common history; the former is
represented in prophecy but as a he-goat pushing, [Dan
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005). Nimrod was a mighty hunter
against the Lord, so the Septuagint; that is, (1.) He set up idolatry,
as Jeroboam did, for the confirming of his usurped dominion. That he
might set up a new government, he set up a new religion upon the ruin of
the primitive constitution of both. Babel was the mother of harlots. Or,
(2.) He carried on his oppression and violence in defiance of God
himself, daring Heaven with his impieties, as if he and his huntsmen
could out-brave the Almighty, and were a match for the Lord of hosts and
all his armies. As if it were a small thing to weary men, he thinks to
weary my God also, [Isa 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#013).

II\. Nimrod was a great ruler: The beginning of his kingdom was Babel,
[Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010). Some way or other, by arts
or arms, he got into power, either being chosen to it or forcing his way
to it; and so laid the foundations of a monarchy, which was afterwards a
head of gold, and the terror of the mighty, and bade fair to be
universal. It does not appear that he had any right to rule by birth;
but either his fitness for government recommended him, as some think, to
an election, or by power and policy he advanced gradually, and perhaps
insensibly, into the throne. See the antiquity of civil government, and
particularly that form of it which lodges the sovereignty in a single
person. If Nimrod and his neighbours began, other nations soon learned
to incorporate under one head for their common safety and welfare,
which, however it began, proved so great a blessing to the world that
things were reckoned to go ill indeed when there was no king in Israel.

III\. Nimrod was a great builder. Probably he was architect in the
building of Babel, and there he began his kingdom; but, when his project
to rule all the sons of Noah was baffled by the confusion of tongues,
out of that land he went forth into Assyria (so the margin reads it,
[Gen 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011)) and built Nineveh, etc.,
that, having built these cities, he might command them and rule over
them. Observe, in Nimrod, the nature of ambition. 1. It is boundless.
Much would have more, and still cries, Give, give. 2. It is restless.
Nimrod, when he had four cities under his command, could not be content
till he had four more. 3. It is expensive. Nimrod will rather be at the
charge of rearing cities than not have the honour of ruling them. The
spirit of building is the common effect of a spirit of pride. 4. It is
daring, and will stick at nothing. Nimrod's name signifies rebellion,
which (if indeed he did abuse his power to the oppression of his
neighbours) teaches us that tyrants to men are rebels to God, and their
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft.

[Genesis 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 10:15</span></span>

Observe here, 1. The account of the posterity of Canaan, of the families
and nations that descended from him, and of the land they possessed, is
more particular than of any other in this chapter, because these were
the nations that were to be subdued before Israel, and their land was in
process of time to become the holy land, Immanuel's land; and this God
had an eye to when, in the mean time, he cast the lot of that accursed
devoted race in that spot of ground which he had selected for his own
people; this Moses takes notice of, [Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008), When the Most High divided to
the nations their inheritance, he set the bounds of the people according
to the number of the children of Israel. 2. By this account it appears
that the posterity of Canaan were numerous, and rich, and very
pleasantly situated; and yet Canaan was under a curse, a divine curse,
and not a curse causeless. Note, Those that are under the curse of God
may yet perhaps thrive and prosper greatly in this world; for we cannot
know love or hatred, the blessing or the curse, by what is before us,
but by what is within us, [Ecc 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#001).
The curse of God always works really and always terribly: but perhaps it
is a secret curse, a curse to the soul, and does not work visibly, or a
slow curse, and does not work immediately; but sinners are by it
reserved for, and bound over to, a day of wrath. Canaan here has a
better land than either Shem or Japheth, and yet they have a better lot,
for they inherit the blessing.

[Genesis 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 10:21</span></span>

Two things especially are observable in this account of the posterity of
Shem: -

I. The description of Shem, [Gen
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021). We have not only his name,
Shem, which signifies a name, but two titles to distinguish him by: -

1\. He was the father of all the children of Eber. Eber was his great
grandson; but why should he be called the father of all his children,
rather than of all Arphaxad's, or Salah's, etc.? Probably because
Abraham and his seed, God's covenant-people, not only descended from
Heber, but from him were called Hebrews; [Gen
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013), Abram the Hebrew. Paul looked
upon it as his privilege that he was a Hebrew of the Hebrews, [Phi
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005). Eber himself, we may suppose, was
a man eminent for religion in a time of general apostasy, and a great
example of piety to his family; and, the holy tongue being commonly
called from him the Hebrew, it is probable that he retained it in his
family, in the confusion of Babel, as a special token of God's favour to
him; and from him the professors of religion were called the children of
Eber. Now, when the inspired penman would give Shem an honourable title,
he calls him the father of the Hebrews. Though when Moses wrote this,
they were a poor despised people, bond-slaves in Egypt, yet, being God's
people, it was an honour to a man to be akin to them. As Ham, though he
had many sons, is disowned by being called the father of Canaan, on
whose seed the curse was entailed ([Gen
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#022)), so Shem, though he had many
sons, is dignified with the title of the father of Eber, on whose seed
the blessing was entailed. Note, a family of saints is more truly
honourable than a family of nobles, Shem's holy seed than Ham's royal
seed, Jacob's twelve patriarchs than Ishmael's twelve princes, [Gen
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020). Goodness is true greatness.

2\. He was the brother of Japheth the elder, by which it appears that,
though Shem is commonly put first, he was not Noah's first-born, but
Japheth was older. But why should this also be put as part of Shem's
title and description, that he was the brother of Japheth, since it had
been, in effect, said often before? And was he not as much brother to
Ham? Probably this was intended to signify the union of the Gentiles
with the Jews in the church. The sacred historian had mentioned it as
Shem's honour that he was the father of the Hebrews; but, lest Japheth's
seed should therefore be looked upon as for ever shut out from the
church, he here reminds us that he was the brother of Japheth, not in
birth only, but in blessing; for Japheth was to dwell in the tents of
Shem. Note, (1.) Those are brethren in the best manner that are so by
grace, and that meet in the covenant of God and in the communion of
saints. (2.) God, in dispensing his grace, does not go by seniority, but
the younger sometimes gets the start of the elder in coming into the
church; so the last shall be first and the first last.

II\. The reason of the name of Peleg ([Gen
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025)): Because in his days (that is,
about the time of his birth, when his name was given him), was the earth
divided among the children of men that were to inhabit it; either when
Noah divided it by an orderly distribution of it, as Joshua divided the
land of Canaan by lot, or when, upon their refusal to comply with that
division, God, in justice, divided them by the confusion of tongues:
whichsoever of these was the occasion, pious Heber saw cause to
perpetuate the remembrance of it in the name of his son; and justly may
our sons be called by the same name, for in our days, in another sense,
is the earth, the church, most wretchedly divided.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 11](gen011)

</div>
