<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen035)  [Next](gen037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 36:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have an account of the posterity of Esau, who, from
him, were called Edomites, that Esau who sold his birthright, and lost
his blessing, and was not loved of God as Jacob was. Here is a brief
register kept of his family for some generations. 1. Because he was the
son of Isaac, for whose sake this honour is put upon him. 2. Because the
Edomites were neighbours to Israel, and their genealogy would be of use
to give light to the following stories of what passed between them. 3.
It is to show the performance of the promise to Abraham, that he should
be "the father of many nations," and of that answer which Rebekah had
from the oracle she consulted, "Two nations are in thy womb," and of the
blessing of Isaac, "Thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth." We
have here, I. Esau's wives ([Gen
36:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)). II. His remove to mount Seir
([Gen 36:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#006)). III. The names of his
sons ([Gen 36:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#009)). IV. The dukes who
descended of his sons ([Gen 36:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015)).
V. The dukes of the Horites ([Gen
36:20-30](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020)). VI. The kings and dukes of
Edom ([Gen 36:31-43](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#031)). Little more is
recorded than their names, because the history of those that were out of
the church (though perhaps it might have been serviceable in politics)
would have been of little use in divinity. It is in the church that the
memorable instances are found of special grace, and special providence;
for that is the enclosure, the rest is common. This chapter is abridged,
[Ch1 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#035), etc.

[Genesis 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 36:1</span></span>

Observe here, 1. Concerning Esau himself, [Gen
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001). He is called Edom (and again,
[Gen 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008)), that name by which was
perpetuated the remembrance of the foolish bargain he made, when he sold
his birthright for that red, that red pottage. The very mention of that
name is enough to intimate the reason why his family is turned off with
such a short account. Note, If men do a wrong thing they must thank
themselves, when it is, long afterwards, remembered against them to
their reproach. 2. Concerning his wives, and the children they bore him
in the land of Canaan. He had three wives, and, by them all, but five
sons: many a one has more by one wife. God in his providence often
disappoints those who take indirect courses to build up a family; yet
here the promise prevailed, and Esau's family was built up. 3.
Concerning his removal to mount Seir, which was the country God had
given him for a possession, when he reserved Canaan for the seed of
Jacob. God owns it, long afterwards: I gave to Esau mount Seir ([Deu
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#005); [Jos
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#004)), which was the reason why the
Edomites must not be disturbed in their possession. Those that have not
a right by promise, such as Jacob had, to Canaan, may have a very good
title by providence to their estates, such as Esau had to mount Seir.
Esau had begun to settle among his wives' relations, in Seir, before
Jacob came from Padan-aram, [Gen 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#003).
Isaac, it is likely, had sent him thither (as Abraham in his life-time
had sent the sons of the concubines from Isaac his son into the east
country, [Gen 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006)), that Jacob might
have the clearer way made for him to the possession of the promised
land. During the life of Isaac, however, Esau had probably still some
effects remaining in Canaan; but, after his death, he wholly withdrew to
mount Seir, took with him what came to his share of his father's
personal estate, and left Canaan to Jacob, not only because he had the
promise of it, but because Esau perceived that if they should continue
to thrive as they had begun there would not be room for both. Thus dwelt
Esau in Mount Seir, [Gen 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008). Note,
Whatever opposition may be made, God's word will be accomplished, and
even those that have opposed it will see themselves, some time or other,
under a necessity of yielding to it, and acquiescing in it. Esau had
struggled for Canaan, but now he tamely retires to mount Seir; for God's
counsels shall certainly stand, concerning the times before appointed,
and the bounds of our habitation.

[Genesis 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 36:9</span></span>

Observe here, 1. That only the names of Esau's sons and grandsons are
recorded, only their names, not their history; for it is the church that
Moses preserves the records of, not the record of those that are
without. Those elders that lived by faith alone obtained a good report.
It is Sion that produces men of renown, not Seir, [Psa
87:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#005). Nor does the genealogy go any
further than the third and fourth generation; the very names of all
after are buried in oblivion. It is only the pedigree of the Israelites,
who were to be the heirs of Canaan, and of whom were to come the
promised seed, and the holy seed, that is drawn out to any length, as
far as there was occasion for it, even of all the tribes till Canaan was
divided among them, and of the royal line till Christ came. 2. That
these sons and grandsons of Esau are called dukes, [Gen
36:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015). Probably they were military
commanders, dukes, or captains, that had soldiers under them; for Esau
and his family lived by the sword, [Gen
27:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#040). Note, Titles of honour have
been more ancient out of the church than in it. Esau's sons were dukes
when Jacob's sons were but plain shepherds, [Gen
47:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#003). This is not a reason why such
titles should not be used among Christians; but it is a reason why men
should not overvalue themselves, or others, for the sake of them. There
is an honour that comes from God, and a name in his house that is
infinitely more valuable. Edomites may be dukes with men, but Israelites
indeed are made to our God kings and priests. 3. We may suppose those
dukes had numerous families of children and servants that were their
dukedoms. God promised to multiply Jacob, and to enrich him; yet Esau
increases, and is enriched first. Note, It is no new thing for the men
of this world to be full of children, and to have their bellies too
filled with hidden treasures, [Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014). God's promise to Jacob began to
work late, but the effect of it remained longer, and it had its complete
accomplishment in the spiritual Israel.

[Genesis 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 36:20</span></span>

In the midst of this genealogy of the Edomites here is inserted the
genealogy of the Horites, those Canaanites, or Hittites (compare [Gen
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034)), that were the natives of Mount
Seir. Mention is made of them, [Gen
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006), and of their interest in Mount
Seir, before the Edomites took possession of it, [Deu
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#012), [Deu
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#022). This comes in here, not only to
give light to the story, but to be a standing reflection upon the
Edomites for intermarrying with them, by which, it is probable, they
learned their way, and corrupted themselves. Esau having sold his
birthright, and lost his blessing, and entered into alliance with the
Hittites, his posterity and the sons of Seir are here reckoned together.
Note, Those that treacherously desert God's church are justly numbered
with those that were never in it; apostate Edomites stand on the same
ground with accursed Horites. Particular notice is taken of one Anah who
fed the asses of Zibeon his father ([Gen
36:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#024)), and yet is called duke Anah,
[Gen 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#029). Note, Those that expect to
rise high should begin low. An honourable descent should not keep men
from an honest employment, nor a mean employment hinder any man's
preferment. This Anah was not only industrious in his business, but
ingenious too, and successful; for he found mules, or (as some read it)
waters, hot-baths, in the wilderness. Those that are diligent in their
business sometimes find more advantages than they expected.

[Genesis 36:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 36:31</span></span>

By degrees, it seems, the Edomites wormed out the Horites, obtained full
possession of the country, and had a government of their own. 1. They
were ruled by kings, who governed the whole country, and seem to have
come to the throne by election, and not by lineal descent; so bishop
Patrick observes. These kings reigned in Edom before there reigned any
king over the children of Israel, that is, before Moses's time, for he
was king in Jeshurun, [Gen 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#003). God
had lately promised Jacob that kings should come out of his loins ([Gen
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011)), yet Esau's blood becomes royal
long before any of Jacob's did. Note, In external prosperity and honour,
the children of the covenant are often cast behind, and those that are
out of covenant get the start. The triumphing of the wicked may be
quick, but it is short; soon ripe, and as soon rotten: but the products
of the promise, though they are slow, are sure and lasting; at the end
it shall speak, and not lie. We may suppose it was a great trial to the
faith of God's Israel to hear of the pomp and power of the kings of
Edom, while they were bond-slaves in Egypt; but those that look for
great things from God must be content to wait for them; God's time is
the best time. 2. They were afterwards governed by dukes, again here
named, who, I suppose, ruled all at the same time in several places in
the country. Either they set up this form of government in conformity to
the Horites, who had used it ([Gen
36:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#029)), or God's providence reduced
them to it, as some conjecture, to correct them for their unkindness to
Israel, in refusing them a passage though their country, [Num
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#018). Note, When power is abused, it
is just with God to weaken it, by turning it into divers channels. For
the transgression of a land, many are the princes thereof. Sin brought
Edom from kings to dukes, from crowns to coronets. We read of the dukes
of Edom ([Exo 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#015)), yet, long
afterwards, of their kings again. 3. Mount Seir is called the land of
their possession, [Gen 36:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#043). While
the Israelites dwelt in the house of bondage, and their Canaan was only
the land of promise, the Edomites dwelt in their own habitations, and
Seir was in their possession. Note, The children of this world have
their all in hand, and nothing in hope ([Luk
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025)); while the children of God have
their all in hope, and next to nothing in hand. But, all things
considered, it is better to have Canaan in promise than mount Seir in
possession.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 37](gen037)

</div>
