<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen047)  [Next](gen049) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 48:0</span></span>

The time drawing nigh that Israel must die, having, in the former
chapter, given order about his burial, in this he takes leave of his
grand-children by Joseph, and in the next of all his children. Thus
Jacob's dying words are recorded, because he then spoke by a spirit of
prophecy; Abraham's and Isaac's are not. God's gifts and graces shine
forth much more in some saints than in others upon their death-beds. The
Spirit, like the wind, blows where it listeth. In this chapter, I.
Joseph, hearing of his father's sickness, goes to visit him, and takes
his two sons with him ([Gen 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001), [Gen
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#002)). II. Jacob solemnly adopts his
two sons, and takes them for his own ([Gen
48:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#003)). III. He blesses them ([Gen
48:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#008)). IV. He explains and
justifies the crossing of his hands in blessing them ([Gen
48:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#017)). V. He leaves a particular
legacy to Joseph ([Gen 48:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#021), [Gen
48:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#022)).

[Genesis 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 48:1</span></span>

Here, I. Joseph, upon notice of his father's illness, goes to see him;
though a man of honour and business, yet he will not fail to show this
due respect to his aged father, [Gen
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001). Visiting the sick, to whom we
lie under obligations, or may have opportunity of doing good, either for
body or soul, is our duty. The sick bed is a proper place both for
giving comfort and counsel to others and receiving instruction
ourselves. Joseph took his two sons with him, that they might receive
their dying grandfather's blessing, and that what they might see in him,
and hear from him, might make an abiding impression upon them. Note, 1.
It is good to acquaint young people that are coming into the world with
the aged servants of God that are going out of it, whose dying testimony
to the goodness of God, and the pleasantness of wisdom's ways, may be a
great encouragement to the rising generation. Manasseh and Ephraim (I
dare say) would never forget what passed at this time. 2. Pious parents
are desirous of a blessing, not only for themselves, but for their
children. "O that they may live before God!" Joseph had been, above all
his brethren, kind to his father, and therefore had reason to expect
particular favour from him.

II\. Jacob, upon notice of his son's visit, prepared himself as well as
he could to entertain him, [Gen 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#002).
He did what he could to rouse his spirits, and to stir up the gift that
was in him; what little was lift of bodily strength he put forth to the
utmost, and sat upon the bed. Note, It is very good for sick and aged
people to be as lively and cheerful as they can, that they may not faint
in the day of adversity. Strengthen thyself, as Jacob here, and God will
strengthen thee; hearten thyself and help thyself, and God will help and
hearten thee. Let the spirit sustain the infirmity.

III\. In recompence to Joseph for all his attentions to him, he adopted
his two sons. In this charter of adoption there is, 1. A particular
recital of God's promise to him, to which this had reference: "God
blessed me ([Gen 48:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#003)), and let that
blessing be entailed upon them." God had promised him two things, a
numerous issue, and Canaan for an inheritance ([Gen
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#004)); and Joseph's sons, pursuant
hereunto, should each of them multiply into a tribe, and each of them
have a distinct lot in Canaan, equal with Jacob's own sons. See how he
blessed them by faith in that which God had said to him, [Heb
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#021). Note, In all our prayers, both
for ourselves and for our children, we ought to have a particular eye
to, and remembrance of, God's promises to us. 2. An express reception of
Joseph's sons into his family: "Thy sons are mine ([Gen
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#005)), not only my grandchildren, but
as my own children." Though they were born in Egypt, and their father
was then separated from his brethren, which might seem to have cut them
off from the heritage of the Lord, yet Jacob takes them in, and owns
them for visible church members. He explains this at [Gen
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016), Let my name be named upon them,
and the name of my fathers; as if he had said, "Let them not succeed
their father in his power and grandeur here in Egypt, but let them
succeed me in the inheritance of the promise made to Abraham," which
Jacob looked upon as much more valuable and honourable, and would have
them to prize and covet accordingly. Thus the aged dying patriarch
teaches these young persons, now that they were of age (being about
twenty-one years old), not to look upon Egypt as their home, nor to
incorporate themselves with the Egyptians, but to take their lot with
the people of God, as Moses afterwards in the like temptation, [Heb
11:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#024). And because it would be a
piece of self-denial in them, who stood so fair for preferment in Egypt,
to adhere to the despised Hebrews, to encourage them he constitutes each
of them the head of a tribe. Note, Those are worthy of double honour
who, through God's grace, break through the temptations of worldly
wealth and preferment, to embrace religion in disgrace and poverty.
Jacob will have Ephraim and Manasseh to believe that it is better to be
low and in the church than high and out of it, to be called by the name
of poor Jacob than to be called by the name of rich Joseph. 3. A proviso
inserted concerning the children he might afterwards have; they should
not be accounted heads of tribes, as Ephraim and Manasseh were, but
should fall in with either the one or the other of their brethren, [Gen
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#006). It does not appear that Joseph
had any more children; however, it was Jacob's prudence to give this
direction, for the preventing of contest and mismanagement. Note, In
making settlements, it is good to take advice, and to provide for what
may happen, while we cannot foresee what will happen. Our prudence must
attend God's providence. 4. Mention is made of the death and burial of
Rachel, Joseph's mother, and Jacob's best beloved wife ([Gen
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#007)), referring to that story, [Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019). Note, (1.) When we come to die
ourselves, it is good to call to mind the death of our dear relations
and friends, that have gone before us, to make death and the grave the
more familiar to us. See [Num 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#013).
Those that were to us as our own souls are dead and buried; and shall we
think it much to follow them in the same path? (2.) The removal of dear
relations from us is an affliction the remembrance of which cannot but
abide with us a great while. Strong affections in the enjoyment cause
long afflictions in the loss.

[Genesis 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 48:8</span></span>

Here is, I. The blessing with which Jacob blessed the two sons of
Joseph, which is the more remarkable because the apostle makes such
particular mention of it ([Heb 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#021)),
while he says nothing of the blessing which Jacob pronounced on the rest
of his sons, though that also was done in faith. Observe here,

1\. Jacob was blind for age, [Gen
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#010). It is one of the common
infirmities of old age. Those that look out at the windows are darkened,
[Ecc 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#003). It is folly to walk in the
sight of our eyes, and to suffer our hearts to go after them, while we
know death will shortly close them, and we do not know but some accident
between us and death may darken them. Jacob, like his father before him,
when he was old, was dim-sighted. Note, (1.) Those that have the honour
of age must therewith be content to take the burden of it. (2.) The eye
of faith may be very clear even when the eye of the body is very much
clouded.

2\. Jacob was very fond of Joseph's sons: He kissed them and embraced
them, [Gen 48:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#010). It is common for old
people to have a very particular affection for their grand-children,
perhaps more than they had for their own children when they were little,
which Solomon gives a reason for ([Pro
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006)), Children's children are the
crown of old men. With what satisfaction does Jacob say here ([Gen
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#011)), I had not thought to see thy
face (having many years given him up for lost), and, lo, God has shown
me also thy seed! See here, (1.) How these two good men own God in their
comforts. Joseph says ([Gen 48:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#009)),
They are my sons whom God has given me, and, to magnify the favour, he
adds, "In this place of my banishment, slavery, and imprisonment." Jacob
says here, God has shown me thy seed. Our comforts are then doubly sweet
to us when we see them coming from God's hand. (2.) How often God, in
his merciful providences, outdoes our expectations, and thus greatly
magnifies his favours. He not only prevents our fears, but exceeds our
hopes. We may apply this to the promise which is made to us and to our
children. We could not have thought that we should have been taken into
covenant with God ourselves, considering how guilty and corrupt we are;
and yet, lo, he has shown us our seed also in covenant with him.

3\. Before he entails his blessing, he recounts his experiences of God's
goodness to him. He had spoken ([Gen
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#003)) of God's appearing to him. The
particular visits of his grace, and the special communion we have
sometimes had with him, ought never to be forgotten. But ([Gen
48:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#015), [Gen
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)) he mentions the constant care
which the divine Providence had taken of him all his days. (1.) He had
fed him all his life long unto this day, [Gen
48:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#015). Note, As long as we have lived
in this world we have had continual experience of God's goodness to us,
in providing for the support of our natural life. Our bodies have called
for daily food, and no little has gone to feed us, yet we have never
wanted food convenient. He that has fed us all our life long surely will
not fail us at last. (2.) He had by his angel redeemed him from all
evil, [Gen 48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016). A great deal of
hardship he had known in his time, but God had graciously kept him from
the evil of his troubles. Now that he was dying he looked upon himself
as redeemed from all evil, and bidding an everlasting farewell to sin
and sorrow. Christ, the Angel of the covenant, is he that redeems us
from all evil, [Ti2 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018). Note, \[1.\]
It becomes the servants of God, when they are old and dying, to witness
for our God that they have found him gracious. \[2.\] Our experiences of
God's goodness to us are improvable, both for the encouragement of
others to serve God, and for encouragement to us in blessing them and
praying for them.

4\. When he confers the blessing and name of Abraham and Isaac upon them
he recommends the pattern and example of Abraham and Isaac to them, [Gen
48:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#015). He calls God the God before
whom his fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, that is, in whom they
believed, whom they observed and obeyed, and with whom they kept up
communion in instituted ordinances, according to the condition of the
covenant. Walk before me, [Gen 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001).
Note, (1.) Those that would inherit the blessing of their godly
ancestors, and have the benefit of God's covenant with them, must tread
in the steps of their piety. (2.) It should recommend religion and the
service of God to us that God was the God of our fathers, and that they
had satisfaction in walking before him.

5\. In blessing them, he crossed hands. Joseph placed them so as that
Jacob's right hand should be put on the head of Manasseh the elder, [Gen
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#012), [Gen
48:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#013). But Jacob would put it on the
head of Ephraim the younger, [Gen
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#014). This displeased Joseph, who was
willing to support the reputation of his first-born, and would therefore
have removed his father's hands, [Gen
48:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#017), [Gen
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#018). But Jacob gave him to
understand that he know what he did, and that he did it not by mistake,
nor in a humour, nor from a partial affection to one more than the
other, but from a spirit of prophecy, and in compliance with the divine
counsels. Manasseh should be great, but truly Ephraim should be greater.
When the tribes were mustered in the wilderness, Ephraim was more
numerous than Manasseh, and had the standard of that squadron ([Num
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#032), [Num
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#033), [Num
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#035); [Num
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#018), [Num
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#020)), and is named first, [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002). Joshua was of that tribe, so was
Jeroboam. The tribe of Manasseh was divided, one half on one side
Jordan, the other half on the other side, which made it the less
powerful and considerable. In the foresight of this, Jacob crossed
hands. Note. (1.) God, in bestowing his blessings upon his people, gives
more to some than to others, more gifts, graces, and comforts, and more
of the good things of this life. (2.) He often gives most to those that
are least likely. He chooses the weak things of the world; raises the
poor out of the dust. Grace observes not the order of nature, nor does
God prefer those whom we think fittest to be preferred, but as it
pleases him. It is observable how often God, by the distinguishing
favours of his covenant, advanced the younger above the elder, Abel
above Cain, Shem above Japheth, Abraham above Nahor and Haran, Isaac
above Ishmael, Jacob above Esau; Judah and Joseph were preferred before
Reuben, Moses before Aaron, David and Solomon before their elder
brethren. See [Sa1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007). He tied the
Jews to observe the birthright ([Deu
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017)), but he never tied himself to
observe it. Some make this typical of the preference given to the
Gentiles above the Jews; the Gentile converts were much more numerous
than those of the Jews. See [Gal 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027).
Thus free grace becomes more illustrious.

II\. The particular tokens of his favour to Joseph. 1. He left with him
the promise of their return out of Egypt, as a sacred trust: I die, but
God shall be with you, and bring you again, [Gen
48:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#021). Accordingly, Joseph, when he
died, left it with his brethren, [Gen
50:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#024). This assurance was given them,
and carefully preserved among them, that they might neither love Egypt
too much when it favoured them, nor fear it too much when it frowned
upon them. These words of Jacob furnish us with comfort in reference to
the death of our friends: They die; but God shall be with us, and his
gracious presence is sufficient to make up the loss: they leave us, but
he will never fail us. Further, He will bring us to the land of our
fathers, the heavenly Canaan, whither our godly fathers have gone before
us. If God be with us while we stay behind in this world, and will
receive us shortly to be with those that have gone before to a better
world, we ought not to sorrow as those that have no hope. 2. He bestowed
one portion upon him above his brethren, [Gen
48:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#022). The lands bequeathed are
described to be those which he took out of the hand of the Amorite with
his sword, and with his bow. He purchased them first ([Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032)), and, it seems, was afterwards
disseized of them by the Amorites, but retook them by the sword,
repelling force by force, and recovering his right by violence when he
could not otherwise recover it. These lands he settled upon Joseph;
mention is made of this grant, [Joh
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#005). Pursuant to it, this parcel of
ground was given to the tribe of Ephraim as their right, and the lot was
never cast upon it; and in it Joseph's bones were buried, which perhaps
Jacob had an eye to as much as to any thing in this settlement. Note, It
may sometimes be both just and prudent to give some children portions
above the rest; but a grave is that which we can most count upon as our
own in this earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 49](gen049)

</div>
