<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen037)  [Next](gen039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 38:0</span></span>

This chapter gives us an account of Judah and his family, and such an
account it is that one would wonder that, of all Jacob's sons, our Lord
should spring out of Judah, [Heb 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#014).
If we were to form a character of him by this story, we should not say,
"Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise," [Gen
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008). But God will show that his
choice is of grace and not of merit, and that Christ came into the world
to save sinners, even the chief, and is not ashamed, upon their
repentance, to be allied to them, also that the worth and worthiness of
Jesus Christ are personal, of himself, and not derived from his
ancestors. Humbling himself to be "made in the likeness of sinful
flesh," he was pleased to descend from some that were infamous. How
little reason had the Jews, who were so called from this Judah, to
boast, as they did, that they were not born of fornication! [Joh
8:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#041). We have, in this chapter, I.
Judah's marriage and issue, and the untimely death of his two eldest
sons ([Gen 38:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)). II. Judah's
incest with his daughter-in-law Tamar, without his knowing it ([Gen
38:12-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012)). III. His confusion, when it
was discovered ([Gen 38:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024)). IV.
The birth of his twin sons, in whom his family was built up ([Gen
38:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#027), etc.).

[Genesis 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 38:1</span></span>

Here is, 1. Judah's foolish friendship with a Canaanite-man. He went
down from his brethren, and withdrew for a time from their society and
his father's family, and got to be intimately acquainted with one Hirah,
an Adullamite, [Gen 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001). It is
computed that he was now not much above fifteen or sixteen years of age,
an easy prey to the tempter. Note, When young people that have been well
educated begin to change their company, they will soon change their
manners, and lose their good education. Those that go down from their
brethren, that despise and forsake the society of the seed of Israel,
and pick up Canaanites for their companions, are going down the hill
apace. It is of great consequence to young people to choose proper
associates; for these they will imitate, study to recommend themselves
to, and, by their opinion of them, value themselves: an error in this
choice is often fatal. 2. His foolish marriage with a Canaanite-woman, a
match made, not by his father, who, it should seem, was not consulted,
but by his new friend Hirah, [Gen
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#002). Many have been drawn into
marriages scandalous and pernicious to themselves and their families by
keeping bad company, and growing familiar with bad people: one wicked
league entangles men in another. Let young people be admonished by this
to take their good parents for their best friends, and to be advised by
them, and not by flatterers, who wheedle them, to make a prey of them.
3. His children by this Canaanite, and his disposal of them. Three sons
he had by her, Er, Onan, and Shelah. It is probable that she embraced
the worship of the God of Israel, at least in profession, but, for aught
that appears, there was little of the fear of God in the family. Judah
married too young, and very rashly; he also married his sons too young,
when they had neither wit nor grace to govern themselves, and the
consequences were very bad. (1.) His first-born, Er, was notoriously
wicked; he was so in the sight of the Lord, that is, in defiance of God
and his law; or, if perhaps he was not wicked in the sight of God, to
whom all men's wickedness is open; and what came of it? Why, God cut him
off presently ([Gen 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#007)): The Lord
slew him. Note, Sometimes God makes quick work with sinners, and takes
them away in his wrath, when they are but just setting out in a wicked
course of life. (2.) The next son, Onan, was, according to the ancient
usage, married to the widow, to preserve the name of his deceased
brother that died childless. Though God had taken away his life for his
wickedness, yet they were solicitous to preserve his memory; and their
disappointment therein, through Onan's sin, was a further punishment of
his wickedness. The custom of marrying the brother's widow was
afterwards made one of the laws of Moses, [Deu
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005). Onan, though he consented to
marry the widow, yet, to the great abuse of his own body, of the wife
that he had married, and of the memory of his brother that was gone, he
refused to raise up seed unto his brother, as he was in duty bound. This
was so much the worse because the Messiah was to descend from Judah,
and, had he not been guilty of this wickedness, he might have had the
honour of being one of his ancestors. Note, Those sins that dishonour
the body and defile it are very displeasing to God and evidences of vile
affections. (3.) Shelah, the third son, was reserved for the widow ([Gen
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#011)), yet with a design that he
should not marry so young as his brothers had done, lest he die also.
Some think that Judah never intended to marry Shelah to Tamar, but
unjustly suspected her to have been the death of her two former husbands
(whereas it was their own wickedness that slew them), and then sent her
to her father's house, with a charge to remain a widow. If so, it was an
inexcusable piece of prevarication that he was guilty of. However, Tamar
acquiesced for the present, and waited the issue.

[Genesis 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 38:12</span></span>

It is a very ill-favoured story that is here told concerning Judah; one
would not have expected such folly in Israel. Judah had buried his wife;
and widowers have need to stand upon their guard with the utmost caution
and resolution against all fleshly lusts. He was unjust to his
daughter-in-law, either through negligence or design, in not giving her
his surviving son, and this exposed her to temptation.

I. Tamar wickedly prostituted herself as a harlot to Judah, that, if the
son might not, the father might raise up seed to the deceased. Some
excuse this by suggesting that, though she was a Canaanite, yet she had
embraced the true religion, and believed the promise made to Abraham and
his seed, particularly that of the Messiah, who was to descend from the
loins of Judah, and that she was therefore thus earnestly desirous to
have a child by one of that family that she might have the honour, or at
least stand fair for the honour, of being the mother of the Messiah.
And, if this was indeed her desire, it had its success; she is one of
the four women particularly named in the genealogy of Christ, [Mat
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003). Her sinful practice was pardoned,
and her good intention was accepted, which magnifies the grace of God,
but can by no means be admitted to justify or encourage the like. Bishop
Patrick thinks it probable that she hoped Shelah, who was by right her
husband, might have come along with his father, and that he might have
been allured to her embraces. There was a great deal of plot and
contrivance in Tamar's sin. 1. She took an opportunity for it, when
Judah had a time of mirth and feasting with his sheep-shearers. Note,
Time of jollity often prove times of temptation, particularly to the sin
of uncleanness; when men are fed to the full, the reins are apt to be
let loose. 2. She exposed herself as a harlot in an open place, [Gen
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#014). Those that are, and would be,
chaste, must be keepers at home, [Tit
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#005). It should seem, it was the custom
of harlots, in those times, to cover their faces, that, though they were
not ashamed, yet they might seem to be so. The sin of uncleanness did
not then go so barefaced as it does now.

II\. Judah was taken in the snare, and though it was ignorantly that he
was guilty of incest with his daughter-in-law (not knowing who she was),
yet he was willfully guilty of fornication: whoever she was, he knew she
was not his wife, and therefore not to be touched. Nor was his sin
capable, in the least, of such a charitable excuse as some make for
Tamar, that though the action was bad the intention possibly might be
good. Observe, 1. Judah's sin began in the eye ([Gen
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#015)): He saw her. Note, Those have
eyes, and hearts too, full of adultery (as it is [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014)), that catch at every bait that
presents itself to them and are as tinder to every spark. We have need
to make a covenant with our eyes, and to turn them from beholding
vanity, lest the eye infect the heart. 2. It added to the scandal that
the hire of a harlot (than which nothing is more infamous) was demanded,
offered, and accepted - a kid from the flock, a goodly price at which
her chastity and honour were valued! Nay, had the consideration been
thousands of rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, it had not been a
valuable consideration. The favour of God, the purity of the soul, the
peace of conscience, and the hope of heaven, are too precious to be
exposed to sale at any such rates; the Topaz of Ethiopia cannot equal
them: what are those profited that lose their souls to gain the world?
3. It turned to the reproach of Judah that he left his jewels in pawn
for a kid. Note, Fleshly lusts are not only brutish, but sottish, and
ruining to men's secular interests. It is plain that whoredom, as well
as wine, and new wine, takes away the heart first, else it would never
take away the signet and the bracelets.

III\. He lost his jewels by the bargain; he sent the kid, according to
this promise, to redeem his pawn, but the supposed harlot could not be
found. He sent it by his friend (who was indeed his back-friend, because
he was aiding and abetting in his evil deeds) the Adullamite, who came
back without the pledge. It is a good account (if it be but true) of any
place which they here gave, there is no harlot in this place; for such
sinners are the scandals and plagues of any place. Judah sits down
content to lose his signet and his bracelets, and forbids his friend to
make any further enquiry after them, giving this reason, lest we be
shamed, [Gen 38:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#023). Either, 1. Lest
his sin should come to be known publicly, and be talked of. Fornication
and uncleanness have ever been looked upon as scandalous things and the
reproach and shame of those that are convicted of them. Nothing will
make those blush that are not ashamed of these. 2. Lest he should be
laughed at as a fool for trusting a strumpet with his signet and his
bracelets. He expresses no concern about the sin, to get that pardoned,
only about the shame, to prevent that. Note, There are many who are more
solicitous to preserve their reputation with men than to secure the
favour of God and a good conscience; lest we be shamed goes further with
them than lest we be damned.

[Genesis 38:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 38:24</span></span>

Here is, I. Judah's rigour against Tamar, when he heard she was an
adulteress. She was, in the eye of the law, Shelah's wife, and therefore
her being with child by another was looked upon as an injury and
reproach to Judah's family: Bring her forth therefore, says Judah, the
master of the family, and let her be burnt; not burnt to death, but
burnt in the cheek or forehead, stigmatized for a harlot. This seems
probable, [Gen 38:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024). Note, it is a
common thing for men to be severe against those very sins in others in
which yet they allow themselves; and so, in judging others, they condemn
themselves, [Rom 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001); [Rom
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022). If he designed that she should
be burnt to death, perhaps, under pretence of zeal against the sin, he
was contriving how to get rid of his daughter-in-law, being loath to
marry Shelah to her. Note, It is a common thing, but a very bad thing,
to cover malice against men's persons with a show of zeal against their
vices.

II\. Judah's shame, when it was made to appear that he was the
adulterer. She produced the ring and the bracelets in court, which
justified the fathering of the child upon Judah, [Gen
38:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#025), [Gen
38:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#026). Note, The wickedness that has
been most secretly committed, and most industriously concealed, yet
sometimes is strangely brought to light, to the shame and confusion of
those who have said, No eye sees. A bird of the air may carry the voice;
however, there is a destroying day coming, when all will be laid open.
Some of the Jewish writers observe that as Judah had said to his father,
See, is this thy son's coat? ([Gen
37:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#032)) so it was now said to him,
"See, are these thy signet and bracelets?" Judah, being convicted by his
own conscience, 1. Confesses his sin: She has been more righteous than
I. He owns that a perpetual mark of infamy should be fastened rather
upon him, who had been so much accessory to it. Note, Those offenders
ought to be treated with the greatest tenderness to whom we have any way
given occasion of offending. If servants purloin, and their masters, by
withholding from them what is due, tempt them to it, they ought to
forgive them. 2. He never returned to it again: He knew her again no
more. Note, Those do not truly repent of their sins that do not forsake
them.

III\. The building up of Judah's family hereby, notwithstanding, in the
birth of Pharez and Zarah, from whom descended the most considerable
families of the illustrious tribe of Judah. It should seem, the birth
was hard to the mother, by which she was corrected for her sin. The
children also, like Jacob and Esau, struggled for the birthright, and
Pharez obtained it, who is ever named first, and from him Christ
descended. He had his name from his breaking forth before his brother:
This breach be upon thee, which is applicable to those that sow discord,
and create distance, between brethren. The Jews, as Zarah, bade fair for
the birthright, and were marked with a scarlet thread, as those that
came out first; but the Gentiles, like Pharez, as a son of violence, got
the start of them, by that violence which the kingdom of heaven suffers,
and attained to the righteousness of which the Jews came short. Yet,
when the fulness of time is come, all Israel shall be saved. Both these
sons are named in the genealogy of our Saviour ([Mat
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003)), to perpetuate the story, as an
instance of the humiliation of our Lord Jesus. Some observe that the
four eldest sons of Jacob fell under very foul guilt, Reuben and Judah
under the guilt of incest, Simeon and Levi under that of murder; yet
they were patriarchs, and from Levi descended the priests, from Judah
the kings and Messiah. Thus they became examples of repentance, and
monuments of pardoning mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 39](gen039)

</div>
