<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen023)  [Next](gen025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 24:0</span></span>

Marriages and funerals are the changes of families, and the common news
among the inhabitants of the villages. In the foregoing chapter we had
Abraham burying his wife, here we have him marrying his son. These
stories concerning his family, with their minute circumstances, are
largely related, while the histories of the kingdoms of the world then
in being, with their revolutions, are buried in silence; for the Lord
knows those that are his. The subjoining of Isaac's marriage to Sarah's
funeral (with a particular reference to it, [Gen
24:67](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#067)) shows us that as "one
generation passes away another generation comes;" and thus the entail
both of the human nature, and of the covenant, is preserved. Here is, I.
Abraham's care about the marrying of his son, and the charge he gave to
his servant about it ([Gen 24:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001)).
II. His servant's journey into Abraham's country, to seek a wife for his
young master among his own relations ([Gen
24:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#010)). III. The kind providence
which brought him acquainted with Rebekah, whose father was Isaac's
cousin-german ([Gen 24:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#015)). IV. The
treaty of marriage with her relations (v. 29-49). V. Their consent
obtained ([Gen 24:50-60](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#050)). VI. The
happy meeting and marriage between Isaac and Rebekah ([Gen
24:61](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#061), etc.).

[Genesis 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 24:1</span></span>

Three things we may observe here concerning Abraham: -

I. The care he took of a good son, to get him married, well married. It
was high time to think of it now, for Isaac was about forty years old,
and it had been customary with his ancestors to marry at thirty, or
sooner, [Gen 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#014), [Gen
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#018), [Gen
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#022), [Gen
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#024). Abraham believed the promise of
the building up of his family, and therefore did not make haste; not
more haste than good speed. Two considerations moved him to think of it
now ([Gen 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#001)): - 1. That he himself
was likely to leave the world quickly, for he was old, and well-stricken
in age, and it would be a satisfaction to him to see his son settled
before he died; and, 2. That he had a good estate to leave behind him,
for the Lord had blessed him in all things; and the blessing of the Lord
makes rich. See how much religion and piety befriend outward prosperity.
Now Abraham's pious care concerning his son was, (1.) That he should not
marry a daughter of Canaan, but one of his kindred. He saw that the
Canaanites were degenerating into great wickedness, and knew by
revelation that they were designed for ruin, and therefore he would not
marry his son among them, lest they should be either a snare to his
soul, or at least a blot to his name. (2.) That yet he should not leave
the land of Canaan, to go himself among his kindred, not even for the
purpose of choosing a wife, lest he should be tempted to settle there.
This caution is given [Gen 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#006), and
repeated, [Gen 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#008). "Bring not my son
thither again, whatever comes of it. Let him rather want a wife than
expose himself to that temptation." Note, Parents in disposing of their
children, should carefully consult the welfare of their souls, and their
furtherance in the way to heaven. Those who through grace have escaped
the corruption that is in the world through lust, and have brought up
their children accordingly, should take heed of doing any thing by which
they may be again entangled therein and overcome, [Pe2
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020). Beware that you bring them not
thither again, [Heb 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#015).

II\. The charge he gave to a good servant, probably Eliezer of Damascus,
one of whose conduct, fidelity, and affection to him and his family, he
had had long experience. He trusted him with this great affair, and not
Isaac himself, because he would not have Isaac go at all into that
country, but marry there by proxy; and no proxy so fit as this steward
of his house. This matter is settled between the master and the servant
with a great deal of care and solemnity. 1. The servant must be bound by
an oath to do his utmost to get a wife for Isaac from among his
relations, [Gen 24:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#002). Abraham swears
him to it, both for his own satisfaction and for the engagement of his
servant to all possible care and diligence in this matter. Thus God
swears his servants to their work, that, having sworn, they may perform
it. Honour is here done to the eternal God; for he it is that is sworn
by, to whom alone these appeals ought to be made. And some think honour
is done to the covenant of circumcision by the ceremony here used of
putting his hand under his thigh. Note, Swearing being an ordinance not
peculiar to the church, but common to mankind, is to be performed by
such signs as are the appointments and common usages of our country, for
binding the person sworn. 2. He must be clear of this oath if, when he
had done his utmost, he could not prevail. This proviso the servant
prudently inserted ([Gen 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#005)),
putting the case that the woman would not follow him; and Abraham
allowed the exception, [Gen 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#008).
Note, Oaths are to be taken with great caution, and the matter sworn to
should be rightly understood and limited, because it is a snare to
devour that which is holy, and, after vows, to make the enquiry which
should have been made before.

III\. The confidence he put in a good God, who, he doubts not, will give
his servant success in this undertaking, [Gen
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#007). He remembers that God had
wonderfully brought him out of the land of his nativity, by the
effectual call of his grace; and therefore doubts not but he will
succeed him in his care not to bring his son thither again. He remembers
also the promise God had made and confirmed to him that he would give
Canaan to his seed, and thence infers that God would own him in his
endeavours to match his son, not among those devoted nations, but to one
that was fit to be the mother of such a seed. "Fear not therefore; he
shall send his angel before thee to make thy way prosperous." Note, 1.
Those that carefully keep in the way of duty, and govern themselves by
the principles of their religion in their designs and undertakings, have
good reason to expect prosperity and success in them. God will cause
that to issue in our comfort in which we sincerely aim at his glory. 2.
God's promises, and our own experiences, are sufficient to encourage our
dependence upon God, and our expectations from him, in all the affairs
of this life. 3. God's angels are ministering spirits, sent forth, not
only for the protection, but for the guidance, of the heirs of promise,
[Heb 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014). "He shall send his angel
before thee, and then thou wilt speed well."

[Genesis 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 24:10</span></span>

Abraham's servant now begins to make a figure in this story; and, though
he is not named, yet much is here recorded to his honour, and for an
example to all servants, who shall be honoured if, by faithfully serving
God and their masters, they adorn the doctrine of Christ (compare [Pro
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#018) with [Tit
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#010)); for there is no respect of
persons with God, [Col 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024), [Col
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025). A good servant that makes
conscience of the duty of his place, and does it in the fear of God,
though he make not a figure in the world nor have praise of men, yet
shall be owned and accepted of God and have praise of him. Observe here,

I. How faithful Abraham's servant approved himself to his master. Having
received his charge, he with all expedition set out on his journey, with
an equipage suitable to the object of his negotiation ([Gen
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#010)), and he had all the goods of
his master, that is, a schedule or particular account of them, in his
hand, to show to those with whom he was to treat; for, from first to
last, he consulted his master's honour. Isaac being a type of Christ,
some make this fetching of a wife for him to signify the espousing of
the church by the agency of his servants the ministers. The church is
the bride, the Lamb's wife, [Rev 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009).
Christ is the bridegroom, and ministers are the friends of the
bridegroom ([Joh 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)), whose work it
is to persuade souls to consent to him, [Co2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002). The spouse of Christ must not be
of the Canaanites, but of his own kindred, born again from above.
Ministers, like Abraham's servant, must lay out themselves with the
utmost wisdom and care to serve their master's interest herein.

II\. How devoutly he acknowledged God in this affair, like one of that
happy household which Abraham had commanded to keep the way of the Lord,
etc., [Gen 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019). He arrived early in
the evening (after many days' journeying) at the place of his
destination, and reposed himself by a well of water, to consider how he
might manage his business for the best. And,

1\. He acknowledges God by a particular prayer ([Gen
24:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#012)), wherein, (1.) He petitions
for prosperity and good success in this affair: Send me good speed, this
day. Note, We have leave to be particular in recommending our affairs to
the conduct and care of the divine Providence. Those that would have
good speed must pray for it. This day, in this affair; thus we must, in
all our ways, acknowledge God, [Pro
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#006). And, if we thus look up to God in
every undertaking which we are in care about, we shall have the comfort
of having done our duty, whatever the issue be. (2.) He pleads God's
covenant with his master Abraham: O God of my master Abraham, show
kindness to him. Note, As the children of good parents, so the servants
of good masters, have peculiar encouragement in the prayers they offer
to God for prosperity and success. (3.) He proposes a sign ([Gen
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#014)), not by it to limit God, nor
with a design to proceed no further if he were not gratified in it; but
it is a prayer, \[1.\] That God would provide a good wife for his young
master, and this was a good prayer. He knew that a prudent wife is from
the Lord ([Pro 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#014)), and therefore
that for this he will be enquired of. He desires that his master's wife
might be humble and industrious woman, bred up to care and labour, and
willing to put her hand to any work that was to be done; and that she
might be of a courteous disposition, and charitable to strangers. When
he came to seek a wife for his master, he did not go to the playhouse or
the park, and pray that he might meet one there, but to the well of
water, expecting to find one there well employed. \[2.\] That he would
please to make his way, in this matter, plain and clear before him, by
the concurrence of minute circumstances in his favour. Note, First, It
is the comfort, as well as the belief, of a good man, that God's
providence extends itself to the smallest occurrences and admirably
serves its own purposes by them. Our times are in God's hand; not only
events themselves, but the times of them. Secondly, It is our wisdom, in
all our affairs, to follow Providence, and folly to force it. Thirdly,
It is very desirable, and that which we may lawfully pray for, while in
the general we set God's will before us as our rule, that he will, by
hints of providence, direct us in the way of our duty, and give us
indications what his mind it. Thus he guides his people with his eye
([Psa 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008)), and leads them in a plain
path, [Psa 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#011).

2\. God owns him by a particular providence. He decreed the thing, and
it was established to him, [Job 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#028).
According to his faith, so was it unto him. The answer to this prayer
was, (1.) Speedy - before he had made an end of speaking ([Gen
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#015)), as it is written ([Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)), While they are yet speaking, I
will hear. Though we are backward to pray, God is forward to hear
prayer. (2.) Satisfactory: the first that came to draw water was, and
did, in every thing, according to his own heart. \[1.\] She was so well
qualified that in all respects she answered the characters he wished for
in the woman that was to be his master's wife, handsome and healthful,
humble and industrious, very courteous and obliging to a stranger, and
having all the marks of a good disposition. When she came to the well
([Gen 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#016)), she went down and filled
her pitcher, and came up to go home with it. She did not stand to gaze
upon the strange man and his camels, but minded her business, and would
not have been diverted from it but by an opportunity of doing good. She
did not curiously nor confidently enter into discourse with him, but
modestly answered him, with all the decorum that became her sex. What a
degenerate age do we live in, in which appear all the instances of
pride, luxury, and laziness, the reverse of Rebekah's character, whose
daughters few are! Those instances of goodness which were then in honour
are now in contempt. \[2.\] Providence so ordered it that she did that
which exactly answered to his sign, and was wonderfully the counterpart
of his proposal: she not only gave him drink, but, which was more than
could have been expected, she offered her services to give his camels
drink, which was the very sign he proposed. Note, First, God, in his
providence, does sometimes wonderfully own the prayer of faith, and
gratify the innocent desires of his praying people, even in little
things, that he may show the extent of his care, and may encourage them
at all times to seek to him and trust in him; yet we must take heed of
being over-bold in prescribing to God, lest the event should weaken our
faith rather than strengthen it. Secondly, It is good to take all
opportunities of showing a humble, courteous, charitable, disposition,
because, some time or other, it may turn more to our honour and benefit
than we think of; some hereby have entertained angels, and Rebekah
hereby, quite beyond her expectation at this time, was brought into the
line of Christ and the covenant. Thirdly, There may be a great deal of
obliging kindness in that which costs but little: our Saviour has
promised a reward for a cup of cold water, [Mat
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042). Fourthly, The concurrence of
providences and their minute circumstances, for the furtherance of our
success in any business, ought to be particularly observed, with wonder
and thankfulness, to the glory of God: The man wondered, [Gen
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#021). We have been wanting to
ourselves, both in duty and in comfort, by neglecting to observe
Providence. \[3.\] Upon enquiry he found, to his great satisfaction,
that she was a near relation to his master, and that the family she was
of was considerable, and able to give him entertainment, [Gen
24:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#023). Note, Providence sometimes
wonderfully directs those that by faith and prayer seek direction from
heaven in the choice of suitable yoke-fellows: happy marriages those are
likely to be that are made in the fear of God; and these, we are sure,
are made in heaven.

3\. He acknowledges God in a particular thanksgiving. He first paid his
respects to Rebekah, in gratitude for her civility ([Gen
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#022)), obliging her with such
ornaments and attire as a maid, especially a bride, cannot forget ([Jer
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#032)), which yet, we should think, ill
suited the pitcher of water; but the ear-rings and bracelets she
sometimes wore did not make her think herself above the labours of a
virtuous woman ([Pro 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#013)), who works
willingly with her hands; nor the services of a child, who, while under
age, differs nothing from a servant, [Gal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001). Having done this, he turns his
wonder ([Gen 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#021)) into worshipping:
Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham, [Gen
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#026), [Gen
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#027). Observe here, (1.) He had
prayed for good speed ([Gen 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#012)),
and now that he had sped well he gives thanks. Note, What we win by
prayer we must wear with praise; for mercies in answer to prayer lay us
under particular obligations. (2.) He had as yet but a comfortable
prospect of mercy, and was not certain what the issue might prove; yet
he gives thanks. Note, When God's favours are coming towards us we must
meet them with our praises. (3.) He blesses God for success when he was
negotiating for his master. Note, We should be thankful for our friend's
mercies as for our own. (4.) He gives thanks that, being in the way, at
a loss what course to steer, the Lord had led him. Note, In doubtful
cases, it is very comfortable to see God leading us, as he led Israel in
the wilderness by the pillar of cloud and fire. (5.) He thinks himself
very happy, and owns God in it, that he was led to the house of his
master's brethren, those of them that had come out of Ur of the
Chaldees, though they had not come to Canaan, but remained in Haran.
They were not idolaters, but worshippers of the true God, and inclinable
to the religion of Abraham's family. Note, God is to be acknowledged in
providing suitable yoke-fellows, especially such as are agreeable in
religion. (6.) He acknowledges that God, herein, had not left his master
destitute of his mercy and truth. God had promised to build up Abraham's
family, yet it seemed destitute of the benefit of that promise; but now
Providence is working towards the accomplishing of it. Note, \[1.\]
God's faithful ones, how destitute soever they may be of worldly
comforts, shall never be left destitute of God's mercy and truth; for
God's mercy is an inexhaustible fountain, and his truth an inviolable
foundation. \[2.\] It adds much to the comfort of any blessing to see in
it the continuance of God's mercy and truth.

[Genesis 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 24:29</span></span>

We have here the making up of the marriage between Isaac and Rebekah. It
is related very largely and particularly, even to the minute
circumstances, which, we should think, might have been spared, while
other things of great moment and mystery (as the story of Melchizedek)
are related in few words. Thus God conceals that which is curious from
the wise and prudent, reveals to babes that which is common and level to
their capacity ([Mat 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)), and rules
and saves the world by the foolishness of preaching, [Co1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021). Thus also we are directed to
take notice of God's providence in the little common occurrences of
human life, and in them also to exercise our own prudence and other
graces; for the scripture was not intended for the use of philosophers
and statesmen only, but to make us all wise and virtuous in the conduct
of ourselves and families. Here is,

I. The very kind reception given to Abraham's servant by Rebekah's
relations. Her brother Laban went to invite and conduct him in, but not
till he saw the ear-rings and the bracelets upon his sister's hands,
[Gen 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#030). "O," thinks Laban, "here
is a man that there is something to be got by, a man that is rich and
generous; we will be sure to bid him welcome!" We know so much of
Laban's character, by the following story, as to think that he would not
have been so free of his entertainment if he had not hoped to be well
paid for it, as he was, [Gen 24:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#053).
Note, A man's gift maketh room for him ([Pro
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#016)), which way soever it turneth,
it prospereth, [Pro 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#008). 1. The
invitation was kind: Come in, thou blessed of the Lord, [Gen
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#031). They saw he was rich, and
therefore pronounced him blessed of the Lord; or, perhaps, because they
heard from Rebekah ([Gen 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#028)) or the
gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, they concluded him a
good man, and therefore blessed of the Lord. Note, Those that are
blessed of God should be welcome to us. It is good owning those whom God
owns. 2. The entertainment was kind, [Gen
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#032), [Gen
24:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#033). Both the house and stable were
well furnished, and Abraham's servant was invited to the free use of
both. Particular care was taken of the camels; for a good man regardeth
the life of his beast, [Pro 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#010). If
the ox knows his owner to serve him, the owner should know his ox to
provide for him that which is fitting for him.

II\. The full account which he gave them of his errand, and the court he
made to them for their consent respecting Rebekah. Observe,

1\. How intent he was upon his business; though he had come off a
journey, and come to a good house, he would not eat, till he had told
his errand, [Gen 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#033). Note, The
doing of our work, and the fulfilling of our trusts, either for God or
man, should be preferred by us before our necessary food: it was our
Saviour's meat and drink, [Joh 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034).

2\. How ingenious he was in the management of it; he approved himself,
in this matter, both a prudent man and a man of integrity, faithful to
his master by whom he was trusted, and just to those with whom he now
treated.

(1.) He gives a short account of the state of his master's family, [Joh
4:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034). He was welcome before, but we
may suppose him doubly welcome when he said, I am Abraham's servant.
Abraham's name, no doubt, was well known among them and respected, and
we might suppose them not altogether ignorant of his state, for Abraham
knew theirs, [Gen 22:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#020). Two things
he suggests, to recommend his proposal: - \[1.\] That his master
Abraham, through the blessing of God, had a very good estate; and,
\[2.\] That he had settled it all upon Isaac, for whom he was now a
suitor.

(2.) He tells them the charge his master had given him, to fetch a wife
for his son from among his kindred, with the reason of it, [Gen
24:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#037), [Gen
24:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#038). Thus he insinuates a pleasing
hint, that, though Abraham had removed to a country at so great a
distance, yet he still retained the remembrance of his relations that he
had left behind, and a respect for them. The highest degrees of divine
affection must not divest us of natural affection. He likewise obviates
an objection, That, if Isaac were deserving, he needed not send so far
off for a wife: why did he not marry nearer home? "For a good reason,"
says he; "my master's son must not match with a Canaanite." He further
recommends his proposal, \[1.\] From the faith his master had that it
would succeed, [Gen 24:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#040). Abraham
took encouragement from the testimony of his conscience that he walked
before God in a regular course of holy living, and thence inferred that
God would prosper him; probably he refers to that covenant which God had
made with him ([Gen 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)), I am God,
all-sufficient, walk before me. Therefore, says he the God before whom I
walk will send his angel. Note, While we make conscience of our part of
the covenant, we may take the comfort of God's part of it; and we should
learn to apply general promises of particular cases, as there is
occasion. \[2.\] From the care he himself had taken to preserve their
liberty of giving or refusing their consent, as they should see cause,
without incurring the guilt of perjury ([Gen
24:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#039)), which showed him, in
general, to be a cautious man, and particularly careful that their
consent might not be forced, but be either free or not at all.

(3.) He relates to them the wonderful concurrence of providences, to
countenance and further the proposal, plainly showing the finger of God
in it. \[1.\] He tells them how he had prayed for direction by a sign,
[Gen 24:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#042). Note, It is good
dealing with those who be prayer take God along with them in their
dealings. \[2.\] How God had answered his prayer in the very letter of
it. Though he did but speak in his heart ([Gen
24:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#045)), which perhaps he mentions,
lest it should be suspected that Rebekah had overheard his prayer and
designedly humoured it. "No," says he, "I spoke it in my heart, so that
none heard it but God, to whom thought are word, and from him the answer
came," [Gen 24:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#046), [Gen
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#047). \[3.\] How he had immediately
acknowledged God's goodness to him therein, leading him, as he here
expresses it, in the right way. Note, God's way is always the right way
([Psa 107:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#007)), and those are well led
whom he leads.

(4.) He fairly refers the matter to their consideration, and waits their
decision ([Gen 24:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#049)): "If you will
deal kindly and truly with my master, well and good: if you will be
sincerely kind, you will accept the proposal, and I have what I came
for; if not, do not hold me in suspense." Note, Those who deal fairly
have reason to expect fair dealing.

(5.) They freely and cheerfully close with the proposal upon a very good
principle ([Gen 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#050)): "The thing
proceedeth from the Lord, Providence smiles upon it, and we have nothing
to say against it." They do not object distance of place, Abraham's
forsaking them, or his having no land in possession, but person estate
only: they do not question the truth of what this man said; but, \[1.\]
They trust much to his integrity. It were well if honesty did so
universally prevail among men that it might be as much an act of
prudence as it is of good nature to take a man's word. \[2.\] They trust
more to God's providence, and therefore by silence give consent, because
it appears to be directed and disposed by Infinite Wisdom. Note, A
marriage is then likely to be comfortable when it appears to proceed
from the Lord.

(6.) Abraham's servant makes a thankful acknowledgment of the good
success he had met with, \[1.\] To God: He worshipped the Lord, [Gen
24:52](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#052). Observe, First, As his good
success went on, he went on to bless God. Those that pray without
ceasing should in every thing give thanks, and own God in every step of
mercy. Secondly, God sent his angel before him, and so gave him success,
[Gen 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#007), [Gen
24:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#040). But when he has the desired
success, he worships God, not the angel. Whatever benefit we have by the
ministration of angels, all the glory must be given to the Lord of the
angels, [Rev 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009). \[2.\] He pays his
respects to the family also, and particularly to the bride, [Gen
24:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#053). He presented her, and her
mother, and brother, with many precious things, both to give a real
proof of his master's riches and generosity and in gratitude for their
civility to him, and further to ingratiate himself with them.

[Genesis 24:54](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">gen 24:54</span></span>

Rebekah is here taking leave of her father's house; and 1. Abraham's
servant presses for a dismission. Though he and his company were very
welcome, and very cheerful there, yet he said, Send me away ([Gen
24:54](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#054)), and again, [Gen
24:56](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#056). He knew his master would expect
him home with some impatience; he had business to do at home which
wanted him, and therefore, as one that preferred his work before his
pleasure, he was for hastening home. Note, Lingering and loitering no
way become a wise and good man; when we have despatched our business
abroad we must not delay our return to our business at home, nor be
longer from it than needs must; for as a bird that wanders from her nest
so is he that wanders from his place, [Pro
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#008). 2. Rebekah's relations, from
natural affection and according to the usual expression of kindness in
that case, solicit for her stay some time among them, [Gen
24:55](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#055). They could not think of parting
with her on a sudden, especially as she was about the remove so far off
and it was not likely that they would ever see one another again: Let
her stay a few days, at least ten, which makes it as reasonable a
request as the reading in the margin seems to make it unreasonable, a
year, or at least ten months. They had consented to the marriage, and
yet were loth to part with her. Note, It is an instance of the vanity of
this world that there is nothing in it so agreeable but it has its
alloy. Nulla est sincera voluptas - There is no unmingled pleasure. They
were pleased that they had matched a daughter of their family so well,
and yet, when it came to the last, it was with great reluctance that
they sent her away. 3. Rebekah herself determined the matter. To her
they appealed, as it was fit they should ([Gen
24:57](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#057)): Call the damsel (who had
retired to her apartment with a modest silence) and enquire at her
mouth. Note, As children ought not to marry without their parents'
consent, so parents ought not to marry them without their own. Before
the matter is resolved on, "Ask at the damsel's mouth;" she is a party
principally concerned, and therefore ought to be principally consulted.
Rebekah consented, not only to go, but to go immediately: I will go,
[Gen 24:58](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#058). We may hope that the
notice she had taken of the servant's piety and devotion gave her such
an idea of the prevalence of religion and godliness in the family she
was to go to made her desirous to hasten thither, and willing to forget
her own people and her father's house, where religion had not so much
the ascendant. 4. Hereupon she is sent away with Abraham's servant; not,
we may suppose, the very next day after, but very quickly: her friends
see that she has a good heart on it, and so they dismiss her, (1.) With
suitable attendants - her nurse ([Gen
24:59](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#059)), her damsels, [Gen
24:61](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#061). It seems, then, that when she
went to the well for water it was not because she had not servants at
command, but because she took a pleasure in works of humble industry.
Now that she was going among strangers, it was fit she should take those
with her with whom she was acquainted. Here is nothing said of her
portion. Her personal merits were a portion in her, she needed none with
her, nor did that ever come into the treaty of marriage. (2.) With
hearty good wishes: They blessed Rebekah, [Gen
24:60](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#060). Note, When our relations are
entering into a new condition, we ought by prayer to recommend them to
the blessing and grace of God. Now that she was going to be a wife, they
prayed that she might be a mother both of a numerous and of a victorious
progeny. Perhaps Abraham's servant had told them of the promise God had
lately made to his master, which it is likely, Abraham acquainted his
household with, that God would multiply his seed as the stars of heaven,
and that they should possess the gate of their enemies ([Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)), to which promise they had an
eye in this blessing, Be thou the mother of that seed.

[Genesis 24:62](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">gen 24:62</span></span>

Isaac and Rebekah are, at length, happily brought together. Observe,

I. Isaac was well employed when he met Rebekah: He went out to meditate,
or pray, in the field, at the even-tide, [Gen
24:62](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#062), [Gen
24:63](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#063). Some think he expected the
return of his servants about this time, and went out on purpose to meet
them. But, it should seem, he went out on another errand, to take the
advantage of a silent evening and a solitary field for meditation and
prayer, those divine exercises by which we converse with God and our own
hearts. Note, 1. Holy souls love retirement. It will do us good to be
often left alone, walking alone and sitting alone; and, if we have the
art of improving solitude, we shall find we are never less alone than
when alone. 2. Meditation and prayer ought to be both our business and
our delight when we are alone; while we have a God, a Christ, and a
heaven, to acquaint ourselves with, and to secure our interest in, we
need not want matter either for meditation or prayer, which, if they go
together, will mutually befriend each other. 3. Our walks in the field
are then truly pleasant when in them we apply ourselves to meditation
and prayer. We there have a free and open prospect of the heavens above
us and the earth around us, and the host and riches of both, by the view
of which we should be led to the contemplation of the Maker and owner of
all. 4. The exercises of devotion should be the refreshment and
entertainment of the evening, to relieve us from the fatigue occasioned
by the care and business of the day, and to prepare us for the repose
and sleep of the night. 5. Merciful providences are then doubly
comfortable when they find us well employed and in the way of our duty.
Some think Isaac was now praying for good success in this affair that
was depending, and meditating upon that which was proper to encourage
his hope in God concerning it; and now, when he sets himself, as it
were, upon his watch-tower, to see what God would answer him, as the
prophet ([Hab 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)), he sees the camels
coming. Sometimes God sends in the mercy prayed for immediately, [Act
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012).

II\. Rebekah behaved herself very becomingly, when she met Isaac:
understanding who he was, she alighted off her camel ([Gen
24:64](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#064)), andtook a veil, and covered
herself ([Gen 24:65](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#065)), in token of
humility, modesty, and subjection. She did not reproach Isaac for not
coming himself to fetch her, or, at least, to meet her a day's journey
or two, did not complain of the tediousness of her journey, or the
difficulty of leaving her relations, to come into a strange place; but,
having seen Providence going before her in the affair, she accommodates
herself with cheerfulness to her new relation. Those that by faith are
espoused to Christ, and would be presented as chaste virgins to him,
must, in conformity to his example, humble themselves, as Rebekah, who
alighted when she saw Isaac on foot, and must put themselves into
subjection to him who is their head ([Eph
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#024)), as Rebekah, signifying it by
the veil she put on, [Co1 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010).

III\. They were brought together (probably after some further
acquaintance), to their mutual comfort, [Gen
24:67](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#067). Observe here, 1. What an
affectionate son he was to his mother: it was about three years since
her death, and yet he was not, till now, comforted concerning it; the
wound which that affliction gave to his tender spirit bled so long, and
was never healed till God brought him into this new relation. Thus
crosses and comforts are balances to each other ([Ecc
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014)), and help to keep the scale
even. 2. What an affectionate husband he was to his wife. Note, Those
that have approved themselves well in one relation, it may be hoped,
will do so in another: She became his wife, and he loved her; there was
all the reason in the world why he should, for so ought men to love
their wives even an themselves. The duty of the relation is then done,
and the comfort of the relation is then enjoyed, when mutual love
governs; for there the Lord commands the blessing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 25](gen025)

</div>
