<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](int000)  [Next](gen001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The First Book of Moses,
Called Genesis

We have now before us the holy Bible, or book, for so bible signifies.
We call it the book, by way of eminency; for it is incomparably the best
book that ever was written, the book of books, shining like the sun in
the firmament of learning, other valuable and useful books, like the
moon and stars, borrowing their light from it. We call it the holy book,
because it was written by holy men, and indited by the Holy Ghost; it is
perfectly pure from all falsehood and corrupt intention; and the
manifest tendency of it is to promote holiness among men. The great
things of God's law and gospel are here written to us, that they might
be reduced to a greater certainty, might spread further, remain longer,
and be transmitted to distant places and ages more pure and entire than
possibly they could be by report and tradition: and we shall have a
great deal to answer for if these things which belong to our peace,
being thus committed to us in black and white, be neglected by us as a
strange and foreign thing, [Hos 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#012).
The scriptures, or writings of the several inspired penmen, from Moses
down to St. John, in which divine light, like that of the morning, shone
gradually (the sacred canon being now completed), are all put together
in this blessed Bible, which, thanks be to God, we have in our hands,
and they make as perfect a day as we are to expect on this side of
heaven. Every part was good, but all together very good. This is the
light that shines in a dark place ([Pe2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019)), and a dark place indeed the
world would be without the Bible.

We have before us that part of the Bible which we call the Old
Testament, containing the acts and monuments of the church from the
creation almost to the coming of Christ in the flesh, which was about
four thousand years - the truths then revealed, the laws then enacted,
the devotions then paid, the prophecies then given, and the events which
concerned that distinguished body, so far as God saw fit to preserve to
us the knowledge of them. This is called a testament, or covenant
(diatheke), because it was a settled declaration of the will of God
concerning man in a federal way, and had its force from the designed
death of the great testator, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world, [Rev 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008). It is called the Old
Testament, with relation to the New, which does not cancel and supersede
it, but crown and perfect it, by the bringing in of that better hope
which was typified and foretold in it; the Old Testament still remains
glorious, though the New far exceeds in glory, [Co2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009).

We have before us that part of the Old Testament which we call the
Pentateuch, or five books of Moses, that servant of the Lord who
excelled all the other prophets, and typified the great prophet. In our
Saviour's distribution of the books of the Old Testament into the law,
the prophets, and the psalms, or Hagiographa, these are the law; for
they contain not only the laws given to Israel, in the last four, but
the laws given to Adam, to Noah, and to Abraham, in the first. These
five books were, for aught we know, the first that ever were written;
for we have not the least mention of any writing in all the book of
Genesis, nor till God bade Moses write ([Exo
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014)); and some think Moses himself
never learned to write till God set him his copy in the writing of the
ten Commandments upon the tables of stone. However, we are sure these
books are the most ancient writings now extant, and therefore best able
to give us a satisfactory account of the most ancient things.

We have before us the first and longest of those five books, which we
call Genesis, written, some think, when Moses was in Midian, for the
instruction and comfort of his suffering brethren in Egypt: I rather
think he wrote it in the wilderness, after he had been in the mount with
God, where, probably, he received full and particular instructions for
the writing of it. And, as he framed the tabernacle, so he did the more
excellent and durable fabric of this book, exactly according to the
pattern shown him in the mount, into which it is better to resolve the
certainty of the things herein contained than into any tradition which
possibly might be handed down from Adam to Methuselah, from him to Shem,
from him to Abraham, and so to the family of Jacob. Genesis is a name
borrowed from the Greek. It signifies the original, or generation: fitly
is this book so called, for it is a history of originals - the creation
of the world, the entrance of sin and death into it, the invention of
arts, the rise of nations, and especially the planting of the church,
and the state of it in its early days. It is also a history of
generations - the generations of Adam, Noah, Abraham, etc., not endless,
but useful genealogies. The beginning of the New Testament is called
Genesis too ([Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)), Biblos
geneseos the book of the genesis, or generation, of Jesus Christ.
Blessed be God for that Book which shows us our remedy, as this opens
our wound. Lord, open our eyes, that we may see the wondrous things both
of thy law and gospel!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 1](gen001)

</div>
