<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen043)  [Next](gen045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 44:0</span></span>

Joseph, having entertained his brethren, dismissed them; but here we
have them brought back in a greater fright than any they had been in
yet. Observe, I. What method he took both to humble them further and
also to try their affection to his brother Benjamin, by which he would
be able to judge of the sincerity of their repentance for what they had
done against himself, of which he was desirous to be satisfied before he
manifested his reconciliation to them. This he contrived to do by
bringing Benjamin into distress (v. 1-17). II. The good success of the
experiment; he found them all heartily concerned, and Judah
particularly, both for the safety of Benjamin and for the comfort of
their aged father ([Gen 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#018), etc.).

[Genesis 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 44:1</span></span>

Joseph heaps further kindnesses upon his brethren, fills their sacks,
returns their money, and sends them away full of gladness; but he also
exercises them with further trials. Our God thus humbles those whom he
loves and loads with benefits. Joseph ordered his steward to put a fine
silver cup which he had (and which, it is likely, was used at his table
when they dined with him) into Benjamin's sack's mouth, that it might
seem as if he had stolen it from the table, and put it here himself,
after his corn was delivered to him. If Benjamin had stolen it, it had
been the basest piece of dishonesty and ingratitude that could be and if
Joseph, by ordering it to be there, had designed really to take
advantage against him, it had been in him most horrid cruelty and
oppression; but it proved, in the issue, that there was no harm done,
nor any designed, on either side. Observe,

I. How the pretended criminals were pursued and arrested, on suspicion
of having stolen a silver cup. The steward charged them with ingratitude
- rewarding evil for good; and with folly, in taking away a cup of daily
use, and which therefore would soon be missed, and diligent search made
for it; for so it may be read: Is not this it in which my lord drinketh
(as having a particular fondness for it), and for which he would search
thoroughly? [Gen 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#005). Or, "By which,
leaving it carelessly at your table, he would make trial whether you
were honest men or no."

II\. How they pleaded for themselves. They solemnly protested their
innocence, and detestation of so base a thing ([Gen
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#007)), urged it as an instance of
their honesty that they had brought their money back ([Gen
44:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#008)), and offered to submit to the
severest punishment if they should be found guilty, [Gen
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#009), [Gen
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#010).

III\. How the theft was fastened upon Benjamin. In his sack the cup was
found to whom Joseph had been particularly kind. Benjamin, no doubt, was
ready to deny, upon oath, the taking of the cup, and we may suppose him
as little liable to suspicion as any of them; but it is in vain to
confront such notorious evidence: the cup is found in his custody; they
dare not arraign Joseph's justice, nor so much as suggest that perhaps
he that had put their money in their sacks' mouths had put the cup
there; but they throw themselves upon Joseph's mercy. And,

IV\. Here is their humble submission, [Gen
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#016). 1. They acknowledge the
righteousness of God: God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants,
perhaps referring to the injury they had formerly done to Joseph, for
which they thought God was now reckoning with them. Note, Even in those
afflictions wherein we apprehend ourselves wronged by men yet we must
own that God is righteous, and finds out our iniquity. 2. They surrender
themselves prisoners to Joseph: We are my lord's servants. Now Joseph's
dreams were accomplished to the utmost. Their bowing so often, and doing
homage, might be looked upon but as a compliment, and no more than what
other strangers did; but the construction they themselves, in their
pride, had put upon his dreams was, Shalt though have dominion over us?
([Gen 37:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#008)), and in this sense it is
now at length fulfilled,; they own themselves his vassals. Since they
did invidiously so understand it, so it shall be fulfilled in them.

V. Joseph, with an air of justice, gives sentence that Benjamin only
should be kept in bondage, and the rest should be dismissed; for why
should any suffer but the guilty? Perhaps Joseph intended hereby to try
Benjamin's temper, whether he could bear such a hardship as this with
the calmness and composure of mind that became a wise and good man: in
short, whether he was indeed his own brother, in spirit as well as
blood; for Joseph himself had been falsely accused, and had suffered
hard things in consequence, and yet kept possession of his own soul.
However, it is plain he intended hereby to try the affection of his
brethren to Benjamin and to their father. If they had gone away
contentedly, and left Benjamin in bonds, no doubt Joseph would soon have
released and promoted him, and sent notice to Jacob, and would have left
the rest of his brethren justly to suffer for their hard-heartedness;
but they proved to be better to Benjamin than he feared. Note, We cannot
judge what men are by what they have been formerly, nor what they will
do by what they have done: age and experience may make men wiser and
better. Those that had sold Joseph would not now abandon Benjamin. The
worst may mend in time.

[Genesis 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 44:18</span></span>

We have here a most ingenious and pathetic speech which Judah made to
Joseph on Benjamin's behalf, to obtain his discharge from the sentence
passed upon him. Perhaps Judah was a better friend to Benjamin than the
rest were, and more solicitous to bring him off; or he thought himself
under greater obligations to attempt it than the rest, because he had
passed his word to his father for his safe return; or the rest chose him
for their spokesman, because he was a man of better sense, and better
spirit, and had a greater command of language than any of them. His
address, as it is here recorded, is so very natural and so expressive of
his present feelings that we cannot but suppose Moses, who wrote it so
long after, to have written it under the special direction of him that
made man's mouth.

I. A great deal of unaffected art, and unstudied unforced rhetoric,
there is in this speech. 1. He addresses himself to Joseph with a great
deal of respect and deference, calls him his lord, himself and his
brethren his servants, begs his patient hearing, and ascribes sovereign
authority to him: "Thou art even as Pharaoh, one whose favour we desire
and whose wrath we dread as we do Pharaoh's." Religion does not destroy
good manners, and it is prudence to speak respectfully to those at whose
mercy we lie: titles of honour to those that are entitled to them are
not flattering titles. 2. He represented Benjamin as one well worthy of
his compassionate consideration ([Gen
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#020)); he was a little one, compared
with the rest of them; the youngest, not acquainted with the world, nor
ever inured to hardship, having always been brought up tenderly with his
father. It made the case the more pitiable that he alone was left of his
mother, and his brother was dead, namely, Joseph. Little did Judah think
what a tender point he touched upon now. Judah knew that Joseph was
sold, and therefore had reason enough to think that he was alive; at
least he could not be sure that he was dead: but they had made their
father believe he was dead; and now they had told that lie so long that
they had forgotten the truth, and begun to believe the lie themselves.
3. He urged it very closely that Joseph had himself constrained them to
bring Benjamin with them, had expressed a desire to see him ([Gen
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#021)), and had forbidden them his
presence unless they brought Benjamin with them ([Gen
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#023), [Gen
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#026)), all which intimated that he
designed him some kindness; and must he be brought with so much
difficulty to the preferment of a perpetual slavery? Was he not brought
to Egypt, in obedience, purely in obedience, to the command of Joseph?
and would he not show him some mercy? Some observe that Jacob's sons, in
reasoning with their father, had said, We will not go down unless
Benjamin go with us ([Gen 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#005)); but
that when Judah comes to relate the story he expresses it more decently:
"We cannot go down with any expectation to speed well." Indecent words
spoken in haste to our superiors should be recalled and amended. 4. The
great argument he insisted upon was the insupportable grief it would be
to his aged father if Benjamin should be left behind in servitude: His
father loveth him, [Gen 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#020). This
they had pleaded against Joseph's insisting on his coming down ([Gen
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#022)): "If he should leave his
father, his father would die; much more if now he be left behind, never
more to return to him." This the old man, of whom they spoke, had
pleaded against his going down: If mischief befal him, you shall bring
down my gray hairs, that crown of glory, with sorrow to the grave, [Gen
44:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#029). This therefore Judah presses
with a great deal of earnestness: "His life is bound up in the lad's
life ([Gen 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#030)); when he sees that
the lad is not with us, he will faint away, and die immediately ([Gen
44:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#031)), or will abandon himself to
such a degree of sorrow as will, in a few days, make an end of him."
And, lastly, Judah pleads that, for his part, he could not bear to see
this: Let me not see the evil that shall come on my father, [Gen
44:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#034). Note, It is the duty of
children to be very tender of their parents' comfort, and to be afraid
of every thing that may be an occasion of grief to them. Thus the love
that descended first must again ascend, and something must be done
towards a recompense for their care. 5. Judah, in honour to the justice
of Joseph's sentence, and to show his sincerity in this plea, offers
himself to become a bondsman instead of Benjamin, [Gen
44:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#033). Thus the law would be
satisfied; Joseph would be no loser (for we may suppose Judah a more
able-bodied man than Benjamin, and fitter for service); and Jacob would
better bear the loss of him than of Benjamin. Now, so far was he from
grieving at his father's particular fondness for Benjamin, that he was
himself willing to be a bondman to indulge it.

Now, had Joseph been, as Judah supposed him, an utter stranger to the
family, yet even common humanity could not but be wrought upon by such
powerful reasonings as these; for nothing could be said more moving,
more tender; it was enough to melt a heart of stone. But to Joseph, who
was nearer akin to Benjamin than Judah himself was, and who, at this
time, felt a greater affection both for him and his aged father than
Judah did, nothing could be more pleasingly nor more happily said.
Neither Jacob nor Benjamin needed an intercessor with Joseph; for he
himself loved them.

II\. Upon the whole matter let us take notice, 1. How prudently Judah
suppressed all mention of the crime that was charged upon Benjamin. Had
he said any thing by way of acknowledgment of it, he would have
reflected on Benjamin's honesty, and seemed too forward to suspect that;
had he said any thing by way of denial of it, he would have reflected on
Joseph's justice, and the sentence he had passed: therefore he wholly
waives that head, and appeals to Joseph's pity. Compare with this that
of Job, in humbling himself before God ([Job
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015)), Though I were righteous, yet
would I not answer; I would not argue, but petition; I would make
supplication to my Judge. 2. What good reason dying Jacob had to say,
Judah, thou art he whom they brethren shall praise ([Gen
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008)), for he excelled them all in
boldness, wisdom, eloquence, and especially tenderness for their father
and family. 3. Judah's faithful adherence to Benjamin, now in his
distress, was recompensed long after by the constant adherence of the
tribe of Benjamin to the tribe of Judah, when all the other ten tribes
deserted it. 4. How fitly does the apostle, when he is discoursing of
the mediation of Christ, observe, that our Lord sprang out of Judah
([Heb 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#014)); for, like his father
Judah, he not only made intercession for the transgressors, but he
became a surety for them, as it follows there ([Gen
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#022)), testifying therein a very
tender concern both for his father and for his brethren.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 45](gen045)

</div>
