<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen034)  [Next](gen036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 35:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have three communions and three funerals. I. Three
communions between God and Jacob. 1. God ordered Jacob to Beth-el; and,
in obedience to that order, he purged his house of idols, and prepared
for that journey ([Gen 35:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001)). 2.
Jacob built an altar at Beth-el, to the honour of God that had appeared
to him, and in performance of his vow ([Gen
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#006), [Gen
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007)). 3. God appeared to him again,
and confirmed the change of his name and covenant with him ([Gen
35:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#009)), of which appearance Jacob
made a grateful acknowledgment ([Gen
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#014), [Gen
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#015)). II. Three funerals. 1.
Deborah's ([Gen 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008)). 2. Rachel's
([Gen 35:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016)). 3. Isaac's ([Gen
35:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#027)). Here is also Rueben's
incest ([Gen 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022)), and an account of
Jacob's sons ([Gen 35:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#023)).

[Genesis 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 35:1</span></span>

Here, I. God reminds Jacob of his vow at Beth-el, and sends him thither
to perform it, [Gen 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001). Jacob had
said in the day of his distress, If I come again in peace, this stone
shall be God's house, [Gen 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#022). God
had performed his part of the bargain, and had given Jacob more than
bread to eat and raiment to put on - he had got an estate, and had
become two bands; but, it should seem, he had forgotten his vow, or at
least had too long deferred the performance of it. Seven or eight years
it was now since he came to Canaan; he had purchased ground there, and
had built an altar in remembrance of God's last appearance to him when
he called him Israel ([Gen 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019), [Gen
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020)); but still Beth-el is
forgotten. Note, Time is apt to wear out the sense of mercies and the
impressions made upon us by them; it should not be so, but so it is. God
had exercised Jacob with a very sore affliction in his family (ch. 34),
to see if this would bring his vow to his remembrance, and put him upon
the performance of it, but it had not this effect; therefore God comes
himself and puts him in mind of it: Arise, go to Beth-el. Note, 1. As
many as God loves he will remind of neglected duties, one way or other,
by conscience or by providences. 2. When we have vowed a vow to God, it
is best not to defer the payment of it ([Ecc
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004)), yet better late than never. God
bade him go to Beth-el and dwell there, that is, not only go himself,
but take his family with him, that they might join with him in his
devotions. Note, In Beth-el, the house of God, we should desire to
dwell, [Psa 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004). That should be our
home, not our inn. God reminds him not expressly of his vow, but of the
occasion of it: When thou fleddest from the face of Esau. Note, The
remembrance of former afflictions should bring to mind the workings of
our souls under them, [Psa 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013), [Psa
66:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#014).

II\. Jacob commands his household to prepare for this solemnity; not
only for the journey and remove, but for the religious services that
were to be performed, [Gen 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#002), [Gen
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#003). Note, 1. Before solemn
ordinances, there must be solemn preparation. Wash you, make you clean,
and then come, and let us reason together, [Isa
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016). 2. Masters of families should
use their authority for the promoting of religion in their families. Not
only we, but our houses also, should serve the Lord, [Jos
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015). Observe the commands he gives
his household, like Abraham, [Gen
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019). (1.) They must put away the
strange gods. Strange gods in Jacob's family! Strange things indeed!
Could such a family, that was taught the good knowledge of the Lord,
admit them? Could such a master, to whom God had appeared twice, and
oftener, connive at them? Doubtless this was his infirmity. Note, Those
that are good themselves cannot always have those about them so good as
they should be. In those families where there is a face of religion, and
an altar to God, yet many times there is much amiss, and more strange
gods than one would suspect. In Jacob's family, Rachel had her ִֶַ,
which, it is to be feared, she secretly made some superstitious use of.
The captives of Shechem brought their gods along with them, and perhaps
Jacob's sons took some with the plunder. However they came by them, now
they must put them away. (2.) They must be clean, and change their
garments; they must observe a due decorum, and make the best appearance
they could. Simeon and Levi had their hands full of blood, it concerned
them particularly to wash, and to put off their garments that were so
stained. These were but ceremonies, signifying the purification and
change of the heart. What are clean clothes, and new clothes, without a
clean heart, and a new heart? Dr. Lightfoot, by their being clean, or
washing themselves, understands Jacob's admission of the proselytes of
Shechem and Syria into his religion by baptism, because circumcision had
become odious. 3. They must go with him to Bethel, [Gen
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#003). Note, Masters of families, when
they go up to the house of God, should bring their families with them.

III\. His family surrendered all they had that was idolatrous or
superstitious, [Gen 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004). Perhaps, if
Jacob had called for them sooner, they would sooner have parted with
them, being convicted by their own consciences of the vanity of them.
Note, Sometimes attempts for reformation succeed better than one could
have expected, and people are not so obstinate against them as we
feared. Jacob's servants, and even the retainers of his family, gave him
all the strange gods, and the ear-rings they wore, either as charms or
to the honour of their gods; they parted with all. Note, Reformation is
not sincere if it be not universal. We hope they parted with them
cheerfully, and without reluctance, as Ephraim did, when he said, What
have I to do any more with idols? ([Hos
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008)), or that people that said to
their idols, Get you hence, [Isa
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#022). Jacob took care to bury their
images, we may suppose in some place unknown to them, that they might
not afterwards find them and return to them. Note, We must be wholly
separated from our sins, as we are from those that are dead and buried
out of our sight, cast them to the moles and the bats, [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020).

IV\. He removes without molestation from Shechem to Bethel, [Gen
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#005). The terror of God was upon the
cities. Though the Canaanites were much exasperated against the sons of
Jacob for their barbarous usage of the Shechemites, yet they were so
restrained by a divine power that they could not take this fair
opportunity, which now offered itself, when they were upon their march,
to avenge their neighbours' quarrel. Note, The way of duty is the way of
safety. While there was sin in Jacob's house, he was afraid of his
neighbours; but now that the strange gods were put away, and they were
all going together to Bethel, his neighbours were afraid of him. When we
are about God's work, we are under special protection. God is with us,
while we are with him; and, if he be for us, who can be against us? See
[Exo 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#024), No man shall desire thy
land, when thou goest up to appear before the Lord. God governs the
world more by secret terrors on men's minds than we are aware of.

[Genesis 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 35:6</span></span>

Jacob and his retinue having safely arrived at Bethel, we are here told
what passed there.

I. There he built an altar ([Gen
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007)), and no doubt offered sacrifice
upon it, perhaps the tenth of his cattle, according to his vow, I will
give the tenth unto thee. With these sacrifices he joined praises for
former mercies, particularly that which the sight of the place brought
afresh to his remembrance; and he added prayers for the continuance of
God's favour to him and his family. And he called the place (that is,
the altar) El-beth-el, the God of Bethel. As, when he made a thankful
acknowledgment of the honour God had lately done him in calling him
Israel, he worshipped God by the name of El-elohe Israel; so, now that
he was making a grateful recognition of God's former favour to him at
Bethel, he worships God by the name of El-beth-el, the God of Bethel,
because there God appeared to him. Note, The comfort which the saints
have in holy ordinances is not so much from Bethel, the house of God, as
from El-beth-el, the God of the house. The ordinances are but empty
things if we do not meet with God in them.

II\. There he buried Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, [Gen
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008). We have reason to think that
Jacob, after he came to Canaan, while his family dwelt near Shechem,
went himself (it is likely, often) to visit his father Isaac at Hebron.
Rebekah probably was dead, but her old nurse (of whom mention is made
[Gen 24:59](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#059)) survived her, and Jacob
took her to his family, to be a companion to his wives, her
country-women, and an instructor to his children; while they were at
Bethel, she died, and died lamented, so much lamented that the oak under
which she was buried was called Allon-bachuth, the oak of weeping. Note,
1. Old servants in a family, that have in their time been faithful and
useful, ought to be respected. Honour was done to this nurse, at her
death, by Jacob's family, though she was not related to them, and though
she was aged. Former services, in such a case, must be remembered. 2. We
do not know where death may meet us; perhaps at Beth-el, the house of
God. Therefore let us be always ready. 3. Family-afflictions may come
even when family-reformation and religion are on foot. Therefore rejoice
with trembling.

III\. There God appeared to him ([Gen
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#009)), to own his altar, to answer to
the name by which he had called him, The God of Bethel ([Gen
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007)), and to comfort him under his
affliction, [Gen 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008). Note, God will
appear to those in a way of grace that attend on him in a way of duty.
Here, 1. He confirmed the change of his name, [Gen
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#010). It was done before by the angel
that wrestled with him ([Gen 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028)),
and here it was ratified by the divine Majesty, or Shechinah, that
appeared to him. There it was to encourage him against the fear of Esau,
here against the fear of the Canaanites. Who can be too hard for Israel,
a prince with God? It is below those who are thus dignified to droop and
despond. 2. He renewed and ratified the covenant with him, by the name
El-shaddai. I am God Almighty, God all-sufficient ([Gen
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011)), able to make good the promise
in due time, and to support thee and provide for thee in the mean time.
Two things are promised him which we have met with often before: - (1.)
That he should be the father of a great nation, great in honour and
power - a company of nations shall be of thee (every tribe of Israel was
a nation, and all the twelve a company of nations), great in honour and
power - kings shall come out of thy loins. (2.) That he should be the
master of a good land ([Gen 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#012)),
described by the grantees, Abraham and Isaac, to whom it was promised,
not by the occupants, the Canaanites in whose possession it now was. The
land that was given to Abraham and Isaac is here entailed on Jacob and
his seed. He shall not have children without an estate, which is often
the case of the poor, nor an estate without children, which is often the
grief of the rich; but both. These two promises had a spiritual
signification, of which we may suppose Jacob himself had some notion,
though not so clear and distinct as we now have; for, without doubt,
Christ is the promised seed, and heaven is the promised land; the former
is the foundation, and the latter the top-stone, of all God's favours.
3. He then went up from him, or from over him, in some visible display
of glory, which had hovered over him while he talked with him, [Gen
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#013). Note, The sweetest communions
the saints have with God in this world are short and transient, and soon
have an end. Our vision of God in heaven will be everlasting; there we
shall be ever with the Lord; it is not so here.

IV\. There Jacob erected a memorial of this, [Gen
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#014). 1. He set up a pillar. When he
was going to Padan-aram, he set up for a pillar that stone on which he
had laid his head. This was agreeable enough to his low condition and
his hasty flight; but now he took time to erect one more stately, more
distinguishable and durable, probably placing that stone in it. In token
of his intending it for a sacred memorial of his communion with God, he
poured oil and the other ingredients of a drink-offering upon it. His
vow was, This stone shall be God's house, that is, shall be set up for
his honour, as houses to the praise of their builders; and here he
performs it, transferring it to God by anointing it. 2. He confirmed the
name he had formerly given to the place ([Gen
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#015)), Beth-el, the house of God. Yet
this very place afterwards lost the honour of its name, and became
Beth-aven, a house of iniquity; for here it was that Jeroboam set up one
of his calves. It is impossible for the best man to entail upon a place
so much as the profession and form of religion.

[Genesis 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 35:16</span></span>

We have here the story of the death of Rachel, the beloved wife of
Jacob. 1. She fell in travail by the way, not able to reach to
Bethlehem, the next town, though they were near it; so suddenly does
pain sometimes come upon a woman in travail, which she cannot escape, or
put off. We may suppose Jacob had soon a tent up, convenient enough for
her reception. 2. Her pains were violent. She had hard labour, harder
than usual: this was the effect of sin, [Gen
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016). Note, Human life begins with
sorrow, and the roses of its joy are surrounded with thorns. 3. The
midwife encouraged her, [Gen 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#017). No
doubt she had her midwife with her, ready at hand, yet that would not
secure her. Rachel had said, when she bore Joseph, God shall add another
son, which now the midwife remembers, and tells her her words were made
good. Yet this did not avail to keep up her spirits; unless God command
away fear, no one else can. He only says as one having authority, Fear
not. We are apt, in extreme perils, to comfort ourselves and our friends
with the hopes of a temporal deliverance, in which we may be
disappointed; we had better found our comforts on that which cannot fail
us, the hope of eternal life. 4. Her travail was to the life of the
child, but to her own death. Note, Though the pains and perils of
childbearing were introduced by sin, yet they have sometimes been fatal
to very holy women, who, though not saved in childbearing, are saved
through it with an everlasting salvation. Rachel had passionately said,
Give me children, or else I die; and now that she had children (for this
was her second) she died. Her dying is here called the departing of her
soul. Note, The death of the body is but the departure of the soul to
the world of spirits. 5. Her dying lips called her new-born son Ben-oni,
The son of my sorrow. And many a son, not born in such hard labour, yet
proves the son of his parent's sorrow, and the heaviness of her that
bore him. Children are enough the sorrow of their poor mothers in the
breeding, bearing, and nursing of them; they should therefore, when they
grow up, study to be their joy, and so, if possible, to make them some
amends. But Jacob, because he would not renew the sorrowful remembrance
of the mother's death every time he called his son by his name, changed
his name, and called him Benjamin, The son of my right hand; that is,
"very dear to me, set on my right hand for a blessing, the support of my
age, like the staff in my right hand." 6. Jacob buried her near the
place where she died. As she died in child-bed, it was convenient to
bury her quickly; and therefore he did not bring her to the
burying-place of his family. If the soul be at rest after death, it
matters little where the body lies. In the place where the tree falls,
there let it be. No mention is made of the mourning that was at her
death, because that might easily be taken for granted. Jacob, no doubt,
was a true mourner. Note, Great afflictions sometimes befal us
immediately after great comforts. Lest Jacob should be lifted up with
the visions of the Almighty with which he was honoured, this was sent as
a thorn in the flesh to humble him. Those that enjoy the favours
peculiar to the children of God must yet expect the troubles that are
common to the children of men. Deborah, who, had she lived, would have
been a comfort to Rachel in her extremity, died but a little before.
Note, When death comes into a family, it often strikes double. God by it
speaks once, yea, twice. The Jewish writers say, "The death of Deborah
and Rachel was to expiate the murder of the Shechemites, occasioned by
Dinah, a daughter of the family." 7. Jacob set up a pillar upon her
grave, so that it was known, long after, to be Rachel's sepulchre ([Sa1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002)), and Providence so ordered it
that this place afterwards fell in the lot of Benjamin. Jacob set up a
pillar in remembrance of his joys ([Gen
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#014)), and here he sets up one in
remembrance of his sorrows; for, as it may be of use to ourselves to
keep both in mind, so it may be of use to others to transmit the
memorials of both: the church, long afterwards, owned that what God said
to Jacob at Bethel, both by his word and by his rod, he intended for
their instruction ([Hos 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004)), There
he spoke with us.

[Genesis 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 35:21</span></span>

Here is, 1. Jacob's removal, [Gen
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#021). He also, as his fathers,
sojourned in the land of promise as in a strange country, and was not
long in a place. Immediately after the story of Rachel's death he is
here called Israel ([Gen 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#021), [Gen
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022)), and not often so afterwards:
the Jews say, "The historian does him this honour here because he bore
that affliction with such admirable patience and submission to
Providence." Note, Those are Israel's indeed, princes with God, that
support the government of their own passions. He that has this rule over
his own spirit is better than the mighty. Israel, a prince with God, yet
dwells in tents; the city is reserved for him in the other world. 2. The
sin of Reuben. A piece of abominable wickedness it was that he was
guilty of ([Gen 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022)), that very sin
which the apostle says ([Co1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)) is
not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his
father's wife. It is said to have been when Israel dwelt in that land;
as if he were then absent from his family, which might be the unhappy
occasion of these disorders. Though perhaps Bilhah was the greater
criminal, and it is probable was abandoned by Jacob for it, yet Reuben's
crime was so provoking that, for it, he lost his birthright and
blessing, [Gen 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004). The first-born is
not always the best, nor the most promising. This was Reuben's sin, but
it was Jacob's affliction; and what a sore affliction it was is
intimated in a little compass, and Israel heard it. No more is said -
that is enough; he heard it with the utmost grief and shame, horror and
displeasure. Reuben thought to conceal it, that his father should never
hear of it; but those that promise themselves secresy in sin are
generally disappointed; a bird of the air carries the voice. 3. A
complete list of the sons of Jacob, now that Benjamin the youngest was
born. This is the first time we have the names of these heads of the
twelve tribes together; afterwards we find them very often spoken of and
enumerated, even to the end of the Bible, [Rev
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004); [Rev
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012). 4. The visit which Jacob made
to his father Isaac at Hebron. We may suppose he had visited him before
since his return, for he sorely longed after his father's house; but
never, till now, brought his family to settle with him, or near him,
[Gen 35:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#027). Probably he did this now
upon the death of Rebekah, by which Isaac was left solitary, and not
disposed to marry again. 5. The age and death of Isaac are here
recorded, though it appears, by computation, that he died not till many
years after Joseph was sold into Egypt, and much about the time that he
was preferred there. Isaac, a mild quiet man, lived the longest of all
the patriarches, for he was 180 years old; Abraham was but 175. Isaac
lived about forty years after he had made his will, [Gen
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#002). We shall not die an hour the
sooner, but abundantly the better, for our timely setting our heart and
house in order. Particular notice is taken of the amicable agreement of
Esau and Jacob, in solemnizing their father's funeral ([Gen
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#029)), to show how wonderfully God
had changed Esau's mind since he vowed his brother's murder immediately
after his father's death, [Gen 27:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#041).
Note, God has many ways of preventing bad men from doing the mischief
they intended; he can either tie their hands or turn their hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 36](gen036)

</div>
