<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb003)  [Next](heb005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 4:0</span></span>

The apostle, having in the foregoing chapter set forth the sin and
punishment of the ancient Jews, proceeds in this, I. To declare that our
privileges by Christ under the gospel exceed the privileges of the
Jewish church under Moses, as a reason why we should make a right
improvement of them ([Heb 4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)). II.
He assigns the cause why the ancient Hebrews did not profit by their
religious privileges ([Heb 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002)). Then,
II. Confirms the privileges of those who believe, and the misery of
those who continue in unbelief ([Heb
4:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003)). IV. Concludes with proper and
powerful arguments and motives to faith and obedience.

[Hebrews 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 4:1</span></span>

Here, I. The apostle declares that our privileges by Christ under the
gospel are not only as great, but greater than those enjoyed under the
Mosaic law. He specifies this, that we have a promise left us of
entering into his rest; that is, of entering into a covenant-relation to
Christ, and a state of communion with God through Christ, and of growing
up therein, till we are made perfect in glory. We have discoveries of
this rest, and proposals, and the best directions how we may attain unto
it. This promise of spiritual rest is a promise left us by the Lord
Jesus Christ in his last will and testament, as a precious legacy. Our
business is to see to it that we be the legatees, that we lay our claim
to that rest and freedom from the dominion of sin, Satan, and the flesh,
by which the souls of men are kept in servitude and deprived of the true
rest of the soul, and may be also set free from the yoke of the law and
all the toilsome ceremonies and services of it, and may enjoy peace with
God in his ordinances and providences, and in our own consciences, and
so have the prospect and earnest of perfect and everlasting rest in
heaven.

II\. He demonstrates the truth of his assertion, that we have as great
advantages as they. For says he ([Heb
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002)), To us was the gospel preached as
well as unto them; the same gospel for substance was preached under both
Testaments, though not so clearly; not in so comfortable a manner under
the Old as under the New. The best privileges the ancient Jews had were
their gospel privileges; the sacrifices and ceremonies of the Old
Testament were the gospel of that dispensation; and, whatever was
excellent in it, was the respect it had to Christ. Now, if this was
their highest privilege, we are not inferior to them; for we have the
gospel as well as they, and in greater purity and perspicuity than they
had.

III\. He again assigns the reason why so few of the ancient Jews
profited by that dispensation of the gospel which they enjoyed, and that
was their want of faith: The word preached did not profit them because
it was not mixed with faith in those that heard him, [Heb
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002). Observe, 1. The word is preached
to us that we may profit by it, that we may gain spiritual riches by it;
it is a price put into our hands to get wisdom, the rich endowment of
the soul. 2. There have been in all ages a great many unprofitable
hearers; many who seem to deal much in sermons, in hearing the word of
God, but gain nothing to their souls thereby; and those who are not
gainers by hearing are great losers. 3. That which is at the bottom of
all our unprofitableness under the word is our unbelief. We do not mix
faith with what we hear; it is faith in the hearer that is the life of
the word. Though the preacher believes the gospel, and endeavours to mix
faith with his preaching, and to speak as one who has believed and so
spoken, yet, if the hearers have not faith in their souls to mix with
the word, they will be never the better for it. This faith must mingle
with every word, and be in act and exercise while we are hearing; and,
when we have heard the word, assenting to the truth of it, approving of
it, accepting the mercy offered, applying the word to ourselves with
suitable affections, then we shall find great profit and gain by the
word preached.

IV\. On these considerations the apostle grounds his repeated and
earnest caution and counsel that those who enjoy the gospel should
maintain a holy fear and jealousy over themselves, lest latent unbelief
should rob them of the benefit of the word, and of that spiritual rest
which is discovered and tendered in the gospel: Let us fear lest, a
promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem
to come short of it, [Heb 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001).
Observe, 1. Grace and glory are attainable by all under the gospel:
there is an offer, and a promise to those who shall accept the offer. 2.
Those who may attain them may also fall short. Those who may attain them
may also fall short. Those who might have attained salvation by faith
may fall short by unbelief. 3. It is a dreadful thing so much as to seem
to fall short of the gospel salvation, to seem so to themselves, to lose
their comfortable hope; and to seem so to others, so losing the honour
of their holy profession. But, if it be so dreadful to seem to fall
short of this rest, it is much more dreadful really to fall short. Such
a disappointment must be fatal. 4. One good means to prevent either our
real falling short or seeming to fall short is to maintain a holy and
religious fear lest we should fall short. This will make us vigilant and
diligent, sincere and serious; this fear will put us upon examining our
faith and exercising it; whereas presumption is the high road to ruin.

V. The apostle confirms the happiness of all those who truly believe the
gospel; and this he does,

1\. By asserting so positively the truth of it, from the experience of
himself and others: "We, who have believed, do enter into rest, [Heb
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003). We enter into a blessed union
with Christ, and into a communion with God through Christ; in this state
we actually enjoy many sweet communications of pardon of sin, peace of
conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, increase of grace and earnests of
glory, resting from the servitude of sin, and reposing ourselves in God
till we are prepared to rest with him in heaven."

2\. He illustrates and confirms it that those who believe are thus
happy, and do enter into rest. (1.) From God's finishing his work of
creation, and so entering into his rest ([Heb
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003), [Heb
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#004)), appointing our first parents to
rest the seventh day, to rest in God. Now as God finished his work, and
then rested from it, and acquiesced in it, so he will cause those who
believe to finish their work, and then to enjoy their rest. (2.) From
God's continuing the observance of the sabbath, after the fall, and the
revelation of a Redeemer. They were to keep the seventh day a holy
sabbath to the Lord, therein praising him who had raised them up out of
nothing by creating power, and praying to him that he would create them
anew by his Spirit of grace, and direct their faith to the promised
Redeemer and restorer of all things, by which faith they find rest in
their souls. (3.) From God's proposing Canaan as a typical rest for the
Jews who believed: and as those who did believe, Caleb and Joshua, did
actually enter into Canaan; so those who now believe shall enter into
rest. (4.) From the certainty of another rest besides that seventh day
of rest instituted and observed both before and after the fall, and
besides that typical Canaan-rest which most of the Jews fell short of by
unbelief; for the Psalmist has spoken of another day and another rest,
whence it is evident that there is a more spiritual and excellent
sabbath remaining for the people of God than that into which Joshua led
the Jews (v. 6-9), and this rest remaining, \[1.\] A rest of grace, and
comfort, and holiness, in the gospel state. This is the rest wherewith
the Lord Jesus, our Joshua, causes weary souls and awakened consciences
to rest, and this is the refreshing. \[2.\] A rest in glory, the
everlasting sabbatism of heaven, which is the repose and perfection of
nature and grace too, where the people of God shall enjoy the end of
their faith and the object of all their desires. (5.) This is further
proved from the glorious forerunners who have actually taken possession
of this rest - God and Christ. It is certain that God, after the
creating of the world in six days, entered into his rest; and it is
certain that Christ, when he had finished the work of our redemption,
entered into his rest; and these were not only examples, but earnests,
that believers shall enter into their rest: He that hath entered into
rest hath also ceased from his own works as God did from his, [Heb
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#010). Every true believer hath ceased
from his own works of righteousness, and from the burdensome works of
the law, as God and Christ have ceased from their works of creation and
redemption.

VI\. The apostle confirms the misery of those who do not believe; they
shall never enter into this spiritual rest, either of grace here or
glory hereafter. This is as certain as the word and oath of God can make
it. As sure as God has entered into his rest, so sure it is that
obstinate unbelievers shall be excluded. As sure as the unbelieving Jews
fell in the wilderness, and never reached the promised land, so sure it
is that unbelievers shall fall into destruction, and never reach heaven.
As sure as Joshua, the great captain of the Jews, could not give them
possession of Canaan because of their unbelief, notwithstanding his
eminent valour and conduct, so sure it is that even Jesus himself, and
captain of our salvation, notwithstanding all that fulness of grace and
strength that dwells in him, will not, cannot, give to final unbelievers
either spiritual or eternal rest: it remains only for the people of God;
others by their sin abandon themselves to eternal restlessness.

[Hebrews 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 4:11</span></span>

In this latter part of the chapter the apostle concludes, first, with a
serious repeated exhortation, and then with proper and powerful motives.

I. Here we have a serious exhortation: Let us labour therefore to enter
into that rest, [Heb 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011). Observe, 1.
The end proposed - rest spiritual and eternal, the rest of grace here
and glory hereafter - in Christ on earth, with Christ in heaven. 2. The
way to this end prescribed-labour, diligent labour; this is the only way
to rest; those who will not work now shall not rest hereafter. After due
and diligent labour, sweet and satisfying rest shall follow; and labour
now will make that rest more pleasant when it comes. The sleep of the
labouring man is sweet, [Ecc 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#012). Let
us therefore labour, let us all agree and be unanimous in this, and let
us quicken one another, and call upon one another to this diligence. It
is the truest act of friendship, when we see our fellow-christians
loiter, to call upon them to mind their business and labour at it in
earnest. "Come, Sirs, let us all go to work; why do we sit still? Why do
we loiter? Come, let us labour; now is our working time, our rest
remains." Thus should Christians call upon themselves and one another to
be diligent in duty; and so much the more as we see the day approaching.

II\. Here we have proper and powerful motives to make the advice
effectual, which are drawn,

1\. From the dreadful example of those who have already perished by
unbelief: Lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief. To have
seen so many fall before us will be a great aggravation of our sin, if
we will not take warning by them: their ruin calls loudly upon us; their
lost and restless souls cry to us from their torments, that we do not,
by sinning as they did, make ourselves miserable as they are.

2\. From the great help and advantage we may have from the word of God
to strengthen our faith, and excite our diligence, that we may obtain
this rest: The word of God is quick and powerful, [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012). By the word of God we may
understand either the essential or the written word: the essential Word,
that in the beginning was with God, and was God ([Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)), the Lord Jesus Christ, and
indeed what is said in this verse is true concerning him; but most
understand it of the written word, the holy scriptures, which are the
word of God. Now of this word it is said, (1.) That is quick; it is very
lively and active, in all its efforts, in seizing the conscience of the
sinner, in cutting him to the heart, and in comforting him and binding
up the wounds of the soul. Those know not the word of God who call it a
dead letter; it is quick, compared to the light, and nothing quicker
than the light; it is not only quick, but quickening; it is a vital
light; it is a living word, zōn. Saints die, and sinners die; but the
word of God lives. All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof as the
flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth
away, but the word of the Lord endureth for ever, [Pe1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024), [Pe1
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025). Your fathers, where are they?
And the prophets, do they live for ever? But my words, which I commanded
the prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? [Zac
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#005), [Zac
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#006). (2.) It is powerful. When God
sets it home by his Spirit, it convinces powerfully, converts
powerfully, and comforts powerfully. It is so powerful as to pull down
strong holds ([Co2 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004), [Co2
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)), to raise the dead, to make the
deaf to hear, the blind to see, the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk.
It is powerful to batter down Satan's kingdom, and to set up the kingdom
of Christ upon the ruins thereof. (3.) It is sharper than any two-edged
sword; it cuts both ways; it is the sword of the Spirit, [Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017). It is the two-edged sword that
cometh out of the mouth of Christ, [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016). It is sharper than any two-edged
sword, for it will enter where no other sword can, and make a more
critical dissection: it pierces to the dividing asunder of the soul and
the spirit, the soul and its habitual prevailing temper; it makes a soul
that has been a long time of a proud spirit to be humble, of a perverse
spirit to be meek and obedient. Those sinful habits that have become as
it were natural to the soul, and rooted deeply in it, and become in a
manner one with it, are separated and cut off by this sword. It cuts off
ignorance from the understanding, rebellion from the will, and enmity
from the mind, which, when carnal, is enmity itself against God. This
sword divides between the joints and the marrow, the most secret, close,
and intimate parts of the body; this sword can cut off the lusts of the
flesh as well as the lusts of the mind, and make men willing to undergo
the sharpest operation for the mortifying of sin. (4.) It is a discerner
of the thoughts and intents of the heart, even the most secret and
remote thoughts and designs. It will discover to men the variety of
their thoughts and purposes, the vileness of them, the bad principles
they are actuated by, the sinister and sinful ends they act to. The word
will turn the inside of a sinner out, and let him see all that is in his
heart. Now such a word as this must needs be a great help to our faith
and obedience.

3\. From the perfections of the Lord Jesus Christ, both of his person
and office.

(1.) His person, particularly his omniscience: Neither is there any
creature that is not manifest in his sight, [Heb
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013). This is agreeable to what Christ
speaks of himself: All the churches shall know that I am he that
searches the reins and hearts, [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023). None of the creatures can be
concealed from Christ; none of the creatures of God, for Christ is the
Creator of them all; and there are none of the motions and workings of
our heads and hearts (which may be called creatures of our own) but what
are open and manifest to him with whom we have to do as the object of
our worship, and the high priest of our profession. He, by his
omniscience, cuts up the sacrifice we bring to him, that it may be
presented to the Father. Now as the high priest inspected the sacrificed
beasts, cut them up to the back-bone to see whether they were sound at
heart, so all things are thus dissected, and lie open to the piercing
eye of our great high priest. An he who now tries our sacrifices will at
length, as Judge, try our state. We shall have to do with him as one who
will determine our everlasting state. Some read the words, to whom with
us there is an account or reckoning. Christ has an exact account of us
all. He has accounted for all who believe on him; and he will account
with all: our accounts are before him. This omniscience of Christ, and
the account we owe of ourselves to him, should engage us to persevere in
faith and obedience till he has perfected all our affairs.

(2.) We have an account of the excellency and perfection of Christ, as
to his office, and this particular office of our high priest. The
apostle first instructs Christians in the knowledge of their high
priest, what kind of high priest he is, and then puts them in mind of
the duty they owe on this account.

\[1.\] What kind of high priest Christ is ([Heb
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)): Seeing we have such a high
priest; that is, First, A great high priest, much greater than Aaron, or
any of the priests of his order. The high priests under the law were
accounted great and venerable person; but they were but faint types and
shadows of Christ. The greatness of our high priest is set forth, 1. By
his having passed into the heavens. The high priest under the law, once
a year, went out of the people's sight within the veil, into the holiest
of all, where were the sacred signals of the presence of God; but Christ
once for all has passed into the heavens, to take the government of all
upon him, to send the Spirit to prepare a place for his people, and to
make intercession for them. Christ executed one part of his priesthood
on earth, in dying for us; the other he executes in heaven, by pleading
the cause, and presenting the offerings, of his people. 2. The greatness
of Christ is set forth by his name, Jesus - a physician and a Saviour,
and one of a divine nature, the Son of God by eternal generation; and
therefore having divine perfection, able to save to the uttermost all
who come to God by him. Secondly, He is not only a great, but a gracious
high priest, merciful, compassionate, and sympathizing with his people:
We have not a high priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, [Heb 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015). Though he is
so great, and so far above us, yet he is very kind, and tenderly
concerned for us. He is touched with the feeling of our infirmities in
such a manner as none else can be; for he was himself tried with all the
afflictions and troubles that are incident to our nature in its fallen
state: and this not only that he might be able to satisfy for us, but to
sympathize with us. But then, Thirdly, He is a sinless high priest: He
was in all things tempted as we are, yet without sin. He was tempted by
Satan, but he came off without sin. We seldom meet with temptations but
they give us some shock. We are apt to give back, though we do not
yield; but our great high priest came off clear in his encounter with
the devil, who could neither find any sin in him nor fix any stain upon
him. He was tried severely by the Father. It pleased the Lord to bruise
him; and yet he sinned not, either in thought, word, or deed. He had
done no violence, neither was there any deceit in his mouth. He was
holy, harmless, and undefiled; and such a high priest became us. Having
thus told us what a one our high priest is, the apostle proceeds to show
us,

\[2.\] How we should demean ourselves towards him. First, Let us hold
fast our profession of faith in him, [Heb
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014). Let us never deny him, never be
ashamed of him before men. Let us hold fast the enlightening doctrines
of Christianity in our heads, the enlivening principles of it in our
hearts, the open profession of it in our lips, and our practical and
universal subjection to it in our lives. Observe here, 1. We ought to be
possessed of the doctrines, principles, and practice, of the Christian
life. 2. When we are so, we may be in danger of losing our hold, from
the corruption of our hearts, the temptations of Satan, and the
allurements of this evil world. 3. The excellency of the high priest of
our profession would make our apostasy from him most heinous and
inexcusable; it would be the greatest folly and the basest ingratitude.
4. Christians must not only set our well, but they must hold out: those
who endure to the end will be saved, and none but they. Secondly, We
should encourage ourselves, by the excellency of our high priest, to
come boldly to the throne of grace, [Heb
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016). Here observe, 1. There is a
throne of grace set up, a way of worship instituted, in which God may
with honour meet poor sinners, and treat with them, and they may with
hope draw night to him, repenting and believing. God might have set up a
tribunal of strict and inexorable justice, dispensing death, the wages
of sin, to all who were convened before it; but he has chosen to set up
a throne of grace. A throne speaks authority, and bespeaks awe and
reverence. A throne of grace speaks great encouragement even to the
chief of sinners. There grace reigns, and acts with sovereign freedom,
power, and bounty. 2. It is our duty and interest to be often found
before this throne of grace, waiting on the Lord in all the duties of
his worship, private and public. It is good for us to be there. 3. Our
business and errand at the throne of grace should be that we may obtain
mercy and find grace to help in time of need. Mercy and grace are the
things we want, mercy to pardon all our sins and grace to purify our
souls. 4. Besides the daily dependence we have upon God for present
supplies, there are some seasons in which we shall most sensibly need
the mercy and grace of God, and we should lay up prayers against such
seasons - times of temptation, either by adversity or prosperity, and
especially a dying time: we should every day put up a petition for mercy
in our last day. The Lord grant unto us that we may find mercy of the
Lord at that day, [Ti2 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#018). 5. In all
our approaches to this throne of grace for mercy, we should come with a
humble freedom and boldness, with a liberty of spirit and a liberty of
speech; we should ask in faith, nothing doubting; we should come with a
Spirit of adoption, as children to a reconciled God and Father. We are
indeed to come with reverence and godly fear, but not with terror and
amazement; not as if we were dragged before the tribunal of justice, but
kindly invited to the mercy-seat, where grace reigns, and loves to exert
and exalt itself towards us. 6. The office of Christ, as being our high
priest, and such a high priest, should be the ground of our confidence
in all our approaches to the throne of grace. Had we not a Mediator, we
could have no boldness in coming to God; for we are guilty and polluted
creatures. All we do is polluted; we cannot go into the presence of God
alone; we must either go in the hand of a Mediator or our hearts and our
hopes will fail us. We have boldness to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus. He is our Advocate, and, while he pleads for his people,
he pleads with the price in his hand, by which he purchased all that our
souls want or can desire.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 5](heb005)

</div>
