<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb007)  [Next](heb009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 8:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle pursues his former subject, the priesthood
of Christ. And, I. He sums up what he had already said ([Heb
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001), [Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002)). II. He sets before them the
necessary parts of the priestly office ([Heb
8:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#003)). And, III. Largely illustrates
the excellency of the priesthood of Christ, by considering the
excellency of that new dispensation or covenant for which Christ is the
Mediator ([Heb 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006) to the end).

[Hebrews 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 8:1</span></span>

Here is, I. A summary recital of what had been said before concerning
the excellency of Christ's priesthood, showing what we have in Christ,
where he now resides, and what sanctuary he is the minister of, [Heb
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001), [Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002). Observe, 1. What we have in
Christ; we have a high priest, and such a high priest as no other people
ever had, no age of the world, or of the church, ever produced; all
others were but types and shadows of this high priest. He is adequately
fitted and absolutely sufficient to all the intents and purposes of a
high priest, both with respect to the honour of God and the happiness of
men and himself; the great honour of all those who have an interest in
him. 2. Where he now resides: He sits on the right hand of the throne of
the Majesty on high, that is, of the glorious God of heaven. There the
Mediator is placed, and he is possessed of all authority and power both
in heaven and upon earth. This is the reward of his humiliation. This
authority he exercises for the glory of his Father, for his own honour,
and for the happiness of all who belong to him; and he will by his
almighty power bring every one of them in their own order to the right
hand of God in heaven, as members of his mystical body, that where he is
they may be also. 3. What is that sanctuary of which he is a minister:
Of the true tabernacle, which the Lord hath pitched, and not man, [Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002). The tabernacle which was pitched
by man, according to the appointment of God. There was an outer part, in
which was the altar where they were to offer their sacrifices, which
typified Christ dying; and there was an interior part within the veil,
which typified Christ interceding for the people in heaven. Now this
tabernacle Christ never entered into; but, having finished the work of
satisfaction in the true tabernacle of his own body, he is now a
minister of the sanctuary, the holy of holies, the true tabernacle in
heaven, there taking care of his people's affairs, interceding with God
for them, that their sins may be pardoned and their persons and services
accepted, through the merit of his sacrifice. He is not only in heaven
enjoying great dominion and dignity, but, as the high priest of his
church, executing this office for them all in general, and every member
of the church in particular.

II\. The apostle sets before the Hebrews the necessary parts of Christ's
priesthood, or what it was that belonged to that office, in conformity
to what every high priest is ordained to, [Heb
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#003), [Heb
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#004). 1. Every high priest is ordained
to offer gifts and sacrifices. Whatever was brought by the people to be
presented to God, whether expiatory sacrifices, or peace-offerings, or
thank-offerings, must be offered by the priest, who was to expiate their
guilt by the blood of the sacrifice, and perfume their gifts and
services by his holy incense, to render their persons and performances
typically acceptable; so then it necessarily belongs to the priesthood
of Christ that he should have somewhat to offer; and he, as the
antitype, had himself to offer, his human nature upon the altar of his
divine nature, as the great atoning sacrifice that finished
transgression, and made an end of sin once for all; and he has the
incense of his own righteousness and merits too to offer with all that
his people offer up to God by him, to render them acceptable. We must
not dare to approach to God, or to present any thing to him, but in and
through Christ, depending upon his merits and mediation; for if we are
accepted, it is in the Beloved. 2. Christ must now execute his
priesthood in heaven, in the holy of holies, the true tabernacle which
the Lord hath fixed. Thus the type must be fully answered; having
finished the work of sacrificing here, he must go into heaven, to
present his righteousness and to make intercession there. For, (1.) If
Christ were on earth, he would not be a priest ([Heb
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#004)), that is, not according to the
Levitical law, as not being of the line of that priesthood; and so long
as that priesthood continued there must be a strict regard paid to the
divine institution in everything. (2.) All the services of the priest,
under the law, as well as every thing in that tabernacle which was
framed according to the pattern in the mount, were only exemplars and
shadows of heavenly things, [Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005).
Christ is the substance and end of the law for righteousness. Something
therefore there must be in Christ's priesthood that answers to the high
priest's entering within the veil to make intercession, without which he
could not have been a perfect priest; and what is this but the ascension
of Christ into heaven, and his appearance there in the sight of God for
his people, to present their prayers, and plead their cause? So that, if
he had still continued on earth, he could not have been a perfect
priest; and an imperfect one he could not be.

[Hebrews 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 8:6</span></span>

In this part of the chapter, the apostle illustrates and confirms the
superior excellency of the priesthood of Christ above that of Aaron,
from the excellency of that covenant, or that dispensation of the
covenant of grace, of which Christ was the Mediator ([Heb
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006)): his ministry is more excellent,
by how much he is the Mediator of a better covenant. The body and soul
too of all divinity (as some observe) consist very much in rightly
distinguishing between the two covenants - the covenant of works and the
covenant of grace; and between the two dispensations of the covenant of
grace - that under the Old Testament and that under the New. Now
observe,

I. What is here said of the old covenant, or rather of the old
dispensation of the covenant of grace: of this it is said, 1. That it
was made with the fathers of the Jewish nation at mount Sinai ([Heb
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009)), and Moses was the Mediator of
that covenant, when God took them by the hand, to lead them out of the
land of Egypt, which intimates the great affection, condescension, and
tender care of God towards them. 2. That this covenant was not found
faultless ([Heb 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007), [Heb
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008)); it was a dispensation of
darkness and dread, tending to bondage, and only a schoolmaster to bring
us to Christ; it was perfect in its kind, and fitted to answer its end,
but very imperfect in comparison of the gospel. 3. That it was not sure
or stedfast; for the Jews continued not in that covenant, and the Lord
regarded them not, [Heb 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009). They
dealt ungratefully with their God, and cruelly with themselves, and fell
under God's displeasure. God will regard those who remain in his
covenant, but will reject those who cast away his yoke from them. 4.
That it is decayed, grown old, and vanisheth away, [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013). It is antiquated, canceled, out
of date, of no more use in gospel times than candles are when the sun
has risen. Some think the covenant of peculiarity did not quite decay
till the destruction of Jerusalem, though it was forfeited at the death
of Christ, and was made old, and was now to vanish and perish, and the
Levitical priesthood vanished with it.

II\. What is here said of the New Testament dispensation, to prove the
superior excellency of Christ's ministry. It is said,

1\. That it is a better covenant ([Heb
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006)), a more clear and comfortable
dispensation and discovery of the grace of God to sinners, bringing in
holy light and liberty to the soul. It is without fault, well ordered in
all things. It requires nothing but what it promises grace to perform.
It accepts of godly sincerity, accounting it gospel perfection. Every
transgression does not turn us out of covenant; all is put into a good
and safe hand.

2\. That it is established upon better promises, more clear and express,
more spiritual, more absolute. The promises of spiritual and eternal
blessings are in this covenant positive and absolute; the promises of
temporal blessings are with a wise and kind proviso, as far as shall be
for God's glory and his people's good. This covenant contains in it
promises of assistance and acceptance in duty, promises of progress and
perseverance in grace and holiness, of bliss and glory in heaven, which
were more obscurely shadowed forth by the promises of the land of
Canaan, a type of heaven.

3\. It is a new covenant, even that new covenant that God long ago
declared he would make with the house of Israel, that is, all the Israel
of God; this was promised in [Jer
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031), [Jer
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032), and accomplished in Christ.
This will always be a new covenant, in which all who truly take hold of
it shall be always found preserved by the power of God. It is God's
covenant; his mercy, love, and grace moved for it; his wisdom devised
it; his Son purchased it; his wisdom devised it; his Son purchased it;
his Spirit brings souls into it, and builds them up in it.

4\. The articles of this covenant are very extraordinary, which are
sealed between God and his people by baptism and the Lord's supper;
whereby they bind themselves to their part, and God assures them he will
do his part; and his is the main and principal part, on which his people
depend for grace and strength to do theirs. Here,

(1.) God articles with his people that he will put his laws into their
minds and write them in their hearts, [Heb
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010). He once wrote his laws to them,
now he will write his laws in them; that is, he will give them
understanding to know and to believe his law; he will give them memories
to retain them; he will give them hearts to love them and consciences to
recognize them; he will give them courage to profess them and power to
put them in practice; the whole habit and frame of their souls shall be
a table and transcript of the law of God. This is the foundation of the
covenant; and, when this is laid, duty will be done wisely, sincerely,
readily, easily, resolutely, constantly, and comfortably.

(2.) He articles with them to take them into a near and very honourable
relation to himself. \[1.\] He will be to them a God; that is, he will
be all that to them, and do all that for them, that God can be and do.
Nothing more can be said in a thousand volumes than is comprehended in
these few words: I will be a God to them. \[2.\] They shall be to him a
people, to love, honour, observe, and obey him in all things; complying
with his cautions, conforming to his commands, comporting with his
providences, copying out his example, taking complacency in his favour.
This those must do and will do who have God for their God; this they are
bound to do as their part of the contract; this they shall do, for God
will enable them to do it, as an evidence that he is their God and that
they are his people; for it is God himself who first founds the
relation, and then fills it up with grace suitable and sufficient, and
helps them in their measure to fill it up with love and duty; so that
God engages both for himself and them.

(3.) He articles with them that they shall grow more and more acquainted
with their God ([Heb 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#011)): They shall
all know me from the least to the greatest, insomuch that there shall
not be so much need of one neighbour teaching another the knowledge of
God. Here observe, \[1.\] In the want of better instruction, one
neighbour should be teaching another to know the Lord, as they have
ability and opportunity for it. \[2.\] This private instruction shall
not be so necessary under the New Testament as it was under the Old. The
old dispensation was shadowy, dark, ritual, and less understood; their
priests preached but seldom, and but a few at a time, and the Spirit of
God was more sparingly given out. But under the new dispensation there
shall be such abundance of public qualified preachers of the gospel, and
dispensers of ordinances statedly in the solemn assemblies, and so great
a flocking to them, as doves to their windows, and such a plentiful
effusion of the Spirit of God to make the ministration of the gospel
effectual, that there shall be a mighty increase and spreading of
Christian knowledge in persons of all sorts, of each sex, and of all
ages. O that this promise might be fulfilled in our days, that the hand
of God may be with his ministers, that a great number may believe and be
turned to the Lord!

(4.) God articles with them about the pardon of their sins, as what
always accompanies the true knowledge of God ([Heb
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012)): For I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, etc. Observe, \[1.\] The freeness of this pardon. It
does not result from merit in man, but from mercy in God; he pardons for
his own name's sake. \[2.\] The fullness of this pardon; it extends to
their unrighteousness, sins, and iniquities; to all kinds of sin, to
sins highly aggravated. \[3.\] The fixedness of this pardon. It is so
final and so fixed that God will remember their sins no more; he will
not recall his pardon; he will not only forgive their sins, but forget
them, treat them as if he had forgotten them. This pardoning mercy is
connected with all other spiritual mercies. Unpardoned sin prevents
mercy, and pulls down judgments; but the pardon of sin prevents
judgment, and opens a wide door to all spiritual blessings; it is the
effect of that mercy that is from everlasting, and the earnest of that
mercy that shall be to everlasting. This is the excellency of the new
dispensation, and these are the articles of it; and therefore we have no
reason to repine, but great reason to rejoice that the former
dispensation is antiquated and has vanished away.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 9](heb009)

</div>
