<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos007)  [Next](hos009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 8:0</span></span>

This chapter, as that before, divides itself into the sins and
punishments of Israel; every verse almost declares both, and all to
bring them to repentance. When they saw the malignant nature of their
sin, in the descriptions of that, they could not but be convinced now
much it was their duty to repent of what was so bad in itself; and when
they saw the mischievous consequences of their sin, in the predictions
of them, they could not but see how much it was their interest to repent
for the preventing of them. I. The sin of Israel is here set forth, 1.
In many general expressions ([Hos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001),
[Hos 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#003), [Hos
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#012), [Hos
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014)). 2. In many particular
instances; setting up kings without God ([Hos
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004)), setting up idols against God
([Hos 8:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004), [Hos
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#011)), and courting alliances with the
neighbouring nations, ([Hos 8:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#008)).
3. In this aggravation of it, that they still kept up a profession of
religion and relation to God ([Hos
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#002), [Hos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013), [Hos
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014)). II. The punishment of Israel is
here set forth as answering to the sin. God would bring an enemy upon
them ([Hos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001), [Hos
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#003)). All their projects should be
blasted ([Hos 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007)). Their confidence
both in their idols and in their foreign alliances should disappoint
them ([Hos 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#006), [Hos
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#008), [Hos
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#010)). Their strength at home should
fail them ([Hos 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014)). Their
sacrifices should have no reckoning made of them, and their sins should
have a reckoning made for them ([Hos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013)).

[Hosea 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 8:1</span></span>

The reproofs and threatenings here are introduced with an order to the
prophet to set the trumpet to his mouth ([Hos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001)), thus to call a solemn assembly,
that all might take notice of what he had to deliver and take warning by
it. He must sound an alarm, must, in God's name, proclaim war with this
rebellious nation. An enemy is coming with speed and fury to seize their
land, and he must awaken them to expect it. Thus the prophet must do the
part of a watchman, that was by sound of trumpet to call the besieged to
stand to their arms, when he saw the besiegers making their attack, [Eze
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#003). The prophet must lift up his
voice like a trumpet ([Isa 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)), and
the people must hearken to the sound of the trumpet, [Jer
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017). Now,

I. Here is a general charge drawn up against them as sinners, as rebels
and traitors against their sovereign Lord. 1. They have transgressed my
covenant, [Hos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001). They have not only
transgressed the command (every sin does that), but they have
transgressed the covenant; they have been guilty of such sins as break
the original contract; they have revolted from their allegiance, and
violated the marriage-covenant by their spiritual whoredom; they have,
in effect, declared that they will be no longer God's people, nor take
him for their God; that is transgressing the covenant. They have not
only done foolishly, but have dealt deceitfully. 2. They have trespassed
against my law in many particular instances. God's law is the rule by
which we are to walk; and this is the malignity of sin, that it
trespasses upon the bounds set us by that law. 3. They have cast off the
thing that is good. They have put away and rejected good, that is, God
himself; so some understand it, and very fitly. He is good, and does
good, and is our goodness. There is none good but one, that is God, the
fountain of all good. They have cast him off, as not desiring to have
any thing more to do with him. God was abandoning them to ruin, and here
gives the reason for it. Note, God never casts off any till they first
cast him off. Or, as we read it, They have cast off the thing that is
good; they have cast off the service and worship of God, which is, in
effect, casting God off. They have cast off that which denominates men
good; they have cast off the fear of God, and the regard of man, and all
sense of virtue and honesty. Observe, They have transgressed my
covenant; it has come to this at last; for they trespassed against my
law. Breaking the command made way for breaking the covenant; and they
did that, for they cast off that which was good; there it began first.
They left off to be wise and to do good, and then they went all to
naught, [Psa 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#003). See the method of
apostasy; men first cast off that which is good; then those omissions
make way for commissions; and frequent actual transgressions of God's
law bring men at length to an habitual renunciation of his covenant.
When men cast off praying, and hearing, and sabbath-sanctification, and
other things that are good, they are in the high road to a total
forsaking of God.

II\. Here are general threatenings of wrath and ruin for their sin: The
enemy shall come as an eagle against the house of the Lord, and ([Hos
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#003)) shall pursue him. If by the house
of the Lord we understand the temple at Jerusalem, by the eagle that
comes against it we must suppose to be meant either Sennacherib, who had
taken all the fenced cities of Judah, laid siege to Jerusalem (and, no
doubt, aimed at the house of the Lord, to lay that waste, as he had done
the temples of the gods of other nations), or Nebuchadnezzar, who burnt
the temple and made a prey of the vessels of the temple. But, if we make
it to point at the destruction of the kingdom of the ten tribes by the
king of Assyria, we must reckon it is the body of that people which as
Israelites, to whom pertained the adoption, the glory, and the
covenants, is here called the house of the Lord. They thought their
being so would be their protection; but the prophet is directed to tell
them that now they had lost the life and spirit of their religion,
though they still retained the name and form of it, they were but as a
carcase to which the eagles and other birds of prey should be gathered
together. The enemy shall pursue them as an eagle, so swiftly, so
strongly, so furiously. Note, Those who break their covenant of
friendship with God expose themselves to the enmity of all about them,
to whom they make themselves a cheap and easy prey; and their having
been the house of the Lord, and his living temples, will be no excuse
nor refuge to them. See [Amo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002).

III\. Here is the people's hypocritical claim of relation to God, when
they were in trouble and distress ([Hos
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#002)): Israel shall cry unto me; when
either they are threatened with these judgments, and would plead an
exemption, or when the judgments are inflicted on them and they apply to
God for relief, pouring out a prayer when God's chastening is upon them,
they will plead that among them God is known and his name is great ([Psa
76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)) and in their distress will
pretend to that knowledge of God's ways which in their prosperity they
desired not, but despised. They will then cry unto God, will call him
their God, and (as impudent beggars) will tell him they are well
acquainted with him, and have known him long. Note, There are many who
in works deny God, and disown him, yet, to serve a turn, will profess
that they know him, that they know more of him than some of their
neighbours do. But what stead will it stand a man in to be able to say,
My God, I know thee, when he cannot say, "My God, I love thee," and "My
God, I serve thee, and cleave to thee only?"

IV\. Here is the prophet's expostulation with them, in God's name ([Hos
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#005)): How long will it be ere they
attain to innocency? It is not meant of absolute innocency (that is what
the guilty can never attain to); but how long will it be ere they repent
and reform, ere they become innocent in this matter, and free from the
sin of idolatry? They are wedded to their idols; how long will it be ere
they are weaned from them, ere they are able to get clear of them? so it
might be rendered. This intimates that custom in sin makes it very
difficult for men to part with it. It is hard to cleanse from that
filthiness, either of flesh or spirit, which has been long wallowed in.
But God speaks as if he thought the time long till sinners cast away
their iniquities and come to live a new life. He complains of their
obstinacy; it is that which keeps his anger against them burning, which
would soon be turned away if they did but attain to innocency from those
sins that kindled it. They in trouble cry, How long will it be ere God
return to us in a way of mercy? but they do not hear him ask, How long
will it be ere they return to God in a way of duty?

V. Here are some particular sins which they are charged with, are
convicted of the folly of, and warned of the fatal consequences of, and
for which God's anger is kindled against them.

1\. In their civil affairs. They set up kings without God, and in
contempt of him, [Hos 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004). So they did
when they rejected Samuel, in whom the Lord was their king, and chose
Saul, that they might be like the nations. So they did when they
revolted from their allegiance to the house of David, and set up
Jeroboam, wherein, though they fulfilled God's secret counsel, yet they
aimed not at his glory, nor consulted his oracle, nor applied to him by
prayer for direction, nor had any regard to his providence, but were led
by their own humour and hurried on by the impetus of their own passions.
So they did now about the time when Hosea prophesied, when it seems to
have grown fashionable to set up kings, and depose them again, according
as the contenders for the crown could make an interest, [Kg2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008), etc. Note, We cannot expect
comfort and success in our affairs when we go about them, and go on in
them, without consulting God and acknowledge not him in all our ways:
"They set up kings, and I knew it not, that is, I did not know it from
them, they did not ask counsel at my mouth, whether they might lawfully
do it or whether it would be best for them to do it, though they had
prophets and oracles with whom they might have advised." They looked not
to the Holy One of Israel, [Isa 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001).
Nor did the princes do as Jephthah, who, before he took upon him the
government, uttered all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh, [Jdg
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#011). Note, Those that are entrusted
with public concerns, and particularly with the election and nomination
of magistrates, ought to take God along with them therein, by desiring
his direction and designing his honour.

2\. In their religious matters they did much worse; for they set up
calves against God, in competition with him and contradiction to him.
"Of their silver and their gold which God gave them, and multiplied to
them, that they might serve and honour him with them, they have made
them idols." They called them gods ([Kg1
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#028), Behold thy gods, O Israel!) but
God calls them idols; the word signifies griefs, or troubles, because
they are offensive to God and will be ruining to those that worship
them. Their silver and their gold they have made to them idols; so the
words are, referring primarily to the images of their gods, which they
made of gold and silver, especially the golden calves at Dan and Bethel.
Idolaters spare no cost in worshipping their idols. But they are very
applicable to the spiritual idolatry of the covetous: Their silver and
their gold are the gods they place their happiness in, set their hearts
upon, to which they pay their homage, and in which they put their
confidence. Now, to show them the folly of their idolatry, he tells
them,

(1.) Whence their gods came. Trace them to their original, and they will
be found the creatures of their own fancies and the work of their own
hands, [Hos 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#006). The calf they
worshipped is here called the calf of Samaria, because it is probable
that when Samaria, in Ahab's time, became the metropolis of the kingdom,
a calf was set up there to be near the court, besides those at Dan and
Bethel, or perhaps one of those was removed thither; for those that are
for new gods will still be for newer. Now let them consider what this
god of theirs owed its rise and being to. \[1.\] To their own invention
and institution: From Israel was it also, not from the God of Israel (he
expressly forbade it), but from Israel; it was a device of their own
(some think), not borrowed from any of their neighbours, no, not from
the Egyptians, for, though they worshipped Apis in a living cow, they
never worshipped a golden calf; that was from Israel; it was their own
iniquity. Now could that be worthy of their worship which was a
contrivance of their own? It was from Israel, that is, the gold and
silver of which it was made were collected from the people of Israel by
a brief: it was a poor god that was framed by contribution. \[2.\] It
was owing to the skill and labour of the craftsman, [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015). The workmen made it, therefore
it is not God, [Hos 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#006). This is a
very cogent conclusive argument, and the inference so very plain that
one would think their own thoughts should have suggested it to them, so
as to make them ashamed of their idolatry. What can be more absurd than
for men to worship that as a god, giving being and good to them, which
they themselves gave being to (both matter and form), but could not give
life to? A made god is no God. This is a self-evident truth; and yet St.
Paul was accused as a criminal for preaching that those are no gods
which are made with hands, [Act 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#026).
And, here, this which should have turned them from their idols comes in
as a reason why they were inseparably wedded to them; therefore they
could not attain to innocency because it was from themselves; they were
willing to have gods of their own to do what they pleased with, that
they themselves might do what they pleased.

(2.) What their gods would come to. If they are not gods, they will not
last; nay, if they pretend to be gods, they will be reckoned with: The
calf of Samaria shall be broken to pieces, and those that would not
yield to the force of the former argument shall be convinced by this
that it is not God, but an unprofitable idol, as the Chaldee calls it.
It shall be broken to shivers, like a potter's vessel, though it be a
golden calf. It shall be chips or saw-dust; it shall be a spider's web;
so St. Jerome. It seems to allude to Moses's grinding to powder the
golden calf that was in his time. This shall be served as that was.
Sennacherib boasted what he had done to Samaria and her idols, [Isa
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#011). Note, Deifying any creature
makes way for the destruction of it. If they had made vessels and
ornaments for themselves of their silver and gold, they might have
remained; but, if they make gods of them, they shall be broken to
pieces.

(3.) What their gods would bring them to. The breaking of them to pieces
would be a disappointment to those who trusted in them. But that was not
all: They have made to themselves idols, that they may be cut off ([Hos
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004)), that their gold and silver,
which they so abused, may be cut off (so some take it), nay, that they
may themselves be cut off from God, from their own land, from the land
of the living. Their idolatry will as certainly end in their extirpation
as if they had purposely designed it. And, when this proves to be the
effect of their sin, what relief will they have from the gods wherein
they trusted? None at all: "Thy calf, O Samaria! has cast thee off; it
cannot give thee any help in thy distress, and the pleasure thou now
takest in it will vanish, and be no pleasure to thee." Those that were
justly sent to the gods whom they had chosen found them miserable
comforters, [Jdg 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#014). If men will
not quit the love and service of sin, yet they shall certainly lose all
the delights and profits of it. If Samaria had continued firm and
faithful to the God of Israel, he would have been a present powerful
help to her; but the calf she preferred before him was a broken reed.
The case will be the same with those that make their silver and their
gold their god. It will cast them off, and not profit them in the day of
wrath, [Eze 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#012). Note, Those that
suffer themselves to be deceived into any idolatries will certainly find
themselves deceived in them. Cardinal Wolsey owned that if he had served
his God as faithfully as he had served his prince he would not have cast
him off, as his prince did, in his old age. Their disappointment in
their idols is illustrated ([Hos 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007))
by a similitude which intimates both that and the destruction which God
brought upon them for their idolatry. \[1.\] They got no good to
themselves by worshipping idols: They have sown the wind. They have put
themselves to a great deal of trouble and expense to make and worship
their idols, have made a business of it as much as the husbandman does
of sowing his corn, in expectation of reaping some mighty advantage from
it, and that they should be as prosperous and victorious as the
neighbouring nations were, that worshipped idols. But it is all a cheat;
it is like sowing the wind, which can yield no increase; they labour in
vain, labour for the wind, [Ecc 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#016).
They take great pains to no purpose, and weary themselves for very
vanity, [Hab 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#013). Those that make an
idol of this world do so; they set their eyes on that which is not,
which, like the wind, makes a great noise, but has nothing substantial
in it. \[2.\] They brought ruin upon themselves by it: They shall reap
the whirlwind, a great whirlwind (so the word signifies), which shall
hurry them away and dash them to pieces. They not only have not their
false gods for them but they set the true God against them; their favour
will stand them in no more stead than the wind, but his wrath will do
them more mischief than a whirlwind. As a man sows, so shall he reap.
"If it may be supposed that a man should sow the wind, and cover it with
earth, or keep it there for a while penned up, what could he expect but
that it should be forced by its being shut up, and the accession of what
might increase its strength, to break forth again in greater quantities
with greater violence?" So Dr. Pocock. They promise themselves plenty,
peace, and victory, by worshipping idols, but their expectations come to
nothing. What they sow never comes up; it has no stalk, no blade, or, if
it have, the bud shall yield no meal; it shall be as the thin ears in
Pharaoh's dream, that were blasted with the east wind, and there was
nothing in them. Or if it yield, if they do prosper for a while in their
idolatrous courses, the strangers shall swallow it up; it shall be so
far from doing them any service that it shall be but as a bait to invite
strangers to invade them, and as a spoil to enrich those strangers and
enable them to do so much the more mischief. Note, The service of idols
is an unprofitable service, and the works of darkness are unfruitful;
nay, in the end they will be pernicious. [Rom
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021), The end of those things is
death. Those that sow iniquity reap vanity: nay, those that sow to the
flesh, reap corruption. The hopes of sinners will be cheats, and their
gains will be snares.

[Hosea 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 8:8</span></span>

It was the honour and happiness of Israel that they had but one God to
trust to and he all-sufficient in every strait, and but one God to
serve, and he well worthy of all their devotions. But it was their sin,
and folly, and shame, that they knew not when they were well off, that
they forsook their own mercies for lying vanities; for,

I. They multiplied their alliances ([Hos
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#009)): They have hired lovers, or (as
the margin reads it) they have hired loves. They were at great expense
to purchase the friendship of the nations about them, that otherwise had
no value nor affection at all for them, nor cared for having any thing
to do with them but only upon the Shechemites' principles - Shall not
their cattle and their substance be ours? [Gen
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#023). Had Israel maintained the
honour of their peculiarity, the surrounding nations would have
continued to admire them as a wise and understanding people; but, when
they profaned their own crown, their neighbours despised them, and they
had no interest in them further than they paid dearly for it. But those
surely have behaved ill among their neighbours who have no loves, no
lovers, but what they hire. See here, 1. The contempt that Israel lay
under among the nations ([Hos 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#008)):
Israel is swallowed up, devoured by strangers, their land eaten up ([Hos
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007)), and themselves too, and, being
impoverished, they have quite lost their credit and reputation, like a
merchant that has become a bankrupt, so that they are among the Gentiles
as a vessel wherein is no pleasure, a vessel of dishonour ([Ti2
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020)), a despised broken vessel, [Jer
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028). None of their neighbours have
any value for them, nor care to have any thing to do with them. Note,
Those that have professed religion, if they degenerate and grow profane,
are of all men the most contemptible. If the salt have lost its savour,
it is fit for nothing but to be trodden under foot of men. Or it denotes
their dispersion and captivity among the Gentiles; they shall be among
them poor and prisoners; and who has pleasure in such? 2. The court that
Israel made to the nations notwithstanding ([Hos
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#009)): They have gone to Assyria, to
engage the king of Assyria to help them; and herein they are as a wild
ass alone by himself, foolish, headstrong, and unruly; they will have
their way, and nothing shall hold them in, no, not the bridle of God's
laws, nothing shall turn them back, no, not the sword of God's wrath.
They take a course by themselves, and the effect will be that, like a
wild ass by himself, they will be the easier and surer prey to the lion.
See [Job 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012); [Jer
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024). Note, Man is in nothing more
like the wild ass's colt than in seeking for that succour and that
satisfaction in the creature which are to be had in God only. 3. The
crosses that they were likely to meet with in their alliances with the
neighbouring nations ([Hos 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#010)):
Though they have hired among the nations, and hoped thereby to prevent
their own ruin, yet now will I gather them, as the sheaves in the floor
([Mic 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012)); so that what they
provided for their own safety shall but make them the easier prey to
their enemies. Note, There is no fence against the judgments of God,
when they come with commission; nay, that which men hire for their own
preservation often contributes to their own destruction. See [Isa
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020). The king of Assyria, whose
friendship they courted, called himself a king of princes, [Isa
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#008). Are not my princes altogether
kings? He laid burdens upon Israel, levied taxes upon them, [Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019), [Kg2
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#020). And for these they shall sorrow
a little; this shall be but a little burden to them in comparison of
what they may further expect; or they will be but little sensible of
this grievance, will not lay it to heart, and therefore may expect
heavier judgments. They have begun to be diminished (so some read it),
by the burden of the king of princes; but this is only the beginning of
sorrows ([Mat 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#008)), the beginning of
revenges, [Deu 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042). Note, God often
comes gradually with his judgments upon a provoking people, that he may
show how slow he is to wrath, and may awaken them to repentance; but
those that are made to sorrow a little, if they are not thereby brought
to sorrow after a godly sort, will, another day, be made to sorrow a
great deal, to sorrow everlastingly.

II\. They multiplied their altars and temples. Observe,

1\. How they denied the power of godliness, and wholly cast that off
([Hos 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#012)): I have written to him the
great things of my law; this intimates the privilege they enjoyed, as
having God's statutes and judgments made known to them, and being
entrusted with the lively oracles. Note, (1.) The things of God's law
are magnalia Dei - the great things of God. They are things that
proclaim the greatness of the Law-maker, and things of great use and
great importance to us; they are our life, and our eternal welfare
depends upon our observance of them and obedience to them; they will
make us great if we make a right use of them; and they are things which
God will magnify and make honourable. (2.) It is a great privilege to
have the things of God's law written; thus they are reduced to a greater
certainty, spread the further, and last the longer, with much less
danger of being embezzled and corrupted than if they were transmitted by
word of mouth only. (3.) The things of God's law are of his own writing;
for Moses and the prophets were his amanuenses, and holy men wrote as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. (4.) It is the advantage of those
that are members of the visible church that these great things are
written to them, are intended for their direction, and so they must
receive them; what things were written in former ages were written for
our learning, and are profitable for us. And, if those were happy who
had the great things of God's law written to them, how much happier are
we who have the gospel written to us! But see how this privilege was
slighted; these great things of the law were counted as a strange thing,
as unintelligible and unreasonable (which might therefore be slighted,
because not to be fathomed, not to be accounted for), or as foreign, and
things of no concernment to them, things that they had nothing to do
with nor were to be governed by; they used those things as strangers,
which they were shy of, and knew not how to bid welcome. We desire not
the knowledge of thy ways. Note, \[1.\] God having written to us the
great things of his law, we ought to make them familiar to us, as our
nearest relations ([Pro 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#003), [Pro
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#004)); for therefore we have them
written, that they may talk with us, [Pro
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#022). \[2.\] We make nothing of the
things of God's law if we make strange of them, as if they did not
affect us and therefore we need not be affected with them.

2\. How they kept up the form of godliness notwithstanding, and to what
little purpose they did so.

(1.) They multiplied their altars ([Hos
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#011)): Ephraim made many altars to
sin. God appointed that there should be but one altar for sacrifice
([Deu 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003), [Deu
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)); but the ten tribes, having
forsaken that, would still be thought very devout, and zealous for the
honour of God, and, as if they would make amends for the affront they
put on God's altar, they made many altars, dedicated to the God of
Israel, whom hereby they intended, or at least pretended, to give glory
to; but that would not justify their violation of God's express command,
nor would the example of the patriarchs, who before the law of Moses had
many altars. No, they made many altars to sin (that is, they did that
which turned into sin to them), and therefore these altars shall be unto
them to sin, that is, God will charge it upon them as a heinous sin, and
put that upon the score of their crimes which they designed to be for
the expiation of their crimes. Or they shall be to them an occasion of
further sin. Their multiplying of altars dedicated to the God of Israel
would introduce altars dedicated to other gods. Note, It is a great sin
to corrupt the worship of God, and it will be charged as sin upon those
that do it, how plausible soever their pretensions may be. And the way
of this, as other sins, is down-hill; those that once deviate from the
fixed rule of God's commands will wander endlessly.

(2.) They multiplied their sacrifices, [Hos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013). Their altars were smoking
altars: They sacrificed flesh for the sacrifices of God's offerings, and
they celebrated their feasts upon their sacrifices; they were at a great
expense upon their devotions, and (as those commonly are who set up
their own inventions in the room of divine institutions) were very
zealous in their way; as if they hoped by their impositions on
themselves to atone for the contempt of the great atonement, and by
their observing a ceremonial law of their own to excuse themselves from
the obligation of all God's moral precepts. But how did they speed?
\[1.\] God makes no reckoning of their services: The Lord accepts them
not. How should he, when they did not offer their sacrifice upon that
altar which alone sanctified the gift, and when they only sacrificed
flesh, but not the spiritual sacrifice of a penitent believing heart?
Note, Those services only are acceptable to God which are performed
according to the rule of his word, and through Jesus Christ, [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005). \[2.\] He takes that occasion to
reckon with them for their sins; now will he, instead of pardoning their
iniquity and blotting out their sins, as they expected, remember their
iniquity and visit their sins. Such an abomination to the Lord are the
sacrifices of the wicked that they provoke him to call them to an
account for all their other abominations. When they think by their
sacrifices to bribe the Judge of heaven and earth into a connivance at
their wickedness he will resent that as the highest affront they can put
upon him, and it shall be the measure-filling sin. Note, A petition for
leave to sin amounts to an imprecation of the curse for sin, and so it
shall be answered, according to the multitude of the idols. "I will
punish their sins, for they shall return to Egypt;" they shall be
carried captive into Assyria, which shall be to them a house of bondage,
as Egypt was to their fathers. Or it refers to [Deu
28:68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#068), where returning to Egypt is
made to close and complete the miseries of that sinful nation.

(3.) They multiplied their temples, and these also in honour of the true
God, as they pretended, but really in contempt of the choice he had made
of Jerusalem to put his name there. Israel has forgotten his Maker, [Hos
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014). They pretended to know him, and
yet forgot him, for they liked not to retain God in their knowledge,
when the remembrance of him would give check to their lusts. It was an
aggravation of their sin in forgetting God that he was their Maker ([Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018); [Job
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#010)), as nothing obliges us more to
remember him than that he is our Creator, [Ecc
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001). "He has forgotten his Maker, and
builds temples; he seems by the temples he builds to me mindful of his
Maker, and to be desirous still to keep him in mind, and yet really he
has forgotten him, because he has cast off the fear of him." Some by
temples here understand palaces, for so the word sometimes signifies.
"He has forgotten his Maker, and yet is so secure and haughty that he
sets his judgments at defiance, as Nebuchadnezzar did when he said, Is
not this great Babylon that I have built?" Judah is likewise charged
with multiplying fenced cities, and trusting in them for safety, when
the judgments of God were abroad. To fortify their cities in subjection
and subordination to God was well enough; but to fortify them in
opposition to God, and without any regard to him or his providence ([Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011)), shows their hearts to be
desperately hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. But none ever
hardened his heart against God and prospered, nor shall they. God will
send a fire upon his cities, upon the cities both of Judah and Israel,
not only the head-cities of Jerusalem and Samaria, but all the other
cities of those two kingdoms, and it shall devour not only the cottages,
but the palaces thereof; though ever so strong, the fire shall master
them; though ever so stately and sumptuous, the fire shall not spare
them. This was fulfilled when all the cities of Israel were laid in
ashes by the king of Assyria, and all the cities of Judah by the king of
Babylon. The fires they both kindled were of his sending; and when he
judges he will overcome.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 9](hos009)

</div>
