<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa013)  [Next](isa015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 14:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. More weight is added to the burden of Babylon,
enough to sink it like a mill-stone; I. It is Israel's cause that is to
be pleaded in this quarrel with Babylon ([Isa
14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001)). 2. The king of Babylon, for
the time being, shall be remarkably brought down and triumphed over (v.
4-20). 3. The whole race of the Babylonians shall be cut off and
extirpated ([Isa 14:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#021)). II. A
confirmation of the prophecy of the destruction of Babylon, which was a
thing at a distance, is here given in the prophecy of the destruction of
the Assyrian army that invaded the land, which happened not long after
([Isa 14:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024)). III. The success of
Hezekiah against the Philistines is here foretold, and the advantages
which his people would gain thereby ([Isa
14:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028)).

[Isaiah 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 14:1</span></span>

This comes in here as the reason why Babylon must be overthrown and
ruined, because God has mercy in store for his people, and therefore, 1.
The injuries done to them must be reckoned for and revenged upon their
persecutors. Mercy to Jacob will be wrath and ruin to Jacob's impenitent
implacable adversaries, such as Babylon was. 2. The yoke of oppression
which Babylon had long laid on their necks must be broken off, and they
must be set at liberty; and, in order to this, the destruction of
Babylon is as necessary as the destruction of Egypt and Pharaoh was to
their deliverance out of that house of bondage. The same prediction is a
promise to God's people and a threatening to their enemies, as the same
providence has a bright side towards Israel and a black or dark side
towards the Egyptians. Observe,

I. The ground of these favours to Jacob and Israel - the kindness God
had for them and the choice he had made of them ([Isa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001)): "The Lord will have mercy on
Jacob, the seed of Jacob now captives in Babylon; he will make it to
appear that he has compassion on them and has mercy in store for them,
and that he will not contend for ever with them, but will yet choose
them, will yet again return to them; though he has seemed for a time to
refuse and reject them, he will show that they are his chosen people and
that the election stands sure." However it may seem to us, God's mercy
is not gone, nor does his promise fail, [Psa
77:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#008).

II\. The particular favours he designed them. 1. He would bring them
back to their native soil and air again: The Lord will set them in their
own land, out of which they were driven. A settlement in the holy land,
the land of promise, is a fruit of God's mercy, distinguishing mercy. 2.
Many should be proselyted to their holy religion, and should return with
them, induced to do so by the manifest tokens of God's favourable
presence with them, the operations of God's grace in them, the
operations of God's grace in them, and his providence for them:
Strangers shall be joined with them, saying, We will go with you, for we
have heard that God is with you, [Zac
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023). It adds much to the honour and
strength of Israel when strangers are joined with them and there are
added to the church many from without, [Act
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047). Let not the church's children be
shy of strangers, but receive those whom God receives, and own those who
cleave to the house of Jacob. 3. These proselytes should not only be a
credit to their cause, but very helpful and serviceable to them in their
return home: The people among whom they live shall take them, take care
of them, take pity on them, and shall bring them to their place - as
friends, loth to part with such good company - as servants, willing to
do them all the good offices they could. God's people, wherever their
lot is cast, should endeavour thus, by all the instances of an exemplary
and winning conversation, to gain an interest in the affections of those
about them, and recommend religion to their good opinion. This was
fulfilled in the return of the captives from Babylon, when all that were
about them, pursuant to Cyrus's proclamation, contributed to their
removal ([Ezr 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#004), [Ezr
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#006)), not as the Egyptians, because
they were sick of them, but because they loved them. 4. They should have
the benefit of their service when they had returned home, for many would
of choice go with them in the meanest post, rather than not go with
them: They shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants and
handmaids; and as the laws of that land saved it from being the
purgatory of servants, providing that they should not be oppressed, so
the advantages of that land made it the paradise of those servants that
had been strangers to the covenants of promise, for there was one law to
the stranger and to those that were born in the land. Those whose lot is
cast in the land of the Lord, a land of light, should take care that
their servants and handmaids may share in the benefit of it, who will
then find it better to be possessed in the Lord's land than possessors
in any other. 5. They should triumph over their enemies, and those that
would not be reconciled to them should be reduced and humbled by them:
They shall take those captives whose captives they were and shall rule
over their oppressors, righteously, but not revengefully. The Jews
perhaps bought Babylonian prisoners out of the hands of the Medes and
Persians and made slaves of them. Or this might have its accomplishment
in their victories over their enemies in the times of the Maccabees. It
is applicable to the success of the gospel (when those were brought into
obedience to it who had made the greatest opposition to it, as Paul) and
to the interest believers have in Christ's victories over their
spiritual enemies, when he led captivity captive, to the power they gain
over their own corruptions, and to the dominion the upright shall have
in the morning, [Psa 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014). 6. They
should see a happy termination of all their grievances ([Isa
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#003)): The Lord shall give thee rest
from thy sorrow and thy fear, and from thy hard bondage. God himself
undertakes to work a blessed change, (1.) In their state. They shall
have rest from their bondage; the days of their affliction, though many,
shall have an end; and the rod of the wicked, though it lie long, shall
not always lie on their lot. (2.) In their spirit. They shall have rest
from their sorrow and fear, sense of their present burdens and dread of
worse. Sometimes fear puts the soul into a ferment as much as sorrow
does, and those must needs feel themselves very easy to whom God has
given rest from both. Those who are freed from the bondage of sin have a
foundation laid for true rest from sorrow and fear.

[Isaiah 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 14:4</span></span>

The kings of Babylon, successively, were the great enemies and
oppressors of God's people, and therefore the destruction of Babylon,
the fall of the king, and the ruin of his family, are here particularly
taken notice of and triumphed in. In the day that God has given Israel
rest they shall take up this proverb against the king of Babylon. We
must not rejoice when our enemy falls, as ours; but when Babylon, the
common enemy of God and his Israel, sinks, then rejoice over her, thou
heaven, and you holy apostles and prophets, [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020). The Babylonian monarchy bade
fair to be an absolute, universal, and perpetual one, and, in these
pretensions, vied with the Almighty; it is therefore very justly, not
only brought down, but insulted over when it is down; and it is not only
the last monarch, Belshazzar, who was slain on that night that Babylon
was taken ([Dan 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030)), who is here
triumphed over, but the whole monarchy, which sunk in him; not without
special reference to Nebuchadnezzar, in whom that monarchy was at its
height. Now here,

I. The fall of the king of Babylon is rejoiced in; and a most curious
and elegant composition is here prepared, not to adorn his hearse or
monument, but to expose his memory and fix a lasting brand of infamy
upon it. It gives us an account of the life and death of this mighty
monarch, how he went down slain to the pit, though he had been the
terror of the mighty in the land of the living, [Eze
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#027). In this parable we may observe,

1\. The prodigious height of wealth and power at which this monarch and
monarchy arrived. Babylon was a golden city, [Isa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004) (it is a Chaldee word in the
original, which intimates that she used to call herself so), so much did
she abound in riches and excel all other cities, as gold does all other
metals. She is gold-thirsty, or an exactress of gold (so some read it);
for how do men get wealth to themselves but by squeezing it out of
others? The New Jerusalem is the only truly golden city, [Rev
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018), [Rev
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021). The king of Babylon, having so
much wealth in his dominions and the absolute command of it, by the help
of that ruled the nations ([Isa 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#006)),
gave them law, read them their doom, and at his pleasure weakened the
nations ([Isa 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012)), that they might
not be able to make head against him. Such vast and victorious armies
did he bring into the field, that, which way soever he looked, he made
the earth to tremble, and shook kingdoms ([Isa
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#016)); all his neighbours were afraid
of him, and were forced to submit to him. No one man could do this by
his own personal strength, but by the numbers he has at his beck. Great
tyrants, by making some do what they will, make others suffer what they
will. How piteous is the case of mankind, which thus seems to be in a
combination against itself, and its own rights and liberties, which
could not be ruined but by its own strength!

2\. The wretched abuse of all this wealth and power, which the king of
Babylon was guilty of, in two instances: -

(1.) Great oppression and cruelty. He is known by the name of the
oppressor ([Isa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004)); he has the
sceptre of the rulers ([Isa 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#005)), has
the command of all the princes about him; but it is the staff of the
wicked, a staff with which he supports himself in his wickedness and
wickedly strikes all about him. He smote the people, not in justice, for
their correction and reformation, but in wrath ([Isa
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#006)), to gratify his own peevish
resentments, and that with a continual stroke, pursued them with his
forces, and gave them no respite, no breathing time, no cessation of
arms. He ruled the nations, but he ruled them in anger, every thing he
said and did was in a passion; so that he who had the government of all
about him had no government of himself. He made the world as a
wilderness, as if he had taken a pride in being the plague of his
generation and a curse to mankind, [Isa
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#017). Great princes usually glory in
building cities, but he gloried in destroying them; see [Psa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006). Two particular instances, worse
than all the rest, are here given of his tyranny: - \[1.\] That he was
severe to his captives ([Isa 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#017)):
He opened not the house of his prisoners; he did not let them loose
homeward (so the margin reads it); he kept them in close confinement,
and never would suffer any to return to their own land. This refers
especially to the people of the Jews, and it is that which fills up the
measure of the king of Babylon's iniquity, that he had detained the
people of God in captivity and would by no means release them; nay, and
by profaning the vessels of God's temple at Jerusalem, did in effect say
that they should never return to their former use, [Dan
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#003). For this he was quickly and
justly turned out by one whose first act was to open the house of God's
prisoners and send home the temple vessels. \[2.\] That he was
oppressive to his own subjects ([Isa
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#020)): Thou hast destroyed thy land,
and slain thy people; and what did he get by that, when the wealth of
the land and the multitude of the people are the strength and honour of
the prince, who never rules so safely, so gloriously, as in the hearts
and affections of the people? But tyrants sacrifice their interests to
their lusts and passions; and God will reckon with them for their
barbarous usage of those who are under their power, whom they think they
may use as they please.

(2.) Great pride and haughtiness. Notice is here taken of his pomp, the
extravagancy of his retinue, [Isa
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011). He affected to appear in the
utmost magnificence. But that was not the worst: it was the temper of
his mind, and the elevation of that, that ripened him for ruin ([Isa
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013), [Isa
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014)): Thou has said in thy heart,
like Lucifer, I will ascend into heaven. Here is the language of his
vainglory, borrowed perhaps from that of the angels who fell, who not
content with their first estate, the post assigned them, would vie with
God, and become not only independent of him, but equal with him. Or
perhaps it refers to the story of Nebuchadnezzar, who, when he would be
more than a man, was justly turned into a brute, [Dan
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#030). The king of Babylon here
promises himself, \[1.\] That in pomp and power he shall surpass all his
neighbours, and shall arrive at the very height of earthly glory and
felicity, that he shall be as great and happy as this world can make
him; that is the heaven of a carnal heart, and to that he hopes to
ascend, and to be as far above those about him as the heaven is above
the earth. Princes are the stars of God, which give some light to this
dark world ([Mat 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029)); but he will
exalt his throne above them all. \[2.\] That he shall particularly
insult over God's Mount Zion, which Belshazzar, in his last drunken
frolic, seems to have had a particular spite against when he called for
the vessels of the temple at Jerusalem, to profane them; see [Dan
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002). In the same humour he here said,
I will sit upon the mount of the congregation (it is the same word that
is used for the holy convocations), in the sides of the north; so Mount
Zion is said to be situated, [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002). Perhaps Belshazzar was
projecting an expedition to Jerusalem, to triumph in the ruins of it, at
the time when God cut him off. \[3.\] That he shall vie with the God of
Israel, of whom he had indeed heard glorious things, that he had his
residence above the heights of the clouds. "But thither," says he, "will
I ascend, and be as great as he; I will be like him whom they call the
Most High." It is a gracious ambition to covet to be like the Most Holy,
for he has said, Be you holy, for I am holy; but it is a sinful ambition
to aim to be like the Most High, for he has said, He that exalteth
himself shall be abased, and the devil drew our first parents in to eat
forbidden fruit by promising them that they should be as gods. \[4.\]
That he shall himself be deified after his death, as some of the first
founders of the Assyrian monarchy were, and stars had even their names
from them. "But," says he, "I will exalt my throne above them all." Such
as this was his pride, which was the undoubted omen of his destruction.

3\. The utter ruin that should be brought upon him. It is foretold, (1.)
That his wealth and power should be broken, and a final period put to
his pomp and pleasure. He has been long an oppressor, but he shall cease
to be so, [Isa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004). Had he ceased to
be so by true repentance and reformation, according to the advice Daniel
gave to Nebuchadnezzar, it might have been a lengthening of his life and
tranquillity. But those that will not cease to sin God will make to
cease. "The golden city, which one would have thought might continue for
ever, has ceased; there is an end of that Babylon. The Lord, the
righteous God, has broken the staff of that wicked prince, broken it
over his head, in token of the divesting him of his office. God has
taken his power from him, and rendered him incapable of doing any more
mischief: he has broken the sceptres; for even these are brittle things,
soon broken and often justly." (2.) That he himself should be seized: He
is persecuted (v. 6); violent hands are laid upon him, and none hinders.
It is the common fate of tyrants, when they fall into the power of their
enemies, to be deserted by their flatterers, whom they took for their
friends. We read of another enemy like this, of whom it is foretold that
he shall come to his end and none shall help him, [Dan
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#045). Tiberius and Nero thus saw
themselves abandoned. (3.) That he should be slain, and go down to the
congregation of the dead, to be free among them, as the slain that are
no more remembered, [Psa 88:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005). He
shall be weak as the dead are, and like unto them, [Isa
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#010). His pomp is brought down to the
grave ([Isa 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011)), that is, it
perishes with him; the pomp of his life shall not, as usual, end in a
funeral pomp. True glory (that is, true grace) will go up with the soul
to heaven, but vain pomp will go down with the body to the grave: there
is an end of it. The noise of his viols is now heard no more. Death is a
farewell to the pleasures, as well as to the pomps, of this world. This
mighty prince, that used to lie on a bed of down, to tread upon rich
carpets, and to have coverings and canopies exquisitely fine, now shall
have the worms spread under him and the worms covering him, worms bred
out of his own putrefied body, which, though he fancied himself a god,
proved him to be made of the same mould with other men. When we are
pampering and decking our bodies it is good to remember they will be
worms'-meat shortly. (4.) That he should not have the honour of a
burial, much less of a decent one and in the sepulchres of his
ancestors. The kings of the nations lie in glory ([Isa
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#018)), either their dead bodies
themselves so embalmed as to be preserved from putrefaction, as of old
among the Egyptians, or their effigies (as with us) erected over their
graves. Thus, as if they would defy the ignominy of death, they lay in a
poor faint sort of glory, every one in his own house, that is, his own
burying-place (for the grave is the house appointed for all living), a
sleeping house, where the busy and troublesome will lie quiet and the
troubled and weary lie at rest. But this king of Babylon is cast out and
has no grave ([Isa 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019)); his dead
body is thrown, like that of a beast, into the next ditch or upon the
next dunghill, like an abominable branch of some noxious poisonous
plant, which nobody will touch, or as the clothes of malefactors put to
death and by the hand of justice thrust through with a sword, on whose
dead bodies heaps of stones are raised, or they are thrown into some
deep quarry among the stones of the pit. Nay, the king of Babylon's dead
body shall be as the carcases of those who are slain in a battle, which
are trodden under feet by the horses and soldiers and crushed to pieces.
Thus he shall not be joined with his ancestors in burial, [Isa
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#020). To be denied decent burial is a
disgrace, which, if it be inflicted for righteousness' sake (as [Psa
79:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#002)), may, as other similar
reproaches, be rejoiced in ([Mat
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012)); it is the lot of the two
witnesses, [Rev 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#009). But if, as here,
it be the just punishment of iniquity, it is an intimation that evil
pursues impenitent sinners beyond death, greater evil than that, and
that they shall rise to everlasting shame and contempt.

4\. The many triumphs that should be in his fall.

(1.) Those whom he had been a great tyrant and terror to will be glad
that they are rid of him, [Isa 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#007),
[Isa 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008). Now that he is gone the
whole earth is at rest and is quiet, for he was the great disturber of
the peace; now they all break forth into singing, for when the wicked
perish there is shouting ([Pro 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#010));
the fir-trees and cedars of Lebanon now think themselves safe; there is
no danger now of their being cut down, to make way for his vast armies
or to furnish him with timber. The neighbouring princes and great men,
who are compared to fir-trees and cedars ([Zac
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002)), may now be easy, and out of
fear of being dispossessed of their rights, for the hammer of the whole
earth is cut asunder and broken ([Jer
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#023)), the axe that boasted itself
against him that hewed with it, [Isa
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#015).

(2.) The congregation of the dead will bid him welcome to them,
especially those whom he had barbarously hastened thither ([Isa
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009), [Isa
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#010)): "Hell from beneath is moved
for thee, to meet thee at thy coming, and to compliment thee upon thy
arrival at their dark and dreadful regions." The chief ones of the
earth, who when they were alive were kept in awe by him and durst not
come near him, but rose from their thrones, to resign them to him, shall
upbraid him with it when he comes into the state of the dead. They shall
go forth to meet him, as they used to do when he made his public entry
into cities he had become master of; with such a parade shall he be
introduced into those regions of horror, to make his disgrace and
torment the more grievous to him. They shall scoffingly rise from their
thrones and seats there, and ask him if he will please to sit down in
them, as he used to do in their thrones on earth? The confusion that
will then cover him they shall make a jest of: "Hast thou also become
weak as we? Who would have thought it? It is what thou thyself didst not
expect it would ever come to when thou wast in every thing too hard for
us. Thou that didst rank thyself among the immortal gods, art thou come
to take thy fate among us poor mortal men? Where is thy pomp now, and
where thy mirth? How hast thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer! son of the
morning! [Isa 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011), [Isa
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012). The king of Babylon shone as
brightly as the morning star, and fancied that wherever he came he
brought day along with him; and has such an illustrious prince as this
fallen, such a star become a clod of clay? Did ever any man fall from
such a height of honour and power into such an abyss of shame and
misery?" This has been commonly alluded to (and it is a mere allusion)
to illustrate the fall of the angels, who were as morning stars ([Job
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007)), but how have they fallen! How
art thou cut down to the ground, and levelled with it, that didst weaken
the nations! God will reckon with those that invade the rights and
disturb the peace of mankind, for he is King of nations as well as of
saints. Now this reception of the king of Babylon into the regions of
the dead, which is here described, surely is something more than a
flight of fancy, and is designed to teach these solid truths: - \[1.\]
That there is an invisible world, a world of spirits, to which the souls
of men remove at death and in which they exist and act in a state of
separation from the body. \[2.\] That separate souls have acquaintance
and converse with each other, though we have none with them: the parable
of the rich man and Lazarus intimates this. \[3.\] That death and hell
will be death and hell indeed to those that fall unsanctified from the
height of this world's pomps and the fulness of its pleasures. Son,
remember, [Luk 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025).

(3.) Spectators will stand amazed at his fall. When he shall be brought
down to hell, to the sides of the pit, and be lodged there, those that
see him shall narrowly look upon him, and consider him ([Isa
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#015), [Isa
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#016)); they shall scarcely believe
their own eyes. "Never was death so great a change to any man as it is
to him. Is it possible that a man, who a few hours ago looked so great,
so pleasant, and was so splendidly adorned and attended, should now look
so ghastly, so despicable, and lie thus naked and neglected? Is this the
man that made the earth to tremble and shook kingdoms? Who could have
thought he should ever come to this?" [Psa
82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007).

5\. Here is an inference drawn from all this ([Isa
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#020)): The seed of evil-doers shall
never be renowned. The princes of the Babylonian monarchy were all a
seed of evil-doers, oppressors of the people of God, and therefore they
had this infamy entailed upon them. They shall not be renowned for ever
(so some read it); they may look big for a time, but all their pomp will
only render their disgrace at last the more shameful. There is no credit
in a sinful way.

II\. The utter ruin of the royal family is here foretold, together with
the desolation of The royal city.

1\. The royal family is to be wholly extirpated. The Medes and Persians,
that are to be employed in this destroying work, are ordered, when they
have slain Belshazzar, to prepare slaughter for his children ([Isa
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#021)) and not to spare them. The
little ones of Babylon must be dashed against the stones, [Psa
137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009). These orders sound very
harshly; but, (1.) They must suffer for the iniquity of their fathers,
which is often visited upon the children, to show how much God hates sin
and is displeased at it, and to deter sinners from it, which is the end
of punishment. Nebuchadnezzar had slain Zedekiah's sons ([Jer
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#010)), and, for that iniquity of his,
his seed are paid in the same coin. (2.) They must be cut off now, that
they may not rise up to possess the land and do as much mischief in
their day as their fathers had done in theirs - that they may not be as
vexatious to the world by building cities for the support of their
tyranny (which was Nimrod's policy, [Gen
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010), [Gen
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011)) as their ancestors had been by
destroying cities. Pharaoh oppressed Israel in Egypt by setting them to
build cities, [Exo 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011). The
providence of God consults the welfare of nations more than we are aware
of by cutting off some who, if they had lived, would have done mischief.
Justly may the enemies cut off the children: For I will rise up against
them, saith the Lord of hosts ([Isa
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#022)), and if God reveal it as his
mind that he will have it done, as none can hinder it, so none need
scruple to further it. Babylon perhaps was proud of the numbers of her
royal family, but God had determined to cut off the name and remnant of
it, so that none should be left, to have both the sons and grandsons of
the king slain; and yet we are sure he never did, nor ever will do, any
wrong to any of his creatures.

2\. The royal city is to be demolished and deserted, [Isa
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#023). It shall be a possession for
solitary frightful birds, particularly the bittern, joined with the
cormorant and the owl, [Isa 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#011). And
thus the utter destruction of the New Testament Babylon is illustrated,
[Rev 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002). It has become a cage of
every unclean and hateful bird. Babylon lay low, so that when it was
deserted, and no care taken to drain the land, it soon became pools of
water, standing noisome puddles, as unhealthful as they were unpleasant:
and thus God will sweep it with the besom of destruction. When a people
have nothing among them but dirt and filth, and will not be made clean
with the besom of reformation, what can they expect but to be swept off
the face of the earth with the besom of destruction?

[Isaiah 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 14:24</span></span>

The destruction of Babylon and the Chaldean empire was a thing at a
great distance; the empire had not risen to any considerable height when
its fall was here foretold: it was almost 200 years from this prediction
of Babylon's fall to the accomplishment of it. Now the people to whom
Isaiah prophesied might ask, "What is this to us, or what shall we be
the better for it, and what assurance shall we have of it?" To both
questions he answers in these verses, by a prediction of the ruin both
of the Assyrians and of the Philistines, the present enemies that
infested them, which they should shortly be eye-witnesses of and have
benefit by. These would be a present comfort to them, and a pledge of
future deliverance, for the confirming of the faith of their posterity.
God is to his people the same to day that he was yesterday and will be
hereafter; and he will for ever be the same that he has been and is.
Here is,

I. Assurance given of the destruction of the Assyrians ([Isa
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#025)): I will break the Assyrian in
my land. Sennacherib brought a very formidable army into the land of
Judah, but there God broke it, broke all his regiments by the sword of a
destroying angel. Note, Those who wrongfully invade God's land shall
find that it is at their peril: and those who with unhallowed feet
trample upon his holy mountains shall themselves there be trodden under
foot. God undertakes to do this himself, his people having no might
against the great company that came against them: "I will break the
Assyrian; let me alone to do it who have angels, hosts of angels, at
command." Now the breaking of the power of the Assyrian would be the
breaking of the yoke from off the neck of God's people: His burden shall
depart from off their shoulders, the burden of quartering that vast army
and paying contribution; therefore the Assyrian must be broken, that
Judah and Jerusalem may be eased. Let those that make themselves a yoke
and a burden to God's people see what they are to expect. Now, 1. This
prophecy is here ratified and confirmed by an oath ([Isa
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024)): The Lord of hosts hath sworn,
that he might show the immutability of his counsel, and that his people
may have strong consolation, [Heb
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017), [Heb
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018). What is here said of this
particular intention is true of all God's purposes: As I have thought,
so shall it come to pass; for he is in one mind, and who can turn him?
Nor is he ever put upon new counsels, or obliged to take new measures,
as men often are when things occur which they did not foresee. Let those
who are the called according to God's purpose comfort themselves with
this, that, as God has purposed, so shall it stand, and on that their
stability depends. 2. The breaking of the Assyrian power is made a
specimen of what God would do with all the powers of the nations that
were engaged against him and his church ([Isa
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#026)): This is the purpose that is
purposed upon the whole earth (the whole world, so the Septuagint), all
the inhabitants of the earth (so the Chaldee), not only upon the
Assyrian empire (which was then reckoned to be in a manner all the
world, as afterwards the Roman empire was, [Luk
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001), and with it many nations fell
that had dependence upon it), but upon all those states and potentates
that should at any time attack his land, his mountains. The fate of the
Assyrian shall be theirs; they shall soon find that they meddle to their
own hurt. Jerusalem, as it was to the Assyrians, will be to all people a
burdensome stone; all that burden themselves with it shall infallibly be
cut to pieces by it, [Zac 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#003), [Zac
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#006). The same hand of power and
justice that is now to be stretched out against the Assyrian for
invading the people of God shall be stretched out upon all the nations
that do likewise. It is still true, and will ever be so, Cursed is he
that curses God's Israel, [Num 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#009).
God will be an enemy to his people's enemies, [Exo
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#022). 3. All the powers on earth are
defied to change God's counsel ([Isa
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#027)): "The Lord of hosts has
purposed to break the Assyrian's yoke, and every rod of the wicked laid
upon the lot of the righteous; and who shall disannul this purpose? Who
can persuade him to recall it, or find out a plea to evade it? His hand
is stretched out to execute this purpose; and who has power enough to
turn it back or to stay the course of his judgments?"

II\. Assurance is likewise given of the destruction of the Philistines
and their power. This burden, this prophecy, that lay as a load upon
them, to sink their state, came in the year that king Ahaz died, which
was the first year of Hezekiah's reign, [Isa
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028). When a good king came in the
room of a bad one then this acceptable message was sent among them. When
we reform, then, and not till then, we may look for good news from
heaven. Now here we have, 1. A rebuke to the Philistines for triumphing
in the death of king Uzziah. He had been as a serpent to them ([Isa
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#029)), had bitten them, had smitten
them, had brought them very low, [Ch2
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006). He warred against the
Philistines, broke down their walls, and built cities among them. But
when Uzziah died, or rather abdicated, it was told with joy in Gath and
published in the streets of Ashkelon. It is inhuman thus to rejoice in
our neighbour's fall. But let them not be secure; for though when Uzziah
was dead they made reprisals upon Ahaz, and took many of the cities of
Judah ([Ch2 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)), yet out of the
root of Uzziah should come a cockatrice, a more formidable enemy than
Uzziah was, even Hezekiah, the fruit of whose government should be to
them a fiery flying serpent, for he should fall upon them with
incredible swiftness and fury: we find he did so. [Kg2
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008), He smote the Philistines even to
Gaza. Note, If God remove one useful instrument in the midst of his
usefulness, he can, and will, raise up others to carry on and complete
the same work that they were employed in and left unfinished. 2. A
prophecy of the destruction of the Philistines by famine and war. (1.)
By famine, [Isa 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#030). "When the
people of God, whom the Philistines has wasted, and distressed, and
impoverished, shall enjoy plenty again," and the first-born of their
poor shall feed (the poorest among them shall have food convenient),
then, as for the Philistines, God will kill their root with famine. That
which was their strength, and with which they thought themselves
established as the tree is by the root, shall be starved and dried up by
degrees, as those die that die by famine; and thus he shall slay the
remnant: those that escape from one destruction are but reserved for
another; and, when there are but a few left, those few shall at length
be cut off, for God will make a full end. (2.) By war. When the needy of
God's people shall lie down in safety, not terrified with the alarms of
war, but delighting in the songs of peace, then every gate and every
city of the Philistines shall be howling and crying ([Isa
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#031)), and there shall be a total
dissolution of their state; for from Judea, which lay north of the
Philistines, there shall come a smoke (a vast army raising a great dust,
a smoke that shall be the indication of a devouring fire at hand), and
none of all that army shall be alone in his appointed times; none shall
straggle or be missing when they are to engage; but they shall all be
vigorous and unanimous in attacking the common enemy, when the time
appointed for the doing of it comes. None of them shall decline the
public service, as, in Deborah's time, Reuben abode among the sheepfolds
and Asher on the sea-shore, [Jdg 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#016),
[Jdg 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017). When God has work to do he
will wonderfully endow and dispose men for it.

III\. The good use that should be made of all these events for the
encouragement of the people of God ([Isa
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032)): What shall one then answer the
messengers of the nations?

1\. This implies, (1.) That the great things God does for his people
are, and cannot but be, taken notice of by their neighbours; those among
the heathen make remarks upon them, [Psa
126:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002). (2.) That messengers will be
sent to enquire concerning them. Jacob and Israel had long been a people
distinguished from all others and dignified with uncommon favours; and
therefore some for good-will, others for ill-will, and all for
curiosity, are inquisitive concerning them. (3.) That it concerns us
always to be ready to give a reason of the hope that we have in the
providence of God, as well as in his grace, in answer to every one that
asks it, with meekness and fear, [Pe1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015). And we need go no further than
the sacred truths of God's word for a reason; for God, in all he does,
is fulfilling the scripture. (4.) The issue of God's dealings with his
people shall be so clearly and manifestly glorious that any one, every
one, shall be able to give an account of them to those that enquire
concerning them. Now,

2\. The answer which is to be given to the messengers of the nations is,
(1.) That God is and will be a faithful friend to his church and people,
and will secure and advance their interests. Tell them that the Lord has
founded Zion. This gives an account both of the work itself that is done
and of the reason of it. What is God doing in the world, and what is he
designing in all the revolutions of states and kingdoms, in the ruin of
some nations and the rise of others? He is, in all this, founding Zion;
he is aiming at the advancement of his church's interests; and what he
aims at he will accomplish. The messengers of the nations, when they
sent to enquire concerning Hezekiah's successes against the Philistines,
expected to learn by what politics, counsels, and arts of war he carried
his point; but they are told that these successes were not owing to any
thing of that nature, but to the care God took of his church and the
interest he had in it. The Lord has founded Zion, and therefore the
Philistines must fall. (2.) That his church has and will have a
dependence upon him: The poor of his people shall trust in it, his poor
people who have lately been brought very low, even the poorest of them;
they more than others, for they have nothing else to trust to, [Zep
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#012), [Zep
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#013). The poor receive the gospel,
[Mat 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005). They shall trust to this,
to this great truth, that the Lord has founded Zion; on this they shall
build their hopes, and not on an arm of flesh. This ought to give us
abundant satisfaction as to public affairs, that however it may go with
particular persons, parties, and interests, the church, having God
himself for its founder and Christ the rock for its foundation, cannot
but stand firm. The poor of his people shall betake themselves to it (so
some read it), shall join themselves to his church and embark in its
interests; they shall concur with God in his designs to establish his
people, and shall wind up all on the same plan, and make all their
little concerns and projects bend to that. Those that take God's people
for their people must be willing to take their lot with them and cast in
their lot among them. Let the messengers of the nations know that the
poor Israelites, who trust in God, having, like Zion, their foundation
in the holy mountains ([Psa 87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)), are
like Zion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever ([Psa
125:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001).), and therefore they will not
fear what man can do unto them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 15](isa015)

</div>
