<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](sol008)  [Next](isa001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, With Practical Observations, of The Book of the Prophet
Isaiah

Prophet is a title that sounds very great to those that understand it,
though, in the eye of the world, many of those that were dignified with
it appeared very mean. A prophet is one that has a great intimacy with
Heaven and a great interest there, and consequently a commanding
authority upon earth. Prophecy is put for all divine revelation ([Pe2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020), [Pe2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021)), because that was most commonly
by dreams, voices, or visions, communicated to prophets first, and by
them to the children of men, [Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006). Once indeed God himself spoke to
all the thousands of Israel from the top of Mount Sinai; but the effect
was so intolerably dreadful that they entreated God would for the future
speak to them as he had done before, by men like themselves, whose
terror should not make them afraid, nor their hands be heavy upon them,
[Job 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#007). God approved the motion
(they have well said, says he, [Deu
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#027), [Deu
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#028)), and the matter was then settled
by consent of parties, that we must never expect to hear from God any
more in that way, but by prophets, who received their instructions
immediately from God, with a charge to deliver them to his church.
Before the sacred canon of the Old Testament began to be written there
were prophets, who were instead of Bibles to the church. Our Saviour
seems to reckon Abel among the prophets, [Mat
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#031), [Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035). Enoch was a prophet; and by him
that was first in prediction which is to be last in execution - the
judgment of the great day. [Jde 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014),
Behold, the Lord comes with his holy myriads. Noah was a preacher of
righteousness. God said of Abraham, He is a prophet, [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007). Jacob foretold things to come,
[Gen 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001). Nay, all the patriarchs are
called prophets. [Psa 105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015), Do my
prophets no harm. Moses was, beyond all comparison, the most illustrious
of all the Old Testament prophets, for with him the Lord spoke face to
face, [Deu 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010). He was the first
writing prophet, and by his hand the first foundations of holy writ were
laid. Even those that were called to be his assistants in the government
had the spirit of prophecy, such a plentiful effusion was there of that
spirit at that time, [Num 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#025). But
after the death of Moses, for some ages, the Spirit of the Lord appeared
and acted in the church of Israel more as a martial spirit than as a
spirit of prophecy, and inspired men more for acting than speaking. I
mean in the time of the judges. We find the Spirit of the Lord coming
upon Othniel, Gideon, Samson, and others, for the service of their
country, with their swords, not with their pens. Messages were then sent
from heaven by angels, as to Gideon and Manoah, and to the people, [Jdg
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001). In all the book of judges there
is never once mention of a prophet, only Deborah is called a prophetess.
Then the word of the Lord was precious; there was no open vision, [Sa1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001). They had the law of Moses,
recently written; let them study that. But in Samuel prophecy revived,
and in him a famous epocha, or period of the church began, a time of
great light in a constant uninterrupted succession of prophets, till
some time after the captivity, when the canon of the Old Testament was
completed in Malachi, and then prophecy ceased for nearly 400 years,
till the coming of the great prophet and his forerunner. Some prophets
were divinely inspired to write the histories of the church. But they
did not put their names to their writings; they only referred for proof
to the authentic records of those times, which were known to be drawn up
by prophets, as Gad, Iddo, etc. David and others were prophets, to write
sacred songs for the use of the church. After them we often read of
prophets sent on particular errands, and raised up for special public
services, among whom the most famous were Elijah and Elisha in the
kingdom of Israel. But none of these put their prophecies in writing,
nor have we any remains of them but some fragments in the histories of
their times; there was nothing of their own writing (that I remember)
but one epistle of Elijah's, [Ch2
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#012). But towards the latter end of
the kingdoms of Judah and Israel, it pleased God to direct his servants
the prophets to write and publish some of their sermons, or abstracts of
them. The dates of many of their prophecies are uncertain, but the
earliest of them was in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and Jeroboam
the second, his contemporary, king of Israel, about 200 years before the
captivity, and not long after Joash had slain Zechariah the son of
Jehoiada in the courts of the temple. If they begin to murder the
prophets, yet they shall not murder their prophecies; these shall remain
as witnesses against them. Hosea was the first of the writing prophets;
and Joel, Amos, and Obadiah, published their prophecies about the same
time. Isaiah began some time after, and not long; but his prophecy is
placed first, because it is the largest of them all, and has most in it
of him to whom all the prophets bore witness; and indeed so much of
Christ that he is justly styled the Evangelical Prophet, and, by some of
the ancients, a fifth Evangelist. We shall have the general title of
this book ([Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)) and therefore
shall here only observe some things,

I. Concerning the prophet himself. He was (if we may believe the
tradition of the Jews) of the royal family, his father being (they say)
brother to king Uzziah. He was certainly much at court, especially in
Hezekiah's time, as we find in his story, to which many think it is
owing that his style is more curious and polite than that of some other
of the prophets, and, in some places, exceedingly lofty and soaring. The
Spirit of God sometimes served his own purpose by the particular genius
of the prophet; for prophets were not speaking trumpets, through which
the Spirit spoke, but speaking men, by whom the Spirit spoke, making use
of their natural powers, in respect both of light and flame, and
advancing them above themselves.

II\. Concerning the prophecy. It is transcendently excellent and useful;
it was so to the church of God then, serving for conviction of sin,
direction in duty, and consolation in trouble. Two great distresses of
the church are here referred to, and comfort prescribed in reference to
them, that by Sennacherib's invasion, which happened in his own time,
and that of the captivity in Babylon, which happened long after; and in
the supports and encouragements laid up for each of these times of need
we find abundance of the grace of the gospel. There are not so many
quotations in the gospels out of any, perhaps not out of all, the
prophecies of the Old Testament, as out of this; nor such express
testimonies concerning Christ, witness that of his being born of a
virgin (ch. 7) and that of his sufferings, [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001). The beginning of this book
abounds most with reproofs for sin and threatenings of judgment; the
latter end of it is full of wood words and comfortable words. This
method the Spirit of Christ took formerly in the prophets and does
still, first to convince and then to comfort; and those that would be
blessed with the comforts must submit to the convictions. Doubtless
Isaiah preached many sermons, and delivered many messages to the people,
which are not written in this book, as Christ did; and probably these
sermons were delivered more largely and fully than they are here
related, but so much is left on record as Infinite Wisdom thought fit to
convey to us on whom the ends of the world have come; and these
prophecies, as well as the histories of Christ, are written that we
might believe on the name of the Son of God, and that, believing, we
might have life through his name; for to us is the gospel here preached
as well as unto those that lived then, and more clearly. O that it may
be mixed with faith!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 1](isa001)

</div>
