<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa041)  [Next](isa043) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 42:0</span></span>

The prophet seems here to launch out yet further into the prophecy of
the Messiah and his kingdom under the type of Cyrus; and, having the
great work of man's salvation by him yet more in view, he almost forgets
the occasion that led him into it and drops the return out of Babylon;
for indeed the prospect of this would be a greater comfort and support
to the believing pious Jews, in their captivity, than the hope of that.
And (as Mr. Gataker well observes) in this and similar prophecies of
Christ, that are couched in types, as of David and Solomon, some
passages agree to the type and not to the truth, other to the truth and
not to the type, and many to the type in one sense and the truth in
another. Here is, I. A prophecy of the Messiah's coming with meekness,
and yet with power, to do the Redeemer's work ([Isa
42:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)). II. His commission opened,
which he received from the Father ([Isa
42:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005)). III. The joy and rejoicing
with which the glad tidings of this should be received ([Isa
42:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010)). IV. The wonderful success
of the gospel, for the overthrow of the devil's kingdom ([Isa
42:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013)). V. The rejection and ruin
of the Jews for their unbelief ([Isa
42:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#018)).

[Isaiah 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 42:1</span></span>

We are sure that these verses are to be understood of Christ, for the
evangelist tells us expressly that in him this prophecy was fulfilled,
[Mat 12:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#017). Behold with an eye of
faith, behold and observe, behold and admire, my servant, whom I uphold.
Let the Old Testament saints behold and remember him. Now what must we
behold and consider concerning him?

I. The Father's concern for him and relation to him, the confidence he
put and the complacency he took in him. This put an honour upon him, and
made him remarkable, above any other circumstance, [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001). 1. God owns him as one employed
for him: He is my servant. Though he was a Son, yet, as a Mediator, he
took upon him the form of a servant, learned obedience to the will of
God and practised it, and laid out himself to advance the interests of
God's kingdom, and so he was God's servant. 2. As one chosen by him: He
is my elect. He did not thrust himself into the service, but was called
of God, and pitched upon as the fittest person for it. Infinite Wisdom
made the choice and then avowed it. 3. As one he put a confidence in: He
is my servant on whom I lean; so some read it. The Father put a
confidence in him that he would go through with his undertaking, and, in
that confidence, brought many sons to glory. It was a great trust which
the Father reposed in the Son, but he knew him to be par negotio - equal
to it, both able and faithful. 4. As one he took care of: He is my
servant whom I uphold; so we read it. The Father bore him up, and bore
him out, in his upholding him; he stood by him and strengthened him. 5.
As one whom he took an entire complacency in: My elect, in whom my soul
delights. His delight was in him from eternity, when he was by him as
one brought up with him, [Pro 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030). He
had a particular satisfaction in his undertaking: he declared himself
well pleased in him ([Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017); [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)), and therefore loved him,
because he laid down his life for the sheep. Let our souls delight in
Christ, rely on him, and rejoice in him; and thus let us be united to
him, and then, for his sake, the Father will be well pleased with us.

II\. The qualification of him for his office: I have put my Spirit upon
him, to enable him to go through his undertaking, [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001). The Spirit did not only come,
but rest, upon him ([Isa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)), not by
measure, as on others of God's servants, but without measure. Those whom
God employs as his servants; as he will uphold them and be well pleased
with them, so he will put his Spirit upon them.

III\. The work to which he is appointed; it is to bring forth judgment
to the Gentiles, that is, in infinite wisdom, holiness, and equity, to
set up a religion in the world under the bonds of which the Gentiles
should come and the blessings of which they should enjoy. The judgments
of the Lord, which had been hidden from the Gentiles ([Psa
147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)), he came to bring forth to the
Gentiles, for he was to be a light to lighten them.

IV\. The mildness and tenderness with which he should pursue this
undertaking, [Isa 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#002), [Isa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003). He shall carry it on, 1. In
silence, and without noise: He shall not strive nor cry. It shall not be
proclaimed, Lo, here, is Christ or Lo, he is there; as when great
princes ride in progress or make a public entry. He shall have no
trumpet sounded before him, nor any noisy retinue to follow him. The
opposition he meets with he shall not strive against, but patiently
endure the contradiction of sinners against himself. His kingdom is
spiritual, and therefore its weapons are not carnal, nor is its
appearance pompous; it comes not with observation. 2. Gently, and
without rigour. Those that are wicked he will be patient with; when he
has begun to crush them, so that they are as bruised reeds, he will give
them space to repent and not immediately break them; though they are
very offensive, as smoking flax ([Isa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005)), yet he will bear with them, as
he did with Jerusalem. Those that are weak he will be tender of; those
that have but a little life, a little heat, that are weak as a reed,
oppressed with doubts and fears, as a bruised reed, that are as smoking
flax, as the wick of a candle newly lighted, which is ready to go out
again, he will not despise them, will not plead against them with his
great power, nor lay upon them more work or more suffering than they can
bear, which would break and quench them, but will graciously consider
their frame. More is implied than is expressed. He will not break the
bruised reed, but will strengthen it, that it may become a cedar in the
courts of our God. He will not quench the smoking flax, but blow it up
into a flame. Note, Jesus Christ is very tender toward those that have
true grace, though they are but weak in it, and accepts the willingness
of the spirit, pardoning and passing by the weakness of the flesh.

V. The courage and constancy with which he should persevere in this
undertaking, so as to carry his point at last ([Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004)): He shall not fail nor be
discouraged. Though he meets with hard service and much opposition, and
foresees how ungrateful the world will be, yet he goes on with his part
of the work, till he is able to say, Is is finished; and he enables his
apostles and minsters to go on with theirs too, and not to fail nor be
discouraged, till they also have finished their testimony. And thus he
accomplishes what he undertook. 1. He brings forth judgment unto truth.
By a long course of miracles, and his resurrection at last, he shall
fully evince the truth of his doctrine and the divine origin and
authority of that holy religion which he came to establish. 2. He sets
judgment in the earth. He erects his government in the world, a church
for himself among men, reforms the world, and by the power of his gospel
and grace fixes such principles in the minds of men as tend to make them
wise and just. 3. The isles of the Gentiles wait for his law, wait for
his gospel, that is, bid it welcome as if it had been a thing they had
long waited for. They shall become his disciples, shall sit at his feet,
and be ready to receive the law from his mouth. What wilt thou have us
to do?

[Isaiah 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 42:5</span></span>

Here is I. The covenant God made with and the commission he gave to the
Messiah, [Isa 42:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005), which are an
exposition of [Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), Behold my
servant, whom I uphold.

1\. The royal titles by which the great God here makes himself known,
and distinguishes himself from all pretenders, speak very much his glory
([Isa 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005)): Thus saith God the Lord.
And who are thou, Lord? Why, he is the fountain of all being and
therefore the fountain of all power. He is the fountain of being, 1. In
the upper world; for he created the heavens and stretched them out ([Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)), and keeps the vast expanse
still upon the stretch. 2. In the lower world: for he spread forth the
earth, and made it a capacious habitation, and that which comes out of
it is produced by his power. 3. In the world of mankind: He gives breath
to the people upon it, not only air to breathe in, but the breath of
life itself and organs to breathe with; nay, he gives spirit, the powers
and faculties of a rational soul, to those that walk therein. Now this
is prefixed to God's covenant with the Messiah, and the commission given
him, not only to show that he has authority to make such a covenant and
give such a commission, and had power sufficient to bear him out, but
that the design of the work of redemption was to maintain the honour of
the Creator, and to restore man to the allegiance he owes to God as his
Maker.

2\. The assurances which he gives to the Messiah of his presence with
him in all he did pursuant to his undertaking speak much encouragement
to him, [Isa 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006). (1.) God owns that
the Messiah did not take the honour of being Mediator to himself, but
was called of God, that he was no intruder, no usurper, but was fairly
brought to it ([Heb 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)): I have
called thee in righteousness. God not only did him no wrong in calling
him to this hard service, he having voluntarily offered himself to it,
but did himself right in providing for his own honour and performing the
word which he had spoken. (2.) He promises to stand by him and
strengthen him in it, to hold his hand, not only to his work, but in it,
to hold his hand, that it might not shake, that it might not fail, and
so to keep him. When an angel was sent from heaven to strengthen him in
his agonies, and the Father himself was with him, then this promise was
fulfilled. Note, Those whom God calls he will own and help, and will
hold their hands.

3\. The great intentions of this commission speak abundance of comfort
to the children of men. He was given for a covenant of the people, for a
mediator, or guarantee, of the covenant of grace, which is all summed up
in him. God, in giving us Christ, has with him freely given us all the
blessings of the new covenant. Two glorious blessings Christ, in his
gospel, brings with him to the Gentile world - light and liberty. (1.)
He is given for a light to the Gentiles, not only to reveal to them what
they were concerned to know, and which otherwise they could not have
known, but to open the blind eyes, that they might know it. By his
Spirit in the word he presents the object; by his Spirit in the heart he
prepared the organ. When the gospel came light came, a great light, to
those that sat in darkness, [Mat 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016);
[Joh 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019). And St. Paul was sent to
the Gentiles to open their eyes, [Act
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018). Christ is the light of the
world. (2.) He is sent to proclaim liberty to the captives, as Cyrus
did, to bring out the prisoners; not only to open the prison-doors, and
give them leave to go out, which was all that Cyrus could do, but to
bring them out, to induce and enable them to make use of their liberty,
which none did but those whose spirits God stirred up. This Christ does
by his grace.

II\. The ratification and confirmation of this grant. That we may be
assured of the validity of it consider, 1. The authority of him that
makes the promise ([Isa 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008)): I am
the Lord, Jehovah, that is my name, and that was the name by which he
made himself known when he began to perform the promise made to the
patriarchs; whereas, before, he manifested himself by the name of God
Almighty, [Exo 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003). If he is the Lord
that gives being and birth to all things, he will give being and birth
to this promise. If his name be Jehovah, which speaks him God alone, we
may be sure his name is jealous, and he will not give his glory to
another, whoever it is that stands in competition with him, especially
not to graven images. He will send the Messiah to open men's eyes, that
so he may turn them from the service of dumb idols to serve the living
God, because, though he has long winked at the times of ignorance, he
will now maintain his prerogative, and will not give his glory to graven
images. He will perform his word because he will not lose the honour of
being true to it, nor be ever charged with falsehood by the worshippers
of false gods. He will deliver his people from under the power of
idolaters because it looks as if he had given his praise to graven
images when he gives up his own worshippers to be worshippers of images.
2. The accomplishment of the promises he had formerly made concerning
his church, which are proofs of the truth of his word and the kindness
he bears to his people ([Isa 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#009)):
"Behold, the former things have come to pass; hitherto the Lord has
helped his church, has supported her under former burdens, relieved her
in former staits; and this in performance of the promises made to the
fathers. There has not failed one word, [Kg1
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#056). And now new things do I declare.
Now I will make new promises, which shall as certainly be fulfilled in
their season as old ones were; now I will bestow new favours, such as
have not been conferred formerly. Old Testament blessings you have had
abundantly; now I declare New Testament blessings, not a fruitful
country and dominion over your neighbours, but spiritual blessings in
heavenly things. Before they spring forth in the preaching of the gospel
I tell you of them, under the type and figure of the former things."
Note, The receipt of former mercies may encourage us to hope for further
mercies; for God is constant in his care for his people, and his
compassions are still new.

III\. The song of joy and praise which should be sung hereupon to the
glory of God ([Isa 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010)): Sing unto
the Lord a new song, a New Testament song. The giving of Christ for a
light to the Gentiles ([Isa 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006)) was
a new thing, and very surprising. The apostle speaks of it as a mystery
which, in other ages, was not made known, as it is now revealed, that
the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, [Eph
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005), [Eph
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006). Now, this being the new thing
which God declares, the newness of the song which is to be sung on this
occasion is this, that whereas, before, the songs of the Lord were very
much confined to the temple at Jerusalem (David's psalms were in the
language of the Jews only, and sung by them in their own country only;
for, when they were in a strange land, they hung their harps on the
willow-trees and could not sing the Lord's song, as we find, [Psa
137:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002)), now the songs of holy joy
and praise shall be sung all the world over. The Gentile nations shall
share equally with the Jews in New Testament blessings, and therefore
shall join in New Testament praises and acts of worship. There shall be
churches set up in Gentile nations and they shall sing a new song. The
conversion of the Gentiles is often foretold under this notion, as
appears, [Rom 15:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009). It is here
promised that the praises of God's grace shall be sung with joy and
thankfulness, 1. By those that live in the end of the earth, in
countries that lie most remote from Jerusalem. From the uttermost parts
of the earth have we heard songs, [Isa
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016). This was fulfilled when
Christianity was planted in our land. 2. By mariners and merchants, and
those that go down to the sea, that do business in great waters, and
suck the riches of the sea, and so make themselves masters of the
fulness thereof and all that is therein, with which they shall praise
God, and justly, for it is his, [Psa
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001); [Psa
95:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#005). The Jews traded little at sea;
if therefore God's praises be sung by those that go down to the sea, it
must be by Gentiles. Sea-faring men are called upon to praise God, [Psa
107:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023). 3. By the islands and the
inhabitants thereof, [Isa 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010), and
again, [Isa 42:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#012). Let them declare
his praise in the islands, the isles of the Gentiles, probably referring
to the islands of Greece. 4. By the wilderness and the cities thereof,
and the villages of Kedar. These lay east from Jerusalem, as the islands
lay west, so that the gospel songs should be sung from the rising of the
sun to the going down of the same. The whole Gentile world had been like
an island, cut off from communication with God's church, and like a
wilderness, uncultivated and bringing forth no fruit to God; but now the
islands and the wilderness shall praise God. 5. By the inhabitants of
the rock, and those that dwell on the tops of the mountains, not only
the Gentiles, but the poorest and meanest and most despicable, those
that dwell in cottages, as well as those that inhabit cities and
villages. The rude and most barbarous, as the mountaineers commonly are,
shall be civilized by the gospel. Or by the inhabitants of the rock may
be meant the inhabitants of that part of Arabia which is called Petraea
- the rocky. Perhaps the neighbouring countries shared in the joy of the
Israelites when they returned out of Babylon and some of them came and
joined with them in their praises; but we find not that it was to any
such degree as might fully answer this illustrious prophecy, and must
conclude that it reaches further, and was fulfilled in that which many
other prophecies of the joy of the nations are said in the New Testament
to be fulfilled in, the conversion of the Gentiles to the faith of
Christ. When they are brought into the church they are brought to give
glory to the Lord; then they are to him for a name and a praise, and
they make it their business to praise him. He is glorified in them and
by them.

[Isaiah 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 42:13</span></span>

It comes all to one whether we make these verses (as some do) the song
itself that is to be sung by the Gentile world or a prophecy of what God
will do to make way for the singing of that song, that evangelical new
song.

I. He will appear in his power and glory more than ever. So he did in
the preaching of his gospel, in the divine power and energy which went
along with it, and in the wonderful success it had in the pulling down
of Satan's stronghold, [Isa 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013),
[Isa 42:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#014). He had long held his
peace, and been still, and refrained himself, while he winked at the
times of the ignorance of the Gentile world ([Act
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030)), and suffered all nations to
walk in their own ways ([Act 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016));
but now he shall go forth as a mighty man, as a man of war, to attack
the devil's kingdom and give it a fatal blow. The going forth of the
gospel is thus represented, [Rev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002).
Christ, in it, went forth conquering and to conquer. The ministry of the
apostles is called their warfare; and they were the soldiers of Jesus
Christ. He shall stir up jealousy, shall appear more jealous than ever
for the glory of his own name and against idolatry. 1. He shall cry, in
the preaching of his word, cry like a travailing woman; for the
ministers of Christ preached as men in earnest, and that travailed in
birth again till they saw Christ formed in the souls of the people, [Gal
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019). He shall cry, yea, roar, in the
gospel woes, which are more terrible than the roaring of a lion, and
which must be preached along with gospel blessings to awaken a sleeping
world. 2. He shall conquer by the power of his Spirit: He shall prevail
against his enemies, shall prevail to make them friends, [Col
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021). Those that contradict and
blaspheme his gospel, he shall prevail to put them to silence and shame.
He will destroy and devour at once all the oppositions of the powers of
darkness. Satan shall fall as lightning from heaven, and he that had the
power of death shall be destroyed. As a type and figure of this, to make
way for the redemption of the Jews out of Babylon, God will humble the
pride, and break the power, of their oppressors, and will at once
destroy and devour the Babylonian monarchy. In accomplishing this
destruction of Babylon by the Persian army under the command of Cyrus,
he will make waste mountains and hills, level the country, and dry up
all their herbs. The army, as usual, shall either carry off the forage
or destroy it, and by laying bridges of boats over rivers shall turn
them into islands, and so drain the fens and low grounds, to make way
for the march of their army, that the pools shall be dried up. Thus,
when the gospel shall be preached, it shall have a free course, and that
which hinders the progress of it shall be taken out of the way.

II\. He will manifest his favour and grace towards those whose spirits
he had stirred up to follow him, as [Ezr
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005). Those who ask the way to Zion he
will show the way, and lead in it, [Isa
42:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#016). Those who by nature were blind,
and those who, being under convictions of sin and wrath are quite at a
loss and know not what to do with themselves, God will lead by a way
that they knew not, will show them the way to life and happiness by
Jesus Christ, who is the way, and will conduct and carry them on in that
way, which before they were strangers to. Thus, in the conversion of
Paul, he was struck blind first, and then God revealed his Son in him,
and made the scales to fall from his eyes. They are weak in knowledge,
and the truths of God at first seem unintelligible; but God will make
darkness light before them, and knowledge shall be easy to them. They
are weak in duty, the commands of God seem impracticable, and
insuperable difficulties are in the way of their obedience; but God will
make crooked things straight; their way shall be plain, and the yoke
easy. Those whom God brings into the right way he will guide in it. As a
type of this, he will lead the Jews, when they return out of captivity,
in a ready road to their own land again, and nothing shall occur to
perplex or embarrass them in their journey. These are great things, and
kind things, very great and very kind; but lest any should say, "They
are too great, too kind, to be expected from God by such an undeserving
people as that of the Jews, such an undeserving world as that of the
Gentiles," he adds, These things will I do unto them, take my word for
it I will, and I will not forsake them; he that begins to show this
great mercy will go on to do them good.

III\. He will particularly put those to confusion who adhere to idols
notwithstanding the attempts made by the preaching of the gospel to turn
them from idols ([Isa 42:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#017)): They
shall be turned back, and greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images.
The Babylonians shall when they see how the Jews, who despise their
images, are owned and delivered by the God they worship without images,
and the Gentiles when they see how idolatry falls before the preaching
of the gospel, is scattered like darkness before the light of the sun,
and melts like snow before its heat. They shall be ashamed that ever
they said to these molten images, You are our gods; for how can those
help their worshippers who cannot help themselves, nor save themselves
from falling into contempt? In times of reformation, when many turn from
iniquity, and sin, being generally deserted, becomes unfashionable, it
may be hoped that those who will not otherwise be reclaimed will be
wrought upon by that consideration to be ashamed of it.

[Isaiah 42:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 42:18</span></span>

The prophet, having spoken by way of comfort and encouragement to the
believing Jews who waited for the consolation of Israel, here turns to
those among them who were unbelieving, for their conviction and
humiliation. Among those who were in captivity in Babylon there were
some who were as the evil figs in Jeremiah's vision, who were sent
thither for their hurt, to be removed into all the kingdoms of the
earth, for a reproach and a proverb, [Jer
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#009). In them there was a type of the
Jews who rejected Christ and were rejected by him, and then fell more
than ever under the curse, when those who believed were inheriting the
blessing; for they were broken, and ruined, and remain dispersed unto
this day. Observe,

I. The call that is given to this people ([Isa
42:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#018)): "Hear, you deaf, and attend to
the joyful sound, and look you blind, that you may see the joyful
light." There is no absurdity in this command, nor is it unbecoming the
wisdom and goodness of God to call us to do that good which yet of
ourselves we are not sufficient for; for those have natural powers which
they may employ so as to do better than they do, and may have
supernatural grace if it be not their own fault, who yet labour under a
moral impotency to that which is good. This call to the deaf to hear and
the blind to see is like the command given to the man that had the
withered hand to stretch it forth; though he could not do this, because
it was withered, yet, if he had not attempted to do it, he would not
have been healed, and his being healed thereupon was owing, not to his
act, but to the divine power.

II\. The character that is given of them ([Isa
42:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#019), [Isa
42:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#020)): Who is blind, but my servant,
or deaf as my messenger? The people of the Jews were in profession God's
servants, and their priests and elders his messengers ([Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)); but they were deaf and blind.
The verse before may be understood as spoken to the Gentile idolaters,
whom he calls deaf and blind, because they worshipped gods that were so.
"But," says he, "no wonder you are deaf and blind when my own people are
as bad as you, and many of them as much set upon idolatry."

1\. He complains of their sottishness - they are blind; and of their
stubbornness - they are deaf. They were even worse than the Gentiles
themselves. Corruptio optimi est pessima - What is best becomes, when
corrupted, the worst. "Who is so wilfully, so scandalously, blind and
deaf as my servant and my messenger, as Jacob who is my servant ([Isa
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008)), and as their prophets and
teachers who are my messengers? Who is blind as he that in profession
and pretension is perfect, that should come nearer to perfection than
other people, their priests and prophets? The one prophesies falsely,
and the other bears rule by their means; and who so blind as those that
will not see when they have the light shining in their faces?" Note,
(1.) It is a common thing, but a very sad thing, for those that in
profession are God's servants and messengers to be themselves blind and
deaf in spiritual things, ignorant, erroneous, and very careless. (2.)
Blindness and deafness in spiritual things are worse in those that
profess themselves to be God's servants and messengers than in others.
It is in them the greater sin and shame, the greater dishonour to God,
and to themselves a greater damnation.

2\. The prophet goes on ([Isa 42:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#020))
to describe the blindness and obstinacy of the Jewish nation, just as
our Saviour describes it in his time ([Mat
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014), [Mat
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015)): Seeing many things, but thou
observest not. Multitudes are ruined for want of observing that which
they cannot but see; they perish, not through ignorance, but mere
carelessness. The Jews in our Saviour's time saw many proofs of his
divine mission, but they did not observe them; they seemed to open their
ears to him, but they did not hear, that is, they did not heed, did not
understand, or believe, or obey, and then it was all one as if they had
not heard.

III\. The care God will take of the honour of his own name,
notwithstanding their blindness and deafness, especially of his word,
which he has magnified above all his name. Shall the unbelief and
obstinacy of men make the promise of God of no effect? God forbid, [Rom
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003), [Rom
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004). No, though they are blind and
deaf, God will be no loser in his glory ([Isa
42:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#021)): The Lord is well pleased for
his righteousness' sake; not well pleased with their sin, but well
pleased in the manifestation of his own righteousness, in rejecting them
for rejecting the great salvation. He speaks as one well pleased, [Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024) : Ah! I will ease me of my
adversaries; and [Eze 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013), I will be
comforted. The scripture was fulfilled in the casting off of the Jews as
well as in the calling in of the Gentiles, and therein the Lord will be
well pleased. He will magnify the law (divine revelation in all the
parts of it) and will make it honourable. The law is truly honourable,
and the things of it are great things; and, if men will not magnify it
by their obedience to it, God will magnify it himself by punishing them
for their disobedience. He will magnify the law by accomplishing what is
written in it, will magnify its authority, its efficacy, its equity. He
will do it at last, when all men shall be judged by the law of liberty,
[Jam 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012). He is doing it every day.
What is it that God is doing in the world, but magnifying the law and
making it honourable?

IV\. The calamities God will bring upon the Jewish nation for their
wilful blindness and deafness, [Isa
42:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#022). They are robbed and spoiled.
Those that were impenitent and unreformed in Babylon were sentenced to
perpetual captivity. It was for their sins that they were spoiled of all
their possessions, not only in their own land, but in the land of their
enemies. They were some of them snared in holes, and others hidden in
prison-houses. They cannot help themselves, for they are snared. Their
friends cannot help them, for they are hidden; and their enemies have
forgotten them in their prisons. They, and all they have, are for a prey
and for a spoil; and there is none that delivers either by force or
ransom, nor any that dares say to the proud oppressors, Restore. There
they lie, and there they are likely to lie. This had its full
accomplishment in the final destruction of the Jewish nation by the
Romans, which God brought upon them for rejecting the gospel of Christ.

V. The counsel given them in order to their relief; for, though their
case be sad, it is not desperate.

1\. The generality of them are deaf; they will not hearken to the voice
of God's word. He will therefore try his rod, and see who among them
will give ear to that, [Isa 42:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#023). We
must not despair concerning those who have been long reasoned with in
vain; some of them may, at length, give ear and hearken. If one method
not take effect, another may, and sinners shall be left inexcusable.
Observe, (1.) We may all of us, if we will, hear the voice of God, and
we are called and invited to hear it. (2.) It is worth while to enquire
who they are that perceive God speaking to them and are willing to hear
him. (3.) Of the many that hear the voice of God there are very few that
hearken to it or heed it, that hear it with attention and application.
(4.) In hearing the word we must have an eye to the time to come. We
must hear for hereafter, for what may occur between us and the grave; we
must especially hear for eternity. We must hear the word with another
world in our eye.

2\. The counsel is, (1.) To acknowledge the hand of God in their
afflictions, and, whoever were the instruments, to have an eye to him as
the principal agent ([Isa 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024)): "Who
gave Jacob and Israel, that people that used to have such an interest in
heaven and such a dominion on earth, who gave them for a spoil to the
robbers, as they are now to the Babylonians and to the Romans? Did not
the Lord? You know he did; consider it then, and hear his voice in these
judgments." (2.) To acknowledge that they had provoked God thus to
abandon them, and had brought all these calamities upon themselves.
\[1.\] These punishments were first inflicted on them for their
disobedience to the laws of God: It is he against whom we have sinned;
the prophet puts himself into the number of the sinners, As [Dan
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#007), [Dan
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#008). "We have sinned; we have all
brought fuel to the fire; and there are those among us that have
wilfully refused to walk in his ways." Jacob and Israel would never have
been given up to the robbers if they had not by their iniquities sold
themselves. Therefore it is, because they have violated the commands of
the law, that God has brought upon them the curses of the law; he has
not dropped, but poured upon him the fury of his anger and the strength
of battle, all the desolations of war, which have set him on fire round
about; for God surrounds the wicked with his favours. See the power of
God's anger; there is no resisting it, no escaping it. See the mischief
that sin makes; it provokes God to anger against a people, and so
kindles a universal conflagration, sets all on fire. \[2.\] These
judgments were continued upon them for their senselessness and
incorrigibleness under the rod of God. The fire of God's wrath kindled
upon him, and he knew it not, was not aware of it, took no notice of the
judgments, at least not of the hand of God in them. Nay, it burned him,
and, though he could not then but know it and feel it, yet he laid it
not to heart, was not awakened by the fiery rebukes he was under nor at
all affected with them. Those who are not humbled by less judgments must
expect greater; for when God judges he will overcome.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 43](isa043)

</div>
