<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa045)  [Next](isa047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 46:0</span></span>

God, by the prophet here, designing shortly to deliver them out of their
captivity, prepared them for that deliverance by possessing them with a
detestation of idols and with a believing confidence in God, even their
own God. I. Let them not be afraid of the idols of Babylon, as if they
could in any way obstruct their deliverance, for they should be defaced
([Isa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001), [Isa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002)); but let them trust in that God
who had often delivered them to do it still, to do it now ([Isa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003), [Isa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#004)). II. Let them not think to make
idols of their own, images of the God of Israel, by them to worship him,
as the Babylonians worship their gods ([Isa
46:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005)). Let them not be so sottish
([Isa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#008)), but have an eye to God in
his word, not in an image; let them depend upon that, and upon the
promises and predictions of it, and God's power to accomplish them all
([Isa 46:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#009)). And let them know that
the unbelief of man shall not make the word of God of no effect ([Isa
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#012), [Isa
46:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#013)).

[Isaiah 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 46:1</span></span>

We are here told,

I. That the false gods will certainly fail their worshippers when they
have most need of them, [Isa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001),
[Isa 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002). Bel and Nebo were two
celebrated idols of Babylon. Some make Bel to be a contraction of Baal;
others rather think not, but that it was Belus, one of their first
kings, who after his death was deified. As Bel was a deified prince, so
(some think) Nebo was a deified prophet, for so Nebo signifies; so that
Bel and Nebo were their Jupiter and their Mercury or Apollo. Barnabas
and Paul passed at Lystra for Jupiter and Mercury. The names of these
idols were taken into the names of their princes, Bel into Belshazzar's,
Nebo into Nebuchadnezzar's and Nebuzaradan's, etc. These gods they had
long worshipped, and in their revels praised them for their successes
(as appears, [Dan 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#004)); and they
insulted over Israel as if Bel and Nebo were too hard for Jehovah and
could detain them in captivity in defiance of their God. Now, that this
might be no discouragement to the poor captives, God here tells them
what shall become of these idols, which they threaten them with. When
Cyrus takes Babylon, down go the idols. It was usual then with
conquerors to destroy the gods of the places and people they conquered,
and to put the gods of their own nation in the room of them, [Isa
37:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#019). Cyrus will do so; and then Bel
and Nebo, that were set up on high, and looked great, bold, and erect,
shall stoop and bow down at the feet of the soldiers that plunder their
temples. And because there is a great deal of gold and silver upon them,
which was intended to adorn them, but serves to expose them, they carry
them away with the rest of the spoil. The carriers' horses, or mules,
are laden with them and their other idols, to be sent among other lumber
(for so it seems they accounted them rather than treasure) into Persia.
So far are they from being able to support their worshippers that they
are themselves a heavy load in the wagons, and a burden to the weary
beast. The idols cannot help one another ([Isa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002)): They stoop, they bow down
together. They are all alike, tottering things, and their day has come
to fall. Their worshippers cannot help them: They could not deliver the
burden out of the enemy's hand, but themselves (both the idols and the
idolaters) have gone into captivity. Let not therefore God's people be
afraid of either. When God's ark was taken prisoner by the Philistines
it proved a burden, not to the beasts, but to the conquerors, who were
forced to return it; but, when Bel and Nebo have gone into captivity,
their worshippers may even give their good word with them: they will
never recover themselves.

II\. That the true God will never fail his worshippers: "You hear what
has become of Bel and Nebo, now hearken to me, O house of Jacob! [Isa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003), [Isa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#004). Am I such a god as these? No;
though you are brought low, and the house of Israel is but a remnant,
your God has been, is, and ever will be, your powerful and faithful
protector."

1\. Let God's Israel do him the justice to own that he has hitherto been
kind to them, careful of them, tender over them, and has all along done
well for them. Let them own, (1.) That he bore them at first: I have
made. Out of what womb came they, but that of his mercy, and grace, and
promise? He formed them into a people and gave them their constitution.
Every good man is what God makes him. (2.) That he bore them up all
along: You have been borne by me from the belly, and carried from the
womb. God began betimes to do them good, as soon as ever they were
formed into a nation, nay, when as yet they were very few, and
strangers. God took them under a special protection, and suffered no man
to do them wrong, [Psa 105:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#012). In
the infancy of their state, when they were not only foolish and
helpless, as children, but forward and peevish, God carried them in the
arms of his power and love, bore them as upon eagles' wings, [Exo
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004); [Deu
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011). Moses had not patience to carry
them as the nursing father does the sucking child ([Num
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012)), but God bore them, and bore
their manners, [Act 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#018). And as God
began early to do them good (when Israel was a child, then I loved him),
so he had constantly continued to do them good: he had carried them from
the womb to this day. And we may all witness for God that he has been
thus gracious to us. We have been borne by him from the belly, from the
womb, else we should have died from the womb and given up the ghost when
we came out of the belly. We have been the constant care of his kind
providence, carried in the arms of his power and in the bosom of his
love and pity. The new man is so; all that in us which is born of God is
borne up by him, else it would soon fail. Our spiritual life is
sustained by his grace as necessarily and constantly as our natural life
by his providence. The saints have acknowledged that God has carried
them from the womb, and have encouraged themselves with the
consideration of it in their greatest straits, [Psa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009), [Psa
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010); [Psa
71:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#005), [Psa
71:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006), [Psa
71:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#017).

2\. He will then do them the kindness to promise that he will never
leave them. He that was their first will be their last; he that was the
author will be the finisher of their well-being ([Isa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#004)): "You have been borne by me from
the belly, nursed when you were children; and even to your old age I am
he, when, by reason of your decays and infirmities, you will need help
as much as in your infancy." Israel were now growing old, so was their
covenant by which they were incorporated, [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013). Gray hairs were here and there
upon them, [Hos 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#009). And they had
hastened their old age, and the calamities of it, by their
irregularities. But God will not cast them off now, will not fail them
when their strength fails; he is still their God, will still carry them
in the same everlasting arms that were laid under them in Moses's time,
[Deu 33:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#027). He has made them and owns
his interest in them, and therefore he will bear them, will bear with
their infirmities, and bear them up under their afflictions: "Even I
will carry and will deliver them; I will now bear them upon eagles'
wings out of Babylon, as in their infancy I bore them out of Egypt."
This promise to aged Israel is applicable to every aged Israelite. God
has graciously engaged to support and comfort his faithful servants,
even in their old age: "Even to your old age, when you grow unfit for
business, when you are compassed with infirmities, and perhaps your
relations begin to grow weary of you, yet I am he - he that I am, he
that I have been - the very same by whom you have been borne from the
belly and carried from the womb. You change, but I am the same. I am he
that I have promised to be, he that you have found me, and he that you
would have me to be. I will carry you, I will bear, will bear you up and
bear you out, and will carry you on in your way and carry you home at
last."

[Isaiah 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 46:5</span></span>

The deliverance of Israel by the destruction of Babylon (the general
subject of all these chapters) is here insisted upon, and again
promised, for the conviction both of idolaters who set up as rivals with
God, and of oppressors who were enemies to the people of God.

I. For the conviction of those who made and worshipped idols, especially
those of Israel who did so, who would have images of their God, as the
Babylonians had of theirs,

1\. He challenges them either to frame an image that should be thought a
resemblance of him or to set up any being that should stand in
competition with him ([Isa 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005)): To
whom will you liken me? It is absurd to think of representing an
infinite and eternal Spirit by the figure of any creature whatsoever. It
is to change his truth into a lie and to turn his glory into shame. None
ever saw any similitude of him, nor can see his face and live. To whom
then can we liken God? [Isa 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018),
[Isa 40:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#025). It is likewise absurd to
think of making any creature equal with the Creator, who is infinitely
above the noblest creatures, yea, or to make any comparison between the
creature and the Creator, since between infinite and finite there is no
proportion.

2\. He exposes the folly of those who made idols and then prayed to
them, [Isa 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#006), [Isa
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#007). (1.) They were at great charge
upon their idols and spared no cost to fit them for their purpose: They
lavish gold out of the bag; no little will serve, and they do not care
how much goes, though they pinch their families and weaken their estates
by it. How does the profuseness of idolaters shame the niggardliness of
many who call themselves God's servants but are for a religion that will
cost them nothing! Some lavish gold out of the bag to make an idol of it
in the house, while others hoard up gold in the bag to make an idol of
it in the heart; for covetousness is idolatry, as dangerous, though not
as scandalous, as the other. They weigh silver in the balance, either to
be the matter of their idol (for even those that were most sottish had
so much sense as to think that God should be served with the best they
had, the best they could possibly afford; those that represented him by
a calf made it a golden one) or to pay the workmen's wages. The service
of sin often proves very expensive. (2.) They were in great care about
their idols and took no little pains about them ([Isa
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#007)): They bear him upon their own
shoulders, and do not hire porters to do it; they carry him, and set him
in his place, more like a dead corpse than a living God. They set him on
a pedestal, and he stands. They take a great deal of pains to fasten
him, and from his place he shall not remove, that they may know where to
find him, though at the same time they know he can neither move a hand
nor stir a step to do them any kindness. (3.) After all, they paid great
respect to their idols, though they were but the works of their own
hands and the creatures of their own fancies. When the goldsmith has
made it that which they please to call a god they fall down, yea, they
worship it. If they magnified themselves too much in pretending to make
a god, as if they would atone for that, they vilified themselves as much
in prostrating themselves to a god that they knew the original of. And,
if they were deceived by the custom of their country in making such gods
as these, they did no less deceive themselves when they cried unto them,
though they knew they could not answer them, could not understand what
they said to them, nor so much as reply Yea, or No, much less could they
save them out of their trouble. Now shall any that have some knowledge
of, and interest in, the true and living God, thus make fools of
themselves?

3\. He puts it to themselves, and their own reason, let that judge in
the case ([Isa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#008)): "Remember this,
that has been often told you, what senseless helpless things idols are,
and show yourselves men - men and not brutes, men and not babes. Act
with reason; act with resolution; act for your own interest. Do a wise
thing; do a brave thing; and scorn to disparage your own judgment as you
do when you worship idols." Note, Sinners would become saints if they
would but show themselves men, if they would but support the dignity of
their nature and use aright its powers and capacities. "Many things you
have been reminded of; bring them again to mind, recall them into you
memories, and revolve them there. O! you transgressors, consider your
ways; remember whence you have fallen, and repent, and so recover
yourselves."

4\. He again produces incontestable proofs that he is God, that he and
none besides is so ([Isa 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#009)): I am
God, and there is none like me. This is that which we have need to be
reminded of again and again; for proof of it he refers, (1.) To the
sacred history: "Remember the former things of old, what the God of
Israel did for his people in their beginnings, whether he did not that
for them which no one else could, and which the false gods did not, nor
could do, for their worshippers. Remember those things, and you will own
that I am God and there is none else." This is a good reason why we
should give glory to him as a nonsuch, and why we should not give that
glory to any other which is due to him alone, [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011). (2.) To the sacred prophecy. He
is God alone, for it is he only that declares the end from the
beginning, [Isa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#010). From the
beginning of time he declared the end of time, and end of all things.
Enoch prophesied, Behold, the Lord comes. From the beginning of a nation
he declares what the end of it will be. He told Israel what should befal
them in the latter days, what their end should be, and wished they were
so wise as to consider it, [Deu 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020),
[Deu 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020). From the beginning of an
event he declares what the end of it will be. Known unto God are all his
works, and, when he pleases, he makes them known. Further than prophecy
guides us it is impossible for us to find out the work that God makes
from the beginning to the end, [Ecc
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011). He declares from ancient times
the things that are not yet done. Many scripture prophecies which were
delivered long ago are not yet accomplished; but the accomplishment of
some in the mean time is an earnest of the accomplishment of the rest in
due time. By this it appears that he is God, and none else; it is he,
and none besides, that can say, and make his words good, "My counsel
shall stand, and all the powers of hell and earth cannot control or
disannul it nor all their policies correct or countermine it." As God's
operations are all according to his counsels, so his counsels shall all
be fulfilled in his operations, and none of his measures shall be
broken, none of his designs shall miscarry. This yields abundant
satisfaction to those who have bound up all their comforts in God's
counsels, that his counsel shall undoubtedly stand; and, if we are
brought to this, that whatever pleases God pleases us, nothing can
contribute more to make us easy than to be assured of this, that God
will do all his pleasure, [Psa 135:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#006).
The accomplishment of this particular prophecy, which relates to the
elevation of Cyrus and his agency in the deliverance of God's people out
of their captivity, is mentioned for the confirmation of this truth,
that the Lord is God and there is none else; and this is a thing which
shall shortly come to pass, [Isa
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011). God by his counsel calls a
ravenous bird from the east, a bird of prey, Cyrus, who (they say) had a
nose like the beak of a hawk or eagle, to which some think this alludes,
or (as others say) to the eagle which was his standard, as it was
afterwards that of the Romans, to which there is supposed to be a
reference, [Mat 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028). Cyrus came from
the east at God's call: for God is Lord of hosts and of those that have
hosts at command. And, if God give him a call, he will give him success.
He is the man that shall execute God's counsel, though he comes from a
far country and knows nothing of the matter. Note, Even those that know
not, and mind not, God's revealed will, are made use of to fulfil the
counsels of his secret will, which shall all be punctually accomplished
in their season by what hand he pleases. That which is here added, to
ratify this particular prediction, may abundantly show to the heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel: "I have spoken of it by my
servants the prophets, and what I have spoken is just the same with what
I have purposed." For, though God has many things in his purposes which
are not in his prophecies, he has nothing in his prophecies but what are
in his purposes. And he will do it, for he will never change his mind;
he will bring it to pass, for it is not in the power of any creature to
control him. Observe with what majesty he says it, as one having
authority: I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass. Dictum,
factum - no sooner said than done. I have purposed it, and he does not
say, "I will take care it shall be done," but, "I will do it." Heaven
and earth shall pass away sooner than one tittle of the word of God.

II\. For the conviction of those that daringly opposed the counsels of
God assurance is here given not only that they shall be accomplished,
but that they shall be accomplished very shortly, [Isa
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#012), [Isa
46:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#013).

1\. This is addressed to the stout-hearted, that is, either, (1.) The
proud and obstinate Babylonians, that are far from righteousness, far
from doing justice or showing mercy to those they have power over, that
say they will never let the oppressed go free, but will still detain
them in spite of their petitions or God's predictions, that are far from
any thing of clemency or compassion to the miserable. Or, (2.) The
unhumbled Jews, that have been long under the hammer, long in the
furnace, but are not broken are not melted, that, like the unbelieving
murmuring Israelites in the wilderness, think themselves far from God's
righteousness (that is, from the performance of his promise, and his
appearing to judge for them), and by their distrusts set themselves at a
yet further distance from it, and keep good things from themselves, as
their fathers, who could not enter into the land of promise because of
unbelief. This is applicable to the Jewish nation when they rejected the
gospel of Christ; though they followed after the law of righteousness,
they attained not to righteousness, because they sought it not by faith,
[Rom 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031), [Rom
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032). They perished far from
righteousness; and it was because they were stout-hearted, [Rom
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003).

2\. Now to them God says that, whatever they think, the one in
presumption, the other in despair, (1.) Salvation shall be certainly
wrought for God's people. If men will not do them justice, God will, and
his righteousness shall effect that for them which men's righteousness
would not reach to. He will place salvation in Zion, that is, he will
make Jerusalem a place of safety and defence to all those who will plant
themselves there; thence shall salvation go forth for Israel his glory.
God glories in his Israel; and he will be glorified in the salvation he
designs to work out for them; it shall redound greatly to his honour.
This salvation shall be in Zion; for thence the gospel shall take rise
([Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)), thither the Redeemer comes
([Isa 59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020), [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026)), and it is Zion's King that has
salvation, [Zac 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009). (2.) It shall be
very shortly wrought. This is especially insisted on with those who
thought it at a distance: "I bring near my righteousness, nearer than
you think of; perhaps it is nearest of all when your straits are
greatest and your enemies most injurious; it shall not be far off when
there is occasion for it, [Psa 85:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#009).
Behold, the Judge stands before the door. My salvation shall not tarry
any longer than till it is ripe and you are ready for it; and therefore,
though it tarry, wait for it; wait patiently, for he that shall come
will come, and will not tarry."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 47](isa047)

</div>
