<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa010)  [Next](isa012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 11:0</span></span>

It is a very good transition in prophecy (whether it be so in rhetoric
or no), and a very common one, to pass from the prediction of the
temporal deliverances of the church to that of the great salvation,
which in the fulness of time should be wrought out by Jesus Christ, of
which the other were types and figures, to which all the prophets bore
witness; and so the ancient Jews understood them. For what else was it
that raised so great an expectation of the Messiah at the time he came.
Upon occasion of the prophecy of the deliverance of Jerusalem from
Sennacherib, here comes in a prophecy concerning Messiah the Prince. I.
His rise out of the house of David ([Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)). II. His qualifications for his
great undertaking ([Isa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002), [Isa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)). III. The justice and equity of
his government ([Isa 11:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)). IV. The
peaceableness of his kingdom ([Isa
11:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)). V. The accession of the
Gentiles to it ([Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)), and with
them the remnant of the Jews, that should be united with them in the
Messiah's kingdom ([Isa 11:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011)) and
of all this God would now shortly give them a type, and some dark
representation, in the excellent government of Hezekiah, the great peace
which the nation should enjoy under him, after the ruin of Sennacherib's
design, and the return of many of the ten tribes out of their dispersion
to their brethren of the land of Judah, when they enjoyed that great
tranquility.

[Isaiah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 11:1</span></span>

The prophet had before, in this sermon, spoken of a child that should be
born, a son that should be given, on whose shoulders the government
should be, intending this for the comfort of the people of God in times
of trouble, as dying Jacob, many ages before, had intended the prospect
of Shiloh for the comfort of his seed in their affliction in Egypt. He
had said ([Isa 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#027)) that the yoke
should be destroyed because of the anointing; now here he tells us on
whom that anointing should rest. He foretels,

I. That the Messiah should, in due time, arise out of the house of
David, as that branch of the Lord which he had said ([Isa
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002)) should be excellent and glorious;
the word is Netzer, which some think is referred to in [Mat
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023), where it is said to be spoken by
the prophets of the Messiah that he should be called a Nazarene. Observe
here, 1. Whence this branch should arise-from Jesse. He should be the
son of David, with whom the covenant of royalty was made, and to whom it
was promised with an oath that of the fruit of his loins God would raise
of Christ, [Act 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030). David is often
called the son of Jesse, and Christ is called so, because he was to be
not only the Son of David, but David himself, [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005). 2. The meanness of his
appearance. (1.) He is called a rod, and a branch; both the words here
used signify a weak, small, tender product, a twig and a sprig (so some
render them), such as is easily broken off. The enemies of God's church
were just before compared to strong and stately boughs ([Isa
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#033)), which will not, without great
labour, be hewn down, but Christ to a tender branch ([Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)); yet he shall be victorious over
them. (2.) He is said to come out of Jesse rather than David, because
Jesse lived and died in meanness and obscurity; his family was of small
account ([Sa1 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#018)), and it was in a
way of contempt and reproach that David was sometimes called the son of
Jesse, [Sa1 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#007). (3.) He comes forth
out of the stem, or stump, of Jesse. When the royal family, that had
been as a cedar, was cut down, and only the stump of it left, almost
levelled with the ground and lost in the grass of the field ([Dan
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#015)), yet it shall sprout again ([Job
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007)); nay, it shall grow out of his
roots, which are quite buried in the earth, and, like the roots of
flowers in the winter, have no stem appearing above ground. The house of
David was reduced and brought very low at the time of Christ's birth,
witness the obscurity and poverty of Joseph and Mary. The Messiah was
thus to begin his estate of humiliation, for submitting to which he
should be highly exalted, and would thus give early notice that his
kingdom was not of this world. The Chaldee paraphrase reads this, There
shall come forth a King from the sons of Jesse, and the Messiah (or
Christ) shall be anointed out of his sons' sons.

II\. That he should be every way qualified for that great work to which
he was designed, that this tender branch should be so watered with the
dews of heaven as to become a strong rod for a sceptre to rule, [Isa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002). 1. In general, the Spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him. The Holy Spirit, in all his gifts and graces,
shall not only come, but rest and abide upon him; he shall have the
Spirit not by measure, but without measure, the fulness of the Godhead
dwelling in him, [Col 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019); [Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009). He began his preaching with this
([Luk 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018)), The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me. 2. In particular, the spirit of government, by which he should
be every way fitted for that judgment which the Father has committed to
him and given him authority to execute ([Joh
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022), [Joh
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027)), and not only so, but should be
made the fountain and treasury of all grace to believers, that from his
fulness they might all receive the Spirit of grace, as all the members
of the body derive animal spirits from the head. (1.) He shall have the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, of counsel and knowledge; he shall
thoroughly understand the business he is to be employed in. No man knows
the Father but the Son, [Mat 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027).
What he is to make known to the children of men concerning God, and his
mind and will, he shall be himself acquainted with and apprised of, [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018). He shall know how to administer
the affairs of his spiritual kingdom in all the branches of it, so as
effectually to answer the two great intentions of it, the glory of God
and the welfare of the children of men. The terms of the covenant shall
be settled by him, and ordinances instituted, in wisdom: treasures of
wisdom shall be hid in him; he shall be our counsellor, and shall be
made of God to us wisdom. (2.) The spirit of courage, or might, or
fortitude. The undertaking was very great, abundance of difficulty must
be broken through, and therefore it was necessary that he should be so
endowed that he might not fail or be discouraged, [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004). He was famed for courage in his
teaching the way of God in truth, and not caring for any man, [Mat
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016). (3.) The spirit of religion, or
the fear of the Lord; not only he shall himself have a reverent
affection for his Father, as his servant ([Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)), and he was heard in that he
feared ([Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)), but he shall have a
zeal for religion, and shall design the advancement of it in his whole
undertaking. Our faith in Christ was never designed to supersede and
jostle out, but to increase and support, our fear of the Lord.

III\. That he should be accurate, and critical, and very exact in the
administration of his government and the exercise of the power committed
to him ([Isa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)): The Spirit
wherewith he shall be clothed shall make him of quick understanding in
the fear of the Lord - of an acute smell or scent (so the word is), for
the apprehensions of the mind are often expressed by the sensations of
the body. Note, 1. Those are most truly and valuably intelligent that
are so in the fear of the Lord, in the business of religion, for that is
both the foundation and top-stone of wisdom. 2. By this it will appear
that we have the Spirit of God, if we have spiritual senses exercised,
and are of quick understanding in the fear of the lord. Those have
divine illumination that know their duty and know how to go about it. 3.
Therefore Jesus Christ had the spirit without measure, that he might
perfectly understand his undertaking; and he did so, as appears not only
in the admirable answers he gave to all that questioned with him, which
proved him to be of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, but in
the management of his whole undertaking. He has settled the great affair
of religion so unexpectedly well (so as effectually to secure both God's
honour and man's happiness) that, it must be owned, he thoroughly
understood it.

IV\. That he should be just and righteous in all the acts of his
government, and there should appear in it as much equity as wisdom. He
shall judge as he expresses it himself, and as he himself would be
judged of, [Joh 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024). 1. Not according
to outward appearance ([Isa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)): he
shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, with respect of persons
([Job 34:19](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#019)) and according to outward
shows and appearances, not reprove after the hearing of his ears, by
common fame and report, and the representations of others, as men
commonly do; nor does he judge of men by the fair words they speak,
calling him, Lord, Lord, or their plausible actions before the eye of
the world, which they do to be seen of men; but he will judge by the
hidden man of the heart, and the inward principles men are governed by,
of which he is an infallible witness. Christ will judge the secrets of
men ([Rom 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016)), will determine
concerning them, not according to their own pretensions and appearances
(that were to judge after the sight of the eyes), not according to the
opinion others have of them (that were to judge after the hearing of the
ears), but we are sure that his judgment is according to truth. 2. He
will judge righteous judgment ([Isa
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005)): Righteousness shall be the
girdle of his loins. He shall be righteous in the administration of his
government, and his righteousness shall be his girdle; it shall
constantly compass him and cleave to him, shall be his ornament and
honour; he shall gird himself for every action, shall gird on his sword
for war in righteousness; his righteousness shall be his strength, and
shall make him expeditious in his undertakings, as a man with his loins
girt. In conformity to Christ, his followers must have the girdle of
truth ([Eph 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014)) and it will be the
stability of the times. Particularly, (1.) He shall in righteousness
plead for the people that are poor and oppressed; he will be their
protector ([Isa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)): With
righteousness shall he judge the poor; he shall judge in favour and
defence of those that have right on their side, though they are poor in
the world, and because they are poor in spirit. It is the duty of
princes to defend and deliver the poor ([Psa
82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003), [Psa
82:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#004)), and the honour of Christ that
he is the poor man's King, [Psa 72:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#002),
[Psa 72:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#004). He shall debate with
evenness for the meek of the earth, or of the land; those that bear the
injuries done them with meekness and patience are in a special manner
entitled to the divine care and protection. I, as a deaf man, heard not,
for thou wilt hear, [Psa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013), [Psa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#014). Some read it, He shall reprove
or correct the meek of the earth with equity. If his own people, the
meek of the land, do amiss, he will visit their transgression with the
rod. (2.) He shall in righteousness plead against his enemies that are
proud and oppressors ([Isa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)): But
he shall smite the earth, the man of the earth, that doth oppress (see
[Psa 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018)), the men of the world,
that mind earthly things only ([Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014)); these he shall smite with the
rod of his mouth, the word of his mouth, speaking terror and ruin to
them; his threatenings shall take hold of them, and be executed upon
them. With the breath of his lips, by the operation of his Spirit,
according to his word, and working with and by it, he shall slay the
wicked. He will do it easily, with a word's speaking, as he laid those
flat who came to seize him, by saying I am he, [Joh
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006). Killing terrors shall arrest
their consciences, killing judgments shall ruin them, their power, and
all their interests; and in the other world everlasting tribulation will
be recompensed to those that trouble his poor people. The apostle
applies this to the destruction of the man of sin, whom he calls that
wicked one ([Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)) whom the Lord
will consume with the spirit of his mouth. And the Chaldee here reads
it, He shall slay that wicked Romulus, or Rome, as Mr. Hugh Broughton
understands it.

V. That there should be great peace and tranquillity under his
government; this is an explication of what was said in [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006), that he should be the Prince of
peace. Peace signifies two things: -

1\. Unity or concord, which is intimated in these figurative promises,
that even the wolf shall dwell peaceably with the lamb; men of the most
fierce and furious dispositions, who used to bite and devour all about
them, shall have their temper so strangely altered by the efficacy of
the gospel and grace of Christ that they shall live in love even with
the weakest and such as formerly they would have made an easy prey of.
So far shall the sheep be from hurting one another, as sometimes they
have done ([Eze 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#020), [Eze
34:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#021)), that even the wolves shall
agree with them. Christ, who is our peace, came to slay all enmities and
to settle lasting friendships among his followers, particularly between
Jews and Gentiles: when multitudes of both, being converted to the faith
of Christ, united in one sheep-fold, then the wolf and the lamb dwelt
together; the wolf did not so much as threaten the lamb, nor was the
lamb afraid of the wolf. The leopard shall not only not tear the kid,
but shall lie down with her: even their young ones shall lie down
together, and shall be trained up in a blessed amity, in order to the
perpetuating of it. The lion shall cease to be ravenous and shall eat
straw like the ox, as some think all the beasts of prey did before the
fall. The asp and the cockatrice shall cease to be venomous, so that
parents shall let their children play with them and put their hands
among them. A generation of vipers shall become a seed of saints, and
the old complaint of homo homini lupus - man is a wolf to man, shall be
at an end. Those that inhabit the holy mountain shall live as amicably
as the creatures did that were with Noah in the ark, and it shall be a
means of their preservation, for they shall not hurt nor destroy one
another as they have done. Now, (1.) This is fulfilled in the wonderful
effect of the gospel upon the minds of those that sincerely embrace it;
it changes the nature, and makes those that trampled on the meek of the
earth, not only meek like them, but affectionate towards them. When
Paul, who had persecuted the saints, joined himself to them, then the
wolf dwelt with the lamb. (2.) Some are willing to hope it shall yet
have a further accomplishment in the latter days, when swords shall be
beaten into ploughshares.

2\. Safety or security. Christ, the great Shepherd, shall take such care
of the flock that those who would hurt them shall not; they shall not
only not destroy one another, but no enemy from without shall be
permitted to give them any molestation. The property of troubles, and of
death itself, shall be so altered that they shall not do any real hurt
to, much less shall they be the destruction of, any that have their
conversation in the holy mountain, [Pe1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013). Who, or what, can harm us, if we
be followers of him that is good? God's people shall be delivered, not
only from evil, but from the fear of it. Even the sucking child shall
without any terror play upon the hole of the asp; blessed Paul does so
when he says, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? and, O
death! where is thy sting?

Lastly, Observe what shall be the effect, and what the cause, of this
wonderful softening and sweetening of men's tempers by the grace of God.
1. The effect of it shall be tractableness, and a willingness to receive
instruction: A little child shall lead those who formerly scorned to be
controlled by the strongest man. Calvin understands it of their willing
submission to the ministers of Christ, who are to instruct with meekness
and not to use any coercive power, but to be as little children, [Mat
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003). See [Co2
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#005). 2. The cause of it shall be the
knowledge of God. The more there is of that the more there is of a
disposition to peace. They shall thus live in love, for the earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, which shall extinguish men's heats
and animosities. The better acquainted we are with the God of love the
more shall we be changed into the same image and the better affected
shall we be to all those that bear his image. The earth shall be as full
of this knowledge as the channels of the sea are of water - so broad and
extensive shall this knowledge be and so far shall it spread - so deep
and substantial shall this knowledge be, and so long shall it last.
There is much more of the knowledge of God to be got by the gospel of
Christ than could be got by the law of Moses; and, whereas then in Judah
only was God known, now all shall know him, [Heb
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#011). But that is knowledge falsely so
called which sows discord among men; the right knowledge of God settles
peace.

[Isaiah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 11:10</span></span>

We have here a further prophecy of the enlargement and advancement of
the kingdom of the Messiah, under the type and figure of the flourishing
condition of the kingdom of Judah in the latter end of Hezekiah's reign,
after the defeat of Sennacherib.

I. This prediction was in part accomplished when the great things God
did for Hezekiah and his people proved as an ensign, inviting the
neighbouring nations to them to enquire of the wonders done in the land,
on which errand the king of Babylon's ambassadors came. To them the
Gentiles sought; and Jerusalem, the rest or habitation of the Jews, was
then glorious, [Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010). Then many
of the Israelites who belonged to the kingdom of the ten tribes, who
upon the destruction of that kingdom by the king of Assyria were forced
to flee for shelter into all the countries about and to some that lay
very remote, even to the islands of the sea, were encouraged to return
to their own country and put themselves under the protection and
government of the king of Judah, the rather because it was an Assyrian
army by which their country had been ruined and that was not routed.
This is said to be a recovery of them the second time ([Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011)), such an instance of the power
and goodness of God, and such a reviving to them, as their first
deliverance out of Egypt was. Then the outcasts of Israel should be
gathered in, and brought home, and those of Judah too, who, upon the
approach of the Assyrian army, shifted for their own safety. Then the
old feud between Ephraim and Judah shall be forgotten, and they shall
join against the Philistines and their other common enemies, [Isa
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013), [Isa
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014). Note, Those who have been
sharers with each other in afflictions and mercies, dangers and
deliverances, ought in consideration thereof to unite for their joint
and mutual safety and protection; and it is likely to be well with the
church when Ephraim and Judah are one against the Philistines. Then,
whatever difficulties there may be in the way of the return of the
dispersed, the Lord shall find out some way or other to remove them, as
when he brought Israel out of Egypt he dried up the Red Sea and Jordan
([Isa 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015)) and led them to Canaan
through the invincible embarrassments of a vast howling wilderness, [Isa
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016). The like will he do this second
time, or that which shall be equivalent. When God's time has come for
the deliverance of his people mountains of opposition shall become plain
before him. Let us not despair therefore when the interests of the
church seem to be brought very low; God can soon turn gloomy days into
glorious ones.

II\. It had a further reference to the days of the Messiah and the
accession of the Gentiles to his kingdom; for to these the apostle
applies [Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010), of which the
following verses are a continuation. [Rom
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#012), There shall be a root of Jesse;
and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the
Gentiles trust. That is a key to this prophecy, which speaks of Christ
as the root of Jesse, or a branch out of his roots ([Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)), a root out of a dry ground,
[Isa 53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002). He is the root of David
([Rev 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005)), the root and offspring of
David [Rev 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016).

1\. He shall stand, or be set up, for an ensign of the people. When he
was crucified he was lifted up from the earth, that, as an ensign of
beacon, he might draw the eyes and the hearts of all men unto him, [Joh
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032). He is set up as an ensign in
the preaching of the everlasting gospel, in which the ministers, as
standard-bearers, display the banner of his love, to allure us to him
([Sol 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)), the banner of his truth,
under which we may enlist ourselves, to engage in a holy war against sin
and Satan. Christ is the ensign to which the children of God that were
scattered abroad are gathered together ([Joh
11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051)), and in him they meet as the
centre of their unity.

2\. To him shall the Gentiles seek. We read of Greeks that did so ([Joh
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#021), We would see Jesus), and upon
that occasion Christ spoke of his being lifted up, to draw all men to
him. The apostle, from the Septuagint (or perhaps the Septuagint from
the apostle, in the editions after Christ) reads it ([Rom
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#012)), In him shall the Gentiles
trust; they shall seek to him with a dependence on him.

3\. His rest shall be glorious. Some understand this of the death of
Christ (the triumphs of the cross made even that glorious), others of
his ascension, when he sat down to rest at the right hand of God. Or
rather it is meant of the gospel church, that Mount Zion of which Christ
has said, This is my rest, and in which he resides. This, though
despised by the world, having upon it the beauty of holiness, is truly
glorious, a glorious high throne, [Jer
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012).

4\. Both Jews and Gentiles shall be gathered to him, [Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011). A remnant of both, a little
remnant in comparison, which shall be recovered, as it were, with great
difficulty and hazard. As formerly God delivered his people, and
gathered them out of all the countries whither they were scattered ([Psa
106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047); [Jer
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#015), [Jer
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#016)), so he will a second time, in
another way, by the powerful working of the Spirit of grace with the
word. He shall set his hand to do it; he shall exert his power, the arm
of the Lord shall be revealed to do it. (1.) There shall be a remnant of
the Jews gathered in: The outcasts of Israel and the dispersed of Judah
([Isa 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012)), many of whom, at the
time of the bringing of them in to Christ, were Jews of the dispersion,
the twelve tribes that were scattered abroad ([Jam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001); [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)), shall flock to Christ; and
probably more of those scattered Jews were brought into the church, in
proportion, than of those which remained in their own land. (2.) Many of
the nations, the Gentiles, shall be brought in by the lifting up of the
ensign. Jacob foretold concerning Shiloh that to him should the
gathering of the people be. Those that were strangers and foreigners
shall be made nigh. The Jews were jealous of Christ's going to the
dispersed among the Gentiles and of his teaching the Gentiles, [Joh
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035).

5\. There shall be a happy accommodation between Judah and Ephraim, and
both shall be safe from their adversaries and have dominion over them,
[Isa 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013), [Isa
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014). The coalescence between Judah
and Israel at that time was a type and figure of the uniting of Jews and
Gentiles, who had been so long at variance in the gospel church. The
house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel ([Jer
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018)) and become one nation ([Eze
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#022)); so the Jews and Gentiles are
made of twain one new man ([Eph 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)),
and, being at peace one with another, those that are adversaries to them
both shall be cut off; for they shall fly upon the shoulders of the
Philistines, as an eagle strikes at her prey, shall spoil those on the
west side of them, and then they shall extend their conquests eastward
over the Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites. The gospel of Christ shall
be successful in all parts, and some of all nations shall become
obedient to the faith.

6\. Every thing that might hinder the progress and success of the gospel
shall be taken out of the way. As when God brought Israel out of Egypt
he dried up the Red Sea and Jordan before them ([Isa
63:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#011), [Isa
63:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#012)), and as afterwards when he
brought up the Jews out of Babylon he prepared them their way ([Isa
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010)), so when Jews and Gentiles are
to be brought together into the gospel church all obstructions shall be
removed ([Isa 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015), [Isa
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016)), difficulties that seemed
insuperable shall be strangely got over, the blind shall be led by a way
that they knew not. See [Isa 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#015),
[Isa 42:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#016); [Isa
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019), [Isa
43:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#020). Converts shall be brought in
chariots and in litters, [Isa 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020).
Some think it is the further accession of multitudes to the church that
is pointed at in that obscure prophecy of the drying up of the river
Euphrates, that the way of the kings of the east may be prepared ([Rev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012)), which seems to refer to this
prophecy. Note, When God's time has come for the bringing of nations, or
particular persons, home to himself, divine grace will be victorious
over all opposition. At the presence of the Lord the sea shall flee and
Jordan be driven back; and those who set their faces heavenward will
find there are not such difficulties in the way as they thought there
were, for there is a highway thither, [Isa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 12](isa012)

</div>
