<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam003)  [Next](jam005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 4:0</span></span>

In this chapter we are directed to consider, I. Some causes of
contention, besides those mentioned in the foregoing chapter, and to
watch against them ([Jam 4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)). II.
We are taught to abandon the friendship of this world, so as to submit
and subject ourselves entirely to God ([Jam
4:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004)). III. All detraction and rash
judgment of others are to be carefully avoided ([Jam
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011), [Jam
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012)). IV. We must preserve a constant
regard, and pay the utmost deference to the disposals of divine
Providence ([Jam 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013) to the end).

[James 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 4:1</span></span>

The former chapter speaks of envying one another, as the great spring of
strifes and contentions; this chapter speaks of a lust after worldly
things, and a setting too great a value upon worldly pleasures and
friendships, as that which carried their divisions to a shameful height.

I. The apostle here reproves the Jewish Christians for their wars, and
for their lusts as the cause of them: Whence come wars and fightings
among you? Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your
members, [Jam 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001). The Jews were a
very seditious people, and had therefore frequent wars with the Romans;
and they were a very quarrelsome divided people, often fighting among
themselves; and many of those corrupt Christians against whose errors
and vices this epistle was written seem to have fallen in with the
common quarrels. Hereupon, our apostle informs them that the origin of
their wars and fightings was not (as they pretended) a true zeal for
their country, and for the honour of God, but that their prevailing
lusts were the cause of all. Observe hence, What is sheltered and
shrouded under a specious pretence of zeal for God and religion often
comes from men's pride, malice, covetousness, ambition, and revenge. The
Jews had many struggles with the Roman power before they ere entirely
destroyed. They often unnecessarily embroiled themselves, and then fell
into parties and factions about the different methods of managing their
wars with their common enemies; and hence it came to pass that, when
their cause might be supposed good, yet their engaging in it and their
management of it came from a bad principle. Their worldly and fleshly
lusts raised and managed their wars and fightings; but one would think
here is enough said to subdue those lusts; for, 1. They make a war
within as well as fightings without. Impetuous passions and desires
first war in their members, and then raise feuds in their nation. There
is war between conscience and corruption, and there is war also between
one corruption and another, and from these contentions in themselves
arose their quarrels with each other. Apply this to private cases, and
may we not then say of fightings and strifes among relations and
neighbours they come from those lusts which war in the members? From
lust of power and dominion, lust of pleasure, or lust of riches, from
some one or more of these lusts arise all the broils and contentions
that are in the world; and, since all wars and fightings come from the
corruptions of our own hearts, it is therefore the right method for the
cure of contention to lay the axe to the root, and mortify those lusts
that war in the members. 2. It should kill these lusts to think of their
disappointment: "You lust, and have not; you kill, and desire to have,
and cannot obtain, [Jam 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#002). You covet
great things for yourselves, and you think to obtain them by your
victories over the Romans or by suppressing this and the other party
among yourselves. You think you shall secure great pleasures and
happiness to yourselves, by overthrowing every thing which thwarts your
eager wishes; but, alas! you are losing your labour and your blood,
while you kill one another with such views as these." Inordinate desires
are either totally disappointed, or they are not to be appeased and
satisfied by obtaining the things desired. The words here rendered
cannot obtain signify cannot gain the happiness sought after. Note
hence, Worldly and fleshly lusts are the distemper which will not allow
of contentment or satisfaction in the mind. 3. Sinful desires and
affections generally exclude prayer, and the working of our desires
towards God: "You fight and war, yet you have not, because you ask not.
You fight, and do not succeed, because you do not pray you do not
consult God in your undertakings, whether he will allow of them or not;
and you do not commit your way to him, and make known your requests to
him, but follow your own corrupt views and inclinations: therefore you
meet with continual disappointments;" or else. 4. "Your lusts spoil your
prayers, and make them an abomination to God, whenever you put them up
to him, v. 3. You ask, and receive not, because you ask amiss, that you
may consume it upon your lusts." As if it had been said, "Though perhaps
you may sometimes pray for success against your enemies, yet it is not
your aim to improve the advantages you gain, so as to promote true piety
and religion either in yourselves or others; but pride, vanity, luxury,
and sensuality, are what you would serve by your successes, and by your
very prayers. You want to live in great power and plenty, in
voluptuousness and a sensual prosperity; and thus you disgrace devotion
and dishonour God by such gross and base ends; and therefore your
prayers are rejected." Let us learn hence, in the management of all our
worldly affairs, and in our prayers to God for success in them, to see
that our ends be right. When men follow their worldly business (suppose
them tradesmen or husbandmen), and ask of God prosperity, but do not
receive what they ask for, it is because they ask with wrong aims and
intentions. They ask God to give them success in their callings or
undertakings; not that they may glorify their heavenly Father and do
good with what they have, but that they may consume it upon their lusts
- that they may be enabled to eat better meat, and drink better drink,
and wear better clothes, and so gratify their pride, vanity, and
voluptuousness. But, if we thus seek the things of this world, it is
just in God to deny them; whereas, if we seek any thing that we may
serve God with it, we may expect he will either give us what we seek or
give us hearts to be content without it, and give opportunities of
serving and glorifying him some other way. Let us remember this, that
when we speed not in our prayers it is because we ask amiss; either we
do not ask for right ends or not in a right manner, not with faith or
not with fervency: unbelieving and cold desires beg denials; and this we
may be sure of, that, when our prayers are rather the language of our
lusts than of our graces, they will return empty.

II\. We have fair warning to avoid all criminal friendships with this
world: You adulterers and adulteresses, know you not that the friendship
of the world is enmity with God? [Jam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004). Worldly people are here called
adulterers and adulteresses, because of their perfidiousness of God,
while they give their best affections to the world. Covetousness is
elsewhere called idolatry, and it is here called adultery; it is a
forsaking of him to whom we are devoted and espoused, to cleave to other
things; there is this brand put upon worldly-mindedness - that it is
enmity to God. A man may have a competent portion of the good things of
this life, and yet may keep himself in the love of God; but he who sets
his heart upon the world, who places his happiness in it, and will
conform himself to it, and do any thing rather than lose its friendship,
he is an enemy to God; it is constructive treason and rebellion against
God to set the world upon his throne in our hearts. Whosoever therefore
is the friend of the world is the enemy of God. He who will act upon
this principle, to keep the smiles of the world, and to have its
continual friendship, cannot but show himself, in spirit, and in his
actions too, an enemy to God. You cannot serve God and mammon, [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024). Hence arise wars and fightings,
even from this adulterous idolatrous love of the world, and serving of
it; for what peace can there be among men, so long as there is enmity
towards God? or who can fight against God, and prosper? "Think seriously
with yourselves what the spirit of the world is, and you will find that
you cannot suit yourselves to it as friends, but it must occasion your
being envious, and full of evil inclinations, as the generality of the
world are. Do you think that the scripture saith in vain, The spirit
that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy?" [Jam
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#005). The account given in the holy
scriptures of the hearts of men by nature is that their imagination is
evil, only evil, and that continually, [Gen
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005). Natural corruption principally
shows itself by envying, and there is a continual propensity to this.
The spirit which naturally dwells in man is always producing one evil
imagination or another, always emulating such as we see and converse
with and seeking those things which are possessed and enjoyed by them.
Now this way of the world, affecting pomp and pleasure, and falling into
strifes and quarrels for the sake of these things, is the certain
consequence of being friends to the world; for there is no friendship
without a oneness of spirit, and therefore Christians, to avoid
contentions, must avoid the friendship of the world, and must show that
they are actuated by nobler principles and that a nobler spirit dwells
in them; for, if we belong to God, he gives more grace than to live and
act as the generality of the world do. The spirit of the world teaches
men to be churls; God teaches them to be bountiful. The spirit of the
world teaches us to lay up, or lay out, for ourselves, and according to
our own fancies; God teaches us to be willing to communicate to the
necessities and to the comfort of others, and so as to do good to all
about us, according to our ability. The grace of God is contrary to the
spirit of the world, and therefore the friendship of the world is to be
avoided, if we pretend to be friends of God yea, the grace of God will
correct and cure the spirit that naturally dwells in us; where he giveth
grace, he giveth another spirit than that of the world.

III\. We are taught to observe the difference God makes between pride
and humility. God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble,
[Jam 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006). This is represented as the
language of scripture in the Old Testament; for so it is declared in the
book of Psalms that God will save the afflicted people (if their spirits
be suited to their condition), but will bring down high looks ([Psa
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027)); and in the book of Proverbs it
is said, He scorneth the scorners, and giveth grace unto the lowly, [Pro
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034). Two things are here to be
observed: - 1. The disgrace cast upon the proud: God resists them; the
original word, antitassetai, signifies, God's setting himself as in
battle array against them; and can there be a greater disgrace than for
God to proclaim a man a rebel, an enemy, a traitor to his crown and
dignity, and to proceed against him as such? The proud resists God; in
his understanding he resists the truths of God; in his will he resists
the truths of God; in his will he resists the laws of God; in his
passions he resists the providence of God; and therefore no wonder that
God sets himself against the proud. Let proud spirits hear this and
tremble - God resists them. Who can describe the wretched state of those
who make God their enemy? He will certainly fill with same (sooner or
later) the faces of such as have filled their hearts with pride. We
should therefore resist pride in our hearts, if we would not have God to
resist us. 2. The honour and help God gives to the humble. Grace, as
opposed to disgrace, is honour; this God gives to the humble; and, where
God gives grace to be humble, there he will give all other graces, and,
as in the beginning of this sixth verse, he will give more grace.
Wherever God gives true grace, he will give more; for to him that hath,
and useth what he hath aright, more shall be given. He will especially
give more grace to the humble, because they see their need of it, will
pray for it and be thankful for it; and such shall have it. For this
reason,

IV\. We are taught to submit ourselves entirely to God: Submit
yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from
you, [Jam 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007). Christians should
forsake the friendship of the world, and watch against that envy and
pride which they see prevailing in natural men, and should by grace
learn to glory in their submissions to God. "Submit yourselves to him as
subjects to their prince, in duty, and as one friend to another, in love
and interest. Submit your understandings to the truths of God; submit
your wills to the will of God, the will of his precept, the will of his
providence." We are subjects, and as such must be submissive; not only
through fear, but through love; not only for wrath, but also for
conscience' sake. "Submit yourselves to God, as considering how many
ways you are bound to this, and as considering what advantage you will
gain by it; for God will not hurt you by his dominion over you, but will
do you good." Now, as this subjection and submission to God are what the
devil most industriously strives to hinder, so we ought with great care
and steadiness to resist his suggestions. If he would represent a tame
yielding to the will and providence of God as what will bring
calamities, and expose to contempt and misery, we must resist these
suggestions of fear. If he would represent submission to God as a
hindrance to our outward ease, or worldly preferments, we must resist
these suggestions of pride and sloth. If he would tempt us to lay any of
our miseries, and crosses, and afflictions, to the charge of Providence,
so that we might avoid them by following his directions instead of
God's, we must resist these provocations to anger, not fretting
ourselves in any wise to do evil. "Let not the devil, in these or the
like attempts, prevail upon you; but resist him and he will flee from
you." If we basely yield to temptations, the devil will continually
follow us; but if we put on the whole armour of God, and stand it out
against him, he will be gone from us. Resolution shuts and bolts the
door against temptation.

V. We are directed how to act towards God, in our becoming submissive to
him, [Jam 4:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008). 1. Draw nigh to God.
The heart that has rebelled must be brought to the foot of God; the
spirit that was distant and estranged from a life of communion and
converse with God must become acquainted with him: "Draw nigh to God, in
his worship and institutions, and in every duty he requires of you." 2.
Cleanse your hands. He who comes unto God must have clean hands. Paul
therefore directs to lift up holy hands without wrath and doubting ([Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)), hands free from blood, and
bribes, and every thing that is unjust or cruel, and free from every
defilement of sin: he is not subject to God who is a servant of sin. The
hands must be cleansed by faith, repentance, and reformation, or it will
be in vain for us to draw nigh to God in prayer, or in any of the
exercises of devotion. 3. The hearts of the double-minded must be
purified. Those who halt between God and the world are here meant by the
double-minded. To purify the heart is to be sincere, and to act upon
this single aim and principle, rather to please God than to seek after
any thing in this world: hypocrisy is heart-impurity; but those who
submit themselves to God aright will purify their hearts as well as
cleanse their hands. 4. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep. "What
afflictions God sends take them as he would have you, and by duly
sensible of them. Be afflicted when afflictions are sent upon you, and
do not despise them; or be afflicted in your sympathies with those who
are so, and in laying to heart the calamities of the church of God.
Mourn and weep for your own sins and the sins of others; times of
contention and division are times to mourn in, and the sins that
occasion wars and fightings should be mourned for. Let your laughter be
turned to mourning and your joy to heaviness." This may be taken either
as a prediction of sorrow or a prescription of seriousness. Let men
think to set grief at defiance, yet God can bring it upon them; none
laugh so heartily but he can turn their laughter into mourning; and this
the unconcerned Christians James wrote to are threatened should be their
case. They are therefore directed, before things come to the worst, to
lay aside their vain mirth and their sensual pleasures, that they might
indulge godly sorrow and penitential tears. 5. "Humble yourselves in the
sight of the Lord. Let the inward acts of the would be suitable to all
those outward expressions of grief, affliction, and sorrow, before
mentioned." Humility of spirit is here required, as in the sight of him
who looks principally at the spirits of men. "Let there be a thorough
humiliation in bewailing every thing that is evil; let there be great
humility in doing that which is good: Humble yourselves."

VI\. We have great encouragement to act thus towards God: He will draw
nigh to those that draw nigh to him ([Jam
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008)), and he will lift up those who
humble themselves in his sight, [Jam
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#010). Those that draw nigh to God in a
way of duty shall find God drawing nigh to them in a way of mercy. Draw
nigh to him in faith, and trust, and obedience, and he will draw nigh to
you for your deliverance. If there be not a close communion between God
and us, it is our fault, and not his. He shall lift up the humble. Thus
much our Lord himself declared, He that shall humble himself shall be
exalted, [Mat 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#012). If we be truly
penitent and humble under the marks of God's displeasure, we shall in a
little time know the advantages of his favour; he will lift us up out of
trouble, or he will lift us up in our spirits and comforts under
trouble; he will lift us up to honour and safety in the world, or he
will lift us up in our way to heaven, so as to raise our hearts and
affections above the world. God will revive the spirit of the humble
([Isa 57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015)), He will hear the desire
of the humble ([Psa 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#017)), and he
will at last life them up to glory. Before honour is humility. The
highest honour in heaven will be the reward of the greatest humility on
earth.

[James 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 4:11</span></span>

In this part of the chapter,

I. We are cautioned against the sin of evil-speaking: Speak not evil one
of another, brethren, [Jam 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011). The
Greek word, katalaleite, signifies speaking any thing that may hurt or
injure another; we must not speak evil things of others, though they be
true, unless we be called to it, and there be some necessary occasion
for the; much less must we report evil things when they are false, or,
for aught we know, may be so. Our lips must be guided by the law of
kindness, as well as truth and justice. This, which Solomon makes a
necessary part of the character of his virtuous woman, that she openeth
her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of kindness ([Pro
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#026)), must needs be a part of the
character of every true Christian. Speak not evil one of another, 1.
Because you are brethren. The compellation, as used by the apostle here,
carries an argument along with it. Since Christians are brethren, they
should not defile nor defame one another. It is required of us that we
be tender of the good name of our brethren; where we cannot speak well,
we had better say nothing than speak evil; we must not take pleasure in
making known the faults of others, divulging things that are secret,
merely to expose them, nor in making more of their known faults than
really they deserve, and, least of all, in making false stories, and
spreading things concerning them of which they are altogether innocent.
What is this but to raise the hatred and encourage the persecutions of
the world, against those who are engaged in the same interests with
ourselves, and therefore with whom we ourselves must stand or fall?
"Consider, you are brethren." 2. Because this is to judge the law: He
that speaketh evil of his brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh
evil of the law, and judgeth the law. The law of Moses says, Thou shalt
not go up and down as a tale-bearer among thy people, [Lev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#016). The law of Christ is, Judge
not, that you be not judged, [Mat 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001).
The sum and substance of both is that men should love one another. A
detracting tongue therefore condemns the law of God, and the commandment
of Christ, when it is defaming its neighbour. To break God's
commandments is in effect to speak evil of them, and to judge them, as
if they were too strict, and laid too great a restraint upon us. The
Christians to whom James wrote were apt to speak very hard things of one
another, because of their differences about indifferent things (such as
the observance of meats and days, as appears from Rom. 14): "Now," says
the apostle, "he who censures and condemns his brother for not agreeing
with him in those things which the law of God has left indifferent
thereby censures and condemns the law, as if it had done ill in leaving
them indifferent. He who quarrels with his brother, and condemns him for
the sake of any thing not determined in the word of God, does thereby
reflect on that word of God, as if it were not a perfect rule. Let us
take heed of judging the law, for the law of the Lord is perfect; if men
break the law, leave that to judge them; if they do not break it, let us
not judge them." This is a heinous evil, because it is to forget our
place, that we ought to be doers of the law, and it is to set up
ourselves above it, as if we were to be judges of it. He who is guilty
of the sin here cautioned against is not a doer of the law, but a judge;
he assumes an office and a place that do not belong to him, and he will
be sure to suffer for his presumption in the end. Those who are most
ready to set up for judges of the law generally fail most in their
obedience to it. 3. Because God, the Lawgiver, has reserved the power of
passing the final sentence on men wholly to himself: There is one
Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy: who art thou that judgest
another? [Jam 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012). Princes and states
are not excluded, by what is here said, from making laws; nor are
subjects at all encouraged to disobey human laws; but God is still to be
acknowledged as the supreme Lawgiver, who only can give law to the
conscience, and who alone is to be absolutely obeyed. His right to enact
laws is incontestable, because he has such a power to enforce them. He
is able to save, and to destroy, so as no other can. He has power fully
to reward the observance of his laws, and to punish all disobedience; he
can save the soul, and make it happy for ever, or he can, after he has
killed, cast into hell; and therefore should be feared and obeyed as the
great Lawgiver, and all judgment should be committed to him. Since there
is one Lawgiver, we may infer that it is not for any man or company of
men in the world to pretend to give laws immediately to bind conscience;
for that is God's prerogative, which must not be invaded. As the apostle
had before warned against being many masters, so here he cautions
against being many judges. Let us not prescribe to our brethren, let us
not censure and condemn them; it is sufficient that we have the law of
God, which is a rule to us all; and therefore we should not set up other
rules. Let us not presume to set up our own particular notions and
opinions as a rule to all about us; for there is one Lawgiver.

II\. We are cautioned against a presumptuous confidence of the
continuance of our lives, and against forming projects thereupon with
assurance of success, [Jam 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013), [Jam
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014). The apostle, having reproved
those who were judges and condemners of the law, now reproves such as
were disregardful of Providence: Go to now, and old way of speaking,
designed to engage attention; the Greek word may be rendered, Behold
now, or "See, and consider, you that say, Today or tomorrow we will go
into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get
gain. Reflect a little on this way of thinking and talking; call
yourselves to account for it." Serious reflection on our words and ways
would show us many evils that we are apt, through inadvertency, to run
into and continue in. There were some who said of old, as too many say
still, We will go to such a city, and do this or that, for such a term
of time, while all serious regards to the disposals of Providence were
neglected. Observe here, 1. How apt worldly and projecting men are to
leave God out of their schemes. Where any are set upon earthly things,
these have a strange power of engrossing the thoughts of the heart. WE
should therefore have a care of growing intent or eager in our pursuits
after any thing here below. 2. How much of worldly happiness lies in the
promises men make to themselves beforehand. Their heads are full of fine
visions, as to what they shall do, and be, and enjoy, in some future
time, when they can neither be sure of time nor of any of the advantages
they promise themselves; therefore observe, 3. How vain a thing it is to
look for any thing good in futurity, without the concurrence of
Providence. We will go to such a city (say they), perhaps to Antioch, or
Damascus, or Alexandria, which were then the great places for traffic;
but how could they be sure, when they set out, that they should reach
any of these cities? Something might possibly stop their way, or call
them elsewhere, or cut the thread of life. Many who have set out on a
journey have gone to their long home, and never reached their journey's
end. But, suppose they should reach the city they designed, how did they
know they should continue there? Something might happen to send them
back, or to call them thence, and to shorten their stay. Or suppose they
should stay the full time they proposed, yet they could not be certain
that they should buy and sell there; perhaps they might lie sick there,
or they might not meet with those to trade with them that they expected.
Yea, suppose they should go to that city, and continue there a year, and
should buy and sell, yet they might not get gain; getting of gain in
this world is at best but an uncertain thing, and they might probably
make more losing bargains than gainful ones. And then, as to all these
particulars, the frailty, shortness, and uncertainty of life, ought to
check the vanity and presumptuous confidence of such projectors for
futurity: What is your life? It is even a vapour that appeareth for a
little time, and then vanisheth away, [Jam
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014). God that wisely left us in the
dark concerning future events, and even concerning the duration of life
itself. We know not what shall be on the morrow; we may know what we
intend to do and to be, but a thousand things may happen to prevent us.
We are not sure of life itself, since it is but as a vapour, something
in appearance, but nothing solid nor certain, easily scattered and gone.
We can fix the hour and minute of the sun's rising and setting tomorrow,
but we cannot fix the certain time of a vapour's being scattered; such
is our life: it appears but for a little time, and then vanisheth away;
it vanisheth as to this world, but there is a life that will continue in
the other world; and, since this life is so uncertain, it concerns us
all to prepare and lay up in store for that to come.

III\. We are taught to keep up a constant sense of our dependence on the
will of God for life, and all the actions and enjoyments of it: You
ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this, or that,
[Jam 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#015). The apostle, having
reproved them for what was amiss, now directs them how to be and do
better: "You ought to say it in your hearts at all times, and with your
tongues upon proper occasions, especially in your constant prayers and
devotions, that if the Lord will give leave, and if he will own and
bless you, you have such and such designs to accomplish." This must be
said, not in a slight, formal, and customary way, but so as to think
what we say, and so as to be reverent and serious in what we say. It is
good to express ourselves thus when we have to do with others, but it is
indispensably requisite that we should say this to ourselves in all that
we go about. Sun Theō - with the leave and blessing of God, was used by
the Greeks in the beginning of every undertaking. 1. If the Lord will,
we shall live. We must remember that our times are not in our own hands,
but at the disposal of God; we live as long as God appoints, and in the
circumstances God appoints, and therefore must be submissive to him,
even as to life itself; and then, 2. If the Lord will, we shall do this
or that. All our actions and designs are under the control of Heaven.
Our heads may be filled with cares and contrivances. This and the other
thing we may propose to do for ourselves, or our families, or our
friends; but Providence sometimes breaks all our measures, and throws
our schemes into confusion. Therefore both our counsels for action and
our conduct in action should be entirely referred to God; all we design
and all we do should be with a submissive dependence on God.

IV\. We are directed to avoid vain boasting, and to look upon it not
only as a weak, but a very evil thing. You rejoice in your boastings;
all such rejoicing is evil, [Jam 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#016).
They promised themselves life and prosperity, and great things in the
world, without any just regard to God; and then they boasted of these
things. Such is the joy of worldly people, to boast of all their
successes, yea, often to boast of their very projects before they know
what success they shall have. How common is it for men to boast of
things which they have no other title to than what arises from their own
vanity and presumption! Such rejoicing (says the apostle) is evil; it is
foolish and it is hurtful. For men to boast of worldly things, and of
their aspiring projects, when they should be attending to the humbling
duties before laid down (in [Jam
4:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008)), is a very evil thing. It is a
great sin in God's account, it will bring great disappointment upon
themselves, and it will prove their destruction in the end. If we
rejoice in God that our times are in his hand, that all events are at
his disposal, and that he is our God in covenant, this rejoicing is
good; the wisdom, power, and providence of God, are then concerned to
make all things work together for our good: but, if we rejoice in our
own vain confidences and presumptuous boasts, this is evil; it is an
evil carefully to be avoided by all wise and good men.

V. We are taught, in the whole of our conduct, to act up to our own
convictions, and, whether we have to do with God or men, to see that we
never go contrary to our own knowledge ([Jam
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#017)): To him that knoweth to do good,
and doeth it not, to him it is sin; it is aggravated sin; it is sinning
with a witness; and it is to have the worst witness against his own
conscience. Observe, 1. This stands immediately connected with the plain
lesson of saying, If the Lord will, we shall do this or that; they might
be ready to say, "This is a very obvious thing; who knows not that we
all depend upon almighty God for life, and breath, and all things?"
Remember then, if you do know this, whenever you act unsuitably to such
a dependence, that to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him
it is sin, the greater sin. 2. Omissions are sins which will come into
judgment, as well as commissions. He that does not the good he knows
should be done, as well as he who does the evil he knows should not be
done, will be condemned. Let us therefore take care that conscience be
rightly informed, and then that it be faithfully and constantly obeyed;
for, if our own hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence towards
God; but if we say, We see, and do not act suitably to our sight, then
our sin remaineth, [Joh 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#041).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 5](jam005)

</div>
