<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam004)  [Next](pe1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 5:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle denounces the judgments of God upon those
rich men who oppress the poor, showing them how great their sin and
folly are in the sight of God, and how grievous the punishments would be
which should fall upon themselves ([Jam
5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)). Hereupon, all the faithful are
exhorted to patience under their trials and sufferings ([Jam
5:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)). The sin of swearing is
cautioned against ([Jam 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)). We are
directed how to act, both under affliction and in prosperity ([Jam
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013)). Prayer for the sick, and
anointing with oil, are prescribed ([Jam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014), [Jam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015)). Christians are directed to
acknowledge their faults one to another, and to pray one for another,
and the efficacy of prayer is proved ([Jam
5:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)). And, lastly, it is
recommended to us to do what we can for bringing back those that stray
from the ways of truth.

[James 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 5:1</span></span>

The apostle is here addressing first sinners and then saints.

I. Let us consider the address to sinners; and here we find James
seconding what his great Master had said: Woe unto you that are rich;
for you have received your consolation, [Luk
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024). The rich people to whom this
word of warning was sent were not such as professed the Christian
religion, but the worldly and unbelieving Jews, such as are here said to
condemn and kill the just, which the Christians had no power to do; and
though this epistle was written for the sake of the faithful, and was
sent principally to them, yet, by an apostrophe, the infidel Jews may be
well supposed here spoken to. They would not hear the word, and
therefore it is written, that they might read it. It is observable, in
the very first inscription of this epistle, that it is not directed, as
Paul's epistles were, to the brethren in Christ, but, in general, to the
twelve tribes; and the salutation is not, grace and peace from Christ,
but, in general, greeting, [Jam 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001).
The poor among the Jews received the gospel, and many of them believed;
but the generality of the rich rejected Christianity, and were hardened
in their unbelief, and hated and persecuted those who believed on
Christ. To these oppressing, unbelieving, persecuting, rich people, the
apostle addresses himself in the first six verses.

1\. He foretels the judgments of God that should come upon them, [Jam
5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001). they should have miseries come
upon them, and such dreadful miseries that the very apprehension of them
was enough to make them weep and howl - misery that should arise from
the very things in which they placed their happiness, and misery that
should be completed by these things witnessing against them at the last,
to their utter destruction; and they are now called to reason upon and
thoroughly to weigh the matter, and to think how they will stand before
God in judgment: Go to now, you rich men. (1.) "You may be assured of
this that very dreadful calamities are coming upon you, calamities that
shall carry nothing of support nor comfort in them, but all misery,
misery in time, misery to eternity, misery in your outward afflictions,
misery in your inward frame and temper of mind, misery in this world,
misery in hell. You have not a single instance of misery only coming
upon you, but miseries. The ruin of your church and nation is at hand;
and there will come a day of wrath, when riches shall not profit men,
but all the wicked shall be destroyed." (2.) The very apprehension of
such miseries as were coming upon them is enough to make them weep and
howl. Rich men are apt to say to themselves (and others are ready to say
to them), Eat, drink, and be merry; but God says, Weep and howl. It is
not said, Weep and repent, for this the apostle does not expect from
them (he speaks in a way of denouncing rather than admonishing); but,
"Weep and howl, for when your doom comes there will be nothing but
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth." Those who live like beasts
are called howl like such. Public calamities are most grievous to rich
people, who live in pleasure, and are secure and sensual; and therefore
they shall weep and howl more than other people for the miseries that
shall come upon them. (3.) Their misery shall arise from the very things
in which they placed their happiness. "Corruption, decay, rust, and
ruin, will come upon all your goodly things: Your riches are corrupted
and your garments are moth-eaten, [Jam
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#002). Those things which you now
inordinately affect will hereafter insupportably wound you: they will be
of no worth, of no use to you, but, on the contrary, will pierce you
through with many sorrows; for," (4.) "They will witness against you,
and they will eat your flesh as it were fire," [Jam
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003). Things inanimate are frequently
represented in scripture as witnessing against wicked men. Heaven,
earth, the stones of the field, the production of the ground, and here
the very rust and canker of ill-gotten and ill-kept treasures, are said
to witness against impious rich men. They think to heap up treasure for
their latter days, to live plentifully upon when they come to be old;
but, alas! they are only heaping up treasures to become a prey to others
(as the Jews had all taken from them by the Romans), and treasures that
will prove at last to be only treasures of wrath, in the day of the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Then shall their
iniquities, in the punishment of them, eat their flesh as it were with
fire. In the ruin of Jerusalem, many thousands perished by fire; in the
last judgment the wicked shall be condemned to everlasting burnings,
prepared for the devil and his angels. The Lord deliver us from the
portion of wicked rich men! and, in order to this, let us take care that
we do not fall into their sins, which we are next to consider.

2\. The apostle shows what those sins are which should bring such
miseries. To be in so deplorable a condition must doubtless be owing to
some very heinous crimes. (1.) Covetousness is laid to the charge of
this people; they laid by their garments till they bred moths and were
eaten; they hoarded up their gold and silver till they were rusty and
cankered. It is a very great disgrace to these things that they carry in
them the principles of their own corruption and consumption - the
garment breeds the moth that frets it, the gold and silver breeds the
canker that eats it; but the disgrace falls most heavily upon those who
hoard and lay up these things till they come to be thus corrupted, and
cankered, and eaten. God gives us our worldly possessions that we may
honour him and do good with them; but if, instead of this, we sinfully
hoard them up, thorough and undue affection towards them, or a distrust
of the providence of God for the future, this is a very heinous crime,
and will be witnessed against by the very rust and corruption of the
treasure thus heaped together. (2.) Another sin charged upon those
against whom James writes is oppression: Behold, the hire of the
labourers, who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back
by fraud, crieth, etc., [Jam 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004).
Those who have wealth in their hands get power into their hands, and
then they are tempted to abuse that power to oppress such as are under
them. The rich we here find employing the poor in their labours, and the
rich have as much need of the labours of the poor as the poor have of
wages from the rich, and could as ill be without them; but yet, not
considering this, they kept back the hire of the labourers; having power
in their hands, it is probable that they made as hard bargains with the
poor as they could, and even after that would not make good their
bargains as they should have done. This is a crying sin, an iniquity
that cries so as to reach the ears of God; and, in this case, God is to
be considered as the Lord of sabaoth, or the Lord of hosts, Kuriou
sabaōth, a phrase often used in the Old Testament, when the people of
God were defenseless and wanted protection, and when their enemies were
numerous and powerful. The Lord of hosts, who has all ranks of beings
and creatures at his disposal, and who sets all in their several places,
hears the oppressed when they cry by reason of the cruelty or injustice
of the oppressor, and he will give orders to some of those hosts that
are under him (angels, devils, storms, distempers, or the like) to
avenge the wrongs done to those who are dealt with unrighteously and
unmercifully. Take heed of this sin of defrauding and oppressing, and
avoid the very appearances of it. (3.) Another sin here mentioned is
sensuality and voluptuousness. You have lived in pleasure on the earth,
and been wanton, [Jam 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#005). God does
not forbid us to use pleasure; but to live in them as if we lived for
nothing else is a very provoking sin; and to do this on the earth, where
we are but strangers and pilgrims, where we are but to continue for a
while, and where we ought to be preparing for eternity - this, this is a
grievous aggravation of the sin of voluptuousness. Luxury makes people
wanton, as in [Hos 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#006), According to
their pasture, so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart
was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me. Wantonness and luxury are
commonly the effects of great plenty and abundance; it is hard for
people to have great plenty and abundance; it is hard for people to have
great estates, and not too much indulge themselves in carnal, sensual
pleasures: "You have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter: you
live as if it were every day a day of sacrifices, a festival; and hereby
your hearts are fattened and nourished to stupidity, dulness, pride, and
an insensibility to the wants and afflictions of others." Some may say,
"What harm is there in good cheer, provided people do not spend above
what they have?" What! Is it no harm for people to make gods of their
bellies, and to give all to these, instead of abounding in acts of
charity and piety? Is it no harm for people to unfit themselves for
minding the concerns of their souls, by indulging the appetites of their
bodies? Surely that which brought flames upon Sodom, and would bring
these miseries for which rich men are here called to weep and howl, must
be a heinous evil! Pride, and idleness, and fullness of bread, mean the
same thing with living in pleasure, and being wanton, and nourishing the
heart as in a day of slaughter. (4.) Another sin here charged on the
rich is persecution: You have condemned and killed the just, and he doth
not resist you, [Jam 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#006). This fills
up the measure of their iniquity. They oppressed and acted very
unjustly, to get estates; when they had them, they gave way to luxury
and sensuality, till they had lost all sense and feeling of the wants or
afflictions of others; and then they persecute and kill without remorse.
They pretend to act legally indeed, they condemn before they kill; but
unjust prosecutions, whatever colour of law they may carry in them, will
come into the reckoning when God shall make inquisition for blood, as
well as massacres and downright murders. Observe here, The just may be
condemned and killed: but then again observe, When such do suffer, and
yield without resistance to the unjust sentence of oppressors, this is
marked by God, to the honour of the sufferers and the infamy of their
persecutors; this commonly shows that judgments are at the door, and we
may certainly conclude that a reckoning-day will come, to reward the
patience of the oppressed and to break to pieces the oppressor. Thus far
the address to sinners goes.

II\. We have next subjoined an address to saints. Some have been ready
to despise or to condemn this way of preaching, when ministers, in their
application, have brought a word to sinners, and a word to saints; but,
from the apostle's here taking this method, we may conclude that this is
the best way rightly to divide the word of truth. From what has been
said concerning wicked and oppressing rich men, occasion is given to
administer comfort to God's afflicted people: "Be patient therefore;
since God will send such miseries on the wicked, you may see what is
your duty, and where your greatest encouragement lies."

1\. Attend to your duty: Be patient ([Jam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)), establish your hearts ([Jam
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008)), grudge not one against another,
brethren, [Jam 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#009). Consider well the
meaning of these three expressions: - (1.) "Be patient - bear your
afflictions without murmuring, your injuries without revenge; and,
though God should not in any signal manner appear for you immediately,
wait for him. The vision is for an appointed time; at the end it will
speak, and will not lie; therefore wait for it. It is but a little
while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Let your
patience be lengthened out to long suffering;" so the word here used,
makrothumēsate, signifies. When we have done our work, we have need of
patience to stay for our reward. This Christian patience is not a mere
yielding to necessity, as the moral patience taught by some philosophers
was, but it is a humble acquiescence in the wisdom and will of God, with
an eye to a future glorious recompense: Be patient to the coming of the
Lord. And because this is a lesson Christians must learn, though ever so
hard or difficult to the, it is repeated in [Jam
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008), Be you also patient. (2.)
"Establish your hearts - let your faith be firm, without wavering, your
practice of what is good constant and continued, without tiring, and
your resolutions for God and heaven fixed, in spite of all sufferings or
temptations." The prosperity of the wicked and the affliction of the
righteous have in all ages been a very great trial to the faith of the
people of God. David tells us that his feet were almost gone, when he
saw the prosperity of the wicked, [Psa
73:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002), [Psa
73:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003). Some of those Christians to whom
St. James wrote might probably be in the same tottering condition; and
therefore they are called upon to establish their hearts; faith and
patience will establish the heart. (3.) Grudge not one against another;
the words mē stenazete signify, Groan not one against another, that is,
"Do not make one another uneasy by your murmuring groans at what befalls
you, nor by your distrustful groans as to what may further come upon
you, nor by your revengeful groans against the instruments of your
sufferings, nor by your envious groans at those who may be free from
your calamities: do not make yourselves uneasy and make one another
uneasy by thus groaning to and grieving one another." "The apostle
seemeth to me" (says Dr. Manton) "to be here taxing those mutual
injuries and animosities wherewith the Christians of those times, having
banded under the names of circumcision and uncircumcision, did grieve
one another, and give each other cause to groan; so that they did not
only sigh under the oppressions of the rich persecutors, but under the
injuries which they sustained from many of the brethren who, together
with them, did profess the holy faith." Those who are in the midst of
common enemies, and in any suffering circumstances, should be more
especially careful not to grieve nor to groan against one another,
otherwise judgments will come upon them as well as others; and the more
such grudgings prevail the nearer do they show judgment to be.

2\. Consider what encouragement here is for Christians to be patient, to
establish their hearts, and not to grudge one against another. And, (1.)
"Look to the example of the husbandman: He waits for the precious fruit
of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early
and latter rain. When you sow your corn in the ground, you wait many
months for the former and latter rain, and are willing to stay till
harvest for the fruit of your labour; and shall not this teach you to
bear a few storms, and to be patient for a season, when you are looking
for a kingdom and everlasting felicity? Consider him that waits for a
crop of corn; and will not you wait for a crown of glory? If you should
be called to wait a little longer than the husbandman does, is it not
something proportionably greater and infinitely more worth your waiting
for? But," (2.) "Think how short your waiting time may possibly be: The
coming of the Lord draweth nigh, [Jam
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008); behold, the Judge standeth before
the door, [Jam 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#009). Do not be
impatient, do not quarrel with one another; the great Judge, who will
set all to rights, who will punish the wicked and reward the good, is at
hand: he should be conceived by you to stand as near as one who is just
knocking at the door." The coming of the Lord to punish the wicked Jews
was then very nigh, when James wrote this epistle; and, whenever the
patience and other graces of his people are tried in an extraordinary
manner, the certainty of Christ's coming as Judge, and the nearness of
it, should establish their hearts. The Judge is now a great deal nearer,
in his coming to judge the world, than when this epistle was written,
nearer by above seventeen hundred years; and therefore this should have
the greater effect upon us. (3.) The danger of our being condemned when
the Judge appears should excite us to mind our duty as before laid down:
Grudge not, lest you be condemned. Fretfulness and discontent expose us
to the just judgment of God, and we bring more calamities upon ourselves
by our murmuring, distrustful, envious groans and grudgings against one
another, than we are aware of. If we avoid these evils, and be patient
under our trials, God will not condemn us. Let us encourage ourselves
with this. (4.) We are encouraged to be patient by the example of the
prophets ([Jam 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010)): Take the
prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of
suffering affliction, and of patience. Observe here, The prophets, on
whom God put the greatest honour, and for whom he had the greatest
favour, were most afflicted: and, when we think that the best men have
had the hardest usage in this world, we should hereby be reconciled to
affliction. Observe further, Those who were the greatest examples of
suffering affliction were also the best and greatest examples of
patience: tribulation worketh patience. Hereupon James gives it to us as
the common sense of the faithful ([Jam
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011)): We count those happy who
endure: we look upon righteous and patient sufferers as the happiest
people. See [Jam 1:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002). (5.) Job also
is proposed as an example for the encouragement of the afflicted. You
have hard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord,
etc., v. 11. In the case of Job you have an instance of a variety of
miseries, and of such as were very grievous, but under all he could
bless God, and, as to the general bent of his spirit, he was patient and
humble: and what came to him in the end? Why, truly, God accomplished
and brought about those things for him which plainly prove that the Lord
is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. The best way to bear afflictions
is to look to the end of them; and the pity of God is such that he will
not delay the bringing of them to an end when his purposes are once
answered; and the tender mercy of God is such that he will make his
people an abundant amends for all their sufferings and afflictions. His
bowels are moved for them while suffering, his bounty is manifested
afterwards. Let us serve our God, and endure our trials, as those who
believe the end will crown all.

[James 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 5:12</span></span>

This epistle now drawing to a close, the penman goes off very quickly
from one thing to another: hence it is that matters so very different
are insisted on in these few verses.

I. The sin of swearing is cautioned against: But above all things, my
brethren, swear not, etc., [Jam 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012).
Some understand this too restrictedly, as if the meaning were, "Swear
not at your persecutors, at those that reproach you and say all manner
of evil of you; be not put into a passion by the injuries they do you,
so as in your passion to be provoked to swear." This swearing is no
doubt forbidden here: and it will not excuse those that are guilty of
this sin to say they sear only when they are provoked to it, and before
they are aware. But the apostle's warning extends to other occasions of
swearing as well as this. Some have translated the words, pro pantōn -
before all things; and so have made sense of this place to be that they
should not, in common conversation, before every thing they say, put an
oath. All customary needless swearing is undoubtedly forbidden, and all
along in scripture condemned, as a very grievous sin. Profane swearing
was very customary among the Jews, and, since this epistle is directed
in general to the twelve tribes scattered abroad (as before has been
observed), we may conceive this exhortation sent to those who believed
not. It is hard to suppose that swearing should be one of the spots of
God's children, since Peter, when he was charged with being a disciple
of Christ and would disprove the charge, cursed and swore, thereby
thinking most effectually to convince them that he was no disciple of
Jesus, it being well known of such that they durst not allow themselves
in swearing; but possibly some of the looser sort of those who were
called Christians might, among other sins here charged upon them, be
guilty also of this. It is a sin that in later years has most
scandalously prevailed, even among those who would be thought above all
others entitled to the Christian name and privileges. It is very rare
indeed to hear of a dissenter from the church of England who is guilty
of swearing, but among those who glory in their being of the established
church nothing is more common; and indeed the most execrable oaths and
curses now daily wound the ears and hearts of all serious Christians.
James here says,

1\. Above all things, swear not; but how many are there who mind this
the least of all things, and who make light of nothing so much as common
profane swearing! But why above all things is swearing here forbidden?
(1.) Because it strikes most directly at the honour of God and most
expressly throws contempt upon his name and authority. (2.) Because this
sin has, of all sins, the least temptation to it: it is not gain, nor
pleasure, nor reputation, that can move men to it, but a wantonness in
sinning, and a needless showing an enmity to God. Thy enemies take thy
name in vain, [Psa 139:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#020). This is a
proof of men's being enemies to God, however they may pretend to call
themselves by his name, or sometimes to compliment him in acts of
worship. (3.) Because it is with most difficulty left off when once men
are accustomed to it, therefore it should above all things be watched
against. And, (4.) "Above all things swear not, for how can you expect
the name of God should be a strong tower to you in your distress if you
profane it and play with it at other times?" But (as Mr. Baxter
observes) "all this is so far from forbidding necessary oaths that it is
but to confirm them, by preserving the due reverence of them." And then
he further notes that "The true nature of an oath is, by our speech, to
pawn the reputation of some certain or great thing, for the averring of
a doubted less thing; and not (as is commonly held) an appeal to God or
other judge." Hence it was that swearing by the heavens, and by the
earth, and by the other oaths the apostle refers to, came to be in use.
The Jews thought if they did but omit the great oath of Chi-Eloah, they
were safe. But they grew so profane as to swear by the creature, as if
it were God; and so advanced it into the place of God; while, on the
other hand, those who swear commonly and profanely by the name of God do
hereby put him upon the level with every common thing.

2\. But let your yea be yea, and your nay nay; lest you fall into
condemnation; that is, "let it suffice you to affirm or deny a thing as
there is occasion, and be sure to stand to your word, an be true to it,
so as to give no occasion for your being suspected of falsehood; and
then you will be kept from the condemnation of backing what you say or
promise by rash oaths, and from profaning the name of God to justify
yourselves. It is being suspected of falsehood that leads men to
swearing. Let it be known that your keep to truth, and are firm to your
word, and by this means you will find there is no need to swear to what
you say. Thus shall you escape the condemnation which is expressly
annexed to the third commandment: The Lord will not hold him guiltless
that taketh his name in vain."

II\. As Christians we are taught to suit ourselves to the dispensations
of Providence ([Jam 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013)): Is any
among you afflicted? Let him pray. Is any merry? Let him sing psalms.
Our condition in this world is various; and our wisdom is to submit to
its being so, and to behave as becomes us both in prosperity and under
affliction. Sometimes we are in sadness, sometimes in mirth; God has set
these one over against the other that we may the better observe the
several duties he enjoins, and that the impressions made on our passions
and affections may be rendered serviceable to our devotions. Afflictions
should put us upon prayer, and prosperity should make us abound in
praise. Not that prayer is to be confined to a time of trouble, nor
singing to a time of mirth; but these several duties may be performed
with special advantage, and to the happiest purposes, at such seasons.
1. In a day of affliction nothing is more seasonable than prayer. The
person afflicted must pray himself, as well as engage the prayers of
others for him. Times of affliction should be praying times. To this end
God sends afflictions, that we may be engaged to seek him early; and
that those who at other times have neglected him may be brought to
enquire after him. The spirit is then most humble, the heart is broken
and tender; and prayer is most acceptable to God when it comes from a
contrite humble spirit. Afflictions naturally draw out complaints; and
to whom should we complain but to God in prayer? It is necessary to
exercise faith and hope under afflictions; and prayer is the appointed
means both for obtaining and increasing these graces in us. Is any
afflicted? Let him pray. 2. In a day of mirth and prosperity singing
psalms is very proper and seasonable. In the original it is only said
sing, psalletō, without the addition of psalms or any other word: and we
learn from the writings of several in the first ages of Christianity
(particularly from a letter of Pliny's, and from some passages in Justin
Martyr and Tertullian) that the Christians were accustomed to sing
hymns, either taken out of scripture, or of more private composure, in
their worship of God. Though some have thought that Paul's advising both
the Colossians and Ephesians to speak to one another psalmois kai
humnois kai ōdais pneumatikais - in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs, refers only to the compositions of scripture, the psalms of David
being distinguished in Hebrew by Shurim, Tehillim, and Mizmorim, words
that exactly answer these of the apostle. Let that be as it will, this
however we are sure of, that the singing of psalms is a gospel
ordinance, and that our joy should be holy joy, consecrated to God.
Singing is so directed to here as to show that, if any be in
circumstances of mirth and prosperity, he should turn his mirth, though
alone, and by himself, in this channel. Holy mirth becomes families and
retirements, as well as public assemblies. Let our singing be such as to
make melody with our hearts unto the Lord, and God will assuredly be
well pleased with this kind of devotion.

III\. We have particular directions given as to sick persons, and
healing pardoning mercy promised upon the observance of those
directions. If any be sick, they are required, 1. To send for the
elders, presbuterous tēs ekkēsias - the presbyters, pastors or ministers
of the church, [Jam 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014), [Jam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015). It lies upon sick people as a
duty to send for ministers, and to desire their assistance and their
prayers. 2. It is the duty of ministers to pray over the sick, when thus
desired and called for. Let them pray over him; let their prayers be
suited to his case, and their intercessions be as becomes those who are
affected wit his calamities. 3. In the times of miraculous healing, the
sick were to be anointed with oil in the name of the Lord. Expositors
generally confine this anointing with oil to such as had the power of
working miracles; and, when miracles ceased, this institution ceased
also. In Mark's gospel we read of the apostle's anointing with oil many
that were sick, and healing them, [Mar
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013). And we have accounts of this
being practiced in the church two hundred years after Christ; but then
the gift of healing also accompanied it, and, when the miraculous gift
ceased, this rite was laid aside. The papists indeed have made a
sacrament of this, which they call the extreme unction. They use it, not
to heal the sick, as it was used by the apostles; but as they generally
run counter to scripture, in the appointments of their church, so here
they ordain that this should be administered only to such as are at the
very point of death. The apostle's anointing was in order to heal the
disease; the popish anointing is for the expulsion of the relics of sin,
and to enable the soul (as they pretend) the better to combat with the
powers of the air. When they cannot prove, by any visible effects, that
Christ owns them in the continuance of this rite, they would however
have people to believe that the invisible effects are very wonderful.
But it is surely much better to omit this anointing with oil than to
turn it quite contrary to the purposes spoken of in scripture. Some
protestants have thought that this anointing was only permitted or
approved by Christ, not instituted. But it should seem, by the words of
James here, that it was a thing enjoined in cases where there was faith
for healing. And some protestants have argued for it with this view. It
was not to be commonly used, not even in the apostolical age; and some
have thought that it should not be wholly laid aside in any age, but
that where there are extraordinary measures of faith in the person
anointing, and in those who are anointed, an extraordinary blessing may
attend the observance of this direction for the sick. However that be,
there is one thing carefully to be observed here, that the saving of the
sick is not ascribed to the anointing with oil, but to prayer: The
prayer of faith shall save the sick, etc., [Jam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015). So that, 4. Prayer over the sick
must proceed fRom. and be accompanied with, a lively faith. There must
be faith both in the person praying and in the person prayed for. In a
time of sickness, it is not the cold and formal prayer that is
effectual, but the prayer of faith. 5. We should observe the success of
prayer. The Lord shall raise up; that is, if he be a person capable and
fit for deliverance, and if God have any thing further for such a person
to do in the world. And, if he have committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him; that is, where sickness is sent as a punishment for some
particular sin, that sin shall be pardoned, and in token thereof the
sickness shall be removed. As when Christ said to the impotent man, Go
and sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, it is intimated that
some particular sin was the cause of his sickness. The great thing
therefore we should beg of God for ourselves and others in the time of
sickness is the pardon of sin. Sin is both the root of sickness and the
sting of it. If sin be pardoned, either affliction shall be removed in
mercy or we shall see there is mercy in the continuance of it. When
healing is founded upon pardon, we may say as Hezekiah did: Thou hast,
in love to my soul, delivered it from the pit of corruption, [Isa
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#017). When you are sick and in pain,
it is most common to pray and cry, O give me ease! O restore me to
health! But your prayer should rather and chiefly be, O that God would
pardon my sins!

IV\. Christians are directed to confess their faults one to another, and
so to join in their prayers with an for one another, [Jam
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016). Some expositors connect this
with [Jam 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014). As if when sick people
send for ministers to pray over them they should then confess their
faults to them. Indeed, where any are conscious that their sickness is a
vindictive punishment of some particular sin, and they cannot look for
the removal of their sickness without particular applications to God for
the pardon of such a sin, there it may be proper to acknowledge and tell
his case, that those who pray over him may know how to plead rightly for
him. But the confession here required is that of Christians to one
another, and not, as the papists would have it, to a priest. Where
persons have injured one another, acts of injustice must be confessed to
those against whom they have been committed. Where persons have tempted
one another to sin or have consented in the same evil actions, there
they ought mutually to blame themselves and excite each other to
repentance. Where crimes are of a public nature, and have done any
public mischief, there they ought to be more publicly confessed, so as
may best reach to all who are concerned. And sometimes it may be well to
confess our faults to some prudent minister or praying friend, that he
may help us to plead with God for mercy and pardon. But then we are not
to think that James puts us upon telling every thing that we are
conscious is amiss in ourselves or in one another; but so far as
confession is necessary to our reconciliation with such as are at
variance with us, or for gaining information in any point of conscience
and making our own spirits quiet and easy, so far we should be ready to
confess our faults. And sometimes also it may be of good use to
Christians to disclose their peculiar weaknesses and infirmities to one
another, where there are great intimacies and friendships, and where
they may help each other by their prayers to obtain pardon of their sins
and power against them. Those who make confession of their faults one to
another should thereupon pray with and for one another. The [Jam
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013) directs persons to pray for
themselves: Is any afflicted let him pray; the [Jam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014) directs to seek for the prayers
of ministers; and the [Jam 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)
directs private Christians to pray one for another; so that here we have
all sorts of prayer (ministerial, social, and secret) recommended.

V. The great advantage and efficacy of prayer are declared and proved:
The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much, whether
he pray for himself or for others: witness the example of Elias, [Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017), [Jam
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018). He who prays must be a righteous
man; not righteous in an absolute sense (for this Elias was not, who is
here made a pattern to us), but righteous in a gospel sense; not loving
nor approving of any iniquity. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear my prayer, [Psa
66:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#018). Further, the prayer itself must
be a fervent, in-wrought, well-wrought prayer. It must be a pouring out
of the heart to God; and it must proceed from a faith unfeigned. Such
prayer avails much. It is of great advantage to ourselves, it may be
very beneficial to our friends, and we are assured of its being
acceptable to God. It is good having those for friends whose prayers are
available in the sight of God. The power of prayer is here proved from
the success of Elijah. This may be encouraging to us even in common
cases, if we consider that Elijah was a man of like passions with us. He
was a zealous good man and a very great man, but he had his infirmities,
and was subject to disorder in his passions as well as others. In prayer
we must not look to the merit of man, but to the grace of God. Only in
this we should copy after Elijah, that he prayed earnestly, or, as it is
in the original, in prayer he prayed. It is not enough to say a prayer,
but we must pray in prayer. Our thoughts must be fixed, our desires firm
and ardent, and our graces in exercise; and, when we thus pray in
prayer, we shall speed in prayer. Elijah prayed that it might not rain;
and God heard him in his pleading against an idolatrous persecuting
country, so that it rained not on the earth for the space of three years
and six months. Again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, etc. Thus you
see prayer is the key which opens and shuts heaven. To this there is an
allusion, [Rev 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#006), where the two
witnesses are said to have power to shut heaven, that it rain not. This
instance of the extraordinary efficacy of prayer is recorded for
encouragement even to ordinary Christians to be instant and earnest in
prayer. God never says to any of the seed of Jacob, Seek my face in
vain. If Elijah by prayer could do such great and wonderful things,
surely the prayers of no righteous man shall return void. Where there
may not be so much of a miracle in God's answering our prayers, yet
there may be as much of grace.

VI\. This epistle concludes with an exhortation to do all we can in our
places to promote the conversion and salvation of others, [Jam
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019), [Jam
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020). Some interpret these verses as
an apology which the apostle is making for himself that he should so
plainly and sharply reprove the Jewish Christians for their many faults
and errors. And certainly James gives a very good reason why he was so
much concerned to reclaim them from their errors, because in thus doing
he should save souls, and hide a multitude of sins. But we are not to
restrain this place to the apostle's converting such as erred from the
truth; no, nor to other ministerial endeavours of the like nature, since
it is said, "If any err, and one convert him, let him be who he will
that does so good an office for another, he is therein an instrument of
saving a soul from death." Those whom the apostle here calls brethren,
he yet supposes liable to err. It is no mark of a wise or a holy man to
boast of his being free from error, or to refuse to acknowledge when he
is in an error. But if any do err, be they ever so great, you must not
be afraid to show them their error; and, be they ever so weak and
little, you must not disdain to make them wiser and better. If they err
from the truth, that is, from the gospel (the great rule and standard of
truth), whether it be in opinion or practice, you must endeavour to
bring them again to the rule. Errors in judgment and in life generally
go together. There is some doctrinal mistake at the bottom of every
practical miscarriage. There is no one habitually bad, but upon some bad
principle. Now to convert such is to reduce them from their error, and
to reclaim them from the evils they have been led into. We are not
presently to accuse and exclaim against an erring brother, and seek to
bring reproaches and calamities upon him, but to convert him: and, if by
all our endeavours we cannot do this, yet we are nowhere empowered to
persecute and destroy him. If we are instrumental in the conversion of
any, we are said to convert them, though this be principally and
efficiently the work of God. And, if we can do no more towards the
conversion of sinners, yet we may do this - pray for the grace and
Spirit of God to convert and change them. And let those that are in any
way serviceable to convert others know what will be the happy
consequence of their doing this: they may take great comfort in it at
present, and they will meet with a crown at last. He that is said to err
from the truth in [Jam 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019) is
described as erring in his way in [Jam
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020), and we cannot be said to convert
any merely by altering their opinions, unless we can bring them to
correct and amend their ways. This is conversion - to turn a sinner from
the error of his ways, and not to turn him from one party to another, or
merely from one notion and way of thinking to another. He who thus
converteth a sinner from the error of his ways shall save a soul from
death. There is a soul in the case; and what is done towards the
salvation of the soul shall certainly turn to good account. The soul
being the principal part of the man, the saving of that only is
mentioned, but it includes the salvation of the whole man: the spirit
shall be saved from hell, the body raised from the grave, and both saved
from eternal death. And then, by such conversion of heart and life, a
multitude of sins shall be hid. A most comfortable passage of scripture
is this. We learn hence that though our sins are many, even a multitude,
yet they may be hid or pardoned; and that when sin is turned from or
forsaken it shall be hid, never to appear in judgment against us. Let
people contrive to cover or excuse their sin as they will, there is no
way effectually and finally to hide it but by forsaking it. Some make
the sense of this text to be, that conversion shall prevent a multitude
of sins; and it is a truth beyond dispute that many sins are prevented
in the party converted, many also may be prevented in others that he may
have an influence upon, or may converse with. Upon the whole, how should
we lay out ourselves with all possible concern for the conversion of
sinners! It will be for the happiness and salvation of the converted; it
will prevent much mischief, and the spreading and multiplying of sin in
the world; it will be for the glory and honour of God; and it will
mightily redound to our comfort and renown in the great day. Those that
turn many to righteousness, and those who help to do so, shall shine as
the stars for ever and ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Introduction](pe1000)

</div>
