<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jos024)  [Next](jdg001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Book of Judges

This is called the Hebrew Shepher Shophtim, the Book of Judges, which
the Syriac and Arabic versions enlarge upon, and call it, The Book of
the Judges of the Children of Israel; the judgments of that nation being
peculiar, so were their judges, whose office differed vastly from that
of the judges of other nations. The Septuagint entitles it only Kritai,
Judges. It is the history of the commonwealth of Israel, during the
government of the judges from Othniel to Eli, so much of it as God saw
fit to transmit to us. It contains the history (according to Dr.
Lightfoot's computation) of 299 years, reckoning to Othniel of Judah
forty years, to Ehud of Benjamin eighty years, to Barak of Naphtali
forty years, to Gideon of Manasseh forty years, to Abimelech his son
three years, to Tola of Issachar twenty-three, to Jair of Manasseh
twenty-two, to Jephtha of Manasseh six, to Ibzan of Judah seven, to Elon
of Zebulun ten, to Abdon of Ephriam eight, to Samson of Dan twenty, in
all 299. As for the years of their servitude, as were Eglon is said to
oppress them eighteen years and Jabin twenty years, and so some others,
those must be reckoned to fall in with some or other of the years of the
judges. The judges here appear to have been of eight several tribes;
that honour was thus diffused, until at last it centred in Judah. Eli
and Samuel, the two judges that fall not within this book, were of Levi.
It seems, there was no judge of Reuben or Simeon, Gad or Asher. The
history of these judges in their order we have in this book to the end
of ch. 16. And then in the last five chapters we have an account of some
particular memorable events which happened, as the story of Ruth did
([Rut 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)) in the days when the judges
ruled, but it is not certain in which judge's days; but they are put
together at the end of the book, that the thread of the general history
might not be interrupted. Now as to the state of the commonwealth of
Israel during this period, I. They do not appear here either so great or
so good as one might have expected the character of such a peculiar
people would be, that were governed by such laws and enriched by such
promises. We find them wretchedly corrupted, and wretchedly oppressed by
their neighbours about them, and nowhere in all the book, either in war
or council, do they make any figure proportionable to their glorious
entry into Canaan. What shall we say to it? God would hereby show us the
lamentable imperfection of all persons and things under the sun, that we
may look for complete holiness and happiness in the other world, and not
in this. Yet, II. We may hope that though the historian in this book
enlarges most upon their provocations and grievances, yet there was a
face of religion upon the land; and, however there were those among them
that were drawn aside to idolatry, yet the tabernacle-service, according
to the law of Moses, was kept up, and there were many that attended it.
Historians record not the common course of justice and commerce in a
nation, taking that for granted, but only the wars and disturbances that
happen; but the reader must consider the other, to balance the blackness
of them. III. It should seem that in these times each tribe had very
much its government in ordinary within itself, and acted separately,
without one common head, or council, which occasioned many differences
among themselves, and kept them from being or doing any thing
considerable. IV. The government of the judges was not constant, but
occasional; when it is said that after Ehud's victory the land rested
eighty years, and after Barak's forty, it is not certain that they
lived, much less that they governed, so long; but they and the rest were
raised up and animated by the Spirit of God to do particular service to
the public when there was occasion, to avenge Israel of their enemies,
and to purge Israel of their idolatries, which are the two things
principally meant by their judging Israel. Yet Deborah, as a prophetess,
was attended for judgment by all Israel, before there was occasion for
her agency in war, [Jdg 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004). V. During
the government of the judges, God was in a more especial manner Israel's
king; so Samuel tells them when they were resolved to throw off this
form of government, [Sa1 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#012). God
would try what his own law and the constitutions of that would do to
keep them in order, and it proved that when there was no king in Israel
every man did that which was right in his own eyes; he therefore,
towards the latter end of this time, made the government of the judges
more constant and universal that it was at first, and at length gave
them David, a king after his own heart; then, and not till then, Israel
began to flourish, which should make us very thankful for magistrates
both supreme and subordinate, for they are ministers of God unto us for
good. Four of the judges of Israel are canonized ([Heb
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#032)), Gideon, Barak, Samson, and
Jephtha. The Learned bishop Patrick thinks the prophet Samuel was the
penman of this Book.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 1](jdg001)

</div>
