<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg000)  [Next](jdg002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

This chapter gives us a particular account what sort of progress the
several tribes of Israel made in the reducing of Canaan after the death
of Joshua. He did (as we say) break the neck of that great work, and put
it into such a posture that they might easily have perfected it in due
time, if they had not been wanting to themselves; what they did in order
hereunto, and wherein they came short, we are told. I. The united tribes
o Judah and Simeon did bravely. 1. God appointed Judah to begin ([Jdg
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001), [Jdg
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#002)). 2. Judah took Simeon to act in
conjunction with him ([Jdg 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#003)). 3.
They succeeded in their enterprises against Bezek ([Jdg
1:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004)), Jerusalem ([Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008)). Hebron and Debir ([Jdg
1:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#009)), Hormah, Gaza, and other
places ([Jdg 1:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#017)). 4. Yet where
there were chariots of iron their hearts failed them ([Jdg
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#019)). Mention is made of the Kenites
settling among them ([Jdg 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016)). II.
The other tribes, in comparison with these, acted a cowardly part. 1.
Benjamin failed ([Jdg 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021)). 2. The
house of Joseph did well against Beth-el ([Jdg
1:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#022)), but in other places did not
improve their advantages, nor Manasseh ([Jdg
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#027), [Jdg
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#028)), nor Ephraim ([Jdg
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#029)). 3. Zebulun spared the
Canaanites ([Jdg 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#030)). 4. Asher
truckled worse than any of them to the Canaanites ([Jdg
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#031), [Jdg
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#032)). 5. Naphtali was kept out of the
full possession of several of his cities ([Jdg
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#033)). 6. Dan was straitened by the
Amorites ([Jdg 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#034)). No account is
given of Issachar, nor of the two tribes and a half on the other side
Jordan.

[Judges 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 1:1</span></span>

Here, I. The children of Israel consult the oracle of God for direction
which of all the tribes should first attempt to clear their country of
the Canaanites, and to animate and encourage the rest. It was after the
death of Joshua. While he lived he directed them, and all the tribes
were obedient to him, but when he died he left no successor in the same
authority that he had; but the people must consult the breast-plate of
judgment, and thence receive the word of command; for God himself, as he
was their King, so he was the Lord of their hosts. The question they ask
is, Who shall go up first? [Jdg 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001).
By this time, we may suppose, they were so multiplied that the places
they were in possession of began to be too strait for them, and they
must thrust out the enemy to make room; now they enquire who should
first take up arms. Whether each tribe was ambitious of being first, and
so strove for the honour of it, or whether each was afraid of being
first, and so strove to decline it, does not appear; but by common
consent the matter was referred to God himself, who is the fittest both
to dispose of honours and to cut out work.

II\. God appointed that Judah should go up first, and promised him
success ([Jdg 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#002)): "I have delivered
the land into his hand, to be possessed, and therefore will deliver the
enemy into his hand, that keeps him out of possession, to be destroyed."
And why must Judah be first in this undertaking? 1. Judah was the most
numerous and powerful tribe, and therefore let Judah venture first.
Note, God appoints service according to the strength he has given. Those
that are most able, from them most work is expected. 2. Judah was first
in dignity, and therefore must be first in duty. He it is whom his
brethren must praise, and therefore he it is who must lead in perilous
services. Let the burden of honour and the burden of work go together.
3. Judah was first served; the lot came up for Judah first, and
therefore Judah must first fight. 4. Judah was the tribe out of which
our Lord was to spring: so that in Judah, Christ, the Lion of the tribe
of Judah, went before them. Christ engaged the powers of darkness first,
and foiled them, which animates us for our conflicts; and it is in him
that we are more than conquerors. Observe, The service and the success
are put together: "Judah shall go up; let him do his part, and then he
shall find that I have delivered the land into his hand." His service
will not avail unless God give the success; but God will not give the
success unless he vigorously apply himself to the service.

III\. Judah hereupon prepares to go up, but courts his brother and
neighbour the tribe of Simeon (the lot of which tribe fell within that
of Judah and was assigned out of it) to join forces with him, [Jdg
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#003). Observe here, 1. That the
strongest should not despise but desire the assistance even of those
that are weaker. Judah was the most considerable of all the tribes, and
Simeon the least considerable, and yet Judah begs Simeon's friendship,
and prays an aid from him; the head cannot say to the foot, I have no
need of thee, for we are members one of another. 2. Those that crave
assistance must be ready to give assistance: Come with me into my lot,
and then I will go with thee into thine. It becomes Israelites to help
one another against Canaanites; and all Christians, even those of
different tribes, should strengthen one another's hands against the
common interests of Satan's kingdom. Those who thus help one another in
love have reason to hope that God will graciously help them both.

IV\. The confederate forces of Judah and Simeon take the field: Judah
went up ([Jdg 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004)), and Simeon with
him, [Jdg 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#003). Caleb, it is probable,
was commander-in-chief of this expedition; for who so fit as he who had
both an old man's head and a young man's hand, the experience of age and
the vigour of youth? [Jos 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010), [Jos
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#011). It should seem too, by what
follows ([Jdg 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#010), [Jdg
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#011)), that he was not yet in
possession of his own allotment. It was happy for them that they had
such a general as, according to his name, was all heart. Some think that
the Canaanites had got together into a body, a formidable body, when
Israel consulted who should go and fight against them, and that they
then began to stir when they heard of the death of Joshua, whose name
had been so dreadful to them; but, if so, it proved they did but meddle
to their own hurt.

V. God gave them great success. Whether they invaded the enemy, or the
enemy first gave them the alarm, the Lord delivered them into their
hand, [Jdg 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004). Though the army of
Judah was strong and bold, yet the victory is attributed to God: he
delivered the Canaanites into their hand; having given them authority,
he here gives them ability to destroy them - put it in their power, and
so tried their obedience to his command, which was utterly to cut them
off. Bishop Patrick observes upon this that we meet not with such
religious expressions in the heathen writers, concerning the success of
their arms, as we have here and elsewhere in this sacred history. I wish
such pious acknowledgments of the divine providence had not grown into
disuse at this time with many that are called Christians. Now, 1. We are
told how the army of the Canaanites was routed in the field, in or near
Bezek, the place where they drew up, which afterwards Saul made the
place of a general rendezvous ([Sa1
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#008)); they slew 10,000 men, which
blow, if followed, could not but be a very great weakening to those that
were already brought so very low. 2. How their king was taken and
mortified. His name was Adoni-bezek, which signifies, lord of Bezek.
There have been those that called their lands by their own names ([Psa
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011)), but here was one (and there
has been many another) that called himself by his land's name. He was
taken prisoner after the battle, and we are here told how they used him;
they cut off his thumbs, to disfit him for fighting, and his great toes,
that he might not be able to run away, [Jdg
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#006). It had been barbarous thus to
triumph over a man in misery, and that lay at their mercy, but that he
was a devoted Canaanite, and one that had in like manner abused others,
which probably they had heard of. Josephus says, "They cut off his hands
and his feet," probably supposing those more likely to be mortal wounds
than only the cutting off of his thumbs and his great toes. But this
indignity which they did him extorted from him an acknowledgment of the
righteousness of God, [Jdg 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#007). Here
observe, (1.) What a great man this Adoni-bezek had been, how great in
the field, where armies fled before him, how great at home, where kings
were set with the dogs of his flock; and yet now himself a prisoner, and
reduced to the extremity of meanness and disgrace. See how changeable
this world is, and how slippery its high places are. Let not the highest
be proud, nor the strongest secure, for they know not how low they may
be brought before they die. (2.) What desolations he had made among his
neighbours: he had wholly subdued seventy kings, to such a degree as to
have them his prisoners; he that was the chief person in a city was then
called a king, and the greatness of their title did but aggravate their
disgrace, and fired the pride of him that insulted over them. We cannot
suppose that Adoni-bezek had seventy of these petty princes at once his
slaves; but first and last, in the course of his reign, he had thus
deposed and abused so many, who perhaps were many of them kings of the
same cities that successively opposed him, and whom he thus treated to
please his own imperious barbarous fancy, and for a terror to others. It
seems the Canaanites had been wasted by civil wars, and those bloody
ones, among themselves, which would very much facilitate the conquest of
them by Israel. "Judah," says Dr. Lightfoot, "in conquering Adoni-bezek,
did, in effect, conquer seventy kings." (3.) How justly he was teated as
he had treated others. Thus the righteous God sometimes, in his
providence, makes the punishment to answer the sin, and observes an
equality in his judgments; the spoiler shall be spoiled, and the
treacherous dealer dealt treacherously with, [Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001). And those that showed no mercy
shall have no mercy shown them, [Jam
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013). See [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010); [Rev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006). (4.) How honestly he owned the
righteousness of God herein: As I have done, so God has requited me. See
the power of conscience, when God by his judgments awakens it, how it
brings sin to remembrance, and subscribes to the justice of God. He that
in his pride had set God at defiance now yields to him, and reflects
with as much regret upon the kings under his table as ever he had looked
upon them with pleasure when he had them there. He seems to own that he
was better dealt with than he had dealt with his prisoners; for though
the Israelites maimed him (according to the law of retaliation, an eye
for an eye, so a thumb for a thumb), yet they did not put him under the
table to be fed with the crumbs there, because, though the other might
well be looked upon as an act of justice, this would have savoured more
of pride and haughtiness than did become an Israelite.

VI\. Particular notice is taken of the conquest of Jerusalem, [Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008). Our translators judge it spoken
of here as done formerly in Joshua's time, and only repeated on occasion
of Adoni-bezek's dying there, and therefore read it, "they had fought
against Jerusalem," and put this verse in a parenthesis; but the
original speaks of it as a thing now done, and this seems most probable
because it is said to be done by the children of Judah in particular,
not by all Israel in general, whom Joshua commanded. Joshua indeed
conquered and slew Adoni-zedec, king of Jerusalem (Jos. 10), but we read
not there of his taking the city; probably, while he was pursing his
conquests elsewhere, this Adoni-bezek, a neighbouring prince, got
possession of it, whom Israel having conquered in the field, the city
fell into their hands, and they slew the inhabitants, except those who
retreated into the castle and held out there till David's time, and they
set the city on fire, in token of their detestation of the idolatry
wherewith it had been deeply infected, yet probably not so utterly as to
consume it, but to leave convenient habitations for as many as they had
to put into the possession of it.

[Judges 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 1:9</span></span>

We have here a further account of that glorious and successful campaign
which Judah and Simeon made. 1. The lot of Judah was pretty well cleared
of the Canaanites, yet not thoroughly. Those that dwelt in the mountain
(the mountains that were round about Jerusalem) were driven out ([Jdg
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#009), [Jdg
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#019)), but those in the valley kept
their ground against them, having chariots of iron, such as we read of,
[Jos 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016). Here the men of Judah
failed, and thereby spoiled the influence which otherwise their example
hitherto might have had on the rest of the tribes, who followed them in
this instance of their cowardice, rather than in all the other instances
of their courage. They had iron chariots, and therefore it was thought
not safe to attack them: but had not Israel God on their side, whose
chariots are thousands of angels ([Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017)), before whom these iron
chariots would be but as stubble to the fire? Had not God expressly
promised by the oracle ([Jdg 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#002)) to
give them success against the Canaanites in this very expedition,
without excepting those that had iron chariots? Yet they suffered their
fears to prevail against their faith, they could not trust God under any
disadvantages, and therefore durst not face the iron chariots, but
meanly withdrew their forces, when with one bold stroke they might have
completed their victories; and it proved of pernicious consequence. They
did run well, what hindered them? [Gal
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007). 2. Caleb was put in possession of
Hebron, which, though given him by Joshua ten or twelve years before (as
Dr. Lightfoot computes), yet being employed in public service, for the
settling of the tribes, which he preferred before his own private
interests, it seems he did not till now make himself master of; so well
content was that good man to serve others, while he left himself to be
served last; few are like-minded, for all seek their own, [Phi
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#020), [Phi
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021). Yet now the men of Judah all
came in to his assistance for the reducing of Hebron ([Jdg
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#010)), slew the sons of Anak, and put
him in possession of it, [Jdg 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#020).
They gave Hebron unto Caleb. And now Caleb, that he might return the
kindness of his countrymen, is impatient to see Debir reduced and put
into the hands of the men of Judah, to expedite which he proffers his
daughter to the person that will undertake to command in the siege of
that important place, [Jdg 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#011), [Jdg
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#012). Othniel bravely undertakes it,
and wins the town and the lady ([Jdg
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#013)), and by his wife's interest and
management with her father gains a very good inheritance for himself and
his family, [Jdg 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#014), [Jdg
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#015). We had this passage before, [Jos
15:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#016), where it was largely
explained and improved. 3. Simeon got ground of the Canaanites in his
border, [Jdg 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#017), [Jdg
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#018). In the eastern part of Simeon's
lot, they destroyed the Canaanites in Zephath, and called it Hormah -
destruction, adding this to some other devoted cities not far off, which
they had some time ago, with good reason, called by that name, [Num
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#002), [Num
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#003). And this perhaps was the
complete performance of the vow they them made that they would utterly
destroy these cities of the Canaanites in the south. In the western part
they took Gaza, Askelon, and Ekron, cities of the Philistines; they
gained present possession of the cities, but, not destroying the
inhabitants, the Philistines in process of time recovered the cities,
and proved inveterate enemies to the Israel of God, and no better could
come of doing their work by the halves. 4. The Kenites gained a
settlement in the tribe of Judah, choosing it there rather than in any
other tribe, because it was the strongest, and there they hoped to be
safe and quiet, [Jdg 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016). These were
the posterity of Jethro, who either went with Israel when Moses invited
them ([Num 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029)) or met them about
the same place when they came up from their wanderings in the wilderness
thirty-eight years after, and went with them then to Canaan, Moses
having promised them that they should fare as Israel fared, [Num
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#032). They had at first seated
themselves in the city of palm-trees, that is, Jericho, a city which
never was to be rebuilt, and therefore the fitter for those who dwelt in
tents, and did not mind building. But afterwards they removed into the
wilderness of Judah, either out of their affection to that place,
because solitary and retired, or out of their affection to that tribe,
which perhaps had been in a particular manner kind to them. Yet we find
the tent of Jael, who was of that family, far north, in the lot of
Naphtali, when Sisera took shelter there, [Jdg
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#017). This respect Israel showed them,
to let them fix where they pleased, being a quiet people, who, wherever
they were, were content with a little. Those that molested none were
molested by none. Blessed are the meek, for thus they shall inherit the
earth.

[Judges 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 1:21</span></span>

We are here told upon what terms the rest of the tribes stood with the
Canaanites that remained.

I. Benjamin neglected to drive the Jebusites out of that part of the
city of Jerusalem which fell to their lot, [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021). Judah had set them a good
example, and gained them great advantages by what they did ([Jdg
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#009)), but they did not follow the blow
for want of resolution.

II\. The house of Joseph,

1\. Bestirred themselves a little to get possession of Beth-el, [Jdg
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#022). That city is mentioned in the
tribe of Benjamin, [Jos 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#022). Yet it
is spoken of there ([Jdg 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#013)) as a
city in the borders of that tribe, and, it should seem, the line went
through it, so that one half of it only belonged to Benjamin, the other
half to Ephraim; and perhaps the activity of the Ephraimites at this
time, to recover it from the Canaanites, secured it entirely to them
henceforward, or at least the greatest part of it, for afterwards we
find it so much under the power of the ten tribes (and Benjamin was none
of them) that Jeroboam set up one of his calves in it. In this account
of the expedition of the Ephraimites against Beth-el observe,

(1.) Their interest in the divine favour: The Lord was with them, and
would have been with the other tribes if they would have exerted their
strength. The Chaldee reads it here, as in many other places, The Word
of the Lord was their helper, namely, Christ himself, the captain of the
Lord's host, now that they acted separately, as well as when they were
all in one body.

(2.) The prudent measures they took to gain the city. They sent spies to
observe what part of the city was weakest, or which way they might make
their attack with most advantage, [Jdg
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#023). These spies got very good
information from a man they providentially met with, who showed them a
private way into the town, which was left unguarded because, being not
generally known, no danger was suspected on that side. And here, \[1.\]
He is not to be blamed for giving them this intelligence if he did it
from a conviction that the Lord was with them, and that by his donation
the land was theirs of right, any more than Rahab was for entertaining
those whom she knew to be enemies of her country, but friends of God.
Nor, \[2.\] Are those to be blamed who showed him mercy, gave him and
his family not only their lives, but liberty to go wherever they
pleased: for one good turn requires another. But, it seems, he would not
join himself to the people of Israel, he feared them rather than loved
them, and therefore he removed after a colony of the Hittites, which, it
should seem, had gone into Arabia and settled there upon Joshua's
invasion of the country; with them this man chose to dwell, and among
them he built a city, a small one, we may suppose, such as planters
commonly build, and in the name of it preserved the ancient name of his
native city, Luz, an almond-tree, preferring this before its new name,
which carried religion in it, Bethel - the house of God.

(3.) Their success. The spies brought or sent notice of the intelligence
they had gained to the army, which improved their advantages, surprised
the city, and put them all to the sword, v. 25. But,

2\. Besides this achievement, it seems, the children of Joseph did
nothing remarkable (1.) Manasseh failed to drive out the Canaanites from
several very considerable cities in their lot, and did not make any
attempt upon them, [Jdg 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#027). But the
Canaanites, being in possession, were resolved not to quit it; they
would dwell in that land, and Manasseh had not resolution enough to
offer to dispossess them; as if there was no meddling with them unless
they were willing to resign, which it was not to be expected they ever
would be. Only as Israel got strength they got ground, and served
themselves, both by their contributions and by their personal services,
[Jdg 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#028), [Jdg
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#035). (2.) Ephraim likewise, though a
powerful tribe, neglected Gezer a considerable city, and suffered the
Canaanites to dwell among them ([Jdg
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#029)), which, some think, intimates
their allowing them a quiet settlement, and indulging them with the
privileges of an unconquered people, not so much as making them
tributaries.

III\. Zebulun, perhaps inclining to the sea-trade, for it was foretold
that it should be a haven for ships, neglected to reduce Kitron and
Nahalol ([Jdg 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#030)), and only made the
inhabitants of those places tributaries to them.

IV\. Asher quitted itself worse than any of the tribes ([Jdg
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#031), [Jdg
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#032)), not only in leaving more towns
than any of them in the hands of the Canaanites, but in submitting to
the Canaanites instead of making them tributaries; for so the manner of
expression intimates, that the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, as
if the Canaanites were the more numerous and the more powerful, would
still be lords of the country, and the Israelites must be only upon
sufferance among them.

V. Naphtali also permitted the Canaanites to live among them ([Jdg
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#033)), only by degrees they got them
so far under as to exact contributions from them.

VI\. Dan was so far from extending his conquests where his lot lay that,
wanting spirit to make head against the Amorites, he was forced by them
to retire into the mountains and inhabit the cities there, but durst not
venture into the valley, where, it is probable, the chariots of iron
were, [Jdg 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#034). Nay, and some of the
cities in the mountains were kept against them, [Jdg
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#035). Thus were they straitened in
their possessions, and forced to seek for more room at Laish, a great
way off, [Jdg 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001), etc. In Jacob's
blessing Judah is compared to a lion, Dan to a serpent; now observe how
Judah with his lion-like courage prospered and prevailed, but Dan with
all his serpenting subtlety could get no ground; craft and artful
management do not always effect the wonders they pretend to. What Dan
came short of doing, it seems, his neighbours the Ephraimites in part
did for him; they put the Amorites under tribute, [Jdg
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#035).

Upon the whole matter it appears that the people of Israel were
generally very careless both of their duty and interest in this thing;
they did not what they might have done to expel the Canaanites and make
room for themselves. And, 1. It was owing to their slothfulness and
cowardice. They would not be at the pains to complete their conquests;
like the sluggard, that dreamed of a lion in the way, a lion in the
streets, they fancied insuperable difficulties, and frightened
themselves with winds and clouds from sowing and reaping. 2. It was
owing to their covetousness; the Canaanites' labour and money would do
them more good (they thought) than their blood, and therefore they were
willing to let them live among them, that they might make a hand of
them. 3. They had not that dread and detestation of idolatry which they
ought to have had; they thought it a pity to put these Canaanites to the
sword, though the measure of their iniquity was full, thought it would
be no harm to let them live among them, and that they should be in no
danger from them. 4. The same thing that kept their fathers forty years
out of Canaan kept them now out of the full possession of it, and that
was unbelief. Distrust of the power and promise of God lost them their
advantages, and ran them into a thousand mischiefs.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 2](jdg002)

</div>
