<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg017)  [Next](jdg019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 18:0</span></span>

How idolatry crept into the family of Micah we read in the preceding
chapter, how it was translated thence into the tribe of Dan we have an
account in this chapter, and how it gained a settlement in a city of
note; for how great a matter does a little fire kindle! The tribe of Dan
had their lot assigned them last of all the tribes, and, it happening to
be too strait for them, a considerable city in the utmost corner of
Canaan northward was added to it. "Let them get it, and take it;" it was
called Laish or Leshem, [Jos 19:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#047).
Now here we are told, I. How they sent spies to bring them an account of
the place, who, by the way, got acquainted with Micah's priest ([Jdg
18:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001)). II. What an encouraging
report these spies brought back ([Jdg
18:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007)). III. What forces were sent
to conquer Laish ([Jdg 18:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#011)). IV.
How they, by the way, plundered Micah of his gods ([Jdg
18:14-26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#014)). V. How easily they
conquered Laish ([Jdg 18:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027)), and,
when they had it, set up the graven image in it ([Jdg
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030), [Jdg
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#031)).

[Judges 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 18:1</span></span>

Here is, 1. The eye which these Danites had upon Laish, not the whole
tribe of Dan, but one family of them, to whose lot, in the subdivision
of Canaan, that city fell. Hitherto this family had sojourned with their
brethren, who had taken possession of their lot, which lay between Judah
and the Philistines, and had declined going to their own city, because
there was no king in Israel to rule over them, [Jdg
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001). It lay a great way off, separate
from the rest of their tribe; it was entirely in the enemy's hand, and
therefore they would sponge upon their brethren rather than go far to
provide for themselves. But at length necessity forced them to arouse
themselves, and they began to think of an inheritance to dwell in. It is
better to have a little of one's own than always to hang upon others. 2.
The enquiry which this family of the Danites made concerning Laish: They
sent five men to search the land ([Jdg
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#002)), that they might know the
character of the country, whether it was an inheritance worth going so
far for, and the posture of the people, whether the making of themselves
masters of it was a thing practicable, what force was necessary in order
thereunto, and which was the best way of making an attack upon it. The
men they sent were men of valour, who, if they fell into their enemies'
hands, knew how to look danger in the face. It is prudent to look before
we leap. Dan had the subtlety of a serpent by the way ([Gen
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#017)), as well as the courage of a
lion's whelp, leaping from Bashan, [Deu
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#022). 3. The acquaintance which their
spies got with Micah's priest, and the use they made of that
acquaintance. It seems, they had know this Levite formerly, he having in
his rambles been sometimes in their country; and, though his countenance
might be altered, they knew him again by his voice, [Jdg
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#003). They were surprised to find him
so far off, enquired what brought him thither, and he told them ([Jdg
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#004)) what business he had there, and
what encouragement. They, understanding that he had an oracle in his
custody, desired he would tell them whether they should prosper in their
present undertaking, [Jdg 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#005). See
their carelessness and regardlessness of God and his providence; they
would not have enquired of the Lord at all if this Levite's mentioning
the teraphim he had with him had not put it into their heads. Many never
think of religion but just when it falls in their way and they cannot
avoid it, like chance customers. See their ignorance of the divine law,
that they thought God, who had forbidden the religious use of graven
images, would yet own them in consulting an image, and give them an
answer of peace. Should he be enquired of by them? [Eze
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003). They seem to have had a greater
opinion of Micah's teraphim than of God's urim; for they had passed by
Shiloh, and, for aught that appears, had not enquired there of God's
high priest, but Micah's shabby Levite shall be an oracle to them. He
betakes himself to his usual method of consulting his teraphim; and,
whether he himself believed it or no, he humoured the thing so well that
he made them believe he had an answer from God encouraging them to go
on, and assuring them of good success ([Jdg
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#006)): "Go in peace, you shall be
safe, and may be easy, for before the Lord is your way," that is, "he
approves it" (as the Lord is said to know the way of the righteous with
acceptation), "and therefore he will make it prosperous, his eye will be
upon you for good, he will direct your way, and preserve your going out
and coming in." Note, Our great care should be that our way be such as
God approves, and, if it be so, we may go in peace. If God care for us,
on him let us cast our care, and be satisfied that we cannot miss our
way if he go before us.

[Judges 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 18:7</span></span>

Here is, I. The observation which the spies made upon the city of Laish,
and the posture of its inhabitants, [Jdg
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007). Never was place so ill governed
and so ill guarded, which would make it a very easy prey to the invader.

1\. It was ill governed, for every man might be as bad as he would, and
there was no magistrate, no heir of restraint (as the word is), that
might so much as put them to shame in any thing, much less put them to
death, so that by the most impudent immoralities they provoked God's
wrath, and by all manner of mutual mischiefs weakened and consumed one
another. See here, (1.) What the office of magistrates is. They are to
be heirs of restraint, that is, to preserve a constant entail of power,
as heirs to an inheritance, in the places where they are, for the
restraining of that which is evil. They are possessors of restraint,
entrusted with their authority for this end, that they may check and
suppress every thing that is vicious and be a terror to evil doers. It
is only God's grace that can renew men's depraved minds and turn their
hearts; but the magistrate's power may restrain their bad practices and
tie their hands, so that the wickedness of the wicked may not be either
so injurious or so infectious as otherwise it would be. Though the sword
of justice cannot cut up the root of bitterness, it may cut off its
branches and hinder its growth and spreading, that vice may not go
without a check, for then it becomes daring and dangerous, and the
community shares in the guilt. (2.) See what method must be used for the
restraint of wickedness. Sinners must be put to shame, that those who
will not be restrained by the shamefulness of the sin before God and
their own consciences may be restrained by the shamefulness of the
punishment before men. All ways must be tried to dash sin out of
countenance and cover it with contempt, to make people ashamed of their
idleness, drunkenness, cheating, lying, and other sins, by making
reputation always appear on virtue's side. (3.) See how miserable, and
how near to ruin, those places are that either have no magistrates or
none that bear the sword to any purpose; the wicked then walk on every
side, [Psa 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008). And how happy we are
in good laws and a good government.

2\. It was ill guarded. The people of Laish were careless, quiet, and
secure, their gates left open, their walls out of repair, because under
no apprehension of danger in any way, though their wickedness was so
great that they had reason to fear divine vengeance every day. It was a
sign that the Israelites, through their sloth and cowardice, were not
now such a terror to the Canaanites as they were when they first came
among them, else the city of Laish, which probably knew itself to be
assigned to them, would not have been so very secure. Though they were
an open and inland town, they lived secure, like the Zidonians (who were
surrounded with the sea and were well fortified both by art and nature),
but were far from the Zidonians, who therefore could not come in to
their assistance, nor help to defend them from the danger which, by
debauching their manners, they had helped to bring them into. And,
lastly, they had no business with any man, which bespeaks either the
idleness they affected (they followed no trade, and so grew lazy and
luxurious, and utterly unable to defend themselves) or the independency
they affected: they scorned to be either in subjection to or alliance
with any of their neighbours, and so they had none to protect them nor
bring in any aid to them. They cared for nobody and therefore nobody
cared for them. Such as these were the men of Laish.

II\. The encouragement which they consequently gave to their countrymen
that sent them to prosecute their design upon this city, [Jdg
18:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#008). Probably the Danites had
formed notions of the insuperable difficulties of the enterprise,
thought it impossible ever to make themselves masters of Laish, and
therefore had kept themselves so long out of the possession of it,
perhaps suggesting likewise to one another, in their unbelief, that it
was not a country worth going so far and running such a risk for, which
jealousies the spies (and they were not, in this, evil spies) had an eye
to in their report. 1. They represent the place as desirable: "If you
will trust our judgments, we have seen the land, and we are agreed in
our verdict upon the view, that, behold, it is very good ([Jdg
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#009)), better than this mountainous
country into which we are here crowded by the Philistines. You need not
doubt of living comfortably in it, for it is a place where there is no
want of any thing," [Jdg 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#010). See
what a good land Canaan was, that this city which lay furthest of all
northward, in the utmost corner of the country, stood on such a fruitful
spot. 2. They represent it as attainable. They do not at all question
but, with God's blessing, they may soon get possession of it; for the
people are secure, [Jdg 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#010). And the
more secure always the less safe. "God has given it into your hands, and
you may have it for the taking." They stir them up to the undertaking:
"Arise, that we may go up against them, let us go about it speedily and
resolutely." They expostulate with them for their delays, and chide them
out of their sluggishness: Are you still? Be not slothful to go. Men
need to be thus stirred up to mind even their interest. Heaven is a very
good land, where there is no want of any thing; our God has, by the
promise, given it into our hands; let us not then be slothful in making
it sure, and laying hold on eternal life, but strive to enter.

III\. The Danites' expedition against Laish. This particular family of
them, to whose lot that city fell, now at length make towards it, [Jdg
18:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#011). The military men were but
600 in all, not a hundredth part of that tribe, for when they entered
Canaan the Danites were above 64,000, [Num
26:43](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#043). It was strange that none of
their brethren of their own tribe, much less of any other, came in to
their assistance; but it was long after Israel came to Canaan before
there appeared among them any thing of a public spirit, or concern for a
common interest, which was the reason why they seldom united in a common
head, and this kept them low and inconsiderable. It appears (by [Jdg
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#021)) that these 600 were the whole
number that went to settle there, for they had their families and
effects with them, their little ones and cattle, so confident were they
of success. The other tribes gave them a free passage through their
country. Their first day's march brought them to Kirjath-jearim ([Jdg
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#012)), and such rare things had
military encampments now become in Israel that the place where they
rested that night was thence called Mahaneh-dan, the camp of Dan, and
probably the place whence they began their march between Zorah and
Eshtaol was called by the same name, and is meant, [Jdg
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#025). The second day's march brought
them to Mount Ephraim, near Micah's house ([Jdg
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#013)), and there we must pause
awhile.

[Judges 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 18:14</span></span>

The Danites had sent out their spies to find out a country for them, and
they sped well in their search; but here, now that they came to the
place (for till this brought it to their mind it does not appear that
they had mentioned it to their brethren), they oblige them with a
further discovery - they can tell them where there are gods: "Here, in
these houses, there are an ephod, and teraphim, and a great many fine
things for devotion, such as we have not the like in our country; now
therefore consider what you have to do, [Jdg
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#014). We consulted them, and had a
good answer from them; they are worth having, nay, they are worth
stealing (that is, having upon the worst terms), and, if we can but make
ourselves masters of these gods, we may the better hope to prosper, and
make ourselves masters of Laish." So far they were in the right, that it
was desirable to have God's presence with them, but wretchedly mistaken
when they took these images (which were fitter to be used in a
puppet-play than in acts of devotion) for tokens of God's presence. They
thought an oracle would be pretty company for them in their enterprise,
and instead of a council of war to consult upon every emergency; and,
the place they were going to settle in being so far from Shiloh, they
thought they had more need of a house of gods among themselves than
Micah had that lived so near to it. They might have made as good an
ephod and teraphim themselves as these were, and such as would have
served their purpose every whit as well; but the reputation which they
found them in possession of (though they had had that reputation but a
while) amused them into a strange veneration for this house of gods,
which they would soon have dropped if they had had so much sense as to
enquire into its origin, and examine whether there were any thing divine
in its institution. Being determined to take these gods along with them,
we are here told how they stole the images, cajoled the priest, and
frightened Micah from attempting to rescue them.

I. The five men that knew the house and the avenues to it, and
particularly the chapel, went in and fetched out the images, with the
ephod, and teraphim, and all the appurtenances, while the 600 kept the
priest in talk at the gate, [Jdg
18:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#016). See what little care this
sorry priest took of his gods; while he was sauntering at the gate, and
gazing at the strangers, his treasure (such as it was) was gone. See how
impotent these sorry gods were, that could not keep themselves from
being stolen. It is mentioned as the reproach of idols that they
themselves had gone into captivity, [Isa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002). O the sottishness of these
Danites! How could they imagine those gods should protect them that
could not keep themselves from being stolen? Yet because they went by
the name of gods, as if it were not enough that they had with them the
presence of the invisible God, nor that they stood in relation to the
tabernacle, where there were even visible tokens of his presence,
nothing will serve them but they must have gods to go before them, not
of their own making indeed, but, which was as bad, of their own
stealing. Their idolatry began in theft, a proper prologue for such an
opera. In order to the breaking of the second commandment, they begin
with the eighth, and take their neighbour's goods to make them their
gods. The holy God hates robbery for burnt-offerings, but the devil
loves it. Had these Danites seized the images to deface and abolish
them, and the priest to punish him, they would have done like Israelites
indeed, and would have appeared jealous for their God as their fathers
had done ([Jos 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016)); but to take
them for their own use was such a complicated crime as showed that they
neither feared God nor regarded man, but were perfectly lost both to
godliness and honesty.

II\. They set upon the priest, and flattered him into a good humour, not
only to let the gods go, but to go himself along with them; for without
him they knew not well how to make use of the gods. Observe, 1. How they
tempted him, [Jdg 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#019). They assured
him of better preferment with them than what he now had. It would be
more honour and profit to be chaplain to a regiment (for they were no
more, though they called themselves a tribe) than to be only a domestic
chaplain to a private gentleman. Let him go with them, and he shall have
more dependants on him, more sacrifices brought to his altar, and more
fees for consulting his teraphim, than he had here. 2. How they won him.
A little persuasion served: His heart was glad, [Jdg
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#020). The proposal took well enough
with his rambling fancy, which would never let him stay long at a place,
and gratified his covetousness and ambition. He had no reason to say but
that he was well off where he was; Micah had not deceived him, nor
changed his wages. He was not moved with any remorse of conscience for
attending on a graven image: had he gone away to Shiloh to minister to
the Lord's priests, according to the duty of a Levite, he might have
been welcome there ([Deu 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#006)), and
his removal would have been commendable; but, instead of this, he takes
the images with him, and carries the infection of the idolatry into a
whole city. It would have been very unjust and ungrateful to Micah if he
had only gone away himself, but it was much more so to take the images
along with him, which he knew the heart of Micah was set upon. Yet
better could not be expected from a treacherous Levite. What house can
be sure of him who has forsaken the house of the Lord? Or what friend
will he be true to that has been false to his God? He could not pretend
that he was under compulsive force, for he was glad in his heart to go.
If ten shekels won him (as bishop Hall expresses it), eleven would lose
him; for what can hold those that have made shipwreck of a good
conscience? The hireling flees because he is a hireling. The priest and
his gods went in the midst of the people. There they placed him, that
they might secure him either from going back himself, if his mind should
change, or from being fetched back by Micah; or perhaps this post was
assigned to him in imitation of the order of Israel's march through the
wilderness, in which the ark and the priests went in the midst of their
camp.

III\. They frightened Micah back when he pursued them to recover his
gods. As soon as ever he perceived that his chapel was plundered, and
his chaplain had run away from him, he mustered all the forces he could
and pursued the robbers, [Jdg 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#022).
His neighbours, and perhaps tenants, that used to join with him in his
devotions, were forward to help him on this occasion; they got together,
and pursued the robbers, who, having their children and cattle before
them ([Jdg 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#021)), could make no great
haste, so that they soon overtook them, hoping by strength of reason to
recover what was stolen, for the disproportion of their numbers was such
that they could not hope to do it by strength of arm. The pursuers
called after them, desiring to speak a word with them; those in the rear
(where it is probable they posted the fiercest and strongest of their
company, expecting there to be attacked) turned about and asked Micah
what ailed him that he was so much concerned, and what he would have,
[Jdg 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#023). He argues with them, and
pleads his right, which he thought should prevail; but they, in answer,
plead their might, which, it proved, did prevail; for it is common that
might overcomes right.

1\. He insists upon the wrong they had certainly done him ([Jdg
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#024)): "You have taken away my gods,
my images of God, which I have an incontestable title to, for I made
them myself, and which I have such an affection for that I am undone if
I lose them; for what have I more that will do me any good if these be
lost?" Now, (1.) This discovers to us the folly of idolaters, and the
power that Satan has over them. What a folly was it for him to call
those his gods which he had made, when he only that made us is to be
worshipped by us as a God! Folly indeed to set his heart upon such silly
idle things, and to look upon himself as undone when he had lost them!
(2.) This may discover to us our spiritual idolatry. That creature which
we place our happiness in, which we set our affections inordinately
upon, and which we can by no means find in our hearts to part with, of
which we say, "What have we more?" that we make an idol of. That is put
in God's place, and is a usurper, which we are concerned about as if our
life and comfort, our hope and happiness, and our all, were bound up in
it. But, (3.) If all people will thus walk in the name of their god,
shall we not be in like manner affected towards our God, the true God?
Let us reckon the having of an interest in God and communion with him
incomparably the richest portion, and the loss of God the sorest loss.
Woe unto us if he depart, for what have we more? Deserted souls that are
lamenting after the Lord may well wonder, as Micah did, that you should
ask what ails them; for the tokens of God's favour are suspended, his
comforts are withdrawn, and what have they more?

2\. They insist upon the mischief they would certainly do him if he
prosecuted his demand. They would not hear reason, nor do justice, nor
so much as offer to pay him the prime cost he had been at upon those
images, nor promise to make restitution of what they had taken when they
had served their present purpose with them in this expedition and had
time to copy them and make others like them for themselves: much less
had they any compassion for a loss he so bitterly lamented. They would
not so much as give him good words, but resolved to justify their
robbery with murder if he did not immediately let fall his claims, [Jdg
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#025). "Take heed lest angry fellows
run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, and that is worse than losing thy
gods." Wicked and unreasonable men reckon it a great provocation to be
asked to do justice, and support themselves by their power against right
and reason. Micah's crime is asking his own, yet, for this, he is in
danger of losing his life and the lives of his household. Micah has not
courage enough to venture his life for the rescue of his gods, so little
opinion has he of their being able to protect him and bear him out, and
therefore tamely gives them up ([Jdg
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#026)): He turned and went back to his
house; and if the loss of his idols did but convince him (as, one would
think, it should) of their vanity and impotency, and his own folly in
setting his heart upon them, and send him back to the true God from whom
he had revolted, he that lost them had a much better bargain than those
that by force of arms carried them off. If the loss of our idols cure us
of the love of them, and make us say, What have we to do any more with
idols? the loss will be unspeakable gain. See [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020); [Isa
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#022).

[Judges 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 18:27</span></span>

Here is, I. Laish conquered by the Danites. They proceeded on their
march, and, because they met with no disaster, perhaps concluded they
had not done amiss in robbing Micah. Many justify themselves in their
impiety by their prosperity. Observe, 1. What posture they found the
people of Laish in, both those of the city and those of the country
about. They were quiet and secure, not jealous of the five spies that
had been among them to search out the land, nor had they any
intelligence of the approach of this enemy, which made them a very easy
prey to this little handful of men that came upon them, [Jdg
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027). Note, Many are brought to
destruction by their security. Satan gets advantage against us when we
are careless and off our watch. Happy therefore is the man that feareth
always. 2. What a complete victory they obtained over them: They put all
the people to the sword, and burnt down so much of the city as they
thought fit to rebuild ([Jdg 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027),
[Jdg 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#028)), and, for aught that
appears, herein they met with no resistance; for the measure of the
iniquity of the Canaanites was full, that of the Danites was but
beginning to fill. 3. How the conquerors settled themselves in their
room, [Jdg 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#028), [Jdg
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#029). They built the city, or much of
it, anew (the old buildings having gone to decay), and called the name
of it Dan, to be a witness for them that, though separated so far off
from their brethren, they were nevertheless Danites by birth, which
might hereafter, by reason of their distance, be called in question. We
should feel concerned not to lose the privilege of our relation to God's
Israel, and therefore should take all occasions to own it and preserve
the remembrance of it to ours after us.

II\. Idolatry immediately set up there. God had graciously performed his
promise, in putting them in possession of that which fell to their lot,
obliging them thereby to be faithful to him who had been so to them.
They inherited the labour of the people, that they might observe his
statues, [Psa 105:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#044), [Psa
105:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#045). But the first thing they do
after they are settled is to break his statues. As soon as they began to
settle themselves they set up the graven image ([Jdg
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030)), perversely attributing their
success to that idol which, if God had not been infinitely patient,
would have been their ruin. Thus a prosperous idolater goes on to
offend, imputing this his power unto his god, [Hab
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011). Their Levite, who officiated as
priest, is at length named here - Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son
of Manasseh. The word Manasseh, in the original, has the letter n, set
over the head, which, some of the Jewish rabbin say, is an intimation
that it should be left out, and then Manasseh will be Moses, and this
Levite, they say, was grandson to the famous Moses, who indeed had a son
named Gershom; but, say they, the historian, in honour of Moses, by a
half interposition of that letter, turned the name into Manasseh. The
vulgar Latin reads it Moses. And if indeed Moses had a grandson that was
rakish, and was picked up as a fit tool to be made use of in the setting
up of idolatry, it is not the only instance (would to God it were!) of
the unhappy degenerating of the posterity of great and good men.
Children's children are not always the crown of old men. But the learned
bishop Patrick takes this to be an idle conceit of the rabbin, and
supposes this Jonathan to be of some other family of the Levites. How
long these corruptions continued we are told in the close. 1. That the
posterity of this Jonathan continued to act as priests to this family of
Dan that was seated at Laish, and in the country about, till the
captivity, [Jdg 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030). After Micah's
image was removed this family retained the character of priests, and had
respect paid them as such by that city, and it is very probable that
Jeroboam had an eye to them when he set up one of his calves there
(which they could welcome at Can, and put some reputation upon, when the
priests of the Lord would have nothing to do with them), and that this
family officiated as some of his priests. 2. That these images continued
till Samuel's time, for so long the ark of God was at Shiloh; and it is
probable that in him time effectual care was taken to suppress and
abolish this idolatry. See how dangerous it is to admit an infection,
for spiritual distempers are not so soon cured as caught.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 19](jdg019)

</div>
