<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg009)  [Next](jdg011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 10:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The peaceable times Israel enjoyed under the
government of two judges, Tola and Jair ([Jdg
10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#001)). II. The troublesome times
that ensued. 1. Israel's sin that brought them into trouble ([Jdg
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#006)). 2. The trouble itself they were
in ([Jdg 10:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#007)). III. Their
repentance and humiliation for sin, their prayers and reformation, and
the mercy they found with God thereupon ([Jdg
10:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#010)). IV. Preparation made for
their deliverance out of the hand of their oppressors ([Jdg
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#017), [Jdg
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#018)).

[Judges 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 10:1</span></span>

Quiet and peaceable reigns, though the best to live in, are the worst to
write of, as yielding least variety of matter for the historian to
entertain his reader with; such were the reigns of these two judges,
Tola and Jair, who make but a small figure and take up but a very little
room in this history. But no doubt they were both raised up of God to
serve their country in the quality of judges, not pretending, as
Abimelech had done, to the grandeur of kings, nor, like him, taking the
honour they had to themselves, but being called of God to it. 1.
Concerning Tola it is said that he arose after Abimelech to defend
Israel, [Jdg 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#001). After Abimelech had
debauched Israel by his wickedness, disquieted and disturbed them by his
restless ambition, and, by the mischiefs he brought on them, exposed
them to enemies from abroad, God animated this good man to appear for
the reforming of abuses, the putting down of idolatry, the appeasing of
tumults, and the healing of the wounds given to the state by Abimelech's
usurpation. Thus he saved them from themselves, and guarded them against
their enemies. He was of the tribe of Issachar, a tribe disposed to
serve, for he bowed his shoulder to bear ([Gen
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#014), [Gen
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#015)), yet one of that tribe is here
raised up to rule; for those that humble themselves shall be exalted. He
bore the name of him that was ancestor to the first family of that
tribe; of the sons of Issachar Tola was the first, [Gen
46:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#013); [Num
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#023). It signifies a worm, yet, being
the name of his ancestor, he was not ashamed of it. Though he was of
Issachar, yet, when he was raised up to the government, he came and
dwelt in Mount Ephraim, which was more in the heart of the country, that
the people might the more conveniently resort to him for judgment. He
judged Israel twenty-three years ([Jdg
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#002)), kept things in good order, but
did not any thing very memorable. 2. Jair was a Gileadite, so was his
next successor Jephthah, both of that half tribe of the tribe of
Manasseh which lay on the other side Jordan; though they seemed
separated from their brethren, yet God took care, while the honour of
the government was shifted from tribe to tribe and before it settled in
Judah, that those who lay remote should sometimes share in it, putting
more abundant honour on that part which lacked. Jair bore the name of a
very famous man of the same tribe who in Moses's time was very active in
reducing this country, [Num 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041);
[Jos 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#030). That which is chiefly
remarkable concerning this Jair is the increase and honour of his
family: He had thirty sons, [Jdg 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#004).
And, (1.) They had good preferments, for they rode on thirty ass colts;
that is, they were judges itinerant, who, as deputies to their father,
rode from place to place in their several circuits to administer
justice. We find afterwards that Samuel made his sons judges, though he
could not make them good ones, [Sa1
8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001). (2.) They had good possessions,
every one a city, out of those that were called, from their ancestor of
the same name with their father, Havoth-jair - the villages of Jair; yet
they are called cities, either because those young gentlemen to whom
they were assigned enlarged and fortified them, and so improved them
into cities, or because they were as well pleased with their lot in
those country towns as if they had been cities compact together and
fenced with gates and bars. Villages are cities to a contented mind.

[Judges 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 10:6</span></span>

While those two judges, Tola and Jair, presided in the affairs of
Israel, things went well, but afterwards,

I. Israel returned to their idolatry, that sin which did most easily
beset them ([Jdg 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#006)): They did evil
again in the sight of the Lord, from whom they were unaccountably bent
to backslide, as a foolish people and unwise. 1. They worshipped many
gods; not only their old demons Baalim and Ashtaroth, which the
Canaanites had worshipped, but, as if they would proclaim their folly to
all their neighbours, they served the gods of Syria, Zidon, Moab, Ammon,
and the Philistines. It looks as if the chief trade of Israel had been
to import deities from all countries. It is hard to say whether it was
more impious or impolitic to do this. By introducing these foreign
deities, they rendered themselves mean and despicable, for no nation
that had any sense of honour changed their gods. Much of the wealth of
Israel, we may suppose, was carried out, in offerings to the temples of
the deities in the several countries whence they came, on which, as
their mother-churches, their temples in Israel were expected to own
their dependence; the priests and devotees of those sorry deities would
follow their gods, no doubt, in crowds into the land of Israel, and, if
they could not live in their own country, would take root there, and so
strangers would devour their strength. If they did it in compliment to
the neighbouring nations, and to ingratiate themselves with them, justly
were they disappointed; for those nations which by their wicked arts
they sought to make their friends by the righteous judgments of God
became their enemies and oppressors. In quo quis peccat, in eo punitur -
Wherein a person offends, therein he shall be punished. 2. They did not
so much as admit the God of Israel to be one of those many deities they
worshipped, but quite cast him off: They forsook the Lord, and served
not him at all. Those that think to serve both God and Mammon will soon
come entirely to forsake God, and to serve Mammon only. If God have not
all the heart, he will soon have none of it.

II\. God renewed his judgments upon them, bringing them under the power
of oppressing enemies. Had they fallen into the hands of the Lord
immediately, they might have found that his mercies were great; but God
let them fall into the hands of man, whose tender mercies are cruel. He
sold them into the hands of the Philistines that lay south-west of
Canaan, and of the Ammonites that lay north-east, both at the same time;
so that between those two millstones they were miserably crushed, as the
original word is ([Jdg 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#008)) for
oppressed. God had appointed that, if any of the cities of Israel should
revolt to idolatry, the rest should make war upon them and cut them off,
[Deu 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012), etc. They had been jealous
enough in this matter, almost to an extreme, in the case of the altar
set up by the two tribes and a half (Jos. 22); but now they had grown so
very bad that when one city was infected with idolatry the next took the
infection and instead of punishing it, imitated and out-did it; and
therefore, since those that should have been revengers to execute wrath
on those that did this evil were themselves guilty, or bore the sword in
vain, God brought the neighbouring nations upon them, to chastise them
for their apostasy. The oppression of Israel by the Ammonites, the
posterity of Lot, was, 1. Very long. It continued eighteen years. Some
make those years to be part of the judgeship of Jair, who could not
prevail to reform and deliver Israel as he would. Others make them to
commence at the death of Jair, which seems the more probable because
that part of Israel which was most infested by the Ammonites was Gilead,
Jair's own country, which we cannot suppose to have suffered so much
while he was living, but that part at least would be reformed and
protected. 2. Very grievous. They vexed them and oppressed them. It was
a great vexation to be oppressed by such a despicable people as the
children of Ammon were. They began with those tribes that lay next them
on the other side Jordan, here called the land of the Amorites ([Jdg
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#008)) because the Israelites had so
wretchedly degenerated, and had made themselves so like the heathen,
that they had become, in a manner, perfect Amorites ([Eze
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003)), or because by their sin they
forfeited their title to this land, so that it might justly be looked
upon as the land of the Amorites again, from whom they took it. But by
degrees they pushed forward, came over Jordan, and invaded Judah, and
Benjamin, and Ephraim ([Jdg 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#009)),
three of the most famous tribes of Israel, yet thus insulted when they
had forsaken God, and unable to make head against the invader. Now the
threatening was fulfilled that they should be slain before their
enemies, and should have no power to stand before them, [Lev
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#017), [Lev
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#037). Their ways and their doings
procure this to themselves; they have sadly degenerated, and so they
come to be sorely distressed.

[Judges 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 10:10</span></span>

Here is, I. A humble confession which Israel make to God in their
distress, [Jdg 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#010). Now they own
themselves guilty, like a malefactor upon the rack, and promise
reformation, like a child under the rod. They not only complain of the
distress, but acknowledge it is their own sin that has brought them into
the distress; therefore God is righteous, and they have no reason to
repine. They confess their omissions, for in them their sin began - "We
have forsaken our God," and their commissions - "We have served Baalim,
and herein have done foolishly, treacherously, and very wickedly."

II\. A humbling message which God thereupon sends to Israel, whether by
an angel (as [Jdg 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001)) or by a prophet
(as [Jdg 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#008)) is not certain. It was
kind that God took notice of their cry, and did not turn a deaf ear to
it and send them no answer at all; it was kind likewise that when they
began to repent he sent them such a message as was proper to increase
their repentance, that they might be qualified and prepared for
deliverance. Now in this message, 1. He upbraids them with their great
ingratitude, reminds them of the great things he had done for them,
delivering them from such and such enemies, the Egyptians first, out of
whose land they were rescued, the Amorites whom they conquered and into
whose land they entered, and since their settlement there, when the
Ammonites had joined with the Moabites to oppress them ([Jdg
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013)), when the Philistines were
vexatious in the days of Shamgar, and afterwards other enemies had given
them trouble, upon their petition God had wrought many a great salvation
for them, [Jdg 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#011), [Jdg
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#012). Of their being oppressed by the
Zidonians and the Maonites we read not elsewhere. God had in justice
corrected them, and in mercy delivered them, and therefore might
reasonably expect that either through fear or through love they would
adhere to him and his service. Well therefore might the word cut them to
the heart ([Jdg 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#013)), "Yet you have
forsaken me that have brought you out of your troubles and served other
gods that brought you into your troubles." Thus did they forsake their
own mercies for their own delusions. 2. He shows them how justly he
might now abandon them to ruin, by abandoning them to the gods that they
had served. To awaken them to a thorough repentance and reformation, he
lets them see, (1.) Their folly in serving Baalim. They had been at a
vast expense to obtain the favour of such gods as could not help them
when they had most need of their help: "Go, and cry unto the gods which
you have chosen ([Jdg 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#014)), try what
they can do for you now. You have worshipped them as gods - try if they
have now either a divine power or a divine goodness to be employed for
you. You paid your homage to them as your kings and lords - try if they
will now protect you. You brought your sacrifices of praise to their
altars as your benefactors, imagining that they gave you your corn, and
wine, and oil, but a friend indeed will be a friend in need; what stead
will their favour stand you in now?" Note, It is necessary, in true
repentance, that there be a full conviction of the utter insufficiency
of all those things to help us and do us any kindness which we have
idolized and set upon the throne in our hearts in competition with God.
We must be convinced that the pleasures of sense on which we have doted
cannot be our satisfaction, nor the wealth of the world which we have
coveted be our portion, that we cannot be happy or easy any where but in
God. (2.) Their misery and danger in forsaking God. "See what a pass you
have brought yourselves to; now you can expect no other than that I
should say, I will deliver you no more, and what will become of you
then?" [Jdg 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#013). This he tells them,
not only as what he might do, but as what he would do if they rested in
a confession of what they had done amiss, and did not put away their
idols and amend for the future.

III\. A humble submission which Israel hereupon made to God's justice,
with a humble application to his mercy, [Jdg
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#015). The children of Israel met
together, probably in a solemn assembly at the door of the tabernacle,
received the impressions of the message God had sent them, were not
driven by it to despair, though it was very threatening, but resolve to
lie at God's feet, and, if they perish, they will perish there. They not
only repeat their confession, We have sinned, but, 1. They surrender
themselves to God's justice: Do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good
unto thee. Hereby they own that they deserved the severest tokens of
God's displeasure and were sure he could do them no wrong, whatever he
laid upon them; they humbled themselves under his mighty and heavy hand,
and accepted of the punishment of their iniquity, which Moses had made
the condition of God's return in mercy to them, [Lev
26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041). Note, True penitents dare and
will refer themselves to God to correct them as he thinks fit, knowing
that their sin is highly malignant in its deserts, and that God is not
rigorous or extreme in his demands. 2. They supplicate for God's mercy:
Deliver us only, we pray thee, this day, from this enemy. They
acknowledge what they deserved, yet pray to God not to deal with them
according to their deserts. Note, We must submit to God's justice with a
hope in his mercy.

IV\. A blessed reformation set on foot hereupon. They brought forth
fruits meet for repentance ([Jdg
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016)): They put away the gods of
strangers (as the word is), strange gods, and worshipped by those
nations that were strangers to the commonwealth of Israel and to the
covenants of promise, and they served the Lord. Need drove them to him.
They knew it was to no purpose to go to the gods whom they had served,
and therefore returned to the God whom they had slighted. This is true
repentance not only for sin, but from sin.

V. God's gracious return in mercy to them, which is expressed here very
tenderly ([Jdg 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016)): His soul was
grieved for the misery of Israel. Not that there is any grief in God (he
has infinite joy and happiness in himself, which cannot be broken in
upon by either the sins or the miseries of his creatures), nor that
there is any change in God: he is in one mind, and who can turn him? But
his goodness is his glory. By it he proclaims his name, and magnifies it
above all names; and, as he is pleased to put himself into the relation
of a father to his people that are in covenant with him, so he is
pleased to represent his goodness to them by the compassions of a father
towards his children; for, as he is the Father of lights, so he is the
Father of mercies. As the disobedience and misery of a child are a grief
to a tender father, and make him feel very sensibly from his natural
affection, so the provocations of God's people are a grief to him ([Psa
95:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#010)), he is broken with their
whorish heart ([Eze 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#009)); their
troubles also are a grief to him; so he is pleased to speak when he is
pleased to appear for the deliverance of his people, changing his way
and method of proceeding, as tender parents when they begin to relent
towards their children with whom they have been displeased. Such are the
tender mercies of our God, and so far is he from having any pleasure in
the death of sinners.

VI\. Things are now working towards their deliverance from the
Ammonites' oppression, [Jdg 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#017),
[Jdg 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#018). God had said, "I will
deliver you no more;" but now they are not what they were, they are
other men, they are new men, and now he will deliver them. That
threatening was denounced to convince and humble them, and, now that it
had taken its desired effect, it is revoked in order to their
deliverance. 1. The Ammonites are hardened to their own ruin. They
gathered together in one body, that they might be destroyed at one blow,
[Rev 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#016). 2. The Israelites are
animated to their own rescue. They assembled likewise, [Jdg
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#017). During their eighteen years'
oppression, as in their former servitudes, they were run down by their
enemies, because they would not incorporate; each family, city, or
tribe, would stand by itself, and act independently, and so they all
became an easy prey to the oppressors, for want of a due sense of a
common interest to cement them: but, whenever they got together, they
did well; so they did here. When God's Israel become as one man to
advance a common good and oppose a common enemy what difficulty can
stand before them? The people and princes of Gilead, having met, consult
first about a general that should command in chief against the
Ammonites. Hitherto most of the deliverers of Israel had an
extraordinary call to the office, as Ehud, Barak, Gideon; but the next
is to be called in a more common way, by a convention of the states, who
enquired out a fit man to command their army, found out one admirably
well qualified for the purpose, and God owned their choice by putting
his Spirit upon him ([Jdg 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029)); so
that this instance is of use for direction and encouragement in
after-ages, when extraordinary calls are no longer to be expected. Let
such be impartially chosen to public trust and power as God has
qualified, and then God will graciously own those who are thus chosen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 11](jdg011)

</div>
