<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg002)  [Next](jdg004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 3:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. A general account of Israel's enemies is premised,
and of the mischief they did them ([Jdg
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)). II. A particular account of
the brave exploits done by the first three of the judges. 1. Othniel,
whom God raised up to fight Israel's battles, and plead their cause
against the king of Mesopotamia ([Jdg
3:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008)). 2. Ehud, who was employed in
rescuing Israel out of the hands of the Moabites, and did it by stabbing
the king of Moab (v. 12-30). 3. Shamgar, who signalized himself in an
encounter with the Philistines ([Jdg
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031)).

[Judges 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 3:1</span></span>

We are here told what remained of the old inhabitants of Canaan. 1.
There were some of them that kept together in united bodies, unbroken
([Jdg 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003)): The five lords of the
Philistines, namely, Ashdod, Gaza, Askelon, Gath, and Ekron, [Sa1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#017). Three of these cities had been
in part reduced ([Jdg 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#018)), but it
seems the Philistines (probably with the help of the other two, which
strengthened their confederacy with each other thenceforward) recovered
the possession of them. These gave the greatest disturbance to Israel of
any of the natives, especially in the latter times of the judges, and
they were never quite reduced until David's time. There was a particular
nation called Canaanites, that kept their ground with the Sidonians,
upon the coast of the great sea. And in the north the Hivites held much
of Mount Lebanon, it being a remote corner, in which perhaps they were
supported by some of the neighbouring states. But, besides these, 2.
There were every where in all parts of the country some scatterings of
the nations ([Jdg 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#005)), Hittites,
Amorites, etc., which, by Israel's foolish connivance and indulgence,
were so many, so easy, and so insolent, that the children of Israel are
said to dwell among them, as if the right had still remained in the
Canaanites, and the Israelites had been taken in by their permission and
only as tenants at will.

Now concerning these remnants of the natives observe,

I. How wisely God permitted them to remain. It is mentioned in the close
of the foregoing chapter as an act of God's justice, that he let them
remain for Israel's correction. But here another construction is put
upon it, and it appears to have been an act of God's wisdom, that he let
them remain for Israel's real advantage, that those who had not known
the wars of Canaan might learn war, [Jdg
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001), [Jdg
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#002). It was the will of God that the
people of Israel should be inured to war, 1. Because their country was
exceedingly rich and fruitful, and abounded with dainties of all sorts,
which, if they were not sometimes made to know hardship, would be in
danger of sinking them into the utmost degree of luxury and effeminacy.
They must sometimes wade in blood, and not always in milk and honey,
lest even their men of war, by the long disuse of arms, should become as
soft and as nice as the tender and delicate woman, that would not set so
much as the sole of her foot to the ground for tenderness and delicacy,
a temper as destructive to every thing that is good as it is to every
thing that is great, and therefore to be carefully watched against by
all God's Israel. 2. Because their country lay very much in the midst of
enemies, by whom they must expect to be insulted; for God's heritage was
a speckled bird; the birds round about were against her, [Jer
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009). It was therefore necessary they
should be well disciplined, that they might defend their coasts when
invaded, and might hereafter enlarge their coast as God had promised
them. The art of war is best learnt by experience, which not only
acquaints men with martial discipline, but (which is no less necessary)
inspires them with a martial disposition. It was for the interest of
Israel to breed soldiers, as it is the interest of an island to breed
sea-men, and therefore God left Canaanites among them, that, by the less
difficulties and hardships they met with in encountering them, they
might be prepared for greater, and, by running with the footmen, might
learn to contend with horses, [Jer
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005). Israel was a figure of the
church militant, that must fight its way to a triumphant state. The
soldiers of Christ must endure hardness, [Ti2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003). Corruption is therefore left
remaining in the hearts even of good Christians, that they may learn
war, may keep on the whole armour of God, and stand continually upon
their guard. The learned bishop Patrick offers another sense of [Jdg
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#002) : That they might know to teach
them war, that is, they shall know what it is to be left to themselves.
Their fathers fought by a divine power. God taught their hands to war
and their fingers to fight; but now that they have forfeited his favour
let them learn what it is to fight like other men.

II\. How wickedly Israel mingled themselves with those that did remain.
One thing God intended in leaving them among them was to prove Israel
([Jdg 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#004)), that those who were
faithful to the God of Israel might have the honour of resisting the
Canaanites' allurements to idolatry, and that those who were false and
insincere might be discovered, and might fall under the shame of
yielding to those allurements. Thus in the Christian churches there must
needs be heresies, that those who are perfect may be made manifest, [Co1
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019). Israel, upon trial, proved bad.
1. They joined in marriage with the Canaanites ([Jdg
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#006)), though they could not advance
either their honour or their estate by marrying with them. They would
mar their blood instead of mending it, and sink their estates instead of
raising them, by such marriages. 2. Thus they were brought to join in
worship with them; they served their gods ([Jdg
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#006)), Baalim and the groves ([Jdg
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007)), that is, the images that were
worshipped in groves of thick trees, which were a sort of natural
temples. In such unequal matches there is more reason to fear that the
bad will corrupt the good than to hope that the good will reform the
bad, as there is in laying two pears together, the one rotten and the
other sound. When they inclined to worship other gods they forgot the
Lord their God. In complaisance to their new relations, they talked of
nothing by Baalim and the groves, so that by degrees they lost the
remembrance of the true God, and forgot there was such a Being, and what
obligations they lay under to him. In nothing is the corrupt memory of
man more treacherous than in this, that it is apt to forget God; because
out of sight, he is out of mind; and here begins all the wickedness that
is in the world: they have perverted their way, for they have forgotten
the Lord their God.

[Judges 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 3:8</span></span>

We now come to the records of the government of the particular judges,
the first of which was Othniel, in whom the story of this book is knit
to that of Joshua, for even in Joshua's time Othniel began to be famous,
by which it appears that it was not long after Israel's settlement in
Canaan before their purity began to be corrupted and their peace (by
consequence) disturbed. And those who have taken pains to enquire into
the sacred chronology are generally agreed that the Danites' idolatry,
and the war with the Benjamites for abusing the Levite's concubine,
though related in the latter end of this book, happened about this time,
under or before the government of Othniel, who, though a judge, was not
such a king in Israel as would keep men from doing what was right in
their own eyes. In this short narrative of Othniel's government we have,

I. The distress that Israel was brought into for their sin, [Jdg
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008). God being justly displeased with
them for plucking up the hedge of their peculiarity, and laying
themselves in common with the nations, plucked up the hedge of their
protection and laid them open to the nations, set them to sale as goods
he would part with, and the first that laid hands on them was
Chushan-rishathaim, king of that Syria which lay between the two great
rivers of Tigris and Euphrates, thence called Mesopotamia, which
signifies in the midst of rivers. It is probable that this was a warlike
prince, and, aiming to enlarge his dominions, he invaded the two tribes
first on the other side Jordan that lay next him, and afterwards,
perhaps by degrees, penetrated into the heart of the country, and as far
as he went put them under contribution, exacting it with rigour, and
perhaps quartering soldiers upon them. Laban, who oppressed Jacob with a
hard service, was of this country; but it lay at such a distance that
one could not have thought Israel's trouble would come from such a far
country, which shows so much the more of the hand of God in it.

II\. Their return to God in this distress: When he slew them, then they
sought him whom before they had slighted. The children of Israel, even
the generality of them, cried unto the Lord, [Jdg
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009). At first they made light of their
trouble, and thought they could easily shake off the yoke of a prince at
such a distance; but, when it continued eight years, they began to feel
the smart of it, and then those cried under it who before had laughed at
it. Those who in the day of their mirth had cried to Baalim and
Ashtaroth now that they are in trouble cry to the Lord from whom they
had revolted, whose justice brought them into this trouble, and whose
power and favour could alone help them out of it. Affliction makes those
cry to God with importunity who before would scarcely speak to him.

III\. God's return in mercy to them for their deliverance. Though need
drove them to him, he did not therefore reject their prayers, but
graciously raised up a deliverer, or saviour, as the word is. Observe,
1. Who the deliverer was. It was Othniel, who married Caleb's daughter,
one of the old stock that had seen the works of the Lord, and had
himself, no question, kept his integrity, and secretly lamented the
apostasy of his people, but waited for a divine call to appear publicly
for the redress of their grievances. He was now, we may suppose, far
advanced in years, when God raised him up to this honour, but the decays
of age were no hindrance to his usefulness when God had work for him to
do. 2. Whence he had his commission, not of man, nor by man; but the
Spirit of the Lord came upon him ([Jdg
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#010)), the spirit of wisdom and
courage to qualify him for the service, and a spirit of power to excite
him to it, so as to give him and others full satisfaction that it was
the will of God he should engage in it. The Chaldee says, The spirit of
prophecy remained on him. 3. What method he took. He first judged
Israel, reproved them, called them to account for their sins, and
reformed them, and then went out to war. This was the right method. Let
sin at home be conquered, that worst of enemies, and then enemies abroad
will be the more easily dealt with. Thus let Christ be our Judge and
Law-giver, and then he will save us, and on no other terms, [Isa
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#022). 4. What good success he had. He
prevailed to break the yoke of the oppression, and, as it should seem,
to break the neck of the oppressor; for it is said, The Lord delivered
Chushan-rishathaim into his hand. Now was Judah, of which tribe Othniel
was, as a lion's whelp gone up from the prey. 5. The happy consequence
of Othniel's good services. The land, though not getting ground, yet had
rest, and some fruits of the reformation, forty years; and the benefit
would have been perpetual if they had kept close to God and their duty.

[Judges 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 3:12</span></span>

Ehud is the next of the judges whose achievements are related in this
history, and here is an account of his actions.

I. When Israel sins again God raises up a new oppressor, [Jdg
3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012). It was an aggravation of
their wickedness that they did evil again after they had smarted so long
for their former iniquities, promised so fair when Othniel judged them,
and received so much mercy from God in their deliverance. What, and
after all this, again to break his commandments! Was the disease
obstinate to all the methods of cure, both corrosives and lenitives? It
seems it was. Perhaps they thought they might make the more bold with
their old sins because they saw themselves in no danger from their old
oppressor; the powers of that kingdom were weakened and brought low. But
God made them know that he had variety of rods wherewith to chastise
them: He strengthened Eglon king of Moab against them. This oppressor
lay nearer to them than the former, and therefore would be the more
mischievous to them; God's judgments thus approached them gradually, to
bring them to repentance. When Israel dwelt in tents, but kept their
integrity, Balak king of Moab, who would have strengthened himself
against them, was baffled; but now that they had forsaken God, and
worshipped the gods of the nations round about them (and perhaps those
of the Moabites among the rest), here was another king of Moab, whom God
strengthened against them, put power into his hands, though a wicked
man, that he might be a scourge to Israel. The staff in his hand with
which he beat Israel was God's indignation; howbeit he meant not so,
neither did his heart think so, [Isa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006), [Isa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007). Israelites did ill, and, we may
suppose, Moabites did worse; yet because God commonly punishes the sins
of his own people in this world, that, the flesh being destroyed, the
spirit may be saved, Israel is weakened and Moab strengthened against
them. God would not suffer the Israelites, when they were the stronger,
to distress the Moabites, nor give them any disturbance, though they
were idolaters ([Deu 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#009)); yet now he
suffered the Moabites to distress Israel, and strengthened them on
purpose that they might: Thy judgments, O God! are a great deep. The
king of Moab took to his assistance the Ammonites and Amalekites ([Jdg
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013)), and this strengthened him; and
we are here told how they prevailed. 1. They beat them in the field:
They went and smote Israel ([Jdg
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013)), not only those tribes that lay
next them on the other side Jordan, who, though first settled, being
frontier-tribes, were most disturbed; but those also within Jordan, for
they made themselves masters of the city of palm-trees, which, it is
probable, was a strong-hold erected near the place where Jericho had
stood, for that was so called ([Deu
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#003)), into which the Moabites put a
garrison, to be a bridle upon Israel, and to secure the passes of
Jordan, for the preservation of the communication with their own
country. It was well for the Kenites that they had left this city ([Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016)) before it fell into the hands of
the enemy. See how quickly the Israelites lost that by their own sin
which they had gained by miracles of divine mercy. 2. They made them to
serve ([Jdg 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#014)), that is, exacted
tribute from them, either the fruits of the earth in kind or money in
lieu of them. They neglected the service of God, and did not pay him his
tribute; thus therefore did God recover from them that wine and oil,
that silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal, [Hos
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008). What should have been paid to the
divine grace, and was not, was distrained for, and paid to the divine
justice. The former servitude ([Jdg
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008)) lasted but eight years, this
eighteen; for, if less troubles do not do the work, God will send
greater.

II\. When Israel prays again God raises up a new deliverer ([Jdg
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015)), named Ehud. We are here told,

1\. That he was a Benjamite. The city of palm-trees lay within the lot
of this tribe, by which it is probable that they suffered most, and
therefore stirred first to shake off the yoke. It is supposed by the
chronologers that the Israelites' war with Benjamin for the wickedness
of Gibeah, by which that whole tribe was reduced to 600 men, happened
before this, so that we may well think that tribe to be now the weakest
of all the tribes, yet out of it God raised up this deliverer, in token
of his being perfectly reconciled to them, to manifest his own power in
ordaining strength out of weakness, and that he might bestow more
abundant honour upon that part which lacked, [Co1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#024).

2\. That he was left-handed, as it seems many of that tribe were, [Jdg
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016). Benjamin signifies the son of
the right hand, and yet multitudes of them were left-handed; for men's
natures do not always answer their names. The lxx. say he was an
ambidexter, one that could use both hands alike, supposing that this was
an advantage to him in the action he was called to; but the Hebrew
phrase, that he was shut of his right hand, intimates that, either
through disease of disuse, he made little or no use of that, but of his
left hand only, and so was the less fit for war, because he must needs
handle his sword but awkwardly; yet God chose this left-handed man to be
the man of his right hand, whom he would make strong for himself, [Psa
80:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#017). It was God's right hand that
gained Israel the victory ([Psa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003)),
not the right hand of the instruments he employed.

3\. We are here told what Ehud did for the deliverance of Israel out of
the hands of the Moabites. He saved the oppressed by destroying the
oppressors, when the measure of their iniquity was full and the set time
to favour Israel had come.

(1.) He put to death Eglon the king of Moab; I say, put him to death,
not murdered or assassinated him, but as a judge, or minister of divine
justice, executed the judgments of God upon him, as an implacable enemy
to God and Israel. This story is particularly related.

\[1.\] He had a fair occasion of access to him. Being an ingenious
active man, and fit to stand before kings, his people chose him to carry
a present in the name of all Israel, over and above their tribute, to
their great lord the king of Moab, that they might find favour in his
eyes, [Jdg 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015). The present is called
mincha in the original, which is the word used in the law for the
offerings that were presented to God to obtain his favour; these the
children of Israel had not offered in their season to the God that loved
them; and now, to punish them for their neglect, they are laid under a
necessity of bringing their offerings to a heathen prince that hated
them. Ehud went on his errand to Eglon, offered his present with the
usual ceremony and expressions of dutiful respect, the better to colour
what he intended and to prevent suspicion.

\[2.\] It should seem, from the first, he designed to be the death of
him, God putting it into his heart, and letting him know also that the
motion was from himself, by the Spirit that came upon him, the impulses
of which carried with them their own evidence, and so gave him full
satisfaction both as to the lawfulness and the success of this daring
attempt, of both which he would have had reason enough to doubt. If he
be sure that God bids him do it, he is sure both that he may do it and
that he shall do it; for a command from God is sufficient to bear us
out, and bring us off, both against our consciences and against all the
world. That he compassed and imagined the death of this tyrant appears
by the preparation he made of a weapon for the purpose, a short dagger,
but half a yard long, like a bayonet, which might easily be concealed
under his clothes ([Jdg 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#016)), perhaps
because none were suffered to come near the king with their swords by
their sides. This he wore on his right thigh, that it might be the more
ready to his left hand, and might be the less suspected.

\[3.\] He contrived how to be alone with him, which he might the more
easily be now that he had not only made himself known to him, but
ingratiated himself by the present, and the compliments which perhaps,
on this occasion, he had passed upon him. Observe, how he laid his plot.
First, He concealed his design even from his own attendants, brought
them part of the way, and then ordered them to go forward towards home,
while he himself, as if he had forgotten something behind him, went back
to the king of Moab's court, [Jdg
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#018). There needed but one hand to do
the execution; had more been engaged they could not so safely have kept
counsel, nor so easily have made an escape. Secondly, He returned from
the quarries by Gilgal ([Jdg 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#019)),
from the graven images (so it is in the margin) which were with Gilgal,
set up perhaps by the Moabites with the twelve stones which Joshua had
set up there. Some suggest that the sight of these idols stirred up in
him such an indignation against the king of Moab as put him upon the
execution of that design which otherwise he had thought to let fall for
the present. Or, perhaps, he came so far as to these images, that,
telling from what place he returned, the king of Moab might be the more
apt to believe he had a message from God. Thirdly, He begged a private
audience, and obtained it in a withdrawing-room, here called a summer
parlour. He told the king he had a secret errand to him, who thereupon
ordered all his attendants to withdraw, [Jdg
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#019). Whether he expected to receive
some private instructions from an oracle, or some private informations
concerning the present state of Israel, as if Ehud would betray his
country, it was a very unwise thing for him to be all alone with a
stronger and one whom he had reason to look upon as an enemy; but those
that are marked for ruin are infatuated, and their hearts hid from
understanding; God deprives them of discretion.

\[4.\] When he had him alone he soon dispatched him. His summer parlour,
where he used to indulge himself in ease and luxury, was the place of
his execution. First, Ehud demands his attention to a message from God
([Jdg 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#020)), and that message was a
dagger. God sends to us by the judgments of his hand, as well as by the
judgments of his mouth. Secondly, Eglon pays respect to a message from
God. Though a king, though a heathen king, though rich and powerful,
though now tyrannizing over the people of God, though a fat unwieldy man
that could not easily rise nor stand long, though in private and what he
did was not under observation, yet, when he expected to receive orders
form heaven, he rose out of his seat; whether it was low and easy, or
whether it was high and stately, he quitted it, and stood up when God
was about to speak to him, thereby owning God his superior. This shames
the irreverence of many who are called Christians, and yet, when a
message from God is delivered to them, study to show, by all the marks
of carelessness, how little they regard it. Ehud, in calling what he had
to do a message from God, plainly avouches a divine commission for it;
and God's inclining Eglon to stand up to it did both confirm the
commission and facilitate the execution. Thirdly, The message was
delivered, not to his ear, but immediately, and literally, to his heart,
into which the fatal knife was thrust, and was left there, [Jdg
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#021), [Jdg
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#022). His extreme fatness made him
unable to resist or to help himself; probably it was the effect of his
luxury and excess; and, when the fat closed up the blade, God would by
this circumstance show how those that pamper the body do but prepare for
their own misery. However, it was an emblem of his carnal security and
senselessness. His heart was a fat as grease, and in that he thought
himself enclosed. See [Psa 119:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#070);
[Psa 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#010). Eglon signifies a calf,
and he fell like a fatted calf, by the knife, an acceptable sacrifice to
divine justice. Notice is taken of the coming out of the dirt or dung,
that the death of this proud tyrant may appear the more ignominious and
shameful. He that had been so very nice and curious about his own body,
to keep it easy and clean, shall now be found wallowing in his own blood
and excrements. Thus does God pour contempt upon princes. Now this act
of Ehud's may justify itself because he had special direction from God
to do it, and it was agreeable to the usual method which, under that
dispensation, God took to avenge his people of their enemies, and to
manifest to the world his own justice. But it will by no means justify
any now in doing the like. No such commissions are now given, and to
pretend to them is to blaspheme God, and made him patronize the worst of
villanies. Christ bade Peter sheathe the sword, and we find not that he
bade him draw it again.

\[5.\] Providence wonderfully favoured his escape, when he had done the
execution. First, The tyrant fell silently, without any shriek or
out-cry, which might have been overheard by his servants at a distance.
How silently does he go down to the pit, choked up, it may be, with his
own fat, which stifled his dying groans, though he had made so great a
noise in the world, and had been the terror of the mighty in the land of
the living! Secondly, The heroic executioner of this vengeance, with
such a presence of mind as discovered not only no consciousness of
guilt, but a strong confidence in the divine protection, shut the doors
after him, took the key with him, and passed through the guards with
such an air of innocence, and boldness, and unconcernedness, as made
them not at all to suspect his having done any thing amiss. Thirdly, The
servants that attended in the antechamber, coming to the door of the
inner parlour, when Ehud had gone, to know their master's pleasure, and
finding it locked and all quiet, concluded he had lain down to sleep,
had covered his feet upon his couch, and gone to consult his pillow
about the message he had received, and to dream upon it ([Jdg
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#024)), and therefore would not offer
to open the door. Thus by their care not to disturb his sleep they lost
the opportunity of revenging his death. See what comes of men's taking
state too much, and obliging those about them to keep their distance;
some time or other it may come against them more than they think of.
Fourthly, The servants at length opened the door, and found their master
had slept indeed his long sleep, [Jdg
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#025). The horror of this tragical
spectacle, and the confusion it must needs put them into, to reflect
upon their own inconsideration in not opening the door sooner, quite put
by the thoughts of sending pursuers after him that had done it, whom now
they despaired of overtaking. Lastly, Ehud by this means made his escape
to Sierath, a thick wood; so some, [Jdg
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#026). It is not said any where in this
story what was the place in which Eglon lived now; but, there being no
mention of Ehud passing and repassing Jordan, I am inclined to think
that Eglon had left his own country of Moab, on the other side Jordan,
and made his principal residence at this time in the city of palm-trees,
within the land of Canaan, a richer country than his own, and that there
he was slain, and then the quarries by Gilgal were not far off him.
There where he had settled himself, and thought he had sufficiently
fortified himself to lord it over the people of God, there he was cut
off, and proved to be fed for the slaughter like a lamb in a large
place.

(2.) Ehud, having slain the king of Moab, gave a total rout to the
forces of the Moabites that were among them, and so effectually shook
off the yoke of their oppression. \[1.\] He raised an army immediately
in Mount Ephraim, at some distance form the headquarters of the
Moabites, and headed them himself, [Jdg
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#027). The trumpet he blew was indeed a
jubilee-trumpet, proclaiming liberty, and a joyful sound it was to the
oppressed Israelites, who for a long time had heard no other trumpets
than those of their enemies. \[2.\] Like a pious man, and as one that
did all this in faith, he took encouragement himself, and gave
encouragement to his soldiers, from the power of God engaged for them
([Jdg 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#028)): "Follow me, for the Lord
hath delivered your enemies into your hands; we are sure to have God
with us, and therefore may go on boldly, and shall go on triumphantly."
\[3.\] Like a politic general, he first secured the fords of Jordan, set
strong guards upon all those passes, to cut off the communications
between the Moabites that were in the land of Israel (for upon them only
his design was) and their own country on the other side Jordan, that if,
upon the alarm given them, they resolved to fly, they might not escape
thither, and, if they resolved to fight, they might not have assistance
thence. Thus he shut them up in that land as their prison in which they
were pleasing themselves as their palace and paradise. \[4.\] He then
fell upon them, and put them all to the sword, 10,000 of them, which it
seems was the number appointed to keep Israel in subjection ([Jdg
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#029)): There escaped not a man of
them. And they were the best and choicest of all the king of Moab's
forces, all lusty men, men of bulk and stature, and not only
able-bodied, but high spirited too, and men of valour, [Jdg
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#029). But neither their strength nor
their courage stood them in any stead when the set time had come for God
to deliver them into the hand of Israel. \[5.\] The consequence of this
victory was that the power of the Moabites was wholly broken in the land
of Israel. The country was cleared of these oppressors, and the land had
rest eighty years, [Jdg 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030). We may
hope that there was likewise a reformation among them, and a check give
to idolatry, by the influence of Ehud which continued a good part of
this time. It was a great while for the land to rest, fourscore years;
yet what is that to the saints' everlasting rest in the heavenly Canaan?

[Judges 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 3:31</span></span>

When it is said the land had rest eighty years, some think it meant
chiefly of that part of the land which lay eastward on the banks of
Jordan, which had been oppressed by the Moabites; but it seems, by this
passage here, that the other side of the country which lay south-west
was in that time infested by the Philistines, against whom Shamgar made
head. 1. It seems Israel needed deliverance, for he delivered Israel;
how great the distress was Deborah afterwards related in her song ([Jdg
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)), that in the days of Shamgar the
highways were unoccupied, etc.; that part of the country which lay next
to the Philistines was so infested with plunderers that people could not
travel the roads in safety, but were in danger of being set upon and
robbed, nor durst they dwell in the unguarded villages, but were forced
to take shelter in the fortified cities. 2. God raised him up to deliver
them, as it should seem, while Ehud was yet living, but superannuated.
So inconsiderable were the enemies for number that it seems the killing
of 600 of them amounted to a deliverance of Israel, and so many he slew
with an ox-goad, or, as some read it, a plough-share. It is probable
that he was himself following the plough when the Philistines made an
inroad upon the country to ravage it, and God put it into his heart to
oppose them; the impulse being sudden and strong, and having neither
sword nor spear to do execution with, he took the instrument that was
next at hand, some of the tools of his plough, and with that killed so
many hundred men and came off unhurt. See here, (1.) That God can make
those eminently serviceable to his glory and his church's good whose
extraction, education, and employment, are very mean and obscure. He
that has the residue of the Spirit could, when he pleased, make
ploughmen judges and generals, and fishermen apostles. (2.) It is no
matter how weak the weapon is if God direct and strengthen the arm. An
ox-goad, when God pleases, shall do more than Goliath's sword. And
sometimes he chooses to work by such unlikely means, that the excellency
of the power may appear to be of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 4](jdg004)

</div>
