<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer050)  [Next](jer052) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 51](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 51:0</span></span>

The prophet, in this chapter, goes on with the prediction of Babylon's
fall, to which other prophets also bore witness. He is very copious and
lively in describing the foresight God had given him of it, for the
encouragement of the pious captives, whose deliverance depended upon it
and was to be the result of it. Here is, I. The record of Babylon's
doom, with the particulars of it, intermixed with the grounds of God's
controversy with her, many aggravations of her fall, and great
encouragements given thence to the Israel of God, that suffered such
hard things by her (v. 1-58). II. The representation and ratification of
this by the throwing of a copy of this prophecy into the river Euphrates
([Jer 51:59-64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059)).

[Jeremiah 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 51:1</span></span>

The particulars of this copious prophecy are dispersed and interwoven,
and the same things left and returned to so often that it could not well
be divided into parts, but we must endeavor to collect them under their
proper heads. Let us then observe here,

I. An acknowledgment of the great pomp and power that Babylon had been
in and the use that God in his providence had made of it ([Jer
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007)): Babylon hath been a golden cup,
a rich and glorious empire, a golden city ([Isa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004)), a head of gold ([Dan
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038)), filled with all good things, as
a cup with wine. Nay, she had been a golden cup in the Lord's hand; he
had in a particular manner filled and favoured her with blessings; he
had made the earth drunk with this cup; some were intoxicated with her
pleasures and debauched by her, others intoxicated with her terrors and
destroyed by her. In both senses the New Testament Babylon is said to
have made the kings of the earth drunk, [Rev
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002); [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003). Babylon had also been God's
battle-axe; it was so at this time, when Jeremiah prophesied, and was
likely to be yet more so, [Jer 51:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#020).
The forces of Babylon were God's weapons of war, tools in his hand, with
which he broke in pieces, and knocked down, nations and kingdoms, -
horses and chariots, which are so much the strength of kingdoms ([Jer
51:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#021)), - man and woman, young and
old, with which kingdoms are replenished ([Jer
51:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#022)), - the shepherd and his flock,
the husbandman and his oxen, with which kingdoms are maintained and
supplied, [Jer 51:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#023). Such havoc as
this the Chaldeans had made when God employed them as instruments of his
wrath for the chastising of the nations; and yet now Babylon itself must
fall. Note, Those that have carried all before them a great while will
yet at length meet with their match, and their day also will come to
fall; the rod will itself be thrown into the fire at last. Nor can any
think it will exempt them from God's judgments that they have been
instrumental in executing his judgments on others.

II\. A just complaint made of Babylon, and a charge drawn up against her
by the Israel of God. 1. She is complained of for her incorrigible
wickedness ([Jer 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#009)): We would have
healed Babylon, but she is not healed. The people of God that were
captives among the Babylonians endeavoured, according to the
instructions given them ([Jer 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)),
to convince them of the folly of their idolatry, but they could not do
it; still they doted as much as ever upon their graven images, and
therefore the Israelites resolved to quit them and go to their own
country. Yet some understand this as spoken by the forces they had hired
for their assistance, declaring that they had done their best to save
her from ruin, but that it was all to no purpose, and therefore they
might as well go home to their respective countries; "for her judgment
reaches unto heaven, and it is in vain to withstand it or think to avert
it." 2. She is complained of for her inveterate malice against Israel.
Other nations had been hardly used by the Chaldeans, but Israel only
complains to God of it, and with confidence appeals to him ([Jer
51:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#034), [Jer
51:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#035)): "The king of Babylon has
devoured me, and crushed me, and never thought he could do enough ruin
to me; he has emptied me of all that was valuable, has swallowed me up
as a dragon, or whale, swallows up the little fish by shoals; he has
filled his belly, filled his treasures, with my delicates, with all my
pleasant things, and has cast me out, cast me away as a vessel in which
there is no pleasure; and now let them be accountable for all this."
Zion and Jerusalem shall say, "Let the violence done to me and my
children, that are my own flesh, and pieces of myself, and all the blood
of my people, which they have shed like water, be upon them; let the
guilt of it lie upon them, and let it be required at their hands." Note,
Ruin is not far off from those that lie under the guilt of wrong done to
God's people.

III\. Judgment given upon this appeal by the righteous Judge of heaven
and earth, on behalf of Israel against Babylon. he sits in the throne
judging right, is ready to receive complaints, and answers ([Jer
51:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#036)): "I will plead thy cause. Leave
it with me; I will in due time plead it effectually and take vengeance
for thee, and every drop of Jerusalem's blood shall be accounted for
with interest." Israel and Judah seemed to have been neglected and
forgotten, but God had an eye to them, [Jer
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#005). It is true their land was filled
with sin against the Holy One of Israel. They were a provoking people
and their sings were a great offence to God, as a holy God, and as their
God, their Holy One; and therefore he justly delivered them up into the
hands of their enemies, and might justly have abandoned them and left
them to perish in their hands; but God deals better with them than they
deserve, and, notwithstanding their iniquities and his severities,
Israel is not forsaken, is not cast off, though he be cast out, but is
owned and looked after by his God, by the Lord of hosts. God is his God
still, and will act for him as the Lord of hosts, a God of power. Note,
Though God's people may have broken his laws and fallen under his
rebukes, yet it does not therefore follow that they are thrown out of
covenant; but God's care of them and love to them will flourish again,
[Psa 89:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030). The Chaldeans thought
they should never be called to an account for what they had done against
God's Israel; but there is a time fixed for vengeance, [Jer
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006). We cannot expect it should come
sooner than the time fixed, but then it will come; he will render unto
Babylon a recompence, for the avenging of Israel is the vengeance of the
Lord, who espouses their cause; it is the vengeance of his temple, [Jer
51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011), as before, [Jer
50:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#028). The Lord God of recompences,
the God to whom vengeance belongs, will surely requite ([Jer
51:56](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#056)), will pay them home; he will
render unto Babylon all the evil they have done in Zion ([Jer
51:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#024)); he will return it in the sight
of his people. They shall have the satisfaction to see their cause
pleaded with jealousy. They shall not only live to see those judgments
brought upon Babylon, but they shall plainly see them to be the
punishment of the wrong they have done to Zion; any man may see it, and
say, Verily there is a God that judges in the earth; for just as Babylon
has caused the slain of Israel to fall, has not only slain those that
were found in arms, but all without distinction, even all the land
(almost all were put to the sword), so at Babylon shall fall the slain
not only of the city, but of all the country, [Jer
51:49](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#049). Cyrus shall measure to the
Chaldeans the same that they measured to the Jews, so that every
observer may discern that God is recompensing them for what they did
against his people; but Zion's children shall in a particular manner
triumph in it ([Jer 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#010)): The Lord
has brought forth our righteousness; he has appeared in our behalf
against those that dealt unjustly with us, and has given us redress; he
has also made it to appear that he is reconciled to us and that we are
yet in his eyes a righteous nation. Let it therefore be spoken of to his
praise: Come and let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God,
that others may be invited to join with us in praising him.

IV\. A declaration of the greatness and sovereignty of that God who
espouses Zion's cause and undertakes to reckon with this proud and
potent enemy, [Jer 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#014). It is the
Lord of hosts that has said it, that has sworn it, has sworn it by
himself (for he could swear by no greater), that he will fill Babylon
with vast and incredible numbers of the enemy's forces, will fill it
with men as with caterpillars, that shall overpower it will multitudes,
and need only to lift up a shout against it, for that shall be so
terrible as to dispirit all the inhabitants and make them an easy prey
to this numerous army. But who, and where, is he that can break so
powerful a kingdom as Babylon? The prophet gives an account of him from
the description he had formerly given of him, and of his sovereignty and
victory over all pretenders ([Jer
10:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#012)), which was there intended
for the conviction of the Babylonian idolaters and the confirmation of
God's Israel in the faith and worship of the God of Israel; and it is
here repeated to show that God will convince those by his judgments who
would not be convinced by his word that he is God over all. Let not any
doubt but that he who has determined to destroy Babylon is able to make
his words good, for, 1. he is the God that made the world ([Jer
51:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#015)), and therefore nothing is too
hard for him to do; it is in his name that our help stands, and on him
our hope is built. 2. He has the command of all the creatures that he
has made ([Jer 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#016)); his providence
is a continued creation. He has wind and rain at his disposal. if he
speak the word, there is a multitude of waters in the heavens (and it is
a wonder how they hang there), fed by vapours out of the earth, and it
is a wonder how they ascend thence. Lightnings and rain seem contraries,
as fire and water, and yet they are produced together; and the wind,
which seems arbitrary in its motions, and we know not whence it comes,
is yet, we are sure, brought out of his treasuries. 3. The idols that
oppose the accomplishment of his word are a mere sham and their
worshippers brutish people, [Jer
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#017), [Jer
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#018). The idols are falsehood, they
are vanity, they are the work of errors; when they come to be visited
(to be examined and enquired into) they perish, that is, their
reputation sinks and they appear to be nothing; and those that make them
are like unto them. But between the God of Israel and these gods of the
heathen there is no comparison ([Jer
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#019)): The portion of Jacob is not
like them; the God who speaks this and will do it is the former of all
things and the Lord of all hosts, and therefore can do what he will; and
there is a near relation between him and his people, for he is their
portion and they are his; they put a confidence in him as their portion
and he is pleased to take a complacency in them and a particular care of
them as the lot of his inheritance; and therefore he will do what is
best for them. The repetition of these things here, which were said
before, intimates both the certainty and the importance of them, and
obliges us to take special notice of them; God hath spoken once; yea,
twice have we heard this, that power belongs to God, power to destroy
the most formidable enemies of his church; and if God thus speak once,
yea, twice, we are inexcusable if we do not perceive it and attend to
it.

V. A description of the instruments that are to be employed in this
service. God has raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medes ([Jer
51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011)), Darius and Cyrus, who come
against Babylon by a divine instinct; for God's device is against
Babylon to destroy it. They do it, but God devised it, he designed it;
they are but accomplishing his purpose, and acting as he directed. Note,
God's counsel shall stand, and according to it all hearts shall move.
Those whom God employs against Babylon are compared ([Jer
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#001)) to a destroying wind, which
either by its coldness blasts the fruits of the earth or by its
fierceness blows down all before it. This wind is brought out of God's
treasuries ([Jer 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#016)), and it is
here said to be raised up against those that dwell in the midst of the
Chaldeans, those of other nations that inhabit among them and are
incorporated with them. The Chaldeans rise up against God by falling
down before idols, and against them God will raise up destroyers, for he
will be too hard for those that contend with him. These enemies are
compared to fanners ([Jer 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#002)), who
shall drive them away as chaff is driven away by the fan. The Chaldeans
had been fanners to winnow God's people ([Jer
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#007)) and to empty them, and now they
shall themselves be in like manner despoiled and dispersed.

VI\. An ample commission given them to destroy and lay all waste. Let
them bend their bow against the archers of the Chaldeans ([Jer
51:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#003)) and not spare her young men, but
utterly destroy them, for the Lord has both devised and done what he
spoke against Babylon, [Jer 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#012).
This may animate the instruments he employs, but assuring them of
success. The methods they take are such as God has devised and therefore
they shall surely prosper; what he has spoken shall be done, for he
himself will do it; and therefore let all necessary preparations be
made. This they are called to, [Jer
51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027), [Jer
51:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#028). Let a standard be set up, under
which to enlist soldiers for this expedition; let a trumpet be blown to
call men together to it and animate them in it; let the nations, out of
which Cyrus's army is to be raised, prepare their recruits; let the
kingdoms of Ararat, and Minni, and Ashkenaz, of Armenia, both the higher
and the lower, and of Ascania, about Phrygia and Bithynia, send in their
quota of men for his service; let general officers be appointed and the
cavalry advance; let the horses come up in great numbers, as the
caterpillars, and come, like them, leaping and pawing in the valley; let
them lay the country waste, as caterpillars do ([Joe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004)), especially rough caterpillars;
let the kings and captains prepare nations against Babylon, for the
service is great and there is occasion for many hands to be employed it.

VII\. The weakness of the Chaldeans, and their inability to make head
against this threatening destroying force. When God employed them
against other nations they had spirit and strength to act offensively,
and went on with admirable resolution, conquering and to conquer; but
now that it comes to their turn to be reckoned with all their might and
courage are gone, their hearts fail them, and none of all their men of
might and mettle have found their hands to act so much as defensively.
They are called upon here to prepare for action, but it is ironically
and in an upbraiding way ([Jer 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011)):
Make bright the arrows, which have grown rusty through disuse; gather
the shields, which in a long time of peace and security have been
scattered and thrown out of the way ([Jer
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#012)); set up the standard upon the
walls of Babylon, upon the towers on those walls, to summon all that
owed suit and service to that mother-city, now to come in to her
assistance; let them make the watch as strong as they can, and appoint
the sentinels to their respective posts, and prepare ambushes for the
reception of the enemy. This intimates that they would be found very
secure and remiss, and would need to be thus quickened (and they were so
to such a degree that they were in the midst of their revels when the
city was taken), but that all their preparations should come to no
purpose. Whoever will may call them to it, but they shall have no heart
to come at the call, [Jer 51:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#029). The
whole land shall tremble, and sorrow (a universal consternation) shall
seize upon them; for they shall see both the irresistible arm and the
irreversible counsel and decree of God against them. They shall see that
God is making Babylon a desolation, and therein is performing what he
has purposed; and then the mighty men of Babylon have forborne to fight,
[Jer 51:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#030). God having taken away
their strength and spirit, so that they have remained in their holds,
not daring so much as to peep forth, the might both of their hearts and
of their hands fails; they become as timorous as women, so that the
enemy has, without any resistance, burnt her dwelling-places and broken
her bars. It is to the same purport with [Jer
51:56-58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#056). When the spoiler comes upon
Babylon her mighty men, who should make head against him, are
immediately taken, their weapons of war fail them, every one of their
bows is broken and stands them in no stead. Their politics fail them;
they call councils of war, but their princes and captains, who sit in
council to concert measures for the common safety, are made drunk; they
are as men intoxicated through stupidity or despair; they can form no
right notions of things; they stagger and are unsteady in their counsels
and resolves, and dash one against another, and, like drunken men, fall
out among themselves. At length they sleep a perpetual sleep, and never
awake from their wine, the wine of God's wrath, for it is to them an
opiate that lays them into a fatal lethargy. The walls of their city
fail them, [Jer 51:58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#058). When the enemy
had found ways to ford Euphrates, which was thought impassable, yet
surely, think they, the walls are impregnable, they are the broad walls
of Babylon or (as the margin reads it), the walls of broad Babylon. The
compass of the city, within the walls, was 385 furlongs, some say 480,
that is, about sixty miles; the walls were 200 cubits high, and fifty
cubits broad, so that two chariots might easily pass by one another upon
them. Some say that there was a threefold wall about the inner city and
the like about the outer, and that the stones of the wall, being laid in
pitch instead of mortar ([Gen 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#003)),
were scarcely separable; and yet these shall be utterly broken, and the
high gates and towers shall be burnt, and the people that are employed
in the defence of the city shall labour in vain in the fire; they shall
quite tire themselves, but shall do no good.

VIII\. The destruction that shall be made of Babylon by these invaders.
1. It is a certain destruction; the doom has passed and it cannot be
reversed; a divine power is engaged against it, which cannot be resisted
([Jer 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#008)): Babylon is fallen and
destroyed, is as sure to fall, to fall into destruction, as if it were
fallen and destroyed already; though when Jeremiah prophesied this, and
many a year after, it was in the height of its power and greatness. God
declares, God appears against Babylon ([Jer
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025)): Behold, I am against thee; and
those cannot stand long whom God is against. He will stretch out his
hand upon it, a hand which no creature can bear the weight of nor
withstand the force of. It is his purpose, which shall be performed,
that Babylon must be a desolation, [Jer
51:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#029). 2. It is a righteous
destruction. Babylon has made herself meet for it, and therefore cannot
fail to meet with it. For ([Jer 51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025))
Babylon has been a destroying mountain, very lofty and bulky as a
mountain, and destroying all the earth, as the stones that are tumbled
from high mountains spoil the grounds about them; but now it shall
itself be rolled down from its rocks, which were as the foundations on
which it stood. It shall be levelled, its pomp and power broken. It is
now a burning mountain, like Aetna and the other volcanoes, that throw
out fire, to the terror of all about them. But it shall be a burnt
mountain; it shall at length have consumed itself, and shall remain a
heap of ashes. So will this world be at the end of time. Again ([Jer
51:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#033)), "Babylon is like a
threshing-floor, in which the people of God have been long threshed, as
sheaves in the floor; but now the time has come that she shall herself
be threshed and her sheaves in her; her princes and great men, and all
her inhabitants, shall be beaten in their own land, as in the
threshing-floor. The threshing-floor is prepared. Babylon is by sin made
meet to be a seat of war, and her people, like corn in harvest, are ripe
for destruction," [Rev 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015); [Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012). 3. It is an unavoidable
destruction. Babylon seems to be well-fenced and fortified against it:
She dwells upon many waters ([Jer
51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013)); the situation of her country
is such that it seems inaccessible, it is so surrounded, and the march
of an enemy into it so embarrassed, by rivers. In allusion to this, the
New Testament Babylon is said to sit upon many waters, that is, to rule
over many nations, as the other Babylon did, [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015). Babylon is abundant in
treasures; and yet "thy end has come, and neither they waters nor thy
wealth shall secure thee." This end that comes shall be the measure of
thy covetousness; it shall be the stint of thy gettings, it shall set
bounds to thy ambition and avarice, which otherwise would have ben
boundless. God, by the destruction of Babylon, said to its proud waves,
Hitherto shall you come, and no further. Note, if men will not set a
measure to their covetousness by wisdom and grace, God will set a
measure to it by his judgments. Babylon, thinking herself very safe and
very great, was very proud; but she will be deceived ([Jer
51:53](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#053)): Though Babylon should mount
her walls and palaces up to heaven, and though (because what is high is
apt to totter) she should take care to fortify the height of her
strength, yet all will not do; God will send spoilers against her, that
shall break through her strength and bring down her height. 4. It is a
gradual destruction, which, if they had pleased, they might have
foreseen and had warning of; for ([Jer
51:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#046)) "A rumor will come one year
that Cyrus is making vast preparations for war, and after that, in
another year, shall come a rumour that his design is upon Babylon, and
he is steering his course that way;" so that when he was a great way off
they might have sent and desired conditions of peace; but they were too
proud, too secure, to do that, and their hearts were hardened to their
destruction. 5. Yet, when it comes, it is a surprising destruction:
Babylon has suddenly fallen ([Jer
51:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#008)); the destruction came upon them
when they did not think of it and was perfected in a little time, as
that of the New Testament Babylon - in one hour, [Rev
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017). The king of Babylon, who should
have been observing the approaches of the enemy, was himself at such a
distance from the place where the attack was made that it was a great
while ere he had notice that the city was taken; so that those who were
posted near the place sent one messenger, one courier, after another,
with advice of it, [Jer 51:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#031). The
foot-posts shall meet at the court from several quarters with this
intelligence to the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one end,
and there is nothing to obstruct the progress of the conquerors, but
they will be at the other end quickly. They are to tell him that the
enemy has seized the passes ([Jer
51:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#032)), the forts or blockades upon
the river, and that, having got over the river, he has set fire to the
reeds on the river side, to alarm and terrify the city, so that all the
men of war are affrighted and have thrown down their arms and
surrendered at discretion. The messengers come, like Job's, one upon the
heels of another, with these tidings, which are immediately confirmed
with a witness by the enemies' being in the palace and slaying the king
himself, [Dan 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030). That profane feast
which they were celebrating at the very time when the city was taken,
which was both an evidence of their strange security and a great
advantage to the enemy, seems here to be referred to ([Jer
51:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#038), [Jer
51:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#039)): They shall roar together like
lions, as men in their revels do, when the wine has got into their
heads. They call it singing; but in scripture-language, and in the
language of sober men, it is called yelling like lions' whelps. It is
probable that they were drinking confusion to Cyrus and his army with
loud huzzas. Well, says God, in their heat, when they are inflamed ([Isa
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011)) and their heads are hot with
hard drinking, I will make their feasts, I will give them their portion.
They have passed their cup round; now the cup of the Lord's right hand
shall be turned unto them ([Hab 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015),
[Hab 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016)), a cup of fury, which shall
make them drunk that they may rejoice (or rather that they may revel it)
and sleep a perpetual sleep; let them be as merry as they can with that
bitter cup, but it shall lay them to sleep never to wake more (as [Jer
51:57](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#057)); for on that night, in the
midst of the jollity, was Belshazzar slain. 6. It is to be a universal
destruction. God will make thorough work of it; for, as he will perform
what he has purposed, so he will perfect what he has begun. The slain
shall fall in great abundance throughout the land of the Chaldeans;
multitudes shall be thrust through in her streets, [Jer
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#004). They are brought down like lambs
to the slaughter ([Jer 51:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#040)), in such
great numbers, so easily, and the enemies make no more of killing them
than the butcher does of killing lambs. The strength of the enemy, and
their invading them, are here compared to an irruption and inundation of
waters ([Jer 51:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#042)): The sea has come
up upon Babylon, which, when it has once broken through its bounds,
there is no fence against, so that she is covered with the multitude of
its waves, overpowered by a numerous army; her cities then become a
desolation, an uninhabited uncultivated desert, [Jer
51:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#043). 7. It is a destruction that
shall reach the gods of Babylon, the idols and images, and fall with a
particular weight upon them. "In token that the whole land shall be
confounded and all her slain shall fall and that throughout all the
country the wounded shall groan, I will do judgment upon her graven
images," [Jer 51:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#047) and again [Jer
51:52](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#052). All must needs perish if their
gods perish, from whom they expect protection. Though the invaders are
themselves idolaters, yet they shall destroy the images and temples of
the gods of Babylon, as an earnest of the abolishing of all counterfeit
deities. Bel was the principal idol that the Babylonians worshipped, and
therefore that is by name here marked for destruction ([Jer
51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044)): I will punish Bel, that great
devourer, that image to which such abundance of sacrifices are offered
and such rich spoils dedicated, and to whose temple there is such a vast
resort. He shall disgorge what he has so greedily regaled himself with.
God will bring forth out of his temple all the wealth laid up there,
[Job 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015). His altars shall be
forsaken, none shall regard him any more, and so that idol which was
thought to be a wall to Babylon shall fall and fail them. 8. It shall be
a final destruction. You may take balm for her pain, but in vain; she
that would not be healed by the word of God shall not be healed by his
providence, [Jer 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#008), [Jer
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#009). Babylon shall become heaps ([Jer
51:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#037)), and, to complete its infamy,
no use shall be made even of the ruins of Babylon, so execrable shall
they be, and attended with such ill omens ([Jer
51:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#026)): They shall not take of thee a
stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations. People shall not care
for having any thing to do with Babylon, or whatever belonged to it. Or
it denotes that there shall be nothing left in Babylon on which to
ground any hopes or attempts of raising it into a kingdom again; for, as
it follows here, it shall be desolate for ever. St. Jerome says that in
his time, though the ruins of Babylon's walls were to be seen, yet the
ground enclosed by them was a forest of wild beasts.

IX\. Here is a call to God's people to go out of Babylon. It is their
wisdom, when the ruin is approaching, to quit the city and retire into
the country ([Jer 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006)): "Flee out of
the midst of Babylon, and get into some remote corner, that you may save
your lives, and may not be cut off in her iniquity." When God's
judgments are abroad it is good to get as far as we can from those
against whom they are levelled, as Israel from the tents of Korah. This
agrees with the advice Christ gave his disciples, with reference to the
destruction of Jerusalem. Let those who shall be in Judea flee to the
mountains, [Mat 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016). It is their
wisdom to get out of the midst of Babylon, lest they be involved, if not
in her ruins, yet in her fears ([Jer
51:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#045), [Jer
51:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#046)): Lest your heart faint, and you
fear for the rumour that shall be heard in the land. Though God had told
them that Cyrus should be their deliverer, and Babylon's destruction
their deliverance, yet they had been told also that in the peace thereof
they should have peace, and therefore the alarms given to Babylon would
put them into a fright, and perhaps they might not have faith and
consideration enough to suppress those fears, for which reason they are
here advised to get out of the hearing of the alarms. Note, Those who
have not grace enough to keep their temper in temptation should have
wisdom enough to keep out of the way of temptation. But this is not all;
it is not only their wisdom to quit the city when the ruin is
approaching, but it is their duty to quit the country too when the ruin
is accomplished, and they are set at liberty by the pulling down of the
prison over their heads. This they are told, [Jer
51:50](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#050), [Jer
51:51](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#051) : "You Israelites, who have
escaped the sword of the Chaldeans your oppressors, and of the Persians
their destroyers, now that the year of release has come, go away, stand
not still; hasten to your own country again, however you may be
comfortably seated in Babylon, for this is not your rest, but Canaan
is." 1. He puts them in mind of the inducements they had to return:
"Remember the Lord afar off, his presence with you now, though you are
here afar off from your native soil; his presence with your fathers
formerly in the temple, though you are now afar off from the ruins of
it." Note, Wherever we are, in the greatest depths, at the greatest
distances, we may and must remember the Lord our God; and in the time of
the greatest fears and hopes it is seasonable to remember the Lord. "And
let Jerusalem come into your mind. Though it be now in ruins, yet favour
its dust ([Psa 102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014)); though few of
you ever saw it, yet believe the report you have had concerning it from
those that wept when they remembered Zion; and think of Jerusalem until
you come up to a resolution to make the best of your way thither." Note,
When the city of our solemnities is out of sight, yet it must not be out
of mind; and it will be of great use to us, in our journey through this
world, to let the heavenly Jerusalem come often into our mind. 2. He
takes notice of the discouragement which the returning captives labour
under ([Jer 51:51](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#051)); being reminded of
Jerusalem, they cry out, "We are confounded; we cannot bear the thought
of it; shame covers our faces at the mention of it, for we have heard of
the reproach of the sanctuary, that is profaned and ruined by strangers;
how can we think of it with any pleasure?" To this he answers ([Jer
51:52](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#052)) that the God of Israel will now
triumph over the gods of Babylon, and so that reproach will be for ever
rolled away. Note, The believing prospect of Jerusalem's recovery will
keep us from being ashamed of Jerusalem's ruins.

X. Here is the diversified feeling excited by Babylon's fall, and it is
the same that we have with respect to the New Testament Babylon, [Rev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009), [Rev
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019). 1. Some shall lament the
destruction of Babylon. There is the sound of a cry, a great outcry
coming from Babylon ([Jer 51:54](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#054)),
lamenting this great destruction, the voice of mourning, because the
Lord has destroyed the voice of the multitude, that great voice of mirth
which used to be heard in Babylon, [Jer
51:55](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#055). We are told what they shall say
in their lamentations ([Jer 51:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#041)):
"How is Sheshach taken, and how are we mistaken concerning her! How is
that city surprised and become an astonishment among the nations that
was the praise, and glory, and admiration of the whole earth!" See how
that may fall into a general contempt which has been universally cried
up. 2. Yet some shall rejoice in Babylon's fall, not as it is the misery
of their fellow-creatures, but as it is the manifestation of the
righteous judgment of God and as it opens the way for the release of
God's captives; upon these accounts the heaven and the earth, and all
that is in both, shall sing for Babylon ([Jer
51:48](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#048)); the church in heaven and the
church on earth shall give to God the glory of his righteousness, and
take notice of it with thankfulness to his praise. Babylon's ruin is
Zion's praise.

[Jeremiah 51:59](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">jer 51:59</span></span>

We have been long attending the judgment of Babylon in this and the
foregoing chapter; now here we have the conclusion of that whole matter.
1. A copy is taken of this prophecy, it should seem by Jeremiah himself,
for Baruch his scribe is not mentioned here ([Jer
51:60](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#060)): Jeremiah wrote in a book all
these words that are here written against Babylon. He received this
notice that he might give it to all whom it might concern. It is of
great advantage both to the propagating and to the perpetuating of the
word of God to have it written, and to have copies taken of the law,
prophets, and epistles. 2. It is sent to Babylon, to the captives there,
by the hand of Seraiah, who went there attendant on or ambassador for
king Zedekiah, in the fourth year of his reign, [Jer
51:59](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059). He went with Zedekiah, or (as
the margin reads it) on the behalf of Zedekiah, into Babylon. The
character given of him is observable, that this Seraiah was a quiet
prince, a prince of rest. He was in honour and power, but not, as most f
the princes then were, hot and heady, making parties, and heading
factions, and driving things furiously. He was of a calm temper, studied
the things that made for peace, endeavoured to preserve a good
understanding between the king his master and the king of Babylon, and
to keep his master from rebelling. He was no persecutor of God's
prophets, but a moderate man. Zedekiah was happy in the choice of such a
man to be his envoy to the king of Babylon, and Jeremiah might safely
entrust such a man with his errand too. Note, it is the real honour of
great men to be quiet men, and it is the wisdom of princes to put such
into places of trust. 3. Seraiah is desired to read it to his countrymen
that had already gone into captivity: "When thou shalt come to Babylon,
and shalt see what a magnificent place it is, how large a city, how
strong, how rich, and how well fortified, and shalt therefore be tempted
to think, Surely, it will stand forever" (as the disciples, when they
observed the buildings of the temple, concluded that nothing would throw
them down but the end of the world, [Mat
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003)), "then thou shalt read all these
words to thyself and thy particular friends, for their encouragement in
their captivity: let them with an eye of faith see to the end of these
threatening powers, and comfort themselves and one another herewith." 4.
He is directed to make a solemn protestation of the divine authority and
unquestionable certainty of that which he had read ([Jer
51:62](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#062)): Then thou shalt look up to
God, and say, O Lord! it is thou that hast spoken against this place, to
cut it off. This is like the angel's protestation concerning the
destruction of the New Testament Babylon. These are the true sayings of
God, [Rev 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009). These words are true
and faithful, [Rev 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005). Though
Seraiah sees Babylon flourishing, having read this prophecy he must
foresee Babylon falling, and by virtue of it must curse its habitation,
though it be taking root ([Job 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003)):
"O Lord! thou hast spoken against this place, and I believe what thou
hast spoken, that, as thou knowest every thing, so thou canst do every
thing. Thou hast passed sentence upon Babylon, and it shall be executed.
Thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, and therefore we
will neither envy its pomp nor fear its power." When we see what this
world is, how glittering its shows are and how flattering its proposals,
let us read in the book of the Lord that its fashion passes away, and it
shall shortly be cut off and be desolate for ever, and we shall learn to
look upon it with a holy contempt. Observe here, When we have been
reading the word of God it becomes us to direct to him whose word it is
a humble believing acknowledgment of the truth, equity, and goodness, of
what we have read. 5. He must then tie a stone to the book and throw it
into the midst of the river Euphrates, as a confirming sign of the
things contained in it, saying, "Thus shall Babylon sink, and not rise;
for they shall be weary, they shall perfectly succumb, as men tired with
a burden, under the load of the evil that I will bring upon them, which
they shall never shake off, nor get from under," [Jer
51:53](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#053), [Jer
51:64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#064). In the sign it was the stone
that sunk the book, which otherwise would have swum. But in the thing
signified it was rather the book that sunk the stone; it was the divine
sentence passed upon Babylon in this prophecy that sunk that city, which
seemed as firm as a stone. The fall of the New Testament Babylon was
represented by something like this, but much more magnificent, [Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021). A mighty angel cast a great
millstone into the sea, saying, Thus shall Babylon fall. Those that sink
under the weight of God's wrath and curse sink irrecoverably. The last
words of the chapter seal up the vision and prophecy of this book: Thus
far are the words of Jeremiah. Not that this prophecy against Babylon
was the last of his prophecies; for it was dated in the fourth year of
Zedekiah ([Jer 51:59](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059)), long before he
finished his testimony; but this is recorded last of his prophecies
because it was to be last accomplished of all his prophecies against the
Gentiles, [Jer 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001). And the chapter
which remains is purely historical, and, as some think, was added by
some other hand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 52](jer052)

</div>
