<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer018)  [Next](jer020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 19:0</span></span>

The same melancholy theme is the subject of this chapter that was of
those foregoing - the approaching ruin of Judah and Jerusalem for their
sins. This Jeremiah had often foretold; here he has particularly full
orders to foretel it again. I. He must set their sins in order before
them, as he had often done, especially their idolatry ([Jer
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#004), [Jer
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#005)). II. He must describe the
particular judgments which were now coming apace upon them for these
sins ([Jer 19:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#006)). III. He must do
this in the valley of Tophet, with great solemnity, and for some
particular reasons ([Jer 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#002), [Jer
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#003)). IV. He must summon a company of
the elders together to be witnesses of this ([Jer
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#001)). V. He must confirm this, and
endeavour to affect his hearers with it, by a sign, which was the
breaking of an earthen bottle, signifying that they should be dashed to
pieces like a potter's vessel ([Jer
19:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#010)). VI. When he had done this
in the valley of Tophet he ratified it in the court of the temple ([Jer
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#014), [Jer
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#015)). Thus were all likely means
tried to awaken this stupid senseless people to repentance, that their
ruin might be prevented; but all in vain.

[Jeremiah 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 19:1</span></span>

The corruption of man having made it necessary that precept should be
upon precept, and line upon line (so unapt are we to receive, and so
very apt to let slip, the things of God), the grace of God has provided
that there shall be, accordingly, precept upon precept, and line upon
line, that those who are irreclaimable may be inexcusable. For this
reason the prophet is here sent with a message to the same purport with
what he had often delivered, but with some circumstances that might make
it the more taken notice of, a thing which ministers should study, for a
little circumstance may sometimes be a great advantage, and those that
would win souls must be wise.

I. He must take of the elders and chief men, both in church and state,
to be his auditors and witnesses to what he said - the ancients of the
people and the ancients of the priests, the most eminent men both in the
magistracy and in the ministry, that they might be faithful witnesses to
record, as those [Isa 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#002). It is
strange that these great men should be at the beck of a poor prophet,
and obey his summons to attend him out of the city, they know not
whither and they knew not why. But, though the generality of the elders
were disaffected to him, yet it is likely that there were some few among
them who looked upon him as a prophet of the Lord, and would pay this
respect to the heavenly vision. Note, Persons of rank and figure have an
opportunity of honouring God, by a diligent attendance on the ministry
of the word and other divine institutions; and they ought to think it an
honour, and no disparagement to themselves, yea, though the
circumstances be mean and despicable. It is certain that the greatest of
men is less than the least of the ordinances of God.

II\. He must go to the valley of the son of Hinnom, and deliver this
message there; for the word of the Lord is not bound to any one place;
as good a sermon may be preached in the valley of Tophet as in the gate
of the temple. Christ preached on a mountain and out of a ship. This
valley lay partly on the south side of Jerusalem, but the prophet's way
to it was by the entry on the east gate - the sun gate ([Jer
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#002)), so some render it, and suppose
it to look not towards the sun-rising, but the noon sun - the potter's
gate, so some. This sermon must be preached in that place, in the valley
of the son of Hinnom, 1. Because there they had been guilty of the
vilest of their idolatries, the sacrificing of their children to Moloch,
a horrid piece of impiety, which the sight of the place might serve to
remind them of and upbraid them with. 2. Because there they should feel
the sorest of their calamities; there the greatest slaughter should be
made among them; and, it being the common sink of the city, let them
look upon it and see what a miserable spectacle this magnificent city
would be when it should be all like the valley of Tophet. God bids him
go thither, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee, when
thou comest thither; whereby it appears (as Mr. Gataker well observed)
that God's messages were frequently not revealed to the prophets before
the very instant of time wherein they were to deliver them.

III\. He must give general notice of a general ruin now shortly coming
upon Judah and Jerusalem, [Jer 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#003).
He must, as those that make proclamation, begin with an Oyes: Hear you
the word of the Lord, though it be a terrible word, for you may thank
yourselves if it be so. Both rulers and ruled must attend to it, at
their peril; the kings of Judah, the king and his sons, the king and his
princes and privy-counsellors, must hear the word of the King of kings,
for, high as they are, he is above them. The inhabitants of Jerusalem
also must hear what God has to say to them. Both princes and people have
contributed to the national guilt and must concur in the national
repentance, or they will both share in the national ruin. Let them all
know that the Lord of hosts, who is therefore able to do what he
threatens, though he is the God of Israel, nay, because he is so, will
therefore punish them in the first place for their iniquities ([Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002)): He will bring evil upon this
place (upon Judah and Jerusalem) so surprising, and so dreadful, that
whosoever hears it, his ears shall tingle; whosoever hears the
prediction of it, hears the report and representation of it, it shall
make such an impression of terror upon him that he shall still think he
hears it sounding in his ears and shall not be able to get it out of his
mind. The ruin of Eli's house is thus described ([Sa1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#011)), and of Jerusalem, [Kg2
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012).

IV\. He must plainly tell them what their sins were for which God had
this controversy with them, [Jer 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#004),
[Jer 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#005). They are charged with
apostasy from God (They have forsaken me) and abuse of the privileges of
the visible church, and which they had been dignified - They have
estranged this place. Jerusalem (the holy city), the temple (the holy
house), which was designed for the honour of God and the support of his
kingdom among men, they had alienated from those purposes, and (as some
render the word) they had strangely abused. They had so polluted both
with their wickedness that God had disowned both, and abandoned them to
ruin. He charges them with an affection for and the adoration of false
gods, such as neither they nor their fathers have known, such as never
had recommended themselves to their belief and esteem by any acts of
power or goodness done for them or their ancestors, as that God had
abundantly done whom they forsook; yet they took them at a venture for
their gods; nay, being fond of change and novelty, they liked them the
better for their being upstarts, and new fashions in religion were as
grateful to their fancies as in other things. They also stand charged
with murder, wilful murder, from malice prepense: They have filled this
place with the blood of innocents. It was Manasseh's sin ([Kg2
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#004)), which the Lord would not
pardon. Nay, as if idolatry and murder, committed separately, were not
bad enough and affront enough to God and man, they have put them
together, have consolidated them into one complicated crime, that of
burning their children in the fire to Baal ([Jer
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#005)), which was the most insolent
defiance to all the laws both of natural and revealed religion that ever
mankind was guilty of; and by it they openly declared that they loved
their new gods better than ever they loved the true God, though they
were such cruel task-masters that they required human sacrifices
(inhuman I should call them), which the Lord Jehovah, whose all lives
and souls are, never demanded from his worshippers; he never spoke of
such a thing, nor came it into his mind. See [Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031).

V. He must endeavour to affect them with the greatness of the desolation
that was coming upon them. He must tell them (as he had done before,
[Jer 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032)) that this valley of the son
of Hinnom shall acquire a new name, the valley of slaughter ([Jer
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#006)), for ([Jer
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#007)) multitudes shall fall there by
the sword, when either they sally out upon the besiegers and are
repulsed or attempt to make their escape and are seized: They shall fall
before their enemies, who not only endeavour to make themselves masters
of their houses and estates, but have such an implacable enmity to them
that they seek their lives; they thirst after their blood, and, when
they are dead, will not allow a cartel for the burying of the slain, but
their carcases shall be meat for the fowls of the heaven and beasts of
the earth. What a dismal place will the valley of Tophet be then! And as
for those that remain within the city, and will not capitulate with the
besiegers, they shall perish for want of food, when first they have
eaten the flesh of their sons and daughters, and dearest friends,
through the straitness wherewith their enemies shall straiten them, [Jer
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#009). This was threatened in the law
as an instance of the extremity to which the judgments of God should
reduce them ([Lev 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#029), [Deu
28:53](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#053)) and was accomplished, [Lam
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010). And, lastly, the whole city
shall be desolate, the houses laid in ashes, the inhabitants slain or
taken prisoners; there shall be no resort to it, nor any thing in it but
what looks rueful and horrid; so that every one that passes by shall be
astonished ([Jer 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#008)), as he had said
before, [Jer 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016). That place which
holiness had made the joy of the whole earth sin had made the reproach
and shame of the whole earth.

VI\. He must assure them that all their attempts to prevent and avoid
this ruin, so long as they continued impenitent and unreformed, would be
fruitless and vain ([Jer 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#007)): I will
make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem (of the princes and
senators of Judah and Jerusalem) in this place, in the royal palace,
which lay on the south side of the city, not far from the place where
the prophet now stood. Note, There is no fleeing from God's justice but
by fleeing to his mercy. Those that will not make good God's counsel, by
humbling themselves under his mighty hand, shall find that God will make
void their counsel and blast their projects, which they think ever so
well concerted for their own preservation. There is no counsel or
strength against the Lord.

[Jeremiah 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 19:10</span></span>

The message of wrath delivered in the foregoing verses is here enforced,
that it might gain credit, two ways: -

I. By a visible sign. The prophet was to take along with him an earthen
bottle ([Jer 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#001)), and, when he had
delivered his message, he was to break the bottle to pieces ([Jer
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#010)), and the same that were
auditors of the sermon must be spectators of the sign. He had compared
this people, in the chapter before, to the potter's clay, which is
easily marred in the making. But some might say, "It is past that with
us; we have been made and hardened long since." "And what though you
be," says he, "the potter's vessel is as soon broken in the hand of any
man as the vessel while it is soft clay is marred in the potter's hand,
and its case is, in this respect, much worse, that the vessel while it
is soft clay, though it be marred, may be moulded again, but, after it
is hardened, when it is broken it can never be pieced again." Perhaps
what they see will affect them more than what they only hear talk of;
that is the intention of sacramental signs, and teaching by symbols was
anciently used. In the explication of this sign he must inculcate what
he had before said, with a further reference to the place where this was
done, in the valley of Tophet. 1. As the bottle was easily,
irresistibly, and irrecoverably broken by the Chaldean army, [Jer
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#011). They depended much upon the
firmness of their constitution, and the fixedness of their courage,
which they thought hardened them like a vessel of brass; but the prophet
shows that all that did but harden them like a vessel of earth, which,
though hard, is brittle and sooner broken than that which is not so
hard. Though they were made vessels of honour, still they were vessels
of earth, and so they shall be made to know if they dishonour God and
themselves, and serve not the purposes for which they were made. It is
God himself, who made them, that resolves to unmake them: I will break
this people and this city, dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel;
the doom of the heathen ([Psa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009),
[Rev 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027)), but now Jerusalem's doom,
[Isa 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#014). A potter's vessel, when
once broken, cannot be made whole again, cannot be cured, so the word
is. The ruin of Jerusalem shall be an utter ruin; no hand can repair it
but his that broke it; and if they return to him, though he has torn, he
will heal. 2. This was done in Tolphet, to signify two things: - (1.)
That Tophet should be the receptacle of the slain: They shall bury in
Tophet till there be no place to bury any more there; they shall jostle
for room to lay their dead, and a very little room will then serve those
who, while they lived, laid house to house and field to field. Those
that would be placed alone in the midst of the earth while they were
above ground, and obliged all about them to keep their distance, must
lie with the multitude when they are underground, for there are
innumerable before them. (2.) That Tophet should be a resemblance of the
whole city ([Jer 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#012)): I will make
this city as Tophet. As they had filled the valley of Tophet with the
slain which they sacrificed to their idols, so God will fill the whole
city with the slain that shall fall as sacrifices to the justice of God.
We read ([Kg2 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)) of Josiah's
defiling Tophet, because it had been abused to idolatry, which he did
(as should seem, [Jer 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#014)) by
filling it with the bones of men; and, whatever it was before,
thenceforward it was looked upon as a detestable place. Dead carcases,
and other filth of the city, were carried thither, and a fire was
continually kept there for the burning of it. This was the posture of
that valley when Jeremiah was sent thither to prophesy; and so execrable
a place was it looked upon to be that, in the language of our Saviour's
time, hell was called, in allusion to it, Gehenna, the valley of Hinnom.
"Now" (says God) "since that blessed reformation, when Tophet was
defiled, did not proceed as it ought to have done, nor prove a thorough
reformation, but though the idols in Tophet were abolished and made
odious those in Jerusalem remained, therefore will I do with the city as
Josiah did by Tophet, fill it with the bodies of men, and make it a heap
of rubbish." Even the houses of Jerusalem, and those of the kings of
Judah, the royal palaces not excepted, shall be defiled as the place of
Tophet ([Jer 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013)), and for the same
reason, because of the idolatries that have been committed there; since
they will not defile them by a reformation, God will defile them by a
destruction, because upon the roofs of their houses they have burnt
incense unto the host of heaven. The flat roofs of their houses were
sometimes used by devout people as convenient places for prayer ([Act
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009)), and by idolaters they were used
as high places, on which they sacrificed to strange gods, especially to
the host of heaven, the sun, moon, and stars, that there they might be
so much nearer to them and have a clearer and fuller view of them. We
read of those that worshipped the host of heaven upon the house-tops
([Zep 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005)), and of altars on the top
of the upper chamber of Ahaz, [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012). This sin upon the house-tops
brought a curse into the house, which consumed it, and made it a
dunghill like Tophet.

II\. By a solemn recognition and ratification of what he had said in the
court of the Lord's house, [Jer 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#014),
[Jer 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#015). The prophet returned from
Tophet to the temple, which stood upon the hill over that valley, and
there confirmed, and probably repeated, what he had said in the valley
of Tophet, for the benefit of those who had not heard it; what he had
said he would stand to. Here, as often before, he both assures them of
judgments coming upon them and assigns the cause of them, which was
their sin. Both these are here put together in a little compass, with a
reference to all that had gone before. 1. The accomplishment of the
prophecies is here the judgment threatened. The people flattered
themselves with a conceit that God would be better than his word, that
the threatening was but to frighten them and keep them in awe a little;
but the prophet tells them that they deceive themselves if they think
so: For thus saith the Lord of hosts, who is able to make his words
good, I will bring upon this city, and upon all her towns, all the
smaller cities that belong to Jerusalem the metropolis, all the evil
that I have pronounced against it. Note, Whatever men may think to the
contrary, the executions of Providence will fully answer the predictions
of the word, and God will appear as terrible against sin and sinners as
the scripture makes him; nor shall the unbelief of men make either his
promises or his threatenings of no effect or of less effect than they
were thought to be of. 2. The contempt of the prophecies is here the sin
charged upon them, as the procuring cause of this judgment. It is
because they have hardened their necks, and would not bow and bend them
to the yoke of God's commands, would not hear my words, that is, would
not heed them and yield obedience to them. Note, The obstinacy of
sinners in their sinful ways is altogether their own fault; if their
necks are hardened, it is their own act and deed, they have hardened
them; if they are deaf to the word of God, it is because they have
stopped their own ears. We have need therefore to pray that God, by his
grace, would deliver us from hardness of heart and contempt of his word
and commandments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 20](jer020)

</div>
