<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer029)  [Next](jer031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 30:0</span></span>

The sermon which we have in this and the following chapter is of a very
different complexion from all those before. The prophet does indeed, by
direction from God, change his voice. Most of what he had said hitherto
was by way of reproof and threatening; but these two chapters are wholly
taken up with precious promises of a return out of captivity, and that
typical of the glorious things reserved for the church in the days of
the Messiah. The prophet is told not only to preach this, but to write
it, because it is intended for the comfort of the generation to come
([Jer 30:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)). It is here promised, I.
That they should hereafter have a joyful restoration. 1. Though they
were now in a great deal of pain and terror ([Jer
30:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#004)). 2. Though their oppressors
were very strong ([Jer 30:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#008)). 3.
Though a full end was made of other nations, and they were not restored
([Jer 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)). 4. Though all means of
their deliverance seemed to fail and be cut off ([Jer
30:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012)). 5. Though God himself had
sent them into captivity, and justly, for their sins ([Jer
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015), [Jer
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#016)). 6. Though all about them
looked upon their case as desperate ([Jer
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017)). II. That after their joyful
restoration they should have a happy settlement, that their city should
be rebuilt ([Jer 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018)), their numbers
increased ([Jer 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#019), [Jer
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#020)), their government established
([Jer 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021)), God's covenant with them
renewed ([Jer 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022)), and their
enemies destroyed and cut off ([Jer
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023), [Jer
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#024)).

[Jeremiah 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 30:1</span></span>

Here, I. Jeremiah is directed to write what God had spoken to him, which
perhaps refers to all the foregoing prophecies. He must write them and
publish them, in hopes that those who had not profited by what he said
upon once hearing it might take more notice of it when in reading it
they had leisure for a more considerate review. Or, rather, it refers to
the promises of their enlargement, which had been often mixed with his
other discourses. He must collect them and put them together, and God
will now add unto them many like words. He must write them for the
generations to come, who should see them accomplished, and thereby have
their faith in the prophecy confirmed. He must write them not in a
letter, as that in the chapter before to the captives, but in a book, to
be carefully preserved in the archives, or among the public rolls or
registers of the state. Daniel understood by these books when the
captivity was about coming to an end, [Dan
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002). He must write them in a book, not
in loose papers: "For the days come, and are yet at a great distance,
when I will bring again the captivity of Israel and Judah, great numbers
of the ten tribes, with those of the two," [Jer
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003). And this prophecy must be
written, that it may be read then also, that so it may appear how
exactly the accomplishment answers the prediction, which is one end of
the writing of prophecies. It is intimated that they shall be beloved
for their fathers' sake ([Rom 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028));
for therefore God will bring them again to Canaan, because it was the
land that he gave to their fathers, which therefore they shall possess.

II\. He is directed what to write. The very words are such as the Holy
Ghost teaches, [Jer 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#004). These are
the words which God ordered to be written; and those promises which are
written by his order are as truly his word as the ten commandments which
were written with his finger. 1. He must write a description of the
fright and consternation which the people were now in, and were likely
to be still in upon every attack that the Chaldeans made upon them,
which will much magnify both the wonder and the welcomeness of their
deliverance ([Jer 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#005)): We have heard
a voice of trembling - the shrieks of terror echoing to the alarms of
danger. The false prophets told them that they should have peace, but
there is fear and not peace, so the margin reads it. No marvel that when
without are fightings within are fears. The men, even the men of war,
shall be quite overwhelmed with the calamities of their nation, shall
sink under them, and yield to them, and shall look like women in labour,
whose pains come upon them in great extremity and they know that they
cannot escape them, [Jer 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#006). You
never heard of a man travailing with child, and yet here you find not
here and there a timorous man, but every man with his hands on his
loins, in the utmost anguish and agony, as women in travail, when they
see their cities burnt and their countries laid waste. But this pain is
compared to that of a woman in travail, not to that of a death-bed,
because it shall end in joy at last, and the pain, like that of a
travailing woman, shall be forgotten. All faces shall be turned into
paleness. The word signifies not only such paleness as arises from a
sudden fright, but that which is the effect of a bad habit of body, the
jaundice, or the green sickness. The prophet laments the calamity upon
the foresight of it ([Jer 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007)): Alas!
for that day is great, a day of judgment, which is called the great day,
the great and terrible day of the Lord ([Joe
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031), [Jde
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006)), great, so that there has been
none like it. The last destruction of Jerusalem is thus spoken of by our
Saviour as unparalleled, [Mat 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021).
It is even the time of Jacob's trouble, a sad time, when God's
professing people shall be in distress above other people. The whole
time of the captivity was a time of Jacob's trouble; and such times
ought to be greatly lamented by all that are concerned for the welfare
of Jacob and the honour of the God of Jacob. 2. He must write the
assurances which God had given that a happy end should at length be put
to these calamities. (1.) Jacob's troubles shall cease: He shall be
saved out of them. Though the afflictions of the church may last long,
they shall not last always. Salvation belongs to the Lord, and shall be
wrought for his church. (2.) Jacob's troublers shall be disabled from
doing him any further mischief, and shall be reckoned with for the
mischief they have done him, [Jer
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#008). The Lord of hosts, who has all
power in his hand, undertakes to do it: "I will break his yoke from off
thy neck, which has long lain so heavy, and has so sorely galled thee. I
will burst thy bonds and restore thee to liberty and ease, and thou
shalt no more be at the beck and command of strangers, shalt no more
serve them, nor shall they any more serve themselves of thee; they shall
no more enrich themselves either by thy possessions or by thy labours."
And, (3.) That which crowns and completes the mercy is that they shall
be restored to the free exercise of their religion again, [Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009). They shall be delivered from
serving their enemies, not that they may live at large and do what they
please, but that they may serve the Lord their God and David their king,
that they may come again into order, under the established government
both in church and state. Therefore they were brought into trouble and
made to serve their enemies because they had not served the Lord their
God as they ought to have done, with joyfulness and gladness of heart,
[Deu 28:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#047). But, when the time shall
come that they should be saved out of their trouble, God will prepare
and qualify them for it by giving them a heart to serve him, and will
make it doubly comfortable by giving them opportunity to serve him.
Therefore we are delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that we may
serve God, [Luk 1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074), [Luk
1:75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075). And then deliverances out of
temporal calamities are mercies indeed to us when by them we find
ourselves engaged to and enlarged in the service of God. They shall
serve their own God, and neither be inclined, as they had been of old in
the day of their apostasy, nor compelled, as they had been of late in
the day of their captivity, to serve other gods. They shall serve David
their king, such governors as God should from time to time set over
them, of the line of David (as Zerubbabel), or at least sitting on the
thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David, as Nehemiah. But
certainly this has a further meaning. The Chaldee paraphrase reads it,
They shall obey (or hearken to) the Messiah (or Christ), the Son of
David, their king. To him the Jewish interpreters apply it. That
dispensation which commenced at their return out of captivity brought
them to the Messiah. He is called David their King because he was the
Son of David ([Mat 22:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042)) and he
answered to the name, [Mat 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#031), [Mat
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#032). David was an illustrious type
of him both in his humiliation and in his exaltation. The covenant of
royalty made with David had principal reference to him, and in him the
promises of that covenant had their full accomplishment. God gave him
the throne of his father David; he raised him up unto them, set him upon
the holy hill of Zion. God is often in the New Testament said to have
raised up Jesus, raised him up as a King, [Act
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026); [Act
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023), [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033). Observe, \[1.\] Those that
serve the Lord as their God must also serve David their King, must give
up themselves to Jesus Christ, to be ruled by him. For all men must
honour the Son as they honour the Father, and come into the service and
worship of God by him as Mediator. \[2.\] Those that are delivered out
of spiritual bondage must make it appear that they are so by giving up
themselves to the service of Christ. Those to whom he gives rest must
take his yoke upon them.

[Jeremiah 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 30:10</span></span>

In these verses, as in those foregoing, the deplorable case of the Jews
in captivity is set forth, but many precious promises are given them
that in due time they should be relieved and a glorious salvation
wrought for them.

I. God himself appeared against them: he scattered them ([Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)); he did all these things unto
them, [Jer 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015). All their calamities
came from his hands; whoever were the instruments, he was the principal
agent. And this made their case very sad that God, even their own God,
spoke concerning them, to pull down and to destroy. Now, 1. This was
intended by him as a fatherly chastisement, and no other ([Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)): "I will correct thee in
measure, or according to judgment, with discretion, no more than thou
deservest, nay, no more than thou canst well bear." What God does
against his people is in a way of correction, and that correction is
always moderated and always proceeds from love: "I will not leave thee
altogether unpunished, as thou art ready to think I should, because of
thy relation to me." Note, A profession of religion, though ever so
plausible, will be far from securing to us impunity in sin. God is no
respecter of persons, but will show his hatred of sin wherever he finds
it, and that he hates it most in those that are nearest to him. God here
corrects his people for the multitude of their iniquity, and because
their sins were increased, [Jer 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014),
[Jer 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015). Are our sorrows multiplied
at any time and do they increase? We must acknowledge that it is because
our sins have been multiplied and they have increased. Iniquities grow
in us, and therefore troubles grow upon us. But, 2. What God intended as
a fatherly chastisement they and others interpreted as an act of
hostility; they looked upon him as having wounded them with the wound of
an enemy and with the chastisement of a cruel one ([Jer
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014)), as if he had designed their
ruin, and neither mitigated the correction nor had any mercy in reserve
for them. It did indeed seem as if God had dealt thus severely with
them, as if he had turned to be their enemy and had fought against them,
[Isa 63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010). Job complains that God had
become cruel to him and multiplied his wounds. When troubles are great
and long we have need carefully to watch over our own hearts, that we
entertain not such hard thoughts as these of God and his providence. His
are the chastisements of a merciful one, not of a cruel one, whatever
they may appear.

II\. Their friends forsook them, and were shy of them. None of those who
had courted them in their prosperity would take notice of them now in
their distress, [Jer 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#013). It is
commonly thus when families go to decay; those hang off from them that
had been their hangers-on. In two cases we are glad of the assistance of
our friends and need their service: - 1. If we be impeached, accused, or
reproached, we expect that our friends should appear in vindication of
us, should speak a good word for us when we cannot put on a face to
speak for ourselves; but here there is none to plead thy cause, none to
stand up in thy defence, none to intercede for thee with thy oppressors;
therefore God will plead their cause, for he might well wonder there was
none to uphold a people that had been so much the favourites of Heaven,
[Isa 63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005). 2. If we be sick, or sore,
or wounded, we expect our friends should attend us, advise us,
sympathize with us, and, if occasion be, lend a hand for the applying of
healing medicines; but here there is none to do that, none to bind up
thy wounds, and by counsels and comforts to make proper applications to
thy case; nay ([Jer 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014)), All thy
lovers have forgotten thee; out of sight out of mind; instead of seeking
thee, they forsake thee. Such as this has often been the case of
religion and serious godliness in the world; those that from their
education, profession, and hopeful beginnings, one might have expected
to be its friends and lovers, its patrons and protectors, desert it,
forget it, and have nothing to say in its defence, nor will do any thing
towards the healing of its wounds. Observe, Thy lovers have forgotten
thee, for I have wounded thee. When God is against a people who will be
for them? Who can be for them so as to do them any kindness? See [Job
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#011). Now, upon this account, their
case seemed desperate and past relief ([Jer
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012)): Thy bruise is incurable, thy
wound grievous, and ([Jer 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015)) thy
sorrow is incurable. The condition of the Jews in captivity was such as
no human power could redress the grievances of; there they were like a
valley full of dead and dry bones, which nothing less than Omnipotence
can put life into. Who could imagine that a people so diminished, so
impoverished, should ever be restored to their own land and
re-established there? So many were the aggravations of their calamity
that their sorrow would not admit of any alleviation, but they seemed to
be hardened in it, and their souls refused to be comforted, till divine
consolations proved strong ones, too strong to be borne down even by the
floods of grief that overwhelmed them. Thy sorrow is incurable because
thy sins, instead of being repented of and forsaken, were increased.
Note, Incurable griefs are owing to incurable lusts. Now in this
deplorable condition they are looked upon with disdain ([Jer
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017)): They called thee an outcast,
abandoned by all, abandoned to ruin; they said, This is Zion, whom no
man seeks after. When they looked on the place where the city and temple
had been built they called that an outcast; now all was in ruins, there
was no resort to it, no residence in it, none asked the way to Zion, as
formerly; no man seeks after it. When they looked on the people that
formerly dwelt in Zion, but were now in captivity (and we read of Zion
dwelling with the daughter of Babylon, [Zac
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007)), they called them outcasts; these
are those who belong to Zion, and are wont to talk much of it and weep
at the remembrance of it, but no man seeks after them, or enquires
concerning them. Note, It is often the lot of Zion to be deserted and
despised by those about her.

III\. For all this God will work deliverance and salvation for them in
due time. Though no other hand, nay, because no other hand, can cure
their wound, his will, and shall. 1. Though he seemed to stand at a
distance from them, yet he assures them of his presence with them, his
powerful and gracious presence: I will save thee, [Jer
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010). I am with thee, to save thee,
[Jer 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011). When they are in their
troubles he is with them, to save them from sinking under them; when the
time has come for their deliverance he is with them, to be ready upon
the first opportunity, to save them out of their trouble. 2. Though they
were at a distance, remote from their own land, afar off in the land of
their captivity, yet there shall salvation find them out, thence shall
it fetch them, them and their seed, for they also shall be known among
the Gentiles, and distinguished from them, that they may return, [Jer
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010). 3. Though they were now full of
fears, and continually alarmed, yet the time shall come when they shall
be in rest and quiet, safe and easy, and none shall make them afraid,
[Jer 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010). 4. Though the nations into
which they were dispersed should be brought to ruin, yet they should be
preserved from that ruin ([Jer 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)):
Though I make a full end of the nations whither I have scattered thee,
and there might be danger of thy being lost among them, yet I will not
make a full end of thee. It was promised that in the peace of these
nations they should have peace ([Jer
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#007)), and yet in the destruction of
these nations they should escape destruction. God's church may sometimes
be brought very low, but he will not make a full end of it, [Jer
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010), [Jer
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#018). 5. Though God correct them, and
justly, for their sins, their manifold transgressions and mighty sins,
yet he will return in mercy to them, and even their sin shall not
prevent their deliverance when God's time shall come. 6. Though their
adversaries were mighty, God will bring them down, and break their power
([Jer 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#016)): All that devour thee
shall be devoured, and thus Zion's cause will be pleaded and will be
made to appear to all the world a righteous cause. Thus Zion's
deliverance will be brought about by the destruction of her oppressors;
and thus her enemies will be recompensed for all the injury they have
done her; for there is a God that judges in the earth, a God to whom
vengeance belongs. "They shall every one of them, without exception, go
into captivity, and the day will come when those that now spoil thee
shall be a spoil." Those that lead into captivity shall go into
captivity, [Rev 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010). This might
serve to oblige the present conquerors to use their captives well,
because the wheel would turn round, and the day would come when they
also should be captives, and let them do now as they would then be done
by. 7. Though the wound seem incurable, God will make a cure of it ([Jer
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017)): I will restore health unto
thee. Be the disease ever so dangerous, the patient is safe if God
undertakes the cure.

IV\. Upon the whole matter, they are cautioned against inordinate fear
and grief, for in these precious promises there is enough to silence
both. 1. They must not tremble as those that have no hope in the
apprehension of future further trouble that might threaten them ([Jer
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010)): Fear thou not, O my servant
Jacob! neither be dismayed. Note, Those that are God's servants must not
give way to disquieting fears, whatever difficulties and dangers may be
before them. 2. They must not sorrow as those that have no hope for the
troubles which at present they lie under, [Jer
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015). "Why criest thou for thy
affliction? It is true thy carnal confidences fail thee, creatures are
physicians of no value, but I will heal thy wound, and therefore, Why
criest thou? Why dost thou fret and complain thus? It is for thy sin
([Jer 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014), [Jer
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015)), and therefore, instead of
repining, thou shouldest be repenting. Wherefore should a man complain
for the punishment of his sins? The issue will be good at last, and
therefore rejoice in hope."

[Jeremiah 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 30:18</span></span>

We have here further intimations of the favour God had in reserve for
them after the days of their calamity were over. It is promised,

I. That the city and temple should be rebuilt, [Jer
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018). Jacob's tents, and his dwelling
places, felt the effects of the captivity, for they lay in ruins when
the inhabitants were carried away captives; but, when they have
returned, the habitations shall be repaired, and raised up out of their
ruins, and therein God will have mercy upon their dwelling places, that
had been monuments of his justice. Then the city of Jerusalem shall be
built upon her own heap, her own hill, though now it be no better than a
ruinous heap. The situation was unexceptionable, and therefore it shall
be rebuilt upon the same spot of ground. He that can make of a city a
heap ([Isa 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#002)) can when he pleases
make of a heap a city again. The palace (the temple, God's palace) shall
remain after the manner thereof; it shall be built after the old model;
and the service of God shall be constantly kept up there and attended as
formerly.

II\. That the sacred feasts should again be solemnized ([Jer
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#019)): Out of the city, and the
temple, and all the dwelling-places of Jacob, shall proceed thanksgiving
and the voice of those that make merry. They shall go with expressions
of joy to the temple service, and with the like shall return from it.
Observe, The voice of thanksgiving is the same with the voice of those
that make merry; for whatever is the matter of our joy should be the
matter of our praise. Is any merry? Let him sing psalms. What makes us
cheerful should make us thankful. Serve the Lord with gladness.

III\. That the people should be multiplied, and increased, and made
considerable: They shall not be few, they shall not be small, but shall
become numerous and illustrious, and make a figure among the nations;
for I will multiply them and I will glorify them. It is for the honour
of the church to have many added to it that shall be saved. This would
make them be of some weight among their neighbours. Let a people be ever
so much diminished and despised, God can multiply and glorify them. They
shall be restored to their former honour: Their children shall be as
aforetime, playing in the streets ([Zac
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#005)); they shall inherit their
parents' estates and honours as formerly; and their congregation shall,
both in civil and sacred things, be established before me. There shall
be a constant succession of faithful magistrates in the congregation of
the elders, to establish that, and of faithful worshippers in the
congregation of the saints. As one generation passes away another shall
be raised up, and so the congregation shall be established before God.

IV\. That they shall be blessed with a good government ([Jer
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021)): Their nobles and judges shall
be of themselves, of their own nation, and they shall no longer be ruled
by strangers and enemies; their governor shall proceed from the midst of
them, shall be one that has been a sharer with them in the afflictions
of their captive state; and this has reference to Christ our governor,
David our King ([Jer 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009)); he is of
ourselves, in all things made like unto his brethren. And I will cause
him to draw near; this may be understood either, 1. Of the people, Jacob
and Israel: "I will cause them to draw near to me in the temple service,
as formerly, to come in to covenant with me, as my people ([Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022)), to approach to me in
communion; for who hath engaged his heart, made a covenant with it, and
brought it into bonds, to approach unto me?" How few are there that do
so! None can do it but by the special grace of God causing them to draw
near. Note, Whenever we approach to God in any holy ordinance we must
engage our hearts to do it; the heart must be prepared for the duty,
employed in it, and kept closely to it. The heart is the main thing that
God looks at and requires; but it is deceitful, and will start aside of
a great deal of care and pains be not taken to engage it, to bind this
sacrifice with cords. Or, 2. It may be understood of the governor; for
it is a single person that is spoken of: Their governor shall be duly
called to his office, shall draw near to God to consult him upon all
occasions. God will cause him to approach to him, for, otherwise, who
would engage to take care of so weak a people, and let this ruin come
under their hand? But when God has work to do, though attended with many
discouragements, he will raise up instruments to do it. But it looks
further, to Christ, to him as Mediator. Note, (1.) The proper work and
office of Christ, as Mediator, is to draw near and approach unto God,
not for himself only, but for us, and in our name and stead, as the high
priest of our profession. The priests are said to draw nigh to God, [Lev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003); [Lev
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017). Moses drew near, [Exo
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#021). (2.) God the Father did cause
Jesus Christ thus to draw near and approach to him as Mediator. He
commanded and appointed him to do it; he sanctified and sealed him,
anointed him for this purpose, accepted him, and declared himself well
pleased in him. (3.) Jesus Christ, being caused by the Father to
approach unto him as Mediator, did engage his heart to do it, that is,
he bound and obliged himself to it, undertook for his heart (so some
read it), for his soul, that, in the fullness of time, it should be made
an offering for sin. His own voluntary undertaking, in compliance with
his Father's will and in compassion to fallen man, engaged him, and then
his own honour kept him to it. It also intimates that he was hearty and
resolute, free and cheerful, in it, and made nothing of the difficulties
that lay in his way, [Isa 63:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003). (4.)
Jesus Christ was, in all this, truly wonderful. We may well ask, with
admiration, Who is this that thus engages his heart to such an
undertaking?

V. That they shall be taken again into covenant with God, according to
the covenant made with their fathers ([Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022)): You shall be my people; and it
is God's good work in us that makes us to him a people, a people for his
name, [Act 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014). I will be your God.
It is his good-will to us that is the summary of that part of the
covenant.

VI\. That their enemies shall be reckoned with and brought down ([Jer
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#020)): I will punish all those that
oppress them, so that it shall appear to all a dangerous thing to touch
God's anointed, [Psa 105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015). The last
two verses come under this head: The whirlwind of the Lord shall fall
with pain upon the head of the wicked. These two verses we had before
([Jer 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019), [Jer
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#020)); there they were a denunciation
of God's wrath against the wicked hypocrites in Israel; here against the
wicked oppressors of Israel. The expressions, exactly agreeing, speak
the same with that ([Isa 51:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022), [Isa
51:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#023)), I will take the cup of
trembling out of thy hand and put it into the hand of those that afflict
thee. The wrath of God against the wicked is here represented to be. 1.
Very terrible, like a whirlwind, surprising and irresistible. 2. Very
grievous. It shall fall with pain upon their heads; they shall be as
much hurt as frightened. 3. It shall pursue them. Whirlwinds are usually
short, but this shall be a continuing whirlwind. 4. It shall accomplish
that for which it is sent: The anger of the Lord shall not return till
he have done it. The purposes of his wrath, as well as the purposes of
his love, will all be fulfilled; he will perform the intents of his
heart. 5. Those that will not lay this to heart now will then be unable
to put off the thoughts of it: In the latter days you shall consider it,
when it will be too late to prevent it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 31](jer031)

</div>
