<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer004)  [Next](jer006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 5:0</span></span>

Reproof for sin and threatenings of judgment are intermixed in this
chapter, and are set the one over against the other: judgments are
threatened, that the reproofs of sin might be the more effectual to
bring them to repentance; sin is discovered, that God might be justified
in the judgments threatened. I. The sins they are charged with are very
great: - Injustice ([Jer 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#001)),
hypocrisy in religion ([Jer 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#002)),
incorrigibleness ([Jer 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)), the
corruption and debauchery of both poor and rich ([Jer
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#004), [Jer
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#005)), idolatry and adultery ([Jer
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007), [Jer
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)), treacherous departures from God
([Jer 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#011)), and impudent defiance of
him ([Jer 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#012), [Jer
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#013)), and, that which is at the
bottom of all this, want of the fear of God, notwithstanding the
frequent calls given them to fear him ([Jer
5:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#020)). In the close of the chapter
they are charged with violence and oppression ([Jer
5:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#026)), and a combination of those
to debauch the nation who should have been active to reform it ([Jer
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#030), [Jer
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#031)). II. The judgments they are
threatened with are very terrible. In general, they shall be reckoned
with ([Jer 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#009), [Jer
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#029)). A foreign enemy shall be
brought in upon them ([Jer 5:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015)),
shall set guards upon them ([Jer 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006)),
shall destroy their fortification ([Jer
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010)), shall carry them away into
captivity ([Jer 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#019)), and keep all
good things from them ([Jer 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#025)).
Herein the words of God's prophets shall be fulfilled ([Jer
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#014)). But, III. Here is an intimation
twice given that God would in the midst of wrath remember mercy, and not
utterly destroy them ([Jer 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010), [Jer
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#018)). This was the scope and purport
of Jeremiah's preaching in the latter end of Josiah's reign and the
beginning of Jehoiakim's; but the success of it did not answer
expectation.

[Jeremiah 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 5:1</span></span>

Here is, I. A challenge to produce any one right honest man, or at least
any considerable number of such, in Jerusalem, [Jer
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#001). Jerusalem had become like the old
world, in which all flesh had corrupted their way. There were some
perhaps who flattered themselves with hopes that there were yet many
good men in Jerusalem, who would stand in the gap to turn away the wrath
of God; and there might be others who boasted of its being the holy city
and thought that this would save it. But God bids them search the town,
and intimates that they should scarcely find a man in it who executed
judgment and made conscience of what he said and did: "Look in the
streets, where they make their appearance and converse together, and in
the broad places, where they keep their markets; see if you can find a
man, a magistrate (so some), that executes judgment, and administers
justice impartially, that will put the laws in execution against vice
and profaneness." When the faithful thus cease and fail it is time to
cry Woe is me! ([Mic 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001), [Mic
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002)), high time to cry, Help Lord,
[Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001). "If there be here and there
a man that is truly conscientious, and does at least speak the truth,
yet you shall not find him in the streets and broad places; he dares not
appear publicly, lest he should be abused and run down. Truth has fallen
in the street ([Isa 59:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#014)), and is
forced to seek for corners." So pleasing would it be to God to find any
such that for their sake he would pardon the city; if there were but ten
righteous men in Sodom, if but one of a thousand, of ten thousand, in
Jerusalem, it should be spared. See how ready God is to forgive, how
swift to show mercy. But it might be said, "What do you make of those in
Jerusalem that continue to make profession of religion and relation to
God? Are not they men for whose sakes Jerusalem may be spared?" No, for
they are not sincere in their profession ([Jer
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#002)): They say, The Lord liveth, and
will swear by his name only, but they swear falsely, that is, 1. They
are not sincere in the profession they make of respect to God, but are
false to him; they honour him with their lips, but their hearts are far
from him. 2. Though they appeal to God only, they make no conscience of
calling him to witness to a lie. Though they do not swear by idols, they
forswear themselves, which is no less an affront to God, as the God of
truth, than the other is as the only true God.

II\. A complaint which the prophet makes to God of the obstinacy and
wilfulness of these people. God had appealed to their eyes ([Jer
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#001)); but here the prophet appeals to
his eyes ([Jer 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)): "Are not thy eyes
upon the truth? Dost thou not see every man's true character? And is not
this the truth of their character, that they have made their faces
harder than a rock?" Or, "Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward
part; but where is it to be found among the men of this generation? For
though they say, The Lord liveth, yet they never regard him; thou hast
stricken them with one affliction after another, but they have not
grieved for the affliction, they have been as stocks and stones under
it, much less have they grieved for the sin by which they have brought
it upon themselves. Thou hast gone further yet, hast consumed them, hast
corrected them yet more severely; but they have refused to receive
correction, to accommodate themselves to thy design in correcting them
and to answer to it. They would not receive instruction by the
correction. The have set themselves to outface the divine sentence and
to outbrave the execution of it, for they have made their faces harder
than a rock; they cannot change countenance, neither blush for shame nor
look pale for fear, cannot be beaten back from the pursuit of their
lusts, whatever check is given them; for, though often called to it,
they have refused to return, and would go forward, right or wrong, as
the horse into the battle."

III\. The trial made both of rich and poor, and the bad character given
of both.

1\. The poor were ignorant, and therefore they were wicked. He found
many that refused to return, for whom he was willing to make the best
excuse their case would bear, and it was this ([Jer
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#004)): "Surely, these are poor, they
are foolish. They never had the advantage of a good education, nor have
they wherewithal to help themselves now with the means of instruction.
They are forced to work hard for their living, and have no time nor
capacity for reading or hearing, so that they know not the way of the
Lord, nor the judgments of their God; they understand neither the way in
which God by his precepts will have them to walk towards him nor the way
in which he by his providence is walking towards them." Note, (1.)
Prevailing ignorance is the lamentable cause of abounding impiety and
iniquity. What can one expect but works of darkness from brutish sottish
people that know nothing of God and religion, but choose to sit in
darkness? (2.) This is commonly a reigning sin among poor people. There
are the devil's poor as well as God's, who, notwithstanding their
poverty, might know the way of the Lord, so as to walk in it and do
their duty, without being book-learned; but they are willingly ignorant,
and therefore their ignorance will not be their excuse.

2\. The rich were insolent and haughty, and therefore they were wicked
([Jer 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#005)): "I will get me to the
great men, and see if I can find them more pliable to the word and
providence of God. I will speak to them, preach at court, in hopes to
make some impression upon men of polite literature. But all in vain;
for, though they know the way of the Lord and the judgment of their God,
yet they are too stiff to stoop to his government: These have altogether
broken the yoke and burst the bonds. They know their Master's will, but
are resolved to have their own will, to walk in the way of their heart
and in the sight of their eyes. They think themselves too goodly to be
controlled, too big to be corrected, even by the sovereign Lord of all
himself. They are for breaking even his bands asunder, [Psa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003). The poor are weak, the rich are
wilful, and so neither do their duty."

IV\. Some particular sins specified, which they were notoriously guilty
of, and which cried most loudly to heaven for vengeance. Their
transgressions indeed were many, of many kinds and often repeated, and
their backslidings were increased; they added to the number of them and
grew more and more impudent in them, [Jer
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006). But two sins especially were
justly to be looked upon as unpardonable crimes: - 1. Their spiritual
whoredom, giving that honour to idols which is due to God only. "Thy
children have forsaken me, to whom they were born and dedicated and
under whom they have been brought up, and they have sworn by those that
are no gods, have made their appeal to them as if they had been
omniscient and their proper judges." This is here put for all acts of
religious worship due to God only, but with which they had honoured
their idols. They have sworn to them (so it may be read), have joined
themselves to them and covenanted with them. Those that forsake God make
a bad change for those that are no gods. 2. Their corporal whoredom.
Because they had forsaken God and served idols, he gave them up to vile
affections; and those that dishonoured him were left to dishonour
themselves and their own families. They committed adultery most
scandalously, without sense of shame or fear of punishment, for they
assembled themselves by troops in the harlots' houses and did not blush
to be seen by one another in the most scandalous places. So impudent and
violent was their lust, so impatient of check, and so eager to be
gratified, that they became perfect beasts ([Jer
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)); like high-fed horses, they
neighed every one after his neighbour's wife, [Jer
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008). Unbridled lusts make men like
natural brute beasts, such monstrous odious things are they. And that
which aggravated their sin was that it was the abuse of God's favours to
them: When they were fed to the full, then their lusts grew thus
furious. Fulness of bread was fuel to the fire of Sodom's lusts. Sine
Cerere et Bacchio friget Venu - Luxurious living feeds the flames of
lust. Fasting would help to tame the unruly evil that is so full of
deadly poison, and bring the body into subjection.

V. A threatening of God's wrath against them for their wickedness and
the universal debauchery of their land.

1\. The particular judgment that is threatened, [Jer
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006). A foreign enemy shall break in
upon them, get dominion over them, and shall lay waste: their country
shall be as if it were overrun and perfectly mastered by wild beasts.
This enemy shall be, (1.) Like a lion of the forest; so strong, so
furious, so irresistible; and he shall slay them. (2.) Like a wolf of
the evening, which comes out at night, when he is hungry, to seek his
prey, and is very fierce and ravenous; and the noise both of the lions'
roaring and of the wolves' howling is very hideous. (3.) Like a leopard,
which is very swift and very cruel, and withal careful not to miss his
prey. The army of the enemy shall watch over their cities so strictly as
to put the inhabitants to this sad dilemma - if they stay in, they are
starved; if they stir out, they are stabbed; Every one that goeth out
thence shall be torn in pieces, which intimates that in many places the
enemy gave no quarter. And all this bloody work is owing to the
multitude of their transgressions. It is sin that makes the great
slaughter.

2\. An appeal to themselves concerning the equity of it ([Jer
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#009)); "Shall I not visit for these
things? Can you yourselves think that the God whose name is Jealous will
let such idolatries go unpunished, or that a God of infinite purity will
connive at such abominable uncleanness?" These are things that must be
reckoned for, else the honour of God's government cannot be maintained,
nor his laws saved from contempt; but sinners will be tempted to think
him altogether such a one as themselves, contrary to that conviction of
their own consciences concerning the judgment of God which is necessary
to be supported, That those who do such things are worthy of death, [Rom
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032). Observe, when God punishes sin,
he is said to visit for it, or enquire into it; for he weighs the cause
before he passes sentence. Sinners have reason to expect punishment upon
the account of God's holiness, to which sin is highly offensive, as well
as upon the account of his justice, to which it renders us obnoxious;
this is intimated in that, Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation
as this? It is not only the word of God, but his soul, that takes
vengeance. And he has national judgments wherewith to take vengeance for
national sins. Such nations as this was cannot long go unpunished. How
shall I pardon thee for this? [Jer
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007). Not but that those who have been
guilty of these sins have found mercy with God, as to their eternal
state (Manasseh himself did, though so much accessory to the iniquity of
these times); but nations, as such, being rewardable and punishable only
in this life, it would not be for the glory of God to let a nation so
very wicked as this pass without some manifest tokens of his
displeasure.

[Jeremiah 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 5:10</span></span>

We may observe in these verses, as before,

I. The sin of this people, upon which the commission signed against them
is grounded. God disowns them and dooms them to destruction, [Jer
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010). But is there not a cause? Yes;
for, 1. They have deserted the law of God ([Jer
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#011)): The house of Israel and the
house of Judah, though at variance with one another, yet both agreed to
deal very treacherously against God. They forsook the worship of him,
and therein violated their covenants with him; they revolted from him,
and played the hypocrite with him. 2. They have defied the judgments of
God and given the lie to his threatenings in the mouth of his prophets,
[Jer 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#012), [Jer
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#013). They were often told that evil
would certainly come upon them; they must expect some desolating
judgment, sword or famine; but they were secure and said, We shall have
peace, though we go on. For, (1.) They did not fear what God is. They
belied him, and confronted the dictates even of natural light concerning
him; for they said, "It is not he, that is, he is not such a one as we
have been made to believe he is; he does not see, or not regard, or will
not require it; and therefore no evil shall come upon us." Multitudes
are ruined by being made to believe that God will not be so strict with
them as his word says he will; nay, by this artifice Satan undid us all:
You shall not surely die. So here: Neither shall we see sword nor
famine. Vain hopes of impunity are the deceitful support of all impiety.
(2.) They did not fear what God said. The prophets gave them fair
warning, but they turned it off with a jest: "They do but talk so,
because it is their trade; they are words of course, and words are but
wind. It is not the word of the Lord that is in them; it is only the
language of their melancholy fancy or their ill-will to their country,
because they are not preferred." Note, Impenitent sinners are not
willing to own any thing to be the word of God that makes against them,
that tends either to part them from, or disquiet them in, their sins.
They threaten the prophets: "They shall become wind, shall pass away
unregarded, and thus shall it be done unto them; what they threaten
against us we will inflict upon them. Do they frighten us with famine?
Let them be fed with the bread of affliction." So Micaiah was, [Kg1
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#027). "Do they tell us of the sword?
Let them perish by the sword," [Jer
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030). Thus their mocking and misusing
God's messengers filled the measure of their iniquity.

II\. The punishment of this people for their sin. 1. The threatenings
they laughed at shall be executed ([Jer
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#014)): Because you speak this word of
contempt concerning the prophets, and the word in their mouths,
therefore God will put honour upon them and their words, for not one
iota or tittle of them shall fall to the ground, [Sa1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019). Here God turns to the prophet
Jeremiah, who had been thus bantered, and perhaps had been a little
uneasy at it: Behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire. God owns
them for his words, though men denied them, and will as surely make them
to take effect as the fire consumes combustible material that is in its
way. The word shall be fire and the people wood. Sinners by sin make
themselves fuel to that wrath of God which is revealed from heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men in the scripture. The
word of God will certainly be too hard for those that contend with it.
Those shall break who will not bow before it. 2. The enemy they thought
themselves in no danger of shall be brought upon them. God gives them
their commission ([Jer 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010)): "Go you
up upon her walls, mount them, trample upon them, tread them down. Walls
of stone, before the divine commission, shall be but mud walls. Having
made yourselves masters of the walls, you may destroy at pleasure. You
may take away her battlements, and leave the fenced fortified cities to
lie open; for her battlements are not the Lord's he does not own them
and therefore will not protect and fortify them." They were not erected
in his fear, nor with a dependence upon him; the people have trusted to
them more than to God, and therefore they are not his. When the city is
filled with sin God will not patronise the fortifications of it, and
then they are paper walls. What can defend us when he who is our
defence, and the defender of all our defences, has departed from us?
[Num 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#009). What is not of God cannot
stand, not stand long, nor stand us in any stead. What dreadful work
these invaders should make is here described ([Jer
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015)): Lo, I will bring a nation upon
you, O house of Israel! Note, God has all nations at his command, does
what he pleases with them and makes what use he pleases of them. And
sometimes he is pleased to make the nations of the earth, the heathen
nations, a scourge to the house of Israel, when that has become a
hypocritical nation. This nation of the Chaldeans is here said to be a
remote nation; it is brought upon them from afar, and therefore will
make the greater spoil and the longer stay, that the soldiers may pay
themselves well for so long a march. "It is a nation that thou hast had
no commerce with, by reason of their distance, and therefore canst not
expect to find favour with." God can bring trouble upon us from places
and causes very remote. It is a mighty nation, that there is no making
head against, an ancient nation, that value themselves upon their
antiquity and will therefore be the more haughty and imperious. It is a
nation whose language thou knowest not; they spoke the Syriac tongue,
which the Jews at that time were not acquainted with, as appears, [Kg2
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#026). The difference of language
would make it the more difficult to treat with them of peace. Compare
this with the threatening, [Deu 28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049),
which it seems to have a reference to, for the law and the prophets
exactly agree. They are well armed: Their quiver is as an open
sepulchre; their arrows shall fly so thick, hit so sure, and wound so
deep, that they shall be reckoned to breathe nothing but death and
slaughter: they are able-bodied, all effective, mighty men, [Jer
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#016). And, when they have made
themselves masters of the country, they shall devour all before them,
and reckon all their own that they can lay their hands on, [Jer
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#017). (1.) They shall strip the
country, shall not only sustain, but surfeit, their soldiers with the
rich products of this fruitful land. "They shall not store up (then it
might possibly by retrieved), but eat up thy harvest in the field and
thy bread in the house, which thy sons and thy daughters should eat."
Note, What we have we have for our families, and it is a comfort to see
our sons and daughters eating that which we have taken care and pains
for. But it is a grievous vexation to see it devoured by strangers and
enemies, to see their camps victualled with our stores, while those that
are dear to us are perishing for want of it: this also is according to
the curse of the law, [Deu 28:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#033).
"They shall eat up thy flocks and herds, out of which thou hast taken
sacrifices for thy idols; they shall not leave thee the fruit of thy
vines and fig-trees." (2.) They shall starve the towns: "They shall
impoverish thy fenced cities" (and what fence is there against poverty,
when it comes like an armed man?), "those cities wherein thou trustedst
to be a protection to the country." Note, It is just with God to
impoverish that which we make our confidence. They shall impoverish them
with the sword, cutting off all provisions from coming to them and
intercepting trade and commerce, which will impoverish even fenced
cities.

III\. An intimation of the tender compassion God has yet for them. The
enemy is commissioned to destroy and lay waste, but must not make a full
end, [Jer 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010). Though they make a
great slaughter, yet some must be left to live; though they make a great
spoil, yet something must be left to live upon, for God has said it
([Jer 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#018)) with a non obstante - a
nevertheless to the present desolation: "Even in those days, dismal as
they are, I will not make a full end with you;" and, if God will not,
the enemy shall not. God has mercy in store for his people, and
therefore will set bounds to this desolating judgment. Hitherto it shall
come, and no further.

IV\. The justification of God in these proceedings against them. As he
will appear to be gracious in not making a full end with them, so he
will appear to be righteous in coming so near it, and will have it
acknowledged that he has done them no wrong, [Jer
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#019). Observe, 1. A reason demanded,
insolently demanded, by the people for these judgments. They will say
"Wherefore doth the Lord our God do all this unto us? What provocation
have we given him, or what quarrel has he with us?" As if against such a
sinful nation there did not appear cause enough of action. Note,
Unhumbled hearts are ready to charge God with injustice in their
afflictions, and pretend they have to seek for the cause of them when it
is written in the forehead of them. But, 2. Here is a reason immediately
assigned. The prophet is instructed what answer to give them; for God
will be justified when he speaks, though he speaks with ever so much
terror. He must tell them that God does this against them for what they
have done against him, and that they may, if they please, read their sin
in their punishment. Do not they know very well that they have forsaken
God, and therefore can they think it strange if he has forsaken them?
Have they forgotten how often they served gods in their own land, that
good land, in the abundance of the fruits of which they ought to have
served God with gladness of heart? and therefore is it not just with God
to make them serve strangers in a strange land, where they can call
nothing their own, as he has threatened to do? [Deu
28:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#047), [Deu
28:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#048). Those that are fond of
strangers, to strangers let them go.

[Jeremiah 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 5:20</span></span>

The prophet, having reproved them for sin and threatened the judgments
of God against them, is here sent to them again upon another errand,
which he must publish in Judah; the purport of it is to persuade them to
fear God, which would be an effectual principle of their reformation, as
the want of that fear had been at the bottom of their apostasy.

I. He complains of the shameful stupidity of this people, and their bent
to backslide from God, speaking as if he knew not what course to take
with them. For,

1\. Their understandings were darkened and unapt to admit the rays of
the divine light: They are a foolish people and without understanding;
they apprehend not the mind of God, though ever so plainly declared to
them by the written word, by his prophets, and by his providence ([Jer
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#021)): They have eyes, but they see
not, ears, but they hear not, like the idols which they made and
worshipped, [Psa 115:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#005), [Psa
115:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#006), [Psa
115:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#008). One would have thought that
they took notice of things, but really they did not; they had
intellectual faculties and capacities, but they did not employ and
improve them as they ought. Herein they disappointed the expectations of
all their neighbours, who, observing what excellent means of knowledge
they had, concluded, Surely they are a wise and an understanding people
([Deu 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006)), and yet really they are a
foolish people and without understanding. Note, We cannot judge of men
by the advantages and opportunities they enjoy: there are those that sit
in darkness in a land of light, that live in sin even in a holy land,
that are bad in the best places. 2. Their wills were stubborn and unapt
to submit to the rules of the divine law ([Jer
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#023)): This people has a revolting and
a rebellious heart; and no wonder when they were foolish and without
understanding, [Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005). Nay, it is
the corrupt bias of the will that bribes and besots the understanding:
none so blind as those that will not see. The character of this people
is the true character of all people by nature, till the grace of God has
wrought a change. We are foolish, slow of understanding, and apt to
mistake and forget; yet that is not the worst. We have a revolting and a
rebellious heart, a carnal mind, that is enmity against God, and is not
in subjection to his law, not only revolting from him by a rooted
aversion to that which is good, but rebellious against him by a strong
inclination to that which is evil. Observe, The revolting heart is a
rebellious one: those that withdraw from their allegiance to God do not
stop there, but by siding in with sin and Satan take up arms against
him. They have revolted and gone. The revolting heart will produce a
revolting life. They are gone, and they will go (so it may be read); now
nothing will be restrained from them, [Gen
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#006).

II\. He ascribed this to the want of the fear of God. When he observes
them to be without understanding he asks, "Fear you not me, saith the
Lord, and will you not tremble at my presence? [Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022). If you would but keep up an awe
of God, you would be more observant of what he says to you: and, did you
but understand your own interest better, you would be more under the
commanding rule of God's fear." When he observes that they have revolted
and gone he adds this, as the root and cause of their apostasy ([Jer
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024)), Neither say they in their
hearts, Let us now fear the Lord our God. Therefore so many bad thoughts
come into their mind, and hurry them to that which is evil, because they
will not admit and entertain good thoughts, and particularly not this
good thought, Let us now fear the Lord our God. It is true it is God's
work to put his fear into our hearts; but it is our work to stir up
ourselves to fear him, and to fasten upon those considerations which are
proper to affect us with a holy awe of him; and it is because we do not
do this that our hearts are so destitute of his fear as they are, and so
apt to revolt and rebel.

III\. He suggests some of those things which are proper to possess us
with a holy fear of God.

1\. We must fear the Lord and his greatness, [Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022). Upon this account he demands our
fear: Shall we not tremble at his presence, and not be afraid of
affronting him, or trifling with him, who in the kingdom of nature and
providence gives such incontestable proofs of his almighty power and
sovereign dominion? Here is one instance given of very many that might
be given: he keeps the sea within compass. Though the tides flow with a
mighty strength twice every day, and if they should flow on awhile would
drown the world, though in a storm the billows rise high and dash to the
shore with incredible force and fury, yet they are under check, they
return, they retire, and no harm is done. This is the Lord's doing, and,
if it were not common, it would be marvellous in our eyes. He has placed
the sand for the bound of the sea, not only for a meer-stone, to mark
out how far it may come and where it must stop, but as a mound, or
fence, to put a stop to it. A wall of sand shall be as effectual as a
wall of brass to check the flowing waves, when God is pleased to make it
so; nay, that is chosen rather, to teach us that a soft answer, like the
soft sand, turns away wrath, and quiets a foaming rage, when grievous
words, like hard rocks, do but exasperate, and make the waters cast
forth so much the more mire and dirt. This bound is placed by a
perpetual decree, by an ordinance of antiquity (so some read it), and
then it sends us as far back as to the creation of the world, when God
divided between the sea and dry land, and fixed marches between them,
[Gen 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009), [Gen
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010) (which is elegantly described,
[Psa 104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006), etc., and [Job
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#008), etc.), or to the period of
Noah's flood, when God promised that he would never drown the world
again, [Gen 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011). An ordinance of
perpetuity - so our translation takes it. It is a perpetual decree; it
has had its effect all along to this day and shall still continue till
day and night come to an end. This perpetual decree the waters of the
sea cannot pass over nor break through. Though the waves thereof toss
themselves, as the troubled sea does when it cannot rest, yet can they
not prevail; though they roar and rage as if they were vexed at the
check given them, yet can they not pass over. Now this is a good reason
why we should fear God; for, (1.) By this we see that he is a God of
almighty power and universal sovereignty, and therefore to be feared and
had in reverence. (2.) This shows us how easily he could drown the world
again and how much we continually lie at his mercy, and therefore we
should be afraid of making him our enemy. (3.) Even the unruly waves of
the sea observe his decree and retreat at his check, and shall not we
then? Why are our hearts revolting and rebellious, when the sea neither
revolts nor rebels?

2\. We must fear the Lord and his goodness, [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005). The instances of this, as of the
former, are fetched from God's common providence, [Jer
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024). We must fear the Lord our God,
that is, we must worship him, and give him glory, and be always in care
to keep ourselves in his love, because he is continually doing us good:
he gives us both the former and the latter rain, the former a little
after seed-time, the latter a little before harvest, and both in their
season; and by this means he reserves to us the appointed weeks of
harvest. Harvest is reckoned by weeks, because in a few weeks enough is
gathered to serve for sustenance the year round. The weeks of the
harvest are appointed us by the promise of God, that seed-time and
harvest shall not fail. And in performance of that promise they are
reserved to us by the divine providence, otherwise we should come short
of them. In harvest mercies therefore God is to be acknowledged, his
power, and goodness, and faithfulness, for they all come from him. And
it is good reason why we should fear him, that we may keep ourselves in
his love, because we have such a necessary dependence upon him. The
fruitful seasons were witnesses for God, even to the heathen world,
sufficient to leave them inexcusable in their contempt of him ([Act
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)); and yet the Jews, who had the
written word to explain their testimony by, were not wrought upon to
fear the Lord, though it appears how much it is our interest to do so.

[Jeremiah 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 5:25</span></span>

Here, I. The prophet shows them what mischief their sins had done them:
They have turned away these things ([Jer
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#025)), the former and the latter rain,
which they used to have in due season ([Jer
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024)), but which had of late been
withheld ([Jer 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)), by reason of
which the appointed weeks of harvest had sometimes disappointed them.
"It is your sin that has withholden good from you, when God was ready to
bestow it upon you." Note, It is sin that stops the current of God's
favour to us, and deprives us of the blessings we used to receive. It is
that which makes the heavens as brass and the earth as iron.

II\. He shows them how great their sins were, how heinous and provoking.
When they had forsaken the worship of the true God, even moral honesty
was lost among them: Among my people are found wicked men ([Jer
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#026)), some of the worst of men, and
so much the worse they were for being found among God's people. 1. They
were spiteful and malicious. Such are properly wicked men, men that
delight in doing mischief. They were found (that is, caught) in the very
act of their wickedness. As hunters or fowlers lay snares for their
game, so did they lie in wait to catch men, and made a sport of it, and
took as much pleasure in it as if they had been entrapping beasts or
birds. They contrives ways of doing mischief to good people (whom they
hated for their goodness), especially to those that faithfully reproved
them ([Isa 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#021)), or to those that
stood in the way of their preferment or whom they supposed to have
affronted them or done them a diskindness, or to those whose estates
they coveted; so Jezebel ensnared Naboth for his vineyard. Nay, they did
mischief for mischief's sake. 2. They were false and treacherous ([Jer
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#027)): "As a cage, or coop, is full of
birds, and of food for them to fatten them for the table, so are their
houses full of deceit, of wealth obtained by fraudulent practices or of
arts and methods of defrauding. All the business of their families is
done with deceit; whoever deals with them, they will cheat him if they
can, which is easily done by those who make no conscience of what they
say and do. Herein they overpass the deed of the wicked, [Jer
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028). Those that act by deceit, with a
colour of law and justice, do more mischief perhaps than those wicked
men ([Jer 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#026)) that carry all before
them by open force and violence; or they are worse than the heathen
themselves, yea, the worst of them. And (would you think it?) they
prosper in these wicked courses and therefore their hearts are hardened
in them. They are greedy of the world, because they find it flows in
upon them, and they stick not at any wickedness in pursuit of it,
because they find that it is so far from hindering their prosperity that
it furthers it: They have become great in the world; they have waxen
rich, and thrive upon it. They have wherewithal to make provision for
the flesh to fulfill all the lusts of it, to which they are very
indulgent, so that they have waxen fat with living at ease and bathing
themselves in all the delights of sense. They are sleek and smooth: The
shine; they look fair and gay; every body admires them. And they pass by
matters of evil (so some read the following words); they escape the
evils which one would expect their sins should bring upon them; they are
not in trouble as other men, much less as we might expect bad men," [Psa
73:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#005), etc. 3. When they had grown
great, and had got power in their hands, they did not do that good with
it which they ought to have done: They judge not the cause, the cause of
the fatherless, and the right of the needy. The fatherless are often
needy, always need assistance and advice, and advantage is taken of
their helpless condition to do them an injury. Who should succour them
then but the great and rich? What have men wealth for but to do good
with it? But these would take no cognizance of any such distressed
cases: they had not so much sense of justice, or compassion for the
injured; or, if they did concern themselves in the cause, it was not to
do right, but to protect those that did wrong. And yet they prosper
still; God layeth not folly to them. Certainly then the things of this
world are not the best things, for often-times the worst men have the
most of them; yet we are not to think that, because they prosper, God
allows of their practices. No; though sentence against their evil works
be not executed speedily, it will be executed. 4. There was a general
corruption of all orders and degrees of men among them ([Jer
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#030), [Jer
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#031)); A wonderful and horrible thing
is committed in the land. The degeneracy of such a people, so privileged
and advanced, was a wonderful thing, and to be viewed with amazement.
How could they ever break through so many obligations? It was a horrible
thing, a thing to be detested and the consequences of it dreaded. To
frighten ourselves from sin, let us call it a horrible thing. What was
the matter? In short, this: (1.) The leaders misled the people: The
prophets prophesy falsely, counterfeit a commission from heaven when
they are factors for hell. Religion is never more dangerously attacked
than under colour and pretence of divine revelation. But why did not the
priests, who had power in their hands for that purpose, restrain these
false prophets? Alas! instead of doing that they made use of them as the
tools of their ambition and tyranny: The priests bear rule by their
means; they supported themselves in their grandeur and wealth, their
laziness and luxury, their impositions and oppressions, by the help of
the false prophets and their interest in the people. Thus they were in a
combination against every thing that was good, and strengthened one
another's hands in evil. (2.) The people were well enough pleased to be
so misled: "They are my people," says God, "and should have stood up for
me, and borne their testimony against the wickedness of their priests
and prophets; but they love to have it so." If the priests and prophets
will let them alone in their sins, they will give them no disturbance in
theirs. They love to be ridden with a loose rein, and like those rulers
very well that will not restrain their lusts and those teachers that
will not reprove them.

III\. He shows them how fatal the consequences of this would certainly
be. Let them consider,

1\. What the reckoning would be for their wickedness ([Jer
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#029)): Shall not I visit for these
things? as before, [Jer 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#009). Sometimes
mercy rejoices against judgment: How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?
Here, judgment is reasoning against mercy: Shall I not visit? We are
sure that Infinite Wisdom knows how to accommodate the matter between
them. The manner of expression is very emphatic, and denotes, (1.) The
certainty and necessity of God's judgments: Shall not my soul be
avenged? Yes, without doubt, vengeance will come, it must come, if the
sinner repent not. (2.) The justice and equity of God's judgments; he
appeals to the sinner's own conscience, Do not those deserve to be
punished that have been guilty of such abominations? Shall he not be
avenged on such a nation, such a wicked provoking nation as this?

2\. What the direct tendency of their wickedness was: What will you do
in the end thereof? That is, (1.) "What a pitch of wickedness will you
come to at last! What will you do? What will you not do that is base and
wicked. What will this grow to? You will certainly grow worse and worse,
till you have filled up the measure of your iniquity." (2.) "What a pit
of destruction will you come to at last! When things are brought to such
a pass as this, nothing can be expected from you but a deluge of sin, so
nothing can be expected from God but a deluge of wrath; and what will
you do when that shall come?" Note, Those that walk in bad ways would do
well to consider the tendency of them both to greater sin and utter
ruin. An end will come; the end of a wicked life will come, when it will
be all called over again, and without doubt will be bitterness in the
latter end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 6](jer006)

</div>
