<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer014)  [Next](jer016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 15:0</span></span>

When we left the prophet, in the close of the foregoing chapter, so
pathetically poring out his prayers before God, we had reason to hope
that in this chapter we should find God reconciled to the land and the
prophet brought into a quiet composed frame; but, to our great surprise,
we find it much otherwise as to both. I. Notwithstanding the prophet's
prayers, God here ratifies the sentence given against the people, and
abandons them to ruin turning a deaf ear to all the intercessions made
for them ([Jer 15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)). II. The
prophet himself, notwithstanding the satisfaction he had in communion
with God, still finds himself uneasy and out of temper. 1. He complains
to God of his continual struggle with his persecutors ([Jer
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010)). 2. God assures him that he
shall be taken under special protection, though there was a general
desolation coming upon the land ([Jer
15:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#011)). 3. He appeals to God
concerning his sincerity in the discharge of his prophetic office and
thinks it hard that he should not have more of the comfort of it ([Jer
15:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015)). 4. Fresh security is given
him that, upon condition he continue faithful, God will continue his
care of him and his favour to him ([Jer
15:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019)). And thus, at length, we
hope he regained the possession of his own soul.

[Jeremiah 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 15:1</span></span>

We scarcely find any where more pathetic expressions of divine wrath
against a provoking people than we have here in these verses. The
prophet had prayed earnestly for them, and found some among them to join
with him; and yet not so much as a reprieve was gained, nor the least
mitigation of the judgment; but this answer is given to the prophet's
prayers, that the decree had gone forth, was irreversible, and would
shortly be executed. Observe here,

I. What the sin was upon which this severe sentence was grounded. 1. It
is in remembrance of a former iniquity; it is because of Manasseh, for
that which he did in Jerusalem, [Jer
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#004). What that was we are told, and
that it was for it that Jerusalem was destroyed, [Kg2
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#003), [Kg2
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#004). It was for his idolatry, and the
innocent blood which he shed, which the Lord would not pardon. He is
called the son of Hezekiah because his relation to so good a father was
a great aggravation of his sin, so far was it from being an excuse of
it. The greatest part of a generation was worn off since Manasseh's
time, yet his sin is brought into the account; as in Jerusalem's last
ruin God brought upon it all the righteous blood shed on the earth, to
show how heavy the guilt of blood will light and lie somewhere, sooner
or later, and that reprieves are not pardons. 2. It is in consideration
of their present impenitence. See how their sin is described ([Jer
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#006)): "Thou hast forsaken me, my
service and thy duty to me; thou hast gone backward into the ways of
contradiction, art become the reverse of what thou shouldst have been
and of what God by his law would have led thee forward to." See how the
impenitence is described ([Jer 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#007)):
They return not from their ways, the ways of their own hearts, into the
ways of God's commandments again. There is mercy for those who have
turned aside if they will return; but what favour can those expect that
persist in their apostasy?

II\. What the sentence is. It is such as denotes no less than an utter
ruin.

1\. God himself abandons and abhors them: My mind cannot be towards
them. How can it be thought that the holy God should have any remaining
complacency in those that have such a rooted antipathy to him? It is not
in a passion, but with a just and holy indignation, that he says, "Cast
them out of my sight, as that which is in the highest degree odious and
offensive, and let them go forth, for I will be troubled with them no
more."

2\. He will not admit any intercession to be made for them ([Jer
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)): "Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, by prayer or sacrifice to reconcile me to them, yet I could
not be prevailed with to admit them into favour." Moses and Samuel were
two as great favourites of Heaven as ever were the blessings of this
earth, and were particularly famed for the success of their mediation
between God and his offending people; many a time they would have been
destroyed if Moses had not stood before him in the breach; and to
Samuel's prayers they owed their lives ([Sa1
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#019)); yet even their intercessions
should not prevail, no, not though they were now in a state of
perfection, much less Jeremiah's who was now a man subject to like
passions as others. The putting of this as a case, Though they should
stand before me, supposes that they do not, and is an intimation that
saints in heaven are not intercessors for saints on earth. It is the
prerogative of the Eternal Word to be the only Mediator in the other
world, whatever Moses, and Samuel, and others were in this.

3\. He condemns them all to one destroying judgment or other. When God
casts them out of his presence, whither shall they go forth? [Jer
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#002). Certainly nowhere to be safe or
easy, but to be met by one judgment while they are pursued by another,
till they find themselves surrounded with mischiefs on all hands, so
that they cannot escape; Such as are for death to death. By death here
is meant the pestilence ([Rev 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008)),
for it is death without visible means. Such as are for death to death,
or for the sword to the sword; every man shall perish in that way that
God has appointed: the law that appoints the malefactor's death
determines what death he shall die. Or, He that is by his own choice for
this judgment, let him take it, or for that, let him take it, but by the
one or the other they shall all fall and none shall escape. It is a
choice like that which David was put to, and was thereby put into a
great strait, [Sa2 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#014). Captivity is
mentioned last, some think, because the sorest judgment of all, it being
both a complication and continuance of miseries. That of the sword is
again repeated ([Jer 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#003)), and is
made the first of another four frightful set of destroyers, which God
will appoint over them, as officers over the soldiers, to do what they
please with them. As those that escape the sword shall be cut off by
pestilence, famine, or captivity, so those that fall by the sword shall
be cut off by divine vengeance, which pursues sinners on the other side
death; there shall be dogs to tear in the field to devour. And, if there
be any that think to outrun justice, they shall be made the most public
monuments of it: They shall be removed into all kingdoms of the earth
([Jer 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#004)), like Cain, who, that he
might be made a spectacle of horror to all, became a fugitive and a
vagabond in the earth.

4\. They shall fall without being relieved. Who can do any thing to help
them? for (1.) God, even their own God (so he had been) appears against
them: I will stretch out my hand against thee, which denotes a
deliberate determined stroke, which will reach far and wound deeply. I
am weary with repenting ([Jer 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#006));
it is a strange expression; they had behaved so provokingly, especially
by their treacherous professions of repentance, that they had put even
infinite patience itself to the stretch. God had often turned away his
wrath when it was ready to break forth against them; but now he will
grant no more reprieves. Miserable is the case of those who have sinned
so long against God's mercy that at length they have sinned it away.
(2.) Their own country expels them, and is ready to spue them out, as it
had done the Canaanites that were before them; for so it was threatened
([Lev 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#028)): I will fan them with a
fan in the gates of the land, in their own gates, through which they
shall be scattered, or into the gates of the earth, into the cities of
all the nations about them, [Jer 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#007).
(3.) Their own children, that should assist them when they speak with
the enemy in the gate, shall be cut off from them: I will bereave them
of children, so that they shall have little hopes that the next
generation will retrieve their affairs, for I will destroy my people;
and, when the inhabitants are slain, the land will soon be desolate.
This melancholy article is enlarged upon, [Jer
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#008), [Jer
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#009), where we have, \[1.\] The
destroyer brought upon them. When God has bloody work to do he will find
out bloody instruments to do it with. Nebuchadnezzar is here called a
spoiler at noon-day, not a thief in the night, that is afraid of being
discovered, but one that without fear shall break through and destroy
all the fences of rights and properties, and this in the face of the sun
and in defiance of its light: I have brought against the mother a young
man, a spoiler (so some read it); for Nebuchadnezzar, when he first
invaded Judah, was but a young man, in the first year of his reign. We
read it, I have brought upon them, even against the mother of the young
men, a spoiler, that is, against Jerusalem, a mother city, that had a
very numerous family of young men: or that invasion was in a particular
manner terrible to those mothers who had many sons fit for war, who must
now hazard their lives in the high places of the field, and, being an
unequal match for the enemy, would be likely to fall there, to the
inexpressible grief of their poor mothers, who had nursed them up with a
great deal of tenderness. The same God that brought the spoiler upon
them caused him to fall upon it, that is, upon the spoil delivered to
him, suddenly and by surprise; and then terrors came upon the city. the
original is very abrupt - the city and terrors. O the city! what a
consternation will it then be in! O the terrors that shall then seize
it! Then the city and terrors shall be brought together, that seemed at
a distance from each other. I will cause to fall suddenly upon her (upon
Jerusalem) a watcher and terrors; so Mr. Gataker reads it, for the word
is used for a watcher ([Dan 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013), [Dan
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#023)), and the Chaldean soldiers were
called watchers, [Jer 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#016). \[2.\] The
destruction made by this destroyer. A dreadful slaughter is here
described. First, The wives are deprived of their husbands: Their widows
are increased above the sand of the seas, so numerous have they now
grown. It was promised that the men of Israel (for those only were
numbered) should be as the sand of the sea for multitude; but now they
shall be all cut off, and their widows shall be so. But observe, God
says, They are increased to me. Though the husbands were cut off by the
sword of his justice, their poor widows were gathered in the arms of his
mercy, who has taken it among the titles of his honour to be the God of
the widows. Widows are said to be taken into the number, the number of
those whom God has a particular compassion and concern for. Secondly,
The parents are deprived of their children: She that has borne seven
sons, whom she expected to be the support and joy of her age, now
languishes, when she has seen them all cut off by the sword in one day,
who had been many years her burden and care. She that had many children
has waxed feeble, [Sa1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#005). See what
uncertain comforts children are; and let us therefore rejoice in them as
though we rejoiced not. When the children are slain the mother gives up
the ghost, for her life was bound up in theirs: Her sun has gone down
while it was yet day; she is bereaved of all her comforts just when she
thought herself in the midst of the enjoyment of them. She is now
ashamed and confounded to think how proud she was of her sons, how fond
of them, and how much she promised herself from them. Some understand,
by this languishing mother, Jerusalem lamenting the death of her
inhabitants as passionately as ever poor mother bewailed her children.
Many are cut off already, and the residue of them, who have yet escaped,
and, as was hoped, were reserved to be the seed of another generation,
even these will I deliver to the sword before their enemies (as the
condemned malefactor is delivered to the sheriff to be executed), saith
the Lord, the Judge of heaven and earth, who, we are sure, herein judges
according to truth, though the judgment seem severe.

5\. They shall fall without being pitied ([Jer
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#005)): "For who shall have pity on
thee, O Jerusalem? When thy God has cast thee out of his sight, and his
compassions fail and are shut up from thee, neither thy enemies nor thy
friends shall have any compassion for thee. They shall have no sympathy
with thee; they shall not bemoan thee nor be sorry for thee; they shall
have no concern for thee, shall not go a step out of their way to ask
how thou dost." For, (1.) Their friends, who were expected to do these
friendly offices, were all involved with them in the calamities, and had
enough to do to bemoan themselves. (2.) It was plain to all their
neighbours that they had brought all this misery upon themselves by
their obstinacy in sin, and that they might easily have prevented it by
repentance and reformation, which they were often in vain called to; and
therefore who can pity them? O Israel! thou hast destroyed thyself.
Those will perish for ever unpitied that might have been saved upon such
easy terms and would not. (3.) God will thus complete their misery. He
will set their acquaintance, as he did Job's at a distance from them;
and his hand, his righteous hand, is to be acknowledged in all the
unkindnesses of our friends, as well as in all the injuries done us by
our foes.

[Jeremiah 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 15:10</span></span>

Jeremiah has now returned from his public work and retired into his
closet; what passed between him and his God there we have an account of
in these and the following verses, which he published afterwards, to
affect the people with the weight and importance of his messages to
them. Here is,

I. The complaint which the prophet makes to God of the many
discouragements he met with in his work, [Jer
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010).

1\. He met with a great deal of contradiction and opposition. He was a
man of strife and contention to the whole land (so it might be read,
rather than to the whole earth, for his business lay only in that land);
both city and country quarrelled with him, and set themselves against
him, and said and did all they could to thwart him. He was a peaceable
man, gave no provocation to any, nor was apt to resent the provocations
given him, and yet a man of strife, not a man striving, but a man
striven with; he was for peace, but, when he spoke, they were for war.
And, whatever they pretended, that which was the real cause of their
quarrels with him was his faithfulness to God and to their souls. He
showed them their sins that were working their ruin, and put them into a
way to prevent that ruin, which was the greatest kindness he could do
them; and yet this was it for which they were incensed against him and
looked upon him as their enemy. Even the prince of peace himself was
thus a man of strife, a sign spoken against, continually enduring the
contradiction of sinners against himself. And the gospel of peace brings
division, even to fire and sword, [Mat
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034), [Mat
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#035); [Luk
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049), [Luk
12:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#051). Now this made Jeremiah very
uneasy, even to a degree of impatience. He cried out, Woe is me, my
mother, that thou hast borne me, as if it were his mother's fault that
she bore him, and he had better never have been born than be born to
such an uncomfortable life; nay, he is angry that she had borne him a
man of strife, as if he had been fatally determined to this by the stars
that were in the ascendant at his birth. If he had any meaning of this
kind, doubtless it was very much his infirmity; we rather hope it was
intended for no more than a pathetic lamentation of his own case. Note,
(1.) Even those who are most quiet and peaceable, if they serve God
faithfully, are often made men of strife. We can but follow peace; we
have the making only of one side of the bargain, and therefore can but,
as much as in us lies, live peaceably. (2.) It is very uncomfortable to
those who are of a peaceable disposition to live among those who are
continually picking quarrels with them. (3.) Yet, if we cannot live so
peaceably as we desire with our neighbours, we must not be so disturbed
at it as thereby to lose the repose of our own minds and put ourselves
upon the fret.

2\. He met with a great deal of contempt, contumely, and reproach. They
every one of them cursed him; they branded him as a turbulent factious
man, as an incendiary and a sower of discord and sedition. They ought to
have blessed him, and to have blessed God for him; but they had arrived
at such a pitch of enmity against God and his word that for his sake
they cursed his messenger, spoke ill of him, wished ill to him, did all
they could to make him odious. They all did so; he had scarcely one
friend in Judah or Jerusalem that would give him a good word. Note, It
is often the lot of the best of men to have the worst of characters
ascribed to them. So persecuted they the prophets. But one would be apt
to suspect that surely Jeremiah had given them some provocation, else he
could not have lost himself thus: no, not the least: I have neither lent
money nor borrowed money, have been neither creditor nor debtor; for so
general is the signification of the words here. (1.) It is implied here
that those who deal much in the business of this world are often
involved thereby in strife and contention; meum et tuum - mine and thine
are the great make-bates; lenders and borrowers sue and are sued, and
great dealers often get a great deal of ill-will. (2.) it was an
instance of Jeremiah's great prudence, and it is written for our
learning, that, being called to be a prophet, he entangled not himself
in the affairs of this life, but kept clear from them, that he might
apply the more closely to the business of his profession and might not
give the least shadow of suspicion that he aimed at secular advantages
in it nor any occasion to his neighbours to contend with him. He put out
no money, for he was no usurer, nor indeed had he any money to lend: he
took up no money, for he was no purchaser, no merchant, no spendthrift.
He was perfectly dead to this world and the things of it: a very little
served to keep him, and we find ([Jer
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#002)) that he had neither wife nor
children to keep. And yet, (3.) Though he behaved thus discreetly, and
so as one would think should have gained him universal esteem, yet he
lay under a general odium, through the iniquity of the times. Blessed be
God, bad as things are with us, they are not so bad but that there are
those with whom virtue has its praise; yet let not those who behave most
prudently think it strange if they have not the respect and esteem they
deserve. Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.

II\. The answer which God gave to this complaint. Though there was in it
a mixture of passion and infirmity, yet God graciously took cognizance
of it, because it was for his sake that the prophet suffered reproach.
In this answer, 1. God assures him that he should weather the storm and
be made easy at last, [Jer 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#011).
Though his neighbours quarrelled with him for what he did in the
discharge of his office, yet God accepted him and promised to stand by
him. It is in the original expressed in the form of an oath: "If I take
not care of thee, let me never be counted faithful; verily it shall go
well with thy remnant, with the remainder of thy life" (for so the word
signifies); "the residue of thy days shall be more comfortable to thee
than those hitherto have been." Thy end shall be good; so the Chaldee
reads it. Note, It is a great and sufficient support to the people of
God that, how troublesome soever their way may be, it shall be well with
them in their latter end, [Psa 37:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#037).
They have still a remnant, a residue, something behind and left in
reserve, which will be sufficient to counterbalance all their
grievances, and the hope of it may serve to make them easy. It should
seem that Jeremiah, besides the vexation that his people gave him, was
uneasy at the apprehension he had of sharing largely in the public
judgments which he foresaw coming; and, though he mentioned not this,
God replied to his thought of it, as to Moses, [Exo
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#019). Jeremiah thought, "If my friends
are thus abusive to me, what will my enemies be?" And God had thought
fit to awaken in him an expectation of this kind, [Jer
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005). But here he quiets his mind with
this promise: "Verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the
time of evil, when all about thee shall be laid waste." Note, God has
all men's hearts in his hand, and can turn those to favour his servants
whom they were most afraid of. And the prophets of the Lord have often
met with fairer and better treatment among open enemies than among those
that call themselves his people. When we see trouble coming, and it
looks very threatening, let us not despair, but hope in God, because it
may prove better than we expect. This promise was accomplished when
Nebuchadnezzar, having taken the city, charged the captain of the guard
to be kind to Jeremiah, and let him have every thing he had a mind to,
[Jer 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#011), [Jer
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#012). The following words, Shall iron
break the northern iron, and the steel, or brass? ([Jer
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#012)), being compared with the
promise of God made to Jeremiah ([Jer
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018)), that he would make him an iron
pillar and brazen walls, seem intended for his comfort. They were
continually clashing with him, and were rough and hard as iron; but
Jeremiah, being armed with power and courage from on high, is as
northern iron, which is naturally stronger, and as steel, which is
hardened by art; and therefore they shall not prevail against him;
compare this with [Eze 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#006); [Eze
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#008), [Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009). He might the better bear their
quarrelling with him when he was sure of the victory. 2. God assures him
that his enemies and persecutors should be lost in the storm, should be
ruined at last, and that therein the word of God in his mouth should be
accomplished and he proved a true prophet, [Jer
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#013), [Jer
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#014). God here turns his speech from
the prophet to the people. To them also [Jer
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#012) may be applied: Shall iron break
the northern iron, and the steel? Shall their courage and strength, and
the most hardly and vigorous of their efforts, be able to contest either
with the counsel of God or with the army of the Chaldeans, which are as
inflexible, as invincible, as the northern iron and steel. Let them
therefore hear their doom: Thy substance and thy treasure will I give to
the spoil, and that without price; the spoilers shall have it gratis; it
shall be to them a cheap and easy prey. Observe, The prophet was poor;
he neither lent nor borrowed; he had nothing to lose, neither substance.
nor treasure, and therefore the enemy will treat him well, Cantabit
vacuus coram latrone viator - The traveller that has no property about
him will congratulate himself when accosted by a robber. But the people
that had great estates in money and land would be slain for what they
had, or the enemy, finding they had much, would use them hardly, to make
them confess more. And it is their own iniquity that herein corrects
them: It is for all thy sins, even in all thy borders. All parts of the
country, even those which lay most remote, had contributed to the
national guilt, and all shall now be brought to account. Let not one
tribe lay the blame upon another, but each take shame to itself: It is
for all thy sins in all thy borders. Thus shall they stay at home till
they see their estates ruined, and then they shall be carried into
captivity, to spend the sad remains of a miserable life in slavery: "I
will make thee to pass with thy enemies, who shall lead thee in triumph
into a land that thou knowest not, and therefore canst expect to find no
comfort in it." All this is the fruit of God's wrath: "It is a fire
kindled in my anger, which shall burn upon you, and, if not extinguished
in time, will burn eternally."

[Jeremiah 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 15:15</span></span>

Here, as before, we have,

I. The prophet's humble address to God, containing a representation both
of his integrity and of the hardships he underwent notwithstanding. It
is a matter of comfort to us that, whatever ails us, we have a God to go
to, before whom we may spread our case and to whose omniscience we may
appeal, as the prophet here, "O Lord! thou knowest; thou knowest my
sincerity, which men are resolved they will not acknowledge; thou
knowest my distress, which men disdain to take notice of." Observe here,

1\. What it is that the prophet prays for, [Jer
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015). (1.) That God would consider
his case and be mindful of him: "O Lord! remember me; think upon me for
good." (2.) That God would communicate strength and comfort to him:
"Visit me; not only remember me, but let me know that thou rememberest
me, that thou art nigh unto me." (3.) That he would appear for him
against those that did him wrong: Revenge me of my persecutors, or
rather, Vindicate me from my persecutors; give judgment against them,
and let that judgment be executed so far as is necessary for my
vindication and to compel them to acknowledge that they have done me
wrong. Further than this a good man will not desire that God should
avenge him. Let something be done to convince the world that (whatever
blasphemers say to the contrary) Jeremiah is a righteous man and the God
whom he serves is a righteous God. (4.) That he would yet spare him and
continue him in the land of the living: "Take me not away by a sudden
stroke, but in thy long-suffering lengthen out my days." The best men
will own themselves so obnoxious to God's wrath that they are indebted
to his patience for the continuance of their lives. Or, "While thou
exercisest long-suffering towards my persecutors, let not them prevail
to take me away." Though in a passion he complained of his birth ([Jer
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010)), yet he desires here that his
death might not be hastened; for life is sweet to nature, and the life
of a useful man is so to grace. I pray not that thou shouldst take them
out of the world.

2\. What it is that he pleads with God for mercy and relief against his
enemies, persecutors, and slanderers.

(1.) That God's honour was interested in this case: Know, and make it
known, that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke. Those that lay
themselves open to reproach by their own fault and folly have great
reason to bear it patiently, but no reason to expect that God should
appear for them. But if it is for doing well that we suffer ill, and for
righteousness' sake that we have all manner of evil said against us, we
may hope that God will vindicate our honour with his own. To the same
purport ([Jer 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#016)), I am called by
thy name, O Lord of hosts! It was for that reason that his enemies hated
him, and therefore for that reason he promised himself that God would
own him and stand by him.

(2.) That the word of God, which he was employed to preach to others, he
had experienced the power and pleasure of in his own soul, and therefore
had the graces of the Spirit to qualify him for the divine favour, as
well as his gifts. We find some rejected of God who yet could say, Lord,
we have prophesied in thy name. But Jeremiah could say more ([Jer
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#016)): "Thy words were found, found
by me" (he searched the scripture, diligently studied the law, and found
that in it which was reviving to him: if we seek we shall find), "found
for me" (the words which he was to deliver to others were laid ready to
his hand, were brought to him by inspiration), "and I did not only taste
them, but eat them, received them entirely, conversed with them
intimately; they were welcome to me, as food to one that is hungry; I
entertained them, digested them, turned them in succum et sanguinem -
into blood and spirits, and was myself delivered into the mould of those
truths which I was to deliver to others." The prophet was told to eat
the roll, [Eze 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#008); [Rev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#009). I did eat it - that is, as it
follows, it was to me the joy and rejoicing of my heart, nothing could
be more agreeable. Understand it, \[1.\] Of the message itself which he
was to deliver. Though he was to foretel the ruin of his country, which
was dear to him, and in the ruin of which he could not but have a deep
share, yet all natural affections were swallowed up in zeal for God's
glory, and even these messages of wrath, being divine messages, were a
satisfaction to him. He also rejoiced, at first, in hope that the people
would take warning and prevent the judgment. Or, \[2.\] Of the
commission he received to deliver this message. Though the work he was
called to was not attended with any secular advantages, but, on the
contrary, exposed him to contempt and persecution, yet, because it put
him in a way to serve God and do good, he took pleasure in it, was glad
to be so employed, and it was his meat and drink to do the will of him
that sent him, [Joh 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034). Or, \[3.\]
Of the promise God gave him that he would assist and own him in his work
([Jer 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#008)); he was satisfied in that,
and depended upon it, and therefore hoped it should not fail him.

(3.) That he had applied himself to the duty of his office with all
possible gravity, seriousness, and self-denial, though he had had of
late but little satisfaction in it, [Jer
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#017). \[1.\] It was his comfort that
he had given up himself wholly to the business of his office and had
done nothing either to divert himself from it or disfit himself for it.
He kept no unsuitable company, denied himself the use even of lawful
recreations, abstained from every thing that looked like levity, lest
thereby he should make himself mean and less regarded. He sat alone,
spent a great deal of time in his closet, because of the hand of the
Lord that was strong upon him to carry him on his work, [Eze
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#014). "For thou hast filled me with
indignation, with such messages of wrath against this people as have
made me always pensive." Note, It will be a comfort to God's ministers,
when men despise them, if they have the testimony of their consciences
for them that they have not by any vain foolish behaviour made
themselves despicable, that they have been dead not only to the wealth
of the world, as this prophet was ([Jer
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010)), but to the pleasures of it
too, as here. But, \[2.\] It is his complaint that he had had but little
pleasure in his work. It was at first the rejoicing of his heart, but of
late it had made him melancholy, so that he had no heart to sit in the
meeting of those that make merry. He cared not for company, for indeed
no company cared for him. He sat alone, fretting at the people's
obstinacy and the little success of his labours among them. This filled
him with a holy indignation. Note, It is the folly and infirmity of some
good people that they lose much of the pleasantness of their religion by
the fretfulness and uneasiness of their natural temper, which they
humour and indulge, instead of mortifying it.

(4.) He throws himself upon God's pity and promise in a very passionate
expostulation ([Jer 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#018)): "Why is my
pain perpetual, and nothing done to ease it? Why are the wounds which my
enemies are continually giving both to my peace and to my reputation
incurable, and nothing done to retrieve either my comfort or my credit?
I once little thought that I should be thus neglected; will the God that
has promised me his presence be to me as a liar, the God on whom I
depend to be me as waters that fail?" We are willing to make the best we
can of it, and to take it as an appeal, \[1.\] To the mercy of God: "I
know he will not let the pain of his servant be perpetual, but he will
ease it, will not let his wound be incurable, but he will heal it; and
therefore I will not despair." \[2.\] To his faithfulness: "Wilt thou be
to me as a liar? No; I know thou wilt not. God is not a man that he
should lie. The fountain of life will never be to his people as waters
that fail."

II\. God's gracious answer to this address, [Jer
15:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019). Though the prophet betrayed
much human frailty in his address, yet God vouchsafed to answer him with
good words and comfortable words; for he knows our frame. Observe,

1\. What God here requires of him as the condition of the further
favours he designed him. Jeremiah had done and suffered much for God,
yet God is no debtor to him, but he is still upon his good behaviour.
God will own him. But, (1.) He must recover his temper, and be
reconciled to his work, and friends with it again, and not quarrel with
it any more as he had done. He must return, must shake off these
distrustful discontented thoughts and passions, and not give way to
them, must regain the peaceable possession and enjoyment of himself, and
resolve to be easy. Note, When we have stepped aside into any
disagreeable frame or way our care must be to return and compose
ourselves into a right temper of mind again; and then we may expect God
will help us, if thus we endeavour to help ourselves. (2.) He must
resolve to be faithful in his work, for he could not expect the divine
protection any longer than he did approve himself so. Though there was
no cause at all to charge Jeremiah with unfaithfulness, and God knew his
heart to be sincere, yet God saw fit to give him this caution. Those
that do their duty must not take it ill to be told their duty. In two
things he must be faithful: - \[1.\] He must distinguish between some
and others of those he preached to: Thou must take forth the precious
from the vile. The righteous are the precious be they ever so mean and
poor; the wicked are the vile be they ever so rich and great. In our
congregations these are mixed, wheat and chaff in the same floor; we
cannot distinguish them by name, but we must by character, and must give
to each a portion, speaking comfort to precious saints and terror to
vile sinners, neither making the heart of the righteous sad nor
strengthening the hands of the wicked ([Eze
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#022)), but rightly dividing the word
of truth. Ministers must take those whom they see to be precious into
their bosoms, and not sit alone as Jeremiah did, but keep up
conversation with those they may do good to and get good by. \[2.\] He
must closely adhere to his instructions, and not in the least vary from
them: Let them return to thee, but return not thou to them, that is, he
must do the utmost he can, in his preaching, to bring people up to the
mind of God; he must tell them they must, at their peril, comply with
that. Those that had flown off from him, that did not like the terms
upon which God's favour was offered to them, "Let them return to thee,
and, upon second thoughts, come up to the terms and strike the bargain;
but do not thou return to them, do not compliment them, nor comply with
them, nor think to make the matter easier to them than the word of God
has made it." Men's hearts and lives must come up to God's law and
comply with that, for God's law will never come down to them nor comply
with them.

2\. What God here promises to him upon the performance of these
conditions. If he approve himself well, (1.) God will tranquilize his
mind and pacify the present tumult of his spirits: If thou return, I
will bring thee again, will restore thy soul, as [Psa
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#003). The best and strongest saints,
if at any time they have gone aside out of the right way, and are
determined to return, need the grace of God to bring them again. (2.)
God will employ him in his service as a prophet, whose work, even in
those bad times, had comfort and honour enough in it to be its own
wages: "Thou shalt stand before me, to receive instructions from me, as
a servant from his master; and thou shalt be as my mouth to deliver my
messages to the people, as an ambassador is the mouth of the prince that
sends him." Note, Faithful ministers are God's mouth to us; they are so
to look upon themselves, and to speak God's mind and as becomes the
oracles of God; and we are so to look upon them, and to hear God
speaking to us by them. Observe, If thou keep close to thy instructions,
thou shalt be as my mouth, not otherwise; so far, and no further, God
will stand by ministers, as they go by the written word. "Thou shalt be
as my mouth, that is, what thou sayest shall be made good, as if I
myself had said it." See [Isa 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026);
[Sa1 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019). (3.) He shall have strength
and courage to face the many difficulties he meets with in his work, and
his spirit shall not fail again as now it does ([Jer
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#020)): "I will make thee unto this
people as a fenced brazen wall, which the storm batters and beats
violently upon, but cannot shake. Return not thou to them by any sinful
compliances, and then trust thy God to arm thee by his grace with holy
resolutions. Be not cowardly, and God will make thee daring." He had
complained that he was made a man of strife. "Expect to be so (says
God); they will fight against thee, they will still continue their
opposition, but they shall not prevail against thee to drive thee off
from thy work nor to cut thee off from the land of the living." (4.) He
shall have God for his protector and mighty deliverer: I am with thee to
save thee. Those that have God with them have a Saviour with them who
has wisdom and strength enough to deal with the most formidable enemy;
and those that are with God, and faithful to him, he will deliver ([Jer
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#021)) either from trouble or through
it. They may perhaps fall into the hand of the wicked, and they may
appear terrible to them, but God will rescue them out of their hands.
They shall not be able to kill them till they have finished their
testimony; they shall not prevent their happiness. God will so deliver
them as to preserve them to his heavenly kingdom ([Ti2
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018)), and that is deliverance enough.
There are many tings that appear very frightful that yet do not prove at
all hurtful to a good man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 16](jer016)

</div>
