<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer002)  [Next](jer004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 3:0</span></span>

The foregoing chapter was wholly taken up with reproofs and threatenings
against the people of God, for their apostasies from him; but in this
chapter gracious invitations and encouragements are given them to return
and repent, notwithstanding the multitude and greatness of their
provocations, which are here specified, to magnify the mercy of God, and
to show that as sin abounded grace did much more abound. Here, I. It is
further shown how bad they had been and how well they deserved to be
quite abandoned, and yet how ready God was to receive them into his
favour upon their repentance ([Jer
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)) II. The impenitence of Judah,
and their persisting in sin, are aggravated from the judgments of God
upon Israel, which they should have taken warning by ([Jer
3:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006)). III. Great encouragements are
given to these backsliders to return and repent, and promises made of
great mercy which God had in store for them, and which he would prepare
them for by bringing them home to himself ([Jer
3:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)). IV. The charge renewed
against them for their apostasy from God, and the invitation repeated to
return and repent, to which are here added the words that are put in
their mouth, which they should make use of in their return to God ([Jer
3:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#020)).

[Jeremiah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 3:1</span></span>

These verses some make to belong to the sermon in the foregoing chapter,
and they open a door of hope to those who receive the conviction of the
reproofs we had there; God wounds that he may heal. Now observe here,

I. How basely this people had forsaken God and gone a whoring from him.
The charge runs very high here. 1. They had multiplied their idols and
their idolatries. To have admitted one strange God among them would have
been bad enough, but they were insatiable in their lustings after false
worships: Thou hast played the harlot with many lovers, [Jer
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001). She had become a common
prostitute to idols; not a foolish deity was set up in all the
neighbourhood but the Jews would have it quickly. Where was a high place
in the country but they had had an idol in it? [Jer
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002). Note, In repentance it is good to
make sorrowful reflections upon the particular acts of sin we have been
guilty of, and the several places and companies where it has been
committed, that we may give glory to God and take shame to ourselves by
a particular confession of it. 2. They had sought opportunity for their
idolatries, and had sent about to enquire for new gods: In the high -
ways hast thou sat for them, as Tamar when she put on the disguise of a
harlot ([Gen 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#014)), and as the
foolish woman, that sits to call passengers, who go right on their way,
[Pro 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#014), [Pro
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#015). As the Arabian in the wilderness
- the Arabian huckster (so some), that courts customers, or waits for
the merchants to get a good bargain and forestal the market - or the
Arabian thief (so others), that watches for his prey; so had they waited
either to court new gods to come among them (the newer the better, and
the more fond they were of them) or to court others to join with them in
their idolatries. They were not only sinners, but Satans, not only
traitors themselves, but tempters to others. 3. They had grown very
impudent in sin. They not only polluted themselves, but their land, with
their whoredoms and with their wickedness ([Jer
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002)); for it was universal and
unpunished, and so became a national sin. And yet ([Jer
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)), "Thou hadst a whore's forehead,
a brazen face of thy own. Thou refusedst to be ashamed; thou didst
enough to shame thee for ever, and yet wouldst not take shame to
thyself." Blushing is the colour of virtue, or at least a relic of it;
but those that are past shame (we say) are past hope. Those that have an
adulterer's heart, if they indulge that, will come at length to have a
whore's forehead, void of all shame and modesty. 4. They abounded in all
manner of sin. They polluted the land not only with their whoredoms
(that is, their idolatries), but with their wickedness, or malice ([Jer
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002)), sins against the second table:
for how can we think that those will be true to their neighbour that are
false to their God? "Nay ([Jer 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#005)),
thou hast spoken and done evil things as thou couldst, and wouldst have
spoken and done worse if thou hadst known how; thy will was to do it,
but thou lackedst opportunity." Note, Those are wicked indeed that sin
to the utmost of their power, that never refuse to comply with a
temptation because they should not, but because they cannot.

II\. How gently God had corrected them for their sins. Instead of
raining fire and brimstone upon them, because, like Sodom, they had
avowed their sin and had gone after strange gods as Sodom after strange
flesh, he only withheld the showers from them, and that only one part of
the year: There has been no latter rain, which might serve as an
intimation to them of their continual dependence upon God; when they had
the former rain, that was no security to them for the latter, but they
must still look up to God. But it had not this effect.

III\. How justly God might have abandoned them utterly, and refused ever
to receive them again, though they should return; this would have been
but according to the known rule of divorces, [Jer
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001). They say (it is an adjudged case,
nay, it is a case in which the law is very express, and it is what every
body knows and speaks of, [Deu 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#004)),
that if a woman be once put away for whoredom, and be joined to another
man, her first husband shall never, upon any pretence whatsoever, take
her again to be his wife; such playing fast and loose with the
marriage-bond would be a horrid profanation of that ordinance and would
greatly pollute that land. Observe, What the law says in this case -
They say, that is, every one will say, and subscribe to the equity of
the law in it; for every man finds something in himself that forbids him
to entertain one that is another man's. And in like manner they had
reason to expect that God would refuse ever to take them to be his
people again, who had not only been joined to one strange god, but had
played the harlot with many lovers. If we had to do with a man like
ourselves, after such provocations as we have been guilty of, he would
be implacable, and we might have despaired of his being reconciled to
us.

IV\. How graciously he not only invites them, but directs them, to
return to him.

1\. He encourages them to hope that they shall find favour with him,
upon their repentance: "Thou thou hast been bad, yet return again to
me," [Jer 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001). This implies a promise
that he will receive them: "Return, and thou shalt be welcome." God has
not tied himself by the laws which he made for us, nor has he the
peevish resentment that men have; he will be more kind to Israel, for
the sake of his covenant with them, than ever any injured husband was to
an adulterous wife; for in receiving penitents, as much as in any thing,
he is God and not man.

2\. He therefore kindly expects that they will repent and return to him,
and he directs them what to say to him ([Jer
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#004)): "Wilt thou not from this time
cry unto me? Wilt not thou, who hast been in such relation to me, and on
whom I have laid such obligations, wilt not thou cry to me? Though thou
hast gone a whoring from me, yet, when thou findest the folly of it,
surely thou wilt think of returning to me, now at least, now at last, in
this thy day. Wilt thou not at this time, nay, wilt thou not from this
time and forward, cry unto me? Whatever thou hast said or done hitherto,
wilt thou not from this time apply to me? From this time of conviction
and correction, now that thou hast been made to see thy sins ([Jer
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002)) and to smart for them ([Jer
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)), wilt thou not now forsake them
and return to me, saying, I will go and return to my first husband, for
then it was better with me than now?" [Hos
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#007). Or "from this time that thou hast
had so kind an invitation to return, and assurance that thou shalt be
well received: will not this grace of God overcome thee? Now that pardon
is proclaimed wilt thou not come in and take the benefit of it? Surely
thou wilt."

(1.) He expects that they will claim relation to God, as theirs: Wilt
thou not cry unto me, My Father, thou art the guide of my youth? \[1.\]
They will surely come towards him as a father, to beg his pardon for
their undutiful behaviour to him (Father, I have sinned) and will hope
to find in him the tender compassions of a father towards a returning
prodigal. They will come to him as a father, to whom they will make
their complaints, and in whom they will put their confidence for relief
and succour. They will now own him as their father, and themselves
fatherless without him; and therefore, hoping to find mercy with him (as
those penitents, [Hos 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003)), \[2.\]
They will come to him as the guide of their youth, that is, as their
husband, for so that relation is described, [Mal
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014). "Though thou hast gone after
many lovers, surely thou wilt at length remember the love of thy
espousals, and return to the husband of thy youth." Or it may be taken
more generally: "As my Father, thou art the guide of my youth." Youth
needs a guide. In our return to God we must thankfully remember that he
was the guide of our youth in the way of comfort; and we must faithfully
covenant that he shall be our guide henceforward in the way of duty, and
that we will follow his guidance, and give up ourselves entirely to it,
that in all doubtful cases we will be determined by our religion.

(2.) He expects that they will appeal to the mercy of God and crave the
benefit of that mercy ([Jer 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#005)), that
they will reason thus with themselves for their encouragement to return
to him: "Will he reserve his anger for ever? Surely he will not, for he
has proclaimed his name gracious and merciful." Repenting sinners may
encourage themselves with this, that, though God chide, he will not
always chide, though he be angry, he will not keep his anger to the end,
but, though he cause grief, he will have compassion, and may thus plead
for reconciliation. Some understand this as describing their hypocrisy,
and the impudence of it: "Though thou hast a whore's forehead ([Jer
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)) and art still doing evil as thou
canst ([Jer 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#005)), yet art thou not
ever and anon crying to me, My Father?" Even when they were most
addicted to idols they pretended a regard to God and his service and
kept up the forms of godliness and devotion. It is a shameful thing for
men thus to call God father, and yet to do the works of the devil (as
the Jews, [Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)), to call him the
guide of their youth, and yet give up themselves to walk after the
flesh, and to flatter themselves with the expectation that his anger
shall have an end, while they are continually treasuring up to
themselves wrath against the day of wrath.

[Jeremiah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 3:6</span></span>

The date of this sermon must be observed, in order to the right
understanding of it; it was in the days of Josiah, who set on foot a
blessed work of reformation, in which he was hearty, but the people were
not sincere in their compliance with it; to reprove them for that, and
warn them of the consequences of their hypocrisy, is the scope of that
which God here said to the prophet, and which he delivered to them. The
case of the two kingdoms of Israel and Judah is here compared, the ten
tribes that revolted from the throne of David and the temple of
Jerusalem and the two tribes that adhered to both. The distinct history
of those two kingdoms we have in the two books of the Kings, and here we
have an abstract of both, as far as relates to this matter.

I. Here is a short account of Israel, the ten tribes. Perhaps the
prophet had been just reading the history of that kingdom when God came
to him, and said, Hast thou seen what backsliding Israel has done? [Jer
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006). For he could not see it otherwise
than in history, they having been carried into captivity long before he
was born. But what we read in the histories of scripture should instruct
us and affect us, as if we ourselves had been eye-witnesses of it. She
is called backsliding Israel because that kingdom was first founded in
an apostasy from the divine institutions, both in church and state. Now
he had seen concerning them, 1. That they were wretchedly addicted to
idolatry. They had played the harlot upon every high mountain and under
every green tree ([Jer 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006)), that is,
they had worshipped other gods in their high places and groves; and no
marvel, when from the first they had worshipped God by the images of the
golden calves at Dan and Bethel. The way of idolatry is down-hill: those
that are in love with images, and will have them, soon become in love
with other gods, and will have them too; for how should those stick at
the breach of the first commandment who make no conscience of the
second? 2. That God by his prophets had invited and encouraged them to
repent and reform ([Jer 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#007)): "After
she had done all these things, for which she might justly have been
abandoned, yet I said unto her, Turn thou unto me and I will receive
thee." Though they had forsaken both the house of David and the house of
Aaron, who both had their authority jure divino - from God, without
dispute, yet God sent his prophets among them, to call them to return to
him, to the worship of him only, not insisting so much as one would have
expected upon their return to the house of David, but pressing their
return to the house of Aaron. We read not that Elijah, that great
reformer, ever mentioned their return to the house of David, while he
was anxious for their return to the faithful service of the true God
according as they had it among them. It is serious piety that God stands
upon more than even his own rituals. 3. That, notwithstanding this, they
had persisted in their idolatries: But she returned not, and God saw it;
he took notice of it, and was much displeased with it, [Jer
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#007), [Jer
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008). Note, God keeps account, whether
we do or no, how often he has called to us to turn to him and we have
refused. 4. That he had therefore cast them off, and given them up into
the hands of their enemies ([Jer 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008)):
When I saw (so it may be read) that for all the actions wherein she had
committed adultery I must dismiss her, I gave her a bill of divorce. God
divorced them when he threw them out of his protection and left them an
easy prey to any that would lay hands on them, when he scattered all
their synagogues and the schools of the prophets and excluded them from
laying any further claim to the covenant made with their fathers. Note,
Those will justly be divorced from God that join themselves to such as
are rivals with him. For proof of this go and see what God did to
Israel.

II\. Let us now see what was the case of Judah, the kingdom of the two
tribes. She is called treacherous sister Judah, a sister because
descended from the same common stock, Abraham and Jacob; but, as Israel
had the character of a backslider, So Judah is called treacherous,
because, though she professed to keep close to God when Israel had
backslidden (she adhered to the kings and priests that were of God's own
appointing, and did not withdraw from her allegiance, so that it was
expected she should deal faithfully), yet she proved treacherous, and
false, and unfaithful to her professions and promises. Note, The
treachery of those who pretend to cleave to God will be reckoned for, as
well as the apostasy of those who openly revolt from him. Judah saw what
Israel did, and what came of it, and should have taken warning. Israel's
captivity was intended for Judah's admonition; but it had not the
designed effect. Judah feared not, but thought herself safe because she
had Levites to be her priests and sons of David to be her kings. Note,
It is an evidence of great stupidity and security when we are not
awakened to a holy fear by the judgments of God upon others. It is here
charged on Judah, 1. That when they had a wicked king that debauched
them they heartily concurred with him in his debaucheries. Judah was
forward enough to play the harlot, to worship any idol that was
introduced among them and to join in any idolatrous usage; so that
through the lightness (or, as some read it, the vileness and baseness)
of her whoredom, or (as the margin reads it) by the fame and report of
her whoredom, her notorious whoredom, for which she had become infamous,
she defiled the land, and made it an abomination to God; for she
committed adultery with stones and stocks, with the basest idols, those
made of wood and stone. In the reigns of Manasseh and Amon, when they
were disposed to idolatry, the people were so too, and all the country
was corrupted with it, and none feared the ruin which Israel by this
means had brought upon themselves. 2. That when they had a good king,
that reformed them, they did not heartily concur with him in the
reformation. This was the present case. God tried whether they would be
good in a good reign, but the evil disposition was still the same: They
returned not to me with their whole heart, but feignedly, [Jer
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#010). Josiah went further in
destroying idolatry than the best of his predecessors had done, and for
his own part he turned to the Lord with all his heart and with all his
soul; so it is said of him, [Kg2
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#025). The people were forced to an
external compliance with him, and joined with him in keeping a very
solemn passover and in renewing their covenants with God ([Ch2
34:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#032), [Ch2
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#017)); but they were not sincere in
it, nor were their hearts right with God. For this reason God at that
very time said, I will remove Judah out of my sight, as I removed Israel
([Kg2 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#027)), because Judah was not
removed from their sin by the sight of Israel's removal from their land.
Hypocritical and ineffectual reformations bode ill to a people. We
deceive ourselves if we think to deceive God by a feigned return to him.
I know no religion without sincerity.

III\. The case of these sister kingdoms is compared, and judgment given
upon the comparison, that of the two Judah was the worse ([Jer
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#011)): Israel has justified herself
more than Judah, that is, she is not so bad as Judah is. This
comparative justification will stand Israel in little stead; what will
it avail us to say, We are not so bad as others, when yet we are not
really good ourselves? But it will serve as an aggravation of the sin of
Judah, which was in two respects worse than that of Israel: - 1. More
was expected from Judah than from Israel; so that Judah dealt
treacherously, they vilified a more sacred profession, and falsified a
more solemn promise, than Israel did. 2. Judah might have taken warning
by the ruin of Israel for their idolatry, and would not. God's judgments
upon others, if they be not means of our reformation, will help to
aggravate our destruction. The prophet Ezekiel ([Eze
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#011)) makes the same comparison
between Jerusalem and Samaria that this prophet here makes between Judah
and Israel, nay, and ([Eze 16:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048))
between Jerusalem and Sodom, and Jerusalem is made the worst of the
three.

[Jeremiah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 3:12</span></span>

Here is a great deal of gospel in these verses, both that which was
always gospel, God's readiness to pardon sin and to receive and
entertain returning repenting sinners, and those blessings which were in
a special manner reserved for gospel times, the forming and founding of
the gospel church by bringing into it the children of God that were
scattered abroad, the superseding of the ceremonial law, and the uniting
of Jews and Gentiles, typified by the uniting of Israel and Judah in
their return out of captivity. The prophet is directed to proclaim these
words towards the north, for they are a call to backsliding Israel, the
ten tribes that were carried captive into Assyria, which lay north from
Jerusalem. That way he must look, to show that God had not forgotten
them, though their brethren had, and to upbraid the men of Judah with
their obstinacy in refusing to answer the calls given them. One might as
well call to those who lay many hundred miles off in the land of the
north; they would as soon hear as these unbelieving and disobedient
people; backsliding Israel will sooner accept of mercy, and have the
benefit of it, than treacherous Judah. And perhaps the proclaiming of
these words towards the north looks as far forward as the preaching of
repentance and remission of sins unto all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem, [Luk 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047). A call to
Israel in the land of the north is a call to others in that land, even
as many as belong to the election of grace. When it was suspected that
Christ would go to the dispersed Jews among the Gentiles, it was
concluded that he would teach the Gentiles, [Joh
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035). So here.

I. Here is an invitation given to backsliding Israel, and in them to the
backsliding Gentiles, to return unto God, the God from whom they had
revolted ([Jer 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)): Return, thou
backsliding Israel. And again ([Jer
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014)): "Turn, O backsliding children!
repent of your backslidings, return to your allegiance, come back to
that good way which you have missed and out of which you have turned
aside." Pursuant to this invitation, 1. They are encouraged to return.
"Repent, and be converted, and your sins shall be blotted out, [Act
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019). You have incurred God's
displeasure, but return to me, and I will not cause my anger to fall
upon you." God's anger is ready to fall upon sinners, as a lion falls on
his prey, and there is none to deliver, as a mountain of lead falling on
them, to sink them past recovery into the lowest hell. But if they
repent it shall be turned away, [Isa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001). I will not keep my anger for
ever, but will be reconciled, for I am merciful. We that are sinful were
for ever undone if God were not merciful; but the goodness of his nature
encourages us to hope that, if we by repentance undo what we have done
against him, he will by a pardon unsay what he has said against us. 2.
They are directed how to return ([Jer
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#013)): "Only acknowledge thy iniquity,
own thyself in a fault and thereby take shame to thyself and give glory
to God." I will not keep my anger for ever (that is a previous promise);
you shall be delivered form that anger of God which is everlasting, from
the wrath to come; but upon what terms? Very easy and reasonable ones.
Only acknowledge thy sins. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive them. This will aggravate the condemnation of sinners,
that the terms of pardon and peace were brought so low, and yet they
would not come up to them. If the prophet had told thee to do some great
thing wouldst thou not have done it? How much more when he says, Only
acknowledge thy iniquity? [Kg2 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#013).
In confessing sin, (1.) We must own the corruption of our nature:
Acknowledge thy iniquity, the perverseness and irregularity of thy
nature. (2.) We must own our actual sins: "That thou hast transgressed
against the Lord thy God, hast affronted him and offended him." (3.) We
must own the multitude of our transgressions: "That thou hast scattered
thy ways to the strangers, run hither and thither in pursuit of thy
idols, under every green tree. Wherever thou hast rambled thou hast left
behind thee the marks of thy folly." (4.) We must aggravate our sin from
the disobedience that there is in it to the divine law. The sinfulness
of sin is the worst thing in it: "You have not obeyed my voice;
acknowledge that, and let that humble you more than any thing else."

II\. Here are precious promises made to these backsliding children, if
they do return, which were in part fulfilled in the return of the Jews
out of their captivity, many that belonged to the ten tribes having
perhaps joined themselves to those of the two tribes, in the prospect of
their deliverance, and returning with them; but the prophecy is to have
its full accomplishment in the gospel church, and the gathering together
of the children of God that were scattered abroad to that: "Return, for,
though you are backsliders, yet you are children; nay, though a
treacherous wife, yet a wife, for I am married to you ([Jer
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014)) and will not disown the
relation." Thus God remembers his covenant with their fathers, that
marriage covenant, and in consideration of that he remembers their land,
[Lev 26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042).

1\. He promises to gather them together from all places whither they are
dispersed and scattered abroad, [Joh
11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052), I will take you, one of a city,
and two of a family, or clan; and I will bring you to Zion, [Jer
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014). All those that by repentance
return to their duty shall return to their former comfort. Observe, (1.)
God will graciously receive those that return to him, nay, it is he that
by his distinguishing grace takes them out from among the rest that
persist in their backslidings; if he had left them, they would have been
undone. (2.) Of the many that have backslidden from God there are but
few, very few in comparison, that return to him, like the gleanings of
the vintage - one of a city and two of a country; Christ's flock is a
little flock, and few there are that find the strait gate. (3.) Of those
few, though dispersed, yet not one shall be lost. Though there be but
one in a city, God will find out that one; he shall not be overlooked in
a crowd, but shall be brought safely to Zion, safely to heaven. The
scattered Jews shall be brought to Jerusalem, and those of the ten
tribes shall be as welcome there as those of the two. God's chosen,
scattered all the world over, shall be brought to the gospel church,
that Mount Zion, the heavenly Jerusalem, that holy hill on which Christ
reigns.

2\. He promises to set those over them that shall be every way blessings
to them ([Jer 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015)): I will give you
pastors after my heart, alluding to the character given of David when
God pitched upon him to be king. [Sa1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014), The Lord hath sought him a man
after his own heart. Observe, (1.) When a church is gathered it must be
governed. "I will bring them to Zion, not to live as they list, but to
be under discipline, not as wild beasts, that range at pleasure, but as
sheep that are under the direction of a shepherd." I will give them
pastors, that is, both magistrates and ministers; both are God's
ordinance for the support of his kingdom. (2.) It is well with a people
when their pastors are after God's own heart, such as they should be,
such as we would have them be, who shall make his will their rule in all
their administrations, and such as endeavour in some measure to conform
to his example, who rule for him, and, as they are capable, rule like
him. (3.) Those are pastors after God's own heart who make it their
business to feed the flock, not to feed themselves and fleece the
flocks, but to do all they can for the good of those that are under
their charge, who feed them with wisdom and understanding (that is,
wisely and understandingly), as David fed them, in the integrity of his
heart and by the skilfulness of his hand, [Psa
78:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#072). Those who are not only pastors,
but teachers, must feed them with the word of God, which is wisdom and
understanding, which is able to make us wise to salvation.

3\. He promises that there shall be no more occasion for the ark of the
covenant, which had been so much the glory of the tabernacle first and
afterwards of the temple, and was the token of God's presence with them;
that shall be set aside, and there shall be no more enquiry after, nor
enquiring of, it ([Jer 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#016)): When you
shall be multiplied and increased in the land, when the kingdom of the
Messiah shall be set up, which by the accession of the Gentiles will
bring in to the church a vast increase (and the days of the Messiah the
Jewish masters themselves acknowledge to be here intended), then they
shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the Lord, they shall have
it no more among them to value, or value themselves upon, because they
shall have a pure spiritual way of worship set up, in which there shall
be no occasion for any of those external ordinances; with the ark of the
covenant the whole ceremonial law shall be set aside, and all the
institutions of it, for Christ, the truth of all those types, exhibited
to us in the word and sacraments of the New Testament, will be to us
instead of all. It is very likely (whatever the Jews suggest to the
contrary) that the ark of the covenant was in the second temple, being
restored by Cyrus with the other vessels of the house of the Lord, [Ezr
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007). But in the gospel temple Christ
is the ark; he is the propitiatory, or mercy-seat; and it is the
spiritual presence of God in his ordinances that we are now to expect.
Many expressions are here used concerning the setting aside of the ark,
that it shall not come to mind, that they shall not remember it, that
they shall not visit it, that none of these things shall be any more
done; for the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in
truth, [Joh 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024). But this variety of
expressions is used to show that the ceremonies of the law of Moses
should be totally and finally abolished, never to be used any more, but
that it would be with difficulty that those who had been so long wedded
to them should be weaned from them; and that they would not quite let
them go till their holy city and holy house should both be levelled with
the ground.

4\. He promises that the gospel church, here called Jerusalem, shall
become eminent and conspicuous, [Jer
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#017). Two things shall make it famous:
- (1.) God's special residence and dominion in it. It shall be called,
The throne of the Lord - the throne of his glory, for that shines forth
in the church - the throne of his government, for that also is erected
there; there he rules his willing people by his word and Spirit, and
brings every thought into obedience to himself. As the gospel got ground
this throne of the Lord was set up even where Satan's seat had been. It
is especially the throne of his grace; for those that by faith come to
this Jerusalem come to God the judge of all, and to Jesus the mediator
of the new covenant, [Heb 12:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022).
(2.) The accession of the Gentiles to it. All the nations shall be
discipled, and so gathered to the church, and shall become subjects to
that throne of the Lord which is there set up, and devoted to the honour
of that name of the Lord which is there both manifested and called upon.

5\. He promises that there shall be a wonderful reformation wrought in
those that are gathered to the church: They shall not walk any more
after the imagination of their evil hearts. They shall not live as they
list, but live by rules, not do according to their own corrupt
appetites, but according to the will of God. See what leads in sin - the
imagination of our own evil hearts; and what sin is - it is walking
after that imagination, being governed by fancy and humour; and what
converting grace does - it takes us off from walking after our own
inventions and brings us to be governed by religion and right reason.

6\. That Judah and Israel shall be happily united in one body, [Jer
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018). They were so in their return out
of captivity and their settlement again in Canaan: The house of Judah
shall walk with the house of Israel, as being perfectly agreed, and
become one stick in the hand of the Lord, as Ezekiel also foretold, [Eze
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#016), [Eze
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#017). Both Assyria and Chaldea fell
into the hands of Cyrus, and his proclamation extended to all the Jews
in all his dominions. And therefore we have reason to think that many of
the house of Israel came with those of Judah out of the land of the
north; though at first there returned but 42,000 (whom we have an
account of, Ezra 2) yet Josephus says (Antiq. 11.68) that some few years
after, under Darius, Zerubbabel went and fetched up above 4,000,000 of
souls, to the land that was given for an inheritance to their fathers.
And we never read of such animosities and enmities between Israel and
Judah as had been formerly. This happy coalescence between Israel and
Judah in Canaan was a type of the uniting of Jews and Gentiles in the
gospel church, when, all enmities being slain, they should become one
sheepfold under one shepherd.

III\. Here is some difficulty started, that lies in the way of all this
mercy; but an expedient is found to get over it.

1\. God asks, How shall I do this for thee? Not as if God showed favour
with reluctancy, as he punishes with a How shall I give thee up? [Hos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008), [Hos
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009). No, though he is slow to anger,
he is swift to show mercy. But it intimates that we are utterly unworthy
of his favours, that we have no reason to expect them, that there is
nothing in us to deserve them, that we can lay no claim to them, and
that he contrives how to do it in such a way as may save the honour of
his justice and holiness in the government of the world. Means must be
devised that his banished be not for ever expelled from him, [Sa2
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014). How shall I do it? (1.) Even
backsliders, if they return and repent, shall be put among the children;
and who could ever have expected that? Behold what manner of love is
this! [Jo1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001). How should we who are
so mean and weak, so worthless and unworthy, and so provoking, ever be
put among the children. (2.) To those whom God puts among the children
he will give the pleasant land, the land of Canaan, that glory of all
lands, that goodly heritage of the hosts of nations, which nations and
their hosts wish for and prefer to their own country, or which the hosts
of the nations have now got possession of. It was a type of heaven,
where there are pleasures for evermore. Now who could expect a place in
that pleasant land that has so often despised it ([Psa
106:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#024)) and is so unworthy of it and
unfit for it? Is this the manner of men?

2\. He does himself return answer to this question: But I said, Thou
shalt call me, My Father. God does himself answer all the objections
that are taken from our unworthiness, or they would never be got over.
(1.) That he may put returning penitents among the children, he will
give them the Spirit of adoption, teaching them to cry, Abba, Father,
[Gal 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006). "Thou shalt call me, My
Father; thou shalt return to me, and resign thyself to me as a father,
and that shall recommend thee to my favour," (2.) That he may give them
the pleasant land, he will put his fear in their hearts, that they may
never turn from him, but may persevere to the end.

[Jeremiah 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 3:20</span></span>

Here is, I. The charge God exhibits against Israel for their treacherous
departures from him, [Jer 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#020). As an
adulterous wife elopes from her husband, so have they gone a whoring
from God. They were joined to God by a marriage-covenant, but they broke
that covenant, they dealt treacherously with God, who had always dealt
kindly and faithfully with them. Treacherous dealing with men like
ourselves is bad enough, but to deal treacherously with God is to deal
treasonably.

II\. Their conviction and confession of the truth of this charge, [Jer
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#021). When God reproved them for their
apostasy, there were some among them, even such as God would take and
bring to Zion, whose voice was heard upon the high places weeping and
praying, humbling themselves before the God of their fathers, lamenting
their calamities, and their sins, the procuring cause of them; for this
is that which they lament, for this they bemoan themselves, that they
have perverted their way and forgotten the Lord their God. Note, 1. Sin
is the perverting of our way, it is turning aside to crooked ways and
perverting that which is right. 2. Forgetting the Lord our God is at the
bottom of all sin. If men would remember God, his eye upon them and
their obligation to him, they would not transgress as they do. 3. By sin
we embarrass ourselves, and bring ourselves into trouble, for that also
is the perverting of our way, [Lam
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#009). 4. Prayers and tears well become
those whose consciences tell them that they have perverted their way and
forgotten their God. When the foolishness of man perverts his way his
heart is apt to fret against the Lord ([Pro
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#003)), whereas it should be melted and
poured out before him.

III\. The invitation God gives them to return to him ([Jer
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022)): Return, you backsliding
children. He calls them children in tenderness and compassion to them,
foolish and froward as children, yet his sons, whom though he corrects
he will not disinherit; for, though they are refractory children (so
some render it), yet they are children. God bears with such children,
and so much parents. When they are convinced of sin ([Jer
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#021)), and humbled for that, then they
are prepared and then they are invited to return, as Christ invites
those to him that are weary and heavy-laden. The promise to those that
return is, "I will heal your backslidings; I will comfort you under the
grief you are in for your backslidings, deliver you out of the troubles
you have brought yourselves into by your backslidings, and cure you of
your refractoriness and tendency to backslide." God will heal our
backslidings by his pardoning mercy, his quieting peace, and his
renewing grace.

IV\. The ready consent they give to this invitation, and their cheerful
compliance with it: Behold, we come unto thee. This is an echo to God's
call; as a voice returned from broken walls, so this from broken hearts.
God says, Return; they answer, Behold, we come. It is an immediate
speedy answer, without delay, not, "We will come hereafter," but, "We do
come now; we need not take time to consider of it;" not, "We come
towards thee," but, "We come to thee, we will make a thorough turn of
it." Observe how unanimous they are: We come, one and all. 1. They come
devoting themselves to God as theirs: "Thou art the Lord our God; we
take thee to be ours, we give up ourselves to thee to be thine; whither
shall we go but to thee? It is our sin and folly that we have gone from
thee." It is very comfortable, in our returns to God after our
backslidings, to look up to him as ours in covenant. 2. They come
disclaiming all expectations of relief and succour but from God only:
"In vain is salvation hoped for from the hills and from the multitude of
the mountains; we now see our folly in relying upon
creature-confidences, and will never so deceive ourselves any more."
They worshipped their idols upon hills and mountains ([Jer
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006)), and they had a multitude of
idols upon their mountains, which they had sought unto and put a
confidence in; but now they will have no more to do with them. In vain
do we look for any thing that is good from them, while from God we may
look for every thing that is good, even salvation itself. Therefore, 3.
They come depending upon God only as their God: In the Lord our God is
the salvation of Israel. He is the Lord, and he only can save; he can
save when all other succours and saviours fail; and he is our God, and
will in his own way and time work salvation for us. It is very
applicable to the great salvation from sin, which Jesus Christ wrought
out for us; that is the salvation of the Lord, his great salvation. 4.
They come justifying God in their troubles and judging themselves for
their sins, [Jer 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#024), [Jer
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#025). (1.) They impute all the
calamities they had been under to their idols, which had not only done
them no good, but had done them abundance of mischief, all the mischief
that had been done them: Shame (the idol, that shameful thing) has
devoured the labour of our fathers. Note, \[1.\] True penitents have
learned to call sin shame; even the beloved sin which has been as an
idol to them, which they have been most pleased with and proud of, even
that they shall call a scandalous thing, shall put contempt upon it and
be ashamed of it. \[2.\] True penitents have learned to call sin death
and ruin, and to charge upon it all the mischiefs they suffer: "It has
devoured all those good things which our fathers laboured for and left
to us; we have found from our youth that our idolatry has been the
destruction of our prosperity." Children often throw away upon their
lusts that which their fathers took a great deal of pains for; and it is
well if at length they are brought (as these here) to see the folly of
it, and to call those vices their shame which have wasted their estates
and devoured the labour of their fathers. Of the labour of their
fathers, which their idols had devoured, they mention particularly their
flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters. First, their
idolatries had provoked God to bring these desolating judgments upon
them, which had ruined their country and families, and made their
estates a prey and their children captives to the conquering enemy. They
had procured these things to themselves. Or, rather, Secondly, These had
been sacrificed to their idols, had been separated unto that shame ([Hos
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010)), and they had devoured them
without mercy; they did eat the fat of their sacrifices ([Deu
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038)), even their human sacrifices.
(2.) They take to themselves the shame of their sin and folly ([Jer
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#025)): "We lie down in our shame,
being unable to bear up under it; our confusion covers us, that is, both
our penal and our penitential shame. Sin has laid us under such rebukes
of God's providence, and such reproaches of our own consciences, as
surround us and fill us with shame. For we have sinned, and shame came
in with sin and still attends upon it. We are sinners by descent; guilt
and corruption are entailed upon us: We and our fathers have sinned. We
were sinners betimes; we began early in a course of sin: We have sinned
from our youth; we have continued in sin, have sinned even unto this
day, though often called to repent and forsake our sins. That which is
the malignity of sin, the worst thing in it, is the affront we have put
upon God by it: We have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God,
forbidding us to sin and commanding us, when we have sinned, to repent."
Now all this seems to be the language of the penitents of the house of
Israel ([Jer 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#020)), of the ten tribes,
either of those that were in captivity or those of them that remained in
their own land. And the prophet takes notice of their repentance to
provoke the men of Judah to a holy emulation. David used it as an
argument with the elders of Judah that it would be a shame for those
that were his bone and his flesh to be the last in bringing the king
back, when the men of Israel appeared forward in it, [Sa2
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#011), [Sa2
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#012). So the prophet excites Judah to
repent because Israel did: and well it were if the zeal of others less
likely would provoke us to strive to get before them and go beyond them
in that which is good.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 4](jer004)

</div>
