<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job007)  [Next](job009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 8:0</span></span>

Job's friends are like Job's messengers: the latter followed one another
close with evil tidings, the former followed him with harsh censures:
both, unawares, served Satan's design; these to drive him from his
integrity, those to drive him from the comfort of it. Eliphaz did not
reply to what Job had said in answer to him, but left it to Bildad, whom
he knew to be of the same mind with himself in this affair. Those are
not the wisest of the company, but the weakest rather, who covet to have
all the talk. Let others speak in their turn, and let the first keep
silence, [Co1 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#030), [Co1
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#031). Eliphaz had undertaken to show
that because Job was sorely afflicted he was certainly a wicked man.
Bildad is much of the same mind, and will conclude Job a wicked man
unless God do speedily appear for his relief. In this chapter he
endeavours to convince Job, I. That he had spoken too passionately ([Job
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#002)). II. That he and his children had
suffered justly ([Job 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003), [Job
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#004)). III. That, if he were a true
penitent, God would soon turn his captivity ([Job
8:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#005)). IV. That it was a usual thing
for Providence to extinguish the joys and hopes of wicked men as his
were extinguished; and therefore that they had reason to suspect him for
a hypocrite ([Job 8:8-19](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008)). V. That
they would be abundantly confirmed in their suspicion unless God did
speedily appear for his relief ([Job
8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020)).

[Job 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 8:1</span></span>

Here, I. Bildad reproves Job for what he had said ([Job
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#002)), checks his passion, but perhaps
(as is too common) with greater passion. We thought Job spoke a great
deal of good sense and much to the purpose, and that he had reason and
right on his side; but Bildad, like an eager angry disputant, turns it
all off with this, How long wilt thou speak these things? taking it for
granted that Eliphaz had said enough to silence him, and that therefore
all he said was impertinent. Thus (as Caryl observes) reproofs are often
grounded upon mistakes. Men's meaning is not taken aright, and then they
are gravely rebuked as if they were evil-doers. Bildad compares Job's
discourse to a strong wind. Job had excused himself with this, that his
speeches were but as wind ([Job 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#026)),
and therefore they should not make such ado about them: "Yea, but" (says
Bildad) "they are as strong wind, blustering and threatening, boisterous
and dangerous, and therefore we are concerned to fence against them."

II\. He justifies God in what he had done. This he had no occasion to do
at this time (for Job did not condemn God, as he would have it thought
he did), or he might at least have done it without reflecting upon Job's
children, as he does here. Could he not be an advocate for God but he
must be an accuser of the brethren? 1. He is right in general, that God
doth not pervert judgment, nor ever go contrary to any settled rule of
justice, [Job 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003). Far be it from him
that he should and from us that we should suspect him. He never
oppresses the innocent, nor lays a greater load on the guilty than they
deserve. He is God, the Judge; and shall not the Judge of all the earth
do right? [Gen 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025). If there should
be unrighteousness with God, how should he judge the world? [Rom
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005), [Rom
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006). He is Almighty, Shaddai - all
sufficient. Men pervert justice sometimes for fear of the power of
others (but God is Almighty, and stands in awe of none), sometimes to
obtain the favour of others; but God is all-sufficient, and cannot be
benefited by the favour of any. It is man's weakness and impotency that
he often is unjust; it is God's omnipotence that he cannot be so. 2. Yet
he is not fair and candid in the application. He takes it for granted
that Job's children (the death of whom was one of the greatest of his
afflictions) had been guilty of some notorious wickedness, and that the
unhappy circumstances of their death were sufficient evidence that they
were sinners above all the children of the east, [Job
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#004). Job readily owned that God did
not pervert judgment; and yet it did not therefore follow either that
his children were cast-aways or that they died for some great
transgression. It is true that we and our children have sinned against
God, and we ought to justify him in all he brings upon us and ours; but
extraordinary afflictions are not always the punishment of extraordinary
sins, but sometimes the trial of extraordinary graces; and, in our
judgment of another's case (unless the contrary appears), we ought to
take the more favourable side, as our Saviour directs, [Luk
13:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#002). Here Bildad missed it.

III\. He put Job in hope that, if he were indeed upright, as he said he
was, he should yet see a good issue of his present troubles: "Although
thy children have sinned against him, and are cast away in their
transgression (they have died in their own sin), yet if thou be pure and
upright thyself, and as an evidence of that wilt now seek unto God and
submit to him, all shall be well yet," [Job
8:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#005). This may be taken two ways,
either, 1. As designed to prove Job a hypocrite and a wicked man, though
not by the greatness, yet the by the continuance, of his afflictions.
"When thou wast impoverished, and thy children were killed, if thou
hadst been pure and upright, and approved thyself so in the trial, God
would before now have returned in mercy to thee and comforted thee
according to the time of thy affliction; but, because he does not so, we
have reason to conclude thou art not so pure and upright as thou
pretendest to be. If thou hadst conducted thyself well under the former
affliction, thou wouldst not have been struck with the latter." Herein
Bildad was not in the right; for a good man may be afflicted for his
trial, not only very sorely, but very long, and yet, if for life, it is
in comparison with eternity but for a moment. But, since Bildad put it
to this issue, God was pleased to join issue with him, and proved his
servant Job an honest man by Bildad's own argument; for, soon after, he
blessed his latter end more than his beginning. Or, 2. As designed to
direct and encourage Job, that he might not thus run himself into
despair, and give up all for gone; there might yet be hope if he would
take the right course. I am apt to think Bildad here intended to condemn
Job, yet would be thought to counsel and comfort him. (1.) He gives him
good counsel, yet perhaps not expecting he would take it, the same that
Eliphaz had given him ([Job 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008)), to
seek unto God, and that betimes (that is, speedily and seriously), and
not to be dilatory and trifling in his return and repentance. He advises
him not to complain, but to petition, to make his supplication to the
Almighty with humility and faith, and to see that there was (what he
feared had hitherto been wanting) sincerity in his heart ("thou must be
pure and upright") and honesty in his house - "that must be the
habitation of thy righteousness, and not filled with ill-gotten goods,
else God will not hear thy prayers," [Psa
66:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#018). It is only the prayer of the
upright that is the acceptable and prevailing prayer, [Pro
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008). (2.) He gives him good hopes
that he shall yet again see good days, secretly suspecting, however,
that he was not qualified to see them. He assures him that, if he would
be early in seeking God, God would awake for his relief, would remember
him and return to him, though now he seemed to forget him and forsake
him - that if his habitation were righteous it should be prosperity.
When we return to God in a way of duty we have reason to hope that he
will return to us in a way of mercy. Let not Job object that he had so
little left to being the world with again that it was impossible he
should ever prosper as he had done; no, "Though thy beginning should be
ever so small, a little meal in the barrel and a little oil in the
cruse, God's blessing shall multiply that to a great increase." This is
God's way of enriching the souls of his people with graces and comforts,
not per saltum - as by a bound, but per gradum - step by step. The
beginning is small, but the progress is to perfection. Dawning light
grows to noonday, a grain of mustard seed to a great tree. Let us not
therefore despise the day of small things, but hope for the day of great
things.

[Job 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 8:8</span></span>

Bildad here discourses very well on the sad catastrophe of hypocrites
and evil-doers and the fatal period of all their hopes and joys. He will
not be so bold as to say with Eliphaz that none that were righteous were
ever cut off thus ([Job 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)); yet he
takes it for granted that God, in the course of his providence, does
ordinarily bring wicked men, who seemed pious and were prosperous, to
shame and ruin in this world, and that, by making their prosperity
short, he discovers their piety to be counterfeit. Whether this will
certainly prove that all who are thus ruined must be concluded to have
been hypocrites he will not say, but rather suspect, and thinks the
application is easy.

I. He proves this truth, of the certain destruction of all the hopes and
joys of hypocrites, by an appeal to antiquity and the concurring
sentiment and observation of all wise and good men; and an undoubted
truth it is, if we take in the other world, that, if not in this life,
yet in the life to come, hypocrites will be deprived of all their trusts
and all their triumphs: whether Bildad so meant or no, we must so take
it. Let us observe the method of his proof, [Job
8:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008).

1\. He insists not on his own judgment and that of his companions: We
are but of yesterday, and know nothing, [Job
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#009). He perceived that Job had no
opinion of their abilities, but thought they knew little. "We will own,"
says Bildad, "that we know nothing, are as ready to confess our
ignorance as thou art to condemn it; for we are but of yesterday in
comparison, and our days upon earth are short and transient, and
hastening away as a shadow. And hence," (1.) "We are not so near the
fountain-head of divine revelation" (which then for aught that appears,
was conveyed by tradition) "as the former age was; and therefore we must
enquire what they said and recount what we have been told of their
sentiments." Blessed be God, now that we have the word of God in
writing, and are directed to search that, we need not enquire of the
former age, nor prepare ourselves to the search of their fathers; for,
though we ourselves are but of yesterday, the word of God in the
scripture is as nigh to us as it was to them ([Rom
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008)), and it is the more sure word of
prophecy, to which we must take heed. If we study and keep God's
precepts, we may by them understand more than the ancients, [Psa
119:99](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#099),[Psa
119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100). (2.) "We do not live so long
as those of the former age did, to make observations upon the methods of
divine providence, and therefore cannot be such competent judges as they
in a cause of this nature." Note, The shortness of our lives is a great
hindrance to the improvement of our knowledge, and so are the frailty
and weakness of our bodies. Vita brevis, ars longa - life is short, the
progress of art boundless.

2\. He refers to the testimony of the ancients and to the knowledge
which Job himself had of their sentiments. "Do thou enquire of the
former age, and let them tell thee, not only their own judgment in this
matter, but the judgment also of their fathers, [Job
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008). They will teach thee, and inform
thee ([Job 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#010)), that all along, in
their time, the judgments of God followed wicked men. This they will
utter out of their hearts, that is, as that which they firmly believe
themselves, which they are greatly affected with and desirous to
acquaint and affect others with." Note, (1.) For the right understanding
of divine Providence, and the unfolding of the difficulties of it, it
will be of use to compare the observations and experiences of former
ages with the events of our own day; and, in order thereto, to consult
history, especially the sacred history, which is the most ancient,
infallibly true, and written designedly for our learning. (2.) Those
that would fetch knowledge from the former ages must search diligently,
prepare for the search, and take pains for the search. (3.) Those words
are most likely to reach to the hearts of the learners that come from
the hearts of the teachers. Those shall teach thee best that utter words
out of their heart, that speak by experience, and not by rote, of
spiritual and divine things. The learned bishop Patrick suggests that
Bildad being a Shuhite, descended from Shuah one of Abraham's sons by
Keturah ([Gen 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002)), in this appeal
which he makes to history he has a particular respect to the rewards
which the blessing of God secured to the posterity of faithful Abraham
(who hitherto, and long after, continued in his religion) and to the
extirpation of those eastern people, neighbours to Job (in whose country
they were settled), for their wickedness, whence he infers that it is
God's usual way to prosper the just and root out the wicked, though for
a while they may flourish.

II\. He illustrates this truth by some similitudes.

1\. The hopes and joys of the hypocrite are here compared to a rush or
flag, v. 11-13. (1.) It grows up out of the mire and water. The
hypocrite cannot gain his hope without some false rotten ground or other
out of which to raise it, and with which to support it and keep it
alive, any more than the rush can grow without mire. He grounds it on
his worldly prosperity, the plausible profession he makes of religion,
the good opinion of his neighbours, and his own good conceit of himself,
which are no solid foundation on which to build his confidence. It is
all but mire and water; and the hope that grows out of it is but rush
and flag. (2.) It may look green and gay for a while (the rush outgrows
the grass), but it is light and hollow, and empty, and good for nothing.
It is green for show, but of no use. (3.) It withers presently, before
any other herb, v. 12. Even while it is in its greenness it is dried
away and gone in a little time. Note, The best state of hypocrites and
evil-doers borders upon withering; even when it is green it is going.
The grass is cut down and withers ([Psa
90:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#006)); but the rush is not cut down
and yet withers, withers before it grows up ([Psa
129:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#006)): as it has no use, so it has no
continuance. So are the paths of all that forget God (v. 13); they take
the same way that the rush does, for the hypocrite's hope shall perish.
Note, \[1.\] Forgetfulness of God is at the bottom of men's hypocrisy,
and of the vain hopes with which they flatter and deceive themselves in
their hypocrisy. Men would not be hypocrites if they did not forget that
the God with whom they have to do searches the heart and requires truth
there, that he is a Spirit and has his eye on our spirits; and
hypocrites would have no hope if they did not forget that God is
righteous, and will not be mocked with the torn and the lame. \[2.\] The
hope of hypocrites is a great cheat upon themselves, and, though it may
flourish for a while, it will certainly perish at last, and they with
it.

2\. They are here compared to a spider's web, or a spider's house (as it
is in the margin), a cobweb, [Job
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#014), [Job
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#015). The hope of the hypocrite, (1.)
Is woven out of his own bowels; it is the creature of his own fancy, and
arises merely from a conceit of his own merit and sufficiency. There is
a great deal of difference between the work of the bee and that of the
spider. A diligent Christian, like the laborious bee, fetches in all his
comfort from the heavenly dews of God's word; but the hypocrite, like
the subtle spider, weaves his out of a false hypothesis of his own
concerning God, as if he were altogether such a one as himself. (2.) He
is very fond of it, as the spider of her web; pleases himself with it,
wraps himself in it, calls it his house, leans upon it, and holds it
fast. It is said of the spider that she takes hold with her hands, and
is in kings' palaces, [Pro 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#028). So
does a carnal worldling hug himself in the fulness and firmness of his
outward prosperity; he prides himself in that house as his palace,
fortifies himself in it as his castle, and makes use of it as the spider
of her web, to ensnare those he has a mind to prey upon. So does a
formal professor; he flatters himself in his own eyes, doubts not of his
salvation, is secure of heaven, and cheats the world with his vain
confidences. (3.) It will easily and certainly be swept away, as the
cobweb with the besom, when God shall come to purge his house. The
prosperity of worldly people will fail them when they expect to find
safety and happiness in it. They seek to hold fast their estates, but
God is plucking them out of their hands; and whose shall all those
things be, which they have provided? or what the better they will be for
them? The confidences of hypocrites will fail them. I tell you, I know
you not. The house built on the sand will fall in the storm, when the
builder most needs it and promised himself the benefit of it. When a
wicked man dies his expectation perishes. The ground of his hopes will
prove false; he will be disappointed of the thing he hoped for, and his
foolish hope with which he buoyed himself up will be turned into endless
despair; and thus his hope will be cut off, his web, that refuge of
lies, swept away, and he crushed in it.

3\. The hypocrite is here compared to a flourishing and well-rooted
tree, which, though it do not wither of itself, yet will easily be cut
down and its place no it no more. The secure and prosperous sinner may
think himself wronged when he is compared to a rush and a flag; he
thinks he has a better root. "We will allow him his conceit," says
Bildad, "and give him all the advantage he can desire, and bring him in
suddenly cut off." He is here represented as Nebuchadnezzar was in his
own dream ([Dan 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010)) by a great tree.
(1.) See this tree fair and flourishing ([Job
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#016)) like a green bay-tree ([Psa
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035)), green before the sun, it keeps
its greenness in defiance of the scorching sun-beams, and his branch
shoots forth under the protection of his garden-wall and with the
benefit of his garden-soil. See it fixed, and taking deep root, never
likely to be overthrown by stormy winds, for his roots are interwoven
with the stones ([Job 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#017)); it grows
in firm ground, not, as the rush, of mire and water. Thus does a wicked
man, when he prospers in the world, think himself secure; his wealth is
a high wall in his own conceit. (2.) See this tree felled and forgotten
notwithstanding, destroyed from his place ([Job
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#018)), and so entirely extirpated that
there shall remain no sign or token where it grew. The very place say, I
have not seen thee; and the standers by shall say the same. I sought
him, but he could not be found, [Psa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#036). He made a great show and a
great noise for a time, but he is gone of a sudden, and neither root nor
branch is left him, [Mal 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001). This is
the joy (that is, this is the end and conclusion) of the wicked man's
way ([Job 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#019)); this is that which
all his joy comes to. The way of the ungodly shall perish, [Psa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006). His hope, he thought, would in
the issue be turned into joy; but this is the issue, this is the joy.
The harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow,
[Isa 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#011). This is the best of it;
and what then is the worst of it? But shall he not leave a family behind
him to enjoy what he has? No, out of the earth (not out of his roots)
shall others grow, that are nothing akin to him, and shall fill up his
place, and rule over that for which he labored. Others (that is, others
of the same spirit and disposition) shall grow up in his place, and be
as secure as ever he was, not warned by his fall. The way of worldlings
is their folly, and yet there is a race of those that approve their
sayings, [Psa 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#013).

[Job 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 8:20</span></span>

Bildad here, in the close of his discourse, sums up what he has to say
in a few words, setting before Job life and death, the blessing and the
curse, assuring him that as he was so he should fare, and therefore they
might conclude that as he fared so he was. 1. On the one hand, if he
were a perfect upright man, God would not cast him away, [Job
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020). Though now he seemed forsaken of
God, he would yet return to him, and by degrees would turn his mourning
into dancing ([Psa 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011)) and comforts
should flow in upon him so plentifully that his mouth should be filled
with laughing, [Job 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#021). So affecting
should the happy change be, [Psa
126:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002). Those that loved him would
rejoice with him; but those that hated him, and had triumphed in his
fall, would be ashamed of their insolence, when they should see him
restored to his former prosperity. Now it is true that God will not cast
away an upright man; he may be cast down for a time, but he shall not be
cast away for ever. It is true that, if not in this world, yet in
another, the mouth of the righteous shall be filled with rejoicing.
Though their sun should set under a cloud, yet it shall rise again
clear, never more to be clouded; though they go mourning to the grave,
that shall not hinder their entrance into the joy of their Lord. It is
true that the enemies of the saints will be clothed with shame when they
see them crowned with honour. But it does not therefore follow that, if
Job were not perfectly restore to his former prosperity, he would
forfeit the character of a perfect man. 2. On the other hand, if he were
a wicked man and an evil-doer, God would not help him, but leave him to
perish in his present distresses ([Job
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020)), and his dwelling-place should
come to nought, ([Job 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#022)). And here
also it is true that God will not help the evil-doers; they throw
themselves out of his protection, and forfeit his favour. He will not
take the ungodly by the hand (so it is in the margin), will not have
fellowship and communion with them; for what communion can there be
between light and darkness? He will not lend them his hand to pull them
out of the miseries, the eternal miseries, into which they have plunged
themselves; they will then stretch out their hand to him for help, but
it will be too late: he will not take them by the hand. Between us and
you there is a great gulf fixed. It is true that the dwelling-place of
the wicked, sooner or later, will come to nought. Those only who make
God their dwelling-place are safe for ever, [Psa
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001); [Psa
91:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001). Those who make other things
their refuge will be disappointed. Sin brings ruin on persons and
families. Yet to argue (as Bildad, I doubt, slyly does) that because
Job's family was sunk, and he himself at present seemed helpless,
therefore he certainly was an ungodly wicked man, was neither just nor
charitable, as long as there appeared no other evidence of his
wickedness and ungodliness. Let us judge nothing before the time, but
wait till the secrets of all hearts shall be made manifest, and the
present difficulties of Providence be solved to universal and
everlasting satisfaction, when the mystery of God shall be finished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 9](job009)

</div>
