<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job021)  [Next](job023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 22:0</span></span>

Eliphaz here leads on a third attack upon poor Job, in which Bildad
followed him, but Zophar drew back, and quitted the field. It was one of
the unhappinesses of Job, as it is of many an honest man, to be
misunderstood by his friends. He had spoken of the prosperity of wicked
men in this world as a mystery of Providence, but they took it for a
reflection upon Providence, as countenancing their wickedness; and they
reproached him accordingly. In this chapter, I. Eliphaz checks him for
his complaints of God, and of his dealings with him, as if he thought
God had done him wrong ([Job 22:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002)).
II. He charges him with many high crimes and misdemeanours, for which he
supposes God was now punishing him. 1. Oppression and injustice ([Job
22:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#005)). 2. Atheism and infidelity
([Job 22:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#012)). III. He compares his
case to that of the old world ([Job
22:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#015)). IV. He gives him very good
counsel, assuring him that, if he would take it, God would return in
mercy to him and he should return to his former prosperity ([Job
22:21-30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021)).

[Job 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 22:1</span></span>

Eliphaz here insinuates that, because Job complained so much of his
afflictions, he thought God was unjust in afflicting him; but it was a
strained innuendo. Job was far from thinking so. What Eliphaz says here
is therefore unjustly applied to Job, but in itself it is very true and
good,

I. That when God does us good it is not because he is indebted to us; if
he were, there might be some colour to say, when he afflicts us, "He
does not deal fairly with us." But whoever pretends that he has by any
meritorious action made God his debtor, let him prove this debt, and he
shall be sure not to lose it, [Rom
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#035). Who has given to him, and it
shall be recompensed to him again? But Eliphaz here shows that the
righteousness and perfection of the best man in the world are no real
benefit or advantage to God, and therefore cannot be thought to merit
any thing from him. 1. Man's piety is no profit to God, no gain, [Job
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#001), [Job
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002). If we could by any thing merit
from God, it would be by our piety, our being righteous, and making our
way perfect. If that will not merit, surely nothing else will. If a man
cannot make God his debtor by his godliness, and honesty, and obedience
to his laws, much less can he by his wit, and learning, and worldly
policy. Now Eliphaz here asks whether any man can possibly be profitable
to God. It is certain that he cannot. By no means. He that is wise may
be profitable to himself. Note, Our wisdom and piety are that by which
we ourselves are, and are likely to be, great gainers. Wisdom is
profitable to direct, [Ecc 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#010).
Godliness is profitable to all things, [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008). If thou be wise, thou shalt be
wise for thyself, [Pro 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#012). The gains
of religion are infinitely greater than the losses of it, and so it will
appear when they are balanced. But can a man be thus profitable to God?
No, for such is the perfection of God that he cannot receive any benefit
or advantage by men; what can be added to that which is infinite? And
such is the weakness and imperfection of man that he cannot offer any
benefit or advantage to God. Can the light of a candle be profitable to
the sun or the drop of the bucket to the ocean? He that is wise is
profitable to himself, for his own direction and defence, his own credit
and comfort; he can with his wisdom entertain himself and enrich
himself; but can he so be profitable to God? No; God needs not us nor
our services. We are undone, for ever undone, without him; but he is
happy, for ever happy, without us. Is it any gain to him, any real
addition to his glory or wealth, if we make our way perfect? Suppose it
were absolutely perfect, yet what is God the better? Much less when it
is so far short of being perfect. 2. It is no pleasure to him. God has
indeed expressed himself in his word well pleased with the righteous;
his countenance beholds them and his delight is in them and their
prayers; but all that adds nothing to the infinite satisfaction and
complacency which the Eternal Mind has in itself. God can enjoy himself
without us, though we could have but little enjoyment of ourselves
without our friends. This magnifies his condescension, in that, though
our services be no real profit or pleasure to him, yet he invites,
encourages, and accepts them.

II\. That when God restrains or rebukes us it is not because he is in
danger from us or jealous of us ([Job
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#004)): "Will he reprove thee for fear
of thee, and take thee down from thy prosperity lest thou shouldst grow
too great for him, as princes sometimes have thought it a piece of
policy to curb the growing greatness of a subject, lest he should become
formidable?" Satan indeed suggested to our first parents that God
forbade them the tree of knowledge for fear of them, lest they should be
as gods, and so become rivals with him; but it was a base insinuation.
God rebukes the good because he loves them, but he never rebukes the
great because he fears them. He does not enter into judgment with men,
that is, pick a quarrel with them and seek occasion against them,
through fear lest they should eclipse his honour or endanger his
interest. Magistrates punish offenders for fear of them. Pharaoh
oppressed Israel because he feared them. It was for fear that Herod slew
the children of Bethlehem and that the Jews persecuted Christ and his
apostles. But God does not, as they did, pervert justice for fear of
any. See [Job 35:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#005).

[Job 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 22:5</span></span>

Eliphaz and his companions had condemned Job, in general, as a wicked
man and a hypocrite; but none of them had descended to particulars, nor
drawn up any articles of impeachment against him, until Eliphaz did so
here, where he positively and expressly charges him with many high
crimes and misdemeanours, which, if he had really been guilty of them,
might well have justified them in their harsh censures of him. "Come,"
says Eliphaz, "we have been too long beating about the bush, too tender
of Job and afraid of grieving him, which has but confirmed him in his
self-justification. It is high time to deal plainly with him. We have
condemned him by parables, but that does not answer the end; he is not
prevailed with to condemn himself. We must therefore plainly tell him,
Thou art the man, the tyrant, the oppressor, the atheist, we have been
speaking of all this while. Is not thy wickedness great? Certainly it
is, or else thy troubles would not be so great. I appeal to thyself, and
thy own conscience; are not thy iniquities infinite, both in number and
heinousness?" Strictly taken, nothing is infinite but God; but he means
this, that his sins were more than could be counted and more heinous
than could be conceived. Sin, being committed against Infinite Majesty,
has in it a kind of infinite malignity. But when Eliphaz charges Job
thus highly, and ventures to descend to particulars too, laying to his
charge that which he knew not, we may take occasion hence, 1. To be
angry at those who unjustly censure and condemn their brethren. For
aught I know, Eliphaz, in accusing Job falsely, as he does here, was
guilty of as great a sin and as great a wrong to Job as the Sabeans and
Chaldeans that robbed him; for a man's good name is more precious and
valuable than his wealth. It is against all the laws of justice,
charity, and friendship, either to raise or receive calumnies,
jealousies, and evil surmises, concerning others; and it is the more
base and disingenuous if we thus vex those that are in distress and add
to their affliction. Eliphaz could produce no instances of Job's guilt
in any of the particulars that follow here, but seems resolved to
calumniate boldly, and throw all the reproach he could on Job, not
doubting but that some would cleave to him. 2. To pity those who are
thus censured and condemned. Innocency itself will be no security
against a false and foul tongue. Job, whom God himself praised as the
best man in the world, is here represented by one of his friends, and he
a wise and good man too, as one of the greatest villains in nature. Let
us not think it strange if at any time we be thus blackened, but learn
how to pass by evil report as well as good, and commit our cause, as Job
did his, to him that judgeth righteously.

Let us see the particular articles of this charge.

I. He charged him with oppression and injustice, that, when he was in
prosperity, he not only did no good with his wealth and power, but did a
great deal of hurt with them. This was utterly false, as appears by the
account Job gives of himself ([Job
29:12](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#012), etc.) and the character God
gave of him, ch. 1. And yet,

1\. Eliphaz branches out this charge into divers particulars, with as
much assurance as if he could call witnesses to prove upon oath every
article of it. He tells him, (1.) That he had been cruel and unmerciful
to the poor. As a magistrate he ought to have protected them and seen
them provided for; but Eliphaz suspects that he never did them any
kindness, but all the mischief his power enabled him to do, - that, for
an inconsiderable debt, he demanded, and carried away by violence, a
pawn of great value, even from his brother, whose honesty and
sufficiency he could not but know ([Job
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006)), Thou hast taken a pledge from
thy brother for nought, or, as the Septuagint reads it, Thou hast taken
thy brethren for pledges, and that for nought, imprisoned them, enslaved
them, because they had nothing to pay, - that he had taken the very
clothes of his insolvent tenants and debtors, so that he had stripped
them naked, and left them so (the law of Moses forbade this, [Exo
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026), [Deu
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#013)), - he had not been charitable
to the poor, no, not to poor travellers, and poor widows: "Thou hast not
given so much as a cup of cold water (which would have cost thee
nothing) to the weary to drink, when he begged for it ([Job
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#007)) and was ready to perish for want
of it, nay, thou hast withholden bread from the hungry in their
extremity, hast not only not given it, but hast forbidden the giving of
it, which is withholding good from those to whom it is really due, [Pro
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#027). Poor widows, who while their
husbands were living troubled nobody, but now were forced to seek
relief, thou hast sent away empty from thy doors with a sad heart, [Job
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#009). Those who came to thee for
justice, thou didst send away unheard, unhelped; nay, though they came
to thee full, thou didst squeeze them, and send them away empty; and,
worst of all, the arms of the fatherless have been broken; those that
could help themselves but little thou hast quite disabled to help
themselves." This which is the blackest part of the charge, is but
insinuated: The arms of the fatherless have been broken. He does not
say, "Thou has broken them," but he would have it understood so, and if
they be broken, and those who have power do not relieve them, they are
chargeable with it. "They have been broken by those under thee, and thou
hast connived at it, which brings thee under the guilt." (2.) That he
had been partial to the rich and great ([Job
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#008)): "As for the mighty man, if he
was guilty of any crime, he was never questioned for it: he had the
earth; he dwelt in it. If he brought an action ever so unjustly, or if
an action were ever so justly brought against him, yet he was sure to
carry his cause in thy courts. The poor were not fed at thy door, while
the rich were feasted at thy table." Contrary to this is Christ's rule
for hospitality ([Luk 14:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#012)); and
Solomon says, He that gives to the rich shall come to poverty.

2\. He attributes all his present troubles to these supposed sins ([Job
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#010), [Job
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#011)): "Those that are guilty of such
practices as these commonly bring themselves into just such a condition
as thou art now in; and therefore we conclude thou hast been thus
guilty." (1.) "The providence of God usually crosses and embarrasses
such; and snares are, accordingly, round about thee, so that, which way
soever thou steppest or lookest, thou findest thyself in distress; and
others are as hard upon thee as thou hast been upon the poor." (2.)
"Their consciences may be expected to terrify and accuse them. No sin
makes a louder cry there than unmercifulness; and, accordingly, sudden
fear troubles thee; and, though thou wilt not own it, it is guilt of
this kind that creates thee all this terror." Zophar had insinuated
this, [Job 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019), [Job
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#020). (3.) "They are brought to their
wits' end, so amazed and bewildered that they know not what to do, and
that also is thy case; for thou art in darkness that thou canst not see
wherefore God contends with thee nor what is the best course for thee to
take, for abundance of waters cover thee," that is, "thou art in a mist,
in the midst of dark waters, in the thick clouds of the sky." Note,
Those that have not shown mercy may justly be denied the comfortable
hope that they shall find mercy; and then what can they expect but
snares, and darkness, and continual fear?

II\. He charged him with atheism, infidelity, and gross impiety, and
thought this was at the bottom of his injustice and oppressiveness: he
that did not fear God did not regard man. He would have it thought that
Job was an Epicurean, who did indeed own the being of God, but denied
his providence, and fancied that he confined himself to the
entertainments of the upper world and never concerned himself in the
inhabitants and affairs of this.

1\. Eliphaz referred to an important truth, which he thought, if Job had
duly considered it, would have prevented him from being so passionate in
his complaints and bold in justifying himself ([Job
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#012)): Is not God in the height of
heaven? Yes, no doubt he is. No heaven so high but God is there; and in
the highest heavens, the heavens of the blessed, the residence of his
glory, he is present in a special manner. There he is pleased to
manifest himself in a way peculiar to the upper world, and thence he is
pleased to manifest himself in a way suited to this lower world. There
is his throne; there is his court: he is called the Heavens, [Dan
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#026). Thus Eliphaz proves that a man
cannot be profitable to God ([Job
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002)), that he ought not to contend
with God (it is his folly if he does), and that we ought always to
address ourselves to God with very great reverence; for when we behold
the height of the stars, how high they are, we should, at the same time,
also consider the transcendent majesty of God, who is above the stars,
and how high he is.

2\. He charged it upon Job that he made a bad use of this doctrine,
which he might have made so good a use of, [Job
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#013). "This is holding the truth in
unrighteousness, fighting against religion with its own weapons, and
turning its own artillery upon itself: thou art willing to own that God
is in the height of heaven but thence thou inferrest, How doth God
know?" Bad men expel the fear of God out of their hearts by banishing
the eye of God out of the world ([Eze
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#012)), and care not what they do if
they can but persuade themselves that God does not know. Eliphaz
suspected that Job had such a notion of God as this, that, because he is
in the height of heaven, (1.) It is therefore impossible for him to see
and hear what is done at so great a distance as this earth, especially
since there is a dark cloud ([Job
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#013)), many thick clouds ([Job
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#014)), that come between him and us,
and are a covering to him, so that he cannot see, much less can he judge
of, the affairs of this lower world; as if God had eyes of flesh, [Job
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#004). The interposing firmament is to
him as transparent crystal, [Eze 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022).
Distance of place creates no difficulty to him who fills immensity, any
more than distance of time to him who is eternal. Or, (2.) That it is
therefore below him, and a diminution to his glory, to take cognizance
of this inferior part of the creation: He walks in the circuit of
heaven, and has enough to do to enjoy himself and his own perfections
and glory in that bright and quiet world; why should he trouble himself
about us? This is gross absurdity, as well as gross impiety, which
Eliphaz here fathers upon Job; for it supposes that the administration
of government is a burden and disparagement to the supreme governor and
that the acts of justice and mercy are a toil to a mind infinitely wise,
holy, and good. If the sun, a creature, and inanimate, can with his
light and influence reach this earth, and every part of it ([Psa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)), even from that vast height of
the visible heavens in which he is, and in the circuit of which he
walks, and that through many a thick and dark cloud, shall we question
it concerning the Creator?

[Job 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 22:15</span></span>

Eliphaz, having endeavoured to convict Job, by setting his sins (as he
thought) in order before him, here endeavours to awaken him to a sight
and sense of his misery and danger by reason of sin; and this he does by
comparing his case with that of the sinners of the old world; as if he
had said, "Thy condition is bad now, but, unless thou repent, it will be
worse, as theirs was - theirs who were overflown with a flood, as the
old world ([Job 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#016)), and theirs the
remnant of whom the fire consumed" ([Job
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#020)), namely, the Sodomites, who, in
comparison of the old world, were but a remnant. And these two instances
of the wrath of God against sin and sinners are more than once put
together, for warning to a careless world, as by our Saviour ([Luk
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026), etc.) and the apostle, [Pe2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005), [Pe2
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#006). Eliphaz would have Job to mark
the old way which wicked men have trodden ([Job
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#015)) and see what came of it, what
the end of their way was. Note, There is an old way which wicked men
have trodden. Religion had but newly entered when sin immediately
followed it. But though it is an old way, a broad way, a tracked way, it
is a dangerous way and it leads to destruction; and it is good for us to
mark it, that we may not dare to walk in it. Eliphaz here puts Job in
mind of it, perhaps in opposition to what he had said of the prosperity
of the wicked; as if he had said, "Thou canst find out here and there a
single instance, it may be, of a wicked man ending his days in peace;
but what is that to those two great instances of the final perdition of
ungodly men - the drowning of the whole world and the burning of Sodom?"
destructions by wholesale, in which he thinks Job may, as in a glass,
see his own face. Observe, 1. The ruin of those sinners ([Job
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#016)): They were cut down out of
time; that is, they were cut off in the midst of their days, when, as
man's time then went, many of them might, in the course of nature, have
lived some hundreds of years longer, which made their immature
extirpation the more grievous. They were cut down out of time, to be
hurried into eternity. And their foundation, the earth on which they
built themselves and all their hopes, was overflown with a flood, the
flood which was brought in upon the world of the ungodly, [Pe2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005). Note, Those who build upon the
sand choose a foundation which will be overflown when the rains descend
and the floods come ([Mat 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#027)), and
then their building must needs fall and they perish in the ruins of it,
and repent of their folly when it is too late. 2. The sin of those
sinners, which brought that ruin ([Job
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#017)): They said unto God, Depart
from us. Job had spoken of some who said so and yet prospered, [Job
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#014). "But these did not (says
Eliphaz); they found to their cost what it was to set God at defiance.
Those who were resolved to lay the reins on the neck of their appetites
and passions began with this; they said unto God, Depart; they abandoned
all religion, hated the thoughts of it, and desired to live without God
in the world; they shunned his word, and silenced conscience, his
deputy. And what can the Almighty do for them?" Some make this to denote
the justness of their punishment. They said to God, Depart from us; and
then what could the Almighty do with them but cut them off? Those who
will not submit to God's golden sceptre must expect to be broken to
pieces with his iron rod. Others make it to denote the injustice of
their sin: But what hath the Almighty done against them? What iniquity
have they found in him, or wherein has he wearied them? [Mic
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003); [Jer
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005). Others make it to denote the
reason of their sin: They say unto God, Depart, asking what the Almighty
can do to them. "What has he done to oblige us? What can he do in a way
of wrath to make us miserable, or in a way of favour to make us happy?"
As they argue, [Zep 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012). The Lord
will not do good, neither will he do evil. Eliphaz shows the absurdity
of this in one word, and that is, calling God the Almighty; for, if he
be so, what cannot he do? But it is not strange if those cast off all
religion who neither dread God's wrath nor desire his favour. 3. The
aggravation of this sin: Yet he had filled their houses with good
things, [Job 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#018). Both those of the
old world and those of Sodom had great plenty of all the delights of
sense; for they ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, etc. ([Luk
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#027)), so that they had no reason to
ask what the Almighty could do for them, for they lived upon his bounty,
no reason to bid him depart from them who had been so kind to them. Many
have their houses full of goods but their hearts empty of grace, and
thereby are marked for ruin. 4. The protestation which Eliphaz makes
against the principles and practices of those wicked people: But the
counsel of the wicked is far from me. Job had said so ([Job
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016)) and Eliphaz will not be behind
him. If they cannot agree in their own principles concerning God, yet
they agree in renouncing the principles of those that live without God
in the world. Note, Those that differ from each other in some matters of
religion, and are engaged in disputes about them, yet ought unanimously
and vigorously to appear against atheism and irreligion, and to take
care that their disputes do not hinder either their vigour or unanimity
in that common cause of God, that righteous cause. 5. The pleasure and
satisfaction which the righteous shall have in this. (1.) In seeing the
wicked destroyed, [Job 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#019). They
shall see it, that is, observe it, and take notice of it ([Hos
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)); and they shall be glad, not to
see their fellow-creatures miserable, or any secular turn of their own
served, or point gained, but to see God glorified, the word of God
fulfilled, the power of oppressors broken, and thereby the oppressed
relieved - to see sin shamed, atheists and infidels confounded, and fair
warning given to all others to shun such wicked courses. Nay, they shall
laugh them to scorn, that is, they justly might do it, they shall do it,
as God does it, in a holy manner, [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004); [Pro
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026). They shall take occasion thence
to expose the folly of sinners and show how ridiculous their principles
are, though they call themselves wits. Lo, this is the man that made not
God his strength; and see what comes of it, [Psa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007). Some understand this of
righteous Noah and his family, who beheld the destruction of the old
world and rejoiced in it, as he had grieved for their impiety. Lot, who
saw the ruin of Sodom, had the same reason to rejoice, [Pe2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#007), [Pe2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008). (2.) In seeing themselves
distinguished ([Job 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#020)): "Whereas
our substance is not cut down, as theirs was, and as thine is; we
continue to prosper, which is a sign that we are the favourites of
Heaven, and in the right." The same rule that served him to condemn Job
by served him to magnify himself and his companions by. His substance is
cut down; therefore he is a wicked man; ours is not; therefore we are
righteous. But it is a deceitful rule to judge by; for none knows love
or hatred by all that is before him. If others be consumed, and we be
not, instead of censuring them and lifting up ourselves, as Eliphaz does
here, we ought to be thankful to God and take it for a warning to
ourselves to prepare for similar calamities.

[Job 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 22:21</span></span>

Methinks I can almost forgive Eliphaz his hard censures of Job, which we
had in the beginning of the chapter, though they were very unjust and
unkind, for this good counsel and encouragement which he gives him in
these verses with which he closes his discourse, and than which nothing
could be better said, nor more to the purpose. Though he thought him a
bad man, yet he saw reason to have hopes concerning him, that, for all
this, he would be both pious and prosperous. But it is strange that out
of the same mouth, and almost in the same breath, both sweet waters and
bitter should proceed. Good men, though they may perhaps be put into a
heat, yet sometimes will talk themselves into a better temper, and, it
may be, sooner than another could talk them into it. Eliphaz had laid
before Job the miserable condition of a wicked man, that he might
frighten him into repentance. Here, on the other hand, he shows him the
happiness which those may be sure of that do repent, that he might
allure and encourage him to it. Ministers must try both ways in dealing
with people, must speak to them from Mount Sinai by the terrors of the
law, and from Mount Sion by the comforts of the gospel, must set before
them both life and death, good and evil, the blessing and the curse. Now
here observe,

I. The good counsel which Eliphaz gives to Job; and good counsel it is
to us all, though, as to Job, it was built upon a false supposition that
he was a wicked man and now a stranger and enemy to God. 1. Acquaint now
thyself with God. Acquiesce in God; so some. It is our duty at all
times, especially when we are in affliction, to accommodate ourselves
to, and quiet ourselves in, all the disposals of the divine Providence.
Join thyself to him (so some); fall in with his interests, and act no
longer in opposition to him. Our translators render it well, "Acquaint
thyself with him; be not such a stranger to him as thou hast made
thyself by casting off the fear of him and restraining prayer before
him." It is the duty and interest of every one of us to acquaint himself
with God. We must get the knowledge of him, fix our affections on him,
join ourselves to him in a covenant of friendship, and then set up, and
keep up, a constant correspondence with him in the ways he has
appointed. It is our honour that we are made capable of this
acquaintance, our misery that by sin we have lost it, our privilege that
through Christ we are invited to return to it; and it will be our
unspeakable happiness to contract and cultivate this acquaintance. 2.
"Be at peace, at peace with thyself, not fretful, uneasy, and in
confusion; let not thy heart be troubled, but be quiet and calm, and
well composed. Be at peace with thy God; be reconciled to him. Do not
carry on this unholy war. Thou complainest that God is thy enemy; be
thou his friend." It is the great concern of every one of us to make our
peace with God, and it is necessary in order to our comfortable
acquaintance with him; for how can two walk together except they be
agreed? [Amo 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003). This we must do
quickly, now, before it be too late. Agree with thy adversary while thou
art in the way. This we are earnestly urged to do. Some read it,
"Acquaint thyself, I pray thee, with him, and be at peace." God himself
beseeches us; ministers, in Christ's stead, pray us to be reconciled.
Can we gainsay such entreaties? 3. Receive the law from his mouth, [Job
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#022). "Having made thy peace with
God, submit to his government, and resolve to be ruled by him, that thou
mayest keep thyself in his love." We receive our being and maintenance
from God. From him we hope to receive our bliss, and from him we must
receive law. Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? [Act
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006). Which way soever we receive the
intimations of his will we must have our eye to him; whether he speaks
by scripture, ministers, conscience, or Providence, we must take the
word as from his mouth and bow our souls to it. Though, in Job's time,
we do not know that there was any written word, yet there was a
revelation of God's will to be received. Eliphaz looked upon Job as a
wicked man, and was pressing him to repent and reform. Herein consists
the conversion of a sinner - his receiving the law from God's mouth and
no longer from the world and the flesh. Eliphaz, being now in contest
with Job, appeals to the word of God for the ending of the controversy.
"Receive that, and be determined by it." To the law and to the
testimony. 4. Lay up his word in thy heart. It is not enough to receive
it, but we must retain it, [Pro 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018).
We must lay it up as a thing of great value, that it may be safe; and we
must lay it up in our hearts, as a thing of great use, that it may be
ready to us when there is occasion and we may neither lose it wholly nor
be at a loss for it in a time of need. 5. Return to the Almighty, [Job
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#023). "Do not only turn from sin, but
turn to God and thy duty. Do not only turn towards the Almighty in some
good inclinations and good beginnings, but return to him; return home to
him, quite to him, so as to reach to the Almighty, by a universal
reformation, an effectual thorough change of thy heart and life, and a
firm resolution to cleave to him;" so Mr. Poole. 6. Put away iniquity
far from thy tabernacle. This was the advice Zophar gave him, [Job
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#014). "Let not wickedness dwell in
thy tabernacle. Put iniquity far off, the further the better, not only
from thy heart and hand, but from thy house. Thou must not only not be
wicked thyself, but must reprove and restrain sin in those that are
under thy charge." Note, Family reformation is needful reformation; we
and our house must serve the Lord.

II\. The good encouragement which Eliphaz gives Job, that he shall be
very happy, if he will but take this good counsel. In general, "Thereby
good shall come unto thee ([Job
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021)); the good that has now departed
from thee, all the good thy heart can desire, temporal, spiritual,
eternal good, shall come to thee. God shall come to thee, into covenant
and communion with thee; and he brings all good with him, all good in
him. Thou art now ruined and brought down, but, if thou return to God,
thou shalt be built up again, and thy present ruins shall be repaired.
Thy family shall be built up in children, thy estate in wealth, and thy
soul in holiness and comfort." The promises which Eliphaz here
encourages Job with are reducible to three heads: -

1\. That his estate should prosper, and temporal blessings should be
bestowed abundantly on him; for godliness has the promise of the life
that now is. It is promised,

(1.) That he shall be very rich ([Job
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#024)): "Thou shalt lay up gold as
dust, in such great abundance, and shalt have plenty of silver ([Job
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#025)), whereas now thou art poor and
stripped of all." Job had been rich. Eliphaz suspected he got his riches
by fraud and oppression, and therefore they were taken from him: but if
he would return to God and his duty, \[1.\] He should have more wealth
than ever he had, not only thousands of sheep and oxen, the wealth of
farmers, but thousands of gold and silver, the wealth of princes, [Job
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#015). Abundantly more riches, true
riches, are to be got by the service of God than by the service of the
world. \[2.\] He should have it more sure to him: "Thou shalt lay it up
in good hands, and hold that which is got by thy piety by a surer tenure
than that which thou didst get by thy iniquity." Thou shalt have silver
of strength (for so the word is), which, being honestly got, will wear
well - silver like steel. \[3.\] He should, by the grace of God, be kept
from setting his heart so much upon it as Eliphaz thought he had done;
and then wealth is a blessing indeed when we are not ensnared with the
love of it. Thou shalt lay up gold; but how? Not as thy treasure and
portion, but as dust, and as the stones of the brooks. So little shalt
thou value it or expect from it that thou shalt lay it at thy feet ([Act
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)), not in thy bosom.

(2.) That yet he shall be very safe. Whereas men's riches usually expose
them to danger, and he had owned that in his prosperity he was not in
safety ([Job 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#026)), now he might be
secure; for the Almighty shall be thy defender; nay, he shall be thy
defence, [Job 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#025). He shall be thy
gold; so it is in the margin, and it is the same word that is used ([Job
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#024)) for gold, but it signifies also
a strong-hold, because money is a defence, [Ecc
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#012). Worldlings make gold their god,
saints make God their gold; and those that are enriched with his favour
and grace may truly be said to have abundance of the best gold, and best
laid up. We read it, "He shall be thy defence against the incursions of
neighbouring spoilers: thy wealth shall not then lie exposed as it did
to Sabeans and Chaldeans," which, some think, is the meaning of that,
Thou shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacle, taking it as a
promise. "The iniquity or wrong designed against thee shall be put off
and shall not reach thee." Note, Those must needs be safe that have
Omnipotence itself for their defence, [Psa
91:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001).

2\. That his soul should prosper, and he should be enriched with
spiritual blessings, which are the best blessings.

(1.) That he should live a life of complacency in God ([Job
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#026)): "For then shalt thou have thy
delight in the Almighty; and thus the Almighty comes to be thy gold by
thy delighting in him, as worldly people delight in their money. He
shall be thy wealth, thy defence, thy dignity; for he shall be thy
delight." The way to have our heart's desire is to make God our heart's
delight, [Psa 37:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004). If God give us
himself to be our joy, he will deny us nothing that is good for us.
"Now, God is a terror to thee; he is so by thy own confession ([Job
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004); [Job
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#009); [Job
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011)); but, if thou wilt return to
him, then, and not till then, he will be thy delight; and it shall be as
much a pleasure to thee to think of him as ever it was a pain." No
delight is comparable to the delight which gracious souls have in the
Almighty; and those that acquaint themselves with him, and submit
themselves entirely to him, shall find his favour to be, not only their
strength, but their song.

(2.) That he should have a humble holy confidence towards God, such as
those are said to have whose hearts condemn them not, [Jo1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#021). "Then shalt thou lift up thy
face to God with boldness, and not be afraid, as thou now art, to draw
near to him. Thy countenance is now fallen, and thou lookest dejected;
but, when thou hast made thy peace with God, thou shalt blush no more,
tremble no more, and hang thy head no more, as thou dost now, but shalt
cheerfully, and with a gracious assurance, show thyself to him, pray
before him, and expect blessings from him."

(3.) That he should maintain a constant communion with God, "The
correspondence, once settled, shall be kept up to thy unspeakable
satisfaction. Letters shall be both statedly and occasionally
interchanged between thee and heaven," [Job
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#027). \[1.\] "Thou shalt by prayer
send letters to God: Thou shalt make thy prayer" (the word is, Thou
shalt multiply thy prayers) "unto him, and he will not think thy letters
troublesome, though many and long. The oftener we come to the throne of
grace the more welcome. Under all thy burdens, in all thy wants, cares,
and fears, thou shalt send to heaven for guidance and strength, wisdom,
and comfort, and good success." \[2.\] "He shall, by his providence and
grace, answer those letters, and give thee what thou askest of him,
either in kind or kindness: He shall hear thee, and make it to appear he
does so by what he does for thee and in thee." \[3.\] "Then thou shalt
by thy praises reply to the gracious answers which he sent thee: Thou
shalt pay thy vows, and that shall be acceptable to him and fetch in
further mercy." Note, When God performs that which in our distress we
prayed for we must make conscience of performing that which we then
promised, else we do not deal honestly. If we promised nothing else we
promised to be thankful, and that is enough, for it includes all, [Psa
116:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#014).

(4.) That he should have inward satisfaction in the management of all
his outward affairs ([Job 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#028)):
"Thou shalt decree a thing and it shall be established unto thee," that
is, "Thou shalt frame all thy projects and purposes with so much wisdom,
and grace, and resignation to the will of God, that the issue of them
shall be to thy heart's content, just as thou wouldst have it to be.
Thou shalt commit thy works unto the Lord by faith and prayer, and then
thy thoughts shall be established; thou shalt be easy and pleased,
whatever occurs, [Pro 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#003). This the
grace of God shall work in thee; nay, sometimes the providence of God
shall give thee the very thing thou didst desire and pray for, and give
it thee in thy own way, and manner, and time. Be it unto thee even as
thou wilt." When at any time an affair succeeds just according to the
scheme we laid, and our measures are in nothing broken, nor are we put
upon new counsels, then we must own the performance of this promise,
Thou shalt decree a thing and it shall be established unto thee.
"Whereas now thou complainest of darkness round about thee, then the
light shall shine on thy ways;" that is, "God shall guide and direct
thee, and then it will follow, of course, that he shall prosper and
succeed thee in all thy undertakings. God's wisdom shall be thy guide,
his favour thy comfort, and thy ways shall be so under both those lights
that thou shalt have a comfortable enjoyment of what is present and a
comfortable prospect of what is future," [Psa
90:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#017).

(5.) That even in times of common calamity and danger he should have
abundance of joy and hope ([Job
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#029)): "When men are cast down round
about thee, cast down in their affairs, cast down in their spirits,
sinking, desponding, and ready to despair, then shalt thou say, There is
lifting up. Thou shalt find that in thyself which will not only bear
thee up under thy troubles, and keep thee from fainting, but lift thee
up above thy troubles and enable thee to rejoice evermore." When men's
hearts fail them for fear, then shall Christ's disciples lift up their
heads for joy, [Luk 21:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026). Thus are
they made to ride upon the high places of the earth ([Isa
58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014)), and that which will lift them
up is the belief of this, that God will save the humble person. Those
that humble themselves shall be exalted, not only in honour, but in
comfort.

3\. That he should be a blessing to his country and an instrument of
good to many ([Job 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#030)): God shall,
in answer to thy prayers, deliver the island of the innocent, and have a
regard therein to the pureness of thy hands, which is necessary to the
acceptableness of our prayers, [Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008). But, because we may suppose the
innocent not to need deliverance (it was guilty Sodom that wanted the
benefit of Abraham's intercession), I incline to the marginal reading,
The innocent shall deliver the island, by their advice ([Ecc
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#014), [Ecc
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#015)) and by their prayers and their
interest in heaven, [Act 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#024). Or, He
shall deliver those that are not innocent, and they are delivered by the
pureness of thy hands; as it may be read, and most probably. Note, A
good man is a public good. Sinners fare the better for saints, whether
they are aware of it or no. If Eliphaz intended hereby (as some think he
did) to insinuate that Job's prayers were not prevailing, nor his hands
pure (for then he would have relieved others, much more himself), he was
afterwards made to see his error, when it appeared that Job had a better
interest in heaven than he had; for he and his three friends, who in
this matter were not innocent, were delivered by the pureness of Job's
hands, [Job 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#008).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 23](job023)

</div>
