<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job031)  [Next](job033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 32:0</span></span>

The stage is clear, for Job and his three friends have sat down, and
neither he nor they have any thing more to say; it is therefore very
seasonable for a moderator to interpose, and Elihu is the man. In this
chapter we have, I. Some account of him, his parentage, his presence at
this dispute, and his sentiments concerning it ([Job
32:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#001)). II. The apology he made for
his bold undertaking to speak to a question which had been so largely
and learnedly argued by his seniors. He pleads, 1. That, though he had
not the experience of an old man, yet he had the understanding of a man
([Job 32:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#006)). 2. That he had
patiently heard all they had to say ([Job
32:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#011)). 3. That he had something
new to offer ([Job 32:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#014)). 4. That
his mind was full of this matter, and it would be a refreshment to him
to give it vent ([Job 32:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#018)). 5.
That he was resolved to speak impartially ([Job
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#021), [Job
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#022)). And he did speak so well to
this matter that Job made no reply to him, and God gave him no rebuke
when he checked both Job himself and his other three friends.

[Job 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 32:1</span></span>

Usually young men are the disputants and old men the moderators; but
here, when old men were the disputants, as a rebuke to them for their
unbecoming heat, a young man is raised up to be the moderator. Divers of
Job's friends were present, that came to visit him and to receive
instruction. Now here we have,

I. The reason why his three friends were now silent. They ceased to
answer him, and let him have his saying, because he was righteous in his
own eyes. This was the reason they gave why they said no more, because
it was to no purpose to argue with a man that was so opinionative, [Job
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#001). Those that are self-conceited
are indeed hard to be wrought upon; there is more hope of a fool (a fool
of God's making) than of those who are fools of their own making, [Pro
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#012). But they did not judge fairly
concerning Job: he was really righteous before God, and not righteous in
his own eyes only; so that it was only to save their own credit that
they made this the reason of their silence, as peevish disputants
commonly do when they find themselves run a-ground and are not willing
to own themselves unable to make their part good.

II\. The reasons why Elihu, the fourth, now spoke. His name Elihu
signifies My God is he. They had all tried in vain to convince Job, but
my God is he that can and will do it, and did it at last: he only can
open the understanding. He is said to be a Buzite, from Buz, Nahor's
second son ([Gen 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#021)), and of the
kindred of Ram, that is, Aram (so some), whence the Syrians or Aramites
descended and were denominated, [Gen
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#021). Of the kindred of Abram; so the
Chaldee-paraphrase, supposing him to be first called Ram - high, then
Abram - a high father, and lastly Abraham - the high father of a
multitude. Elihu was not so well known as the rest, and therefore is
more particularly described thus.

1\. Elihu spoke because he was angry and thought he had good cause to be
so. When he had made his observations upon the dispute he did not go
away and calumniate the disputants, striking them secretly with a
malicious censorious tongue, but what he had to say he would say before
their faces, that they might vindicate themselves if they could. (1.) He
was angry at Job, because he thought he did not speak so reverently of
God as he ought to have done; and that was too true ([Job
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#002)): He justified himself more than
God, that is, took more care and pains to clear himself from the
imputation of unrighteousness in being thus afflicted than to clear God
from the imputation of unrighteousness in afflicting him, as if he were
more concerned for his own honour than for God's; whereas he should, in
the first place, have justified God and cleared his glory, and then he
might well enough have left his own reputation to shift for itself.
Note, A gracious heart is jealous for the honour of God, and cannot but
be angry when that is neglected or postponed, or when any injury is done
it. Nor is it any breach of the law of meekness to be angry at our
friends when they are offensive to God. Get thee behind me, Satan, says
Christ to Simon. Elihu owned Job to be a good man, and yet would not say
as he said when he thought he said amiss: it is too great a compliment
to our friends not to tell them of their faults. (2.) He was angry at
his friends because he thought they had not conducted themselves so
charitably towards Job as they ought to have done ([Job
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#003)): They had found no answer, and
yet had condemned Job. They had adjudged him to be a hypocrite, a wicked
man, and would not recede from that sentence concerning him; and yet
they could not prove him so, nor disprove the evidences he produced of
his integrity. They could not make good the premises, and yet held fast
the conclusion. They had no reply to make to his arguments, and yet they
would not yield, but, right or wrong, would run him down; and this was
not fair. Seldom is a quarrel begun, and more seldom is a quarrel
carried on to the length that this was, in which there is not a fault on
both sides. Elihu, as became a moderator, took part with neither, but
was equally displeased with the mistakes and mismanagement of both.
Those that in good earnest seek for truth must thus be impartial in
their judgments concerning the contenders, and not reject what is true
and good on either side for the sake of what is amiss, nor approve or
defend what is amiss for the sake of what is true and good, but must
learn to separate between the precious and the vile.

2\. Elihu spoke because he thought that it was time to speak, and that
now, at length, it had come to his turn, v. 4, 5. (1.) He had waited on
Job's speeches, had patiently heard him out, until the words of Job were
ended. (2.) He had waited on his friends' silence, so that, as he would
not interrupt him, so he would not prevent them, not because they were
wiser than he, but because they were older than he, and therefore it was
expected by the company that they should speak first; and Elihu was very
modest, and would by no means offer to abridge them of their privilege.
Some certain rules of precedency must be observed, for the keeping of
order. Though inward real honour will attend true wisdom and worth, yet,
since every man will think himself or his friend the wisest and
worthiest, this can afford no certain rule for the outward ceremonial
honour, which therefore must attend seniority either of age or office;
and this respect the seniors may the better require because they paid it
when they were juniors, and the juniors may the better pay because they
shall have it when they come to be seniors.

[Job 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 32:6</span></span>

Elihu here appears to have been,

I. A man of great modesty and humility. Though a young man, and a man of
abilities, yet not pert, and confident, and assuming: his face shone,
and, like Moses, he did not know it, which made it shine so much the
brighter. Let it be observed by all, especially by young people, as
worthy their imitation, 1. What a diffidence he had of himself and of
his own judgment ([Job 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#006)): "I am
young, and therefore I was afraid, and durst not show you my opinion,
for fear I should either prove mistaken or do that which was unbecoming
me." He was so observant of all that passed, and applied his mind so
closely to what he heard, that he had formed in himself a judgment of
it. He neither neglected it as foreign, nor declined it as intricate;
but, how clear soever the matter was to himself, he was afraid to
deliver his mind upon it, because he differed in his sentiments from
those that were older than he. Note, It becomes us to be suspicious of
our own judgment in matters of doubtful disputation, to be swift to hear
the sentiments of others and slow to speak our own, especially when we
go contrary to the judgment of those for whom, upon the score of their
learning and piety, we justly have a veneration. 2. What a deference he
paid to his seniors, and what great expectations he had from them, ([Job
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#007)): I said, Days should speak.
Note, Age and experience give a man great advantage in judging of
things, both as they furnish a man with so much the more matter for his
thoughts to work upon and as they ripen and improve the facilities he is
to work with, which is a good reason why old people should take pains
both to learn themselves and to teach others (else the advantages of
their age are a reproach to them), and why young people should attend on
their instructions. It is a good lodging with an old disciple, [Act
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#016); [Tit
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#004). Elihu's modesty appeared in the
patient attention he gave to what his seniors said, [Job
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#011), [Job
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#012). He waited for their words as
one that expected much from them, agreeably to the opinion he had of
these grave men. He gave ear to their reasons, that he might take their
meaning, and fully understand what was the drift of their discourse and
what the force of their arguments. He attended to them with diligence
and care, and this, (1.) Though they were slow, and took up a great deal
of time in searching out what to say. Though they had often to seek for
matter and words, paused and hesitated, and were unready at their work,
yet he overlooked that, and gave ear to their reasons, which, if really
convincing, he would not think the less so for the disadvantages of the
delivery of them. (2.) Though they trifled and made nothing of it,
though none of them answered Job's words nor said what was proper to
convince him, yet he attended to them, in hopes they would bring it to
some head at last. We must often be willing to hear what we do not like,
else we cannot prove all things. His patient attendance on their
discourses he pleads, \[1.\] As that which entitled him to a liberty of
speech in his turn and empowered him to require their attention. Hanc
veniam petimusque damusque vicissim - This liberty we mutually allow and
ask. Those that have heard may speak, and those that have learned may
teach. \[2.\] As that which enabled him to pass a judgment upon what
they had said. He had observed what they aimed at, and therefore knew
what to say to it. Let us be thoroughly apprized of the sentiments of
our brethren before we censure them; for he that answers a matter before
he hears it, or when he has heard it only by halves, it is folly and
shame to him, and bespeaks him both impertinent and imperious.

II\. A man of great sense and courage, and one that knew as well when
and how to speak as when and how to keep silence. Though he had so much
respect to his friends as not to interrupt them with his speaking, yet
he had so much regard to truth and justice (his better friends) as not
to betray them by his silence. He boldly pleads,

1\. That man is a rational creature, and therefore that every man has
for himself a judgment of discretion and ought to be allowed a liberty
of speech in his turn. He means the same that Job did ([Job
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#003), But I have understanding as well
as you) when he says ([Job 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#008)), But
there is a spirit in man; only he expresses it a little more modestly,
that one man has understanding as well as another, and no man can
pretend to have the monopoly of reason or to engross all the trade of
it. Had he meant I have revelation as well as you (as some understand
it), he must have proved it; but, if he meant only I have reason as well
as you, they cannot deny it, for it is every man's honour, and it is no
presumption to claim it, nor could they gainsay his inference from it
([Job 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#010)): Therefore hearken to me.
Learn here, (1.) That the soul is a spirit, neither material itself nor
dependent upon matter, but capable of conversing with things spiritual,
which are not the objects of sense. (2.) It is an understanding spirit.
It is able to discover and receive truth, to discourse and reason upon
it, and to direct and rule accordingly. (3.) This understanding spirit
is in every man; it is the light that lighteth every man, [Joh
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009). (4.) It is the inspiration of the
Almighty that gives us this understanding spirit; for he is the Father
of spirits and fountain of understanding. See [Gen
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007); [Ecc
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007); [Zac
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001).

2\. That those who are advanced above others in grandeur and gravity do
not always proportionably go beyond them in knowledge and wisdom ([Job
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#009)): Great men are not always wise;
it is a pity but they were, for then they would never do hurt with their
greatness and would do so much the more good with their wisdom. Men
should be preferred for their wisdom, and those that are in honour and
power have most need of wisdom and have the greatest opportunity of
improving in it; and yet it does not follow that great men are always
wise, and therefore it is folly to subscribe to the dictates of any with
an implicit faith. The aged do not always understand judgment; even they
may be mistaken, and therefore must not expect to bring every thought
into obedience to them: nay, therefore they must not take it as an
affront to be contradicted, but rather take it as a kindness to be
instructed, by their juniors: Therefore I said, hearken to me, [Job
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#010). We must be willing to hear
reason from those that are every way inferior to us, and to yield to it.
He that has a good eye can see further upon level ground than he that is
purblind can from the top of the highest mountain. Better is a poor and
wise child then an old and foolish king, [Ecc
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#013).

3\. That it was requisite for something to be said, for the setting of
this controversy in a true light, which, by all that had hitherto been
said, was but rendered more intricate and perplexed ([Job
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#013)): "I must speak, lest you should
say, We have found out wisdom, lest you should think your argument
against Job conclusive and irrefragable, and that Job cannot be
convinced and humbled by any other argument than this of yours, That God
casteth him down and not man, that it appears by his extraordinary
afflictions that God is his enemy, and therefore he is certainly a
wicked man. I must show you that this is a false hypothesis and that Job
may be convinced without maintaining it." Or, "Lest you should think you
have found out the wisest way, to reason no more with him, but leave it
to God to thrust him down." It is time to speak when we hear errors
advanced and disputed for, especially under pretence of supporting the
cause of God with them. It is time to speak when God's judgments are
vouched for the patronizing of men's pride and passion and their unjust
uncharitable censures of their brethren; then we must speak on God's
behalf.

4\. That he had something new to offer, and would endeavour to manage
the dispute in a better manner than it had hitherto been managed, v. 14.
He thinks he may expect a favourable hearing; for, (1.) He will not
reply to Job's protestations of his integrity, but allows the truth of
them, and therefore does not interpose as his enemy: "He hath not
directed his words against me. I have nothing to say against the main
scope of his discourse, nor do I differ from his principles. I have only
a gentle reproof to give him for his passionate expressions." (2.) He
will not repeat their arguments, nor go upon their principles: "Neither
will I answer him with your speeches - not with the same matter, for
should I only say what has been said I might justly be silenced as
impertinent, - nor in the same manner; I will not be guilty of that
peevishness towards him myself which I dislike in you." The controversy
that has already been fully handled a wise man will let alone, unless he
can amend and improve what has been done; why should he actum agere - do
that which has been done already?

[Job 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 32:15</span></span>

Three things here apologize for Elihu's interposing as he does in this
controversy which had already been canvassed by such acute and learned
disputants: -

1\. That the stage was clear, and he did not break in upon any of the
managers on either side: They were amazed ([Job
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#015)); they stood still, and answered
no more, [Job 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#016). They not only
left off speaking themselves, but they stood still, to hear if any of
the company would speak their minds, so that (as we say) he had room and
fair play given him. They seemed not fully satisfied themselves with
what they had said, else they would have adjourned the court, and not
have stood still, expecting what might further be offered. And therefore
I said ([Job 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#017)), "I will answer
also my part. I cannot pretend to give a definitive sentence; no, the
judgment is the Lord's, and by him it must be determined who is in the
right and who is in the wrong; but, since you have each of you shown
your opinion, I also will show mine, and let it take its fate with the
rest." When what is offered, even by the meanest, is offered thus
modestly, it is a pity but it should be fairly heard and considered. I
see no inconvenience in supposing that Elihu here discovers himself to
be the penman of this book, and that he here writes as an historian,
relating the matter of fact, that, after he had bespoken their attention
in the foregoing verses, they were amazed, they left off whispering
among themselves, did not gainsay the liberty of speech he desired, but
stood still to hear what he would say, being much surprised at the
admirable mixture of boldness and modesty that appeared in his preface.

2\. That he was uneasy, and even in pain, to be delivered of his
thoughts upon this matter. They must give him leave to speak, for he
cannot forbear; while he is musing the fire burns ([Psa
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003)), shut up in his bones, as the
prophet speaks, [Jer 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009). Never did
nurse, when her breasts were gorged, so long to have them drawn as Elihu
did to deliver his mind concerning Job's case, [Job
32:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#018). If any of the disputants had
hit that which he thought was the right joint, he would contentedly have
been silent; but, when he thought they all missed it, he was eager to be
trying his hand at it. He pleads, (1.) That he had a great deal to say:
"I am full of matter, having carefully attended to all that has hitherto
been said, and made my own reflections upon it." When aged men are drawn
dry, and have spent their stock, in discoursing of the divine
Providence, God can raise up others, even young men, and fill them with
matter for the edifying of his church; for it is a subject that can
never be exhausted, though those that speak upon it may. (2.) That he
was under a necessity of saying it: "The spirit within me not only
instructs me what to say, but puts me on to say it; so that if I have
not vent (such a ferment are my thoughts in) I shall burst like bottles
of new wine when it is working," [Job
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#019). See what a great grief it is to
a good minister to be silenced and thrust into a corner; he is full of
matter, full of Christ, full of heaven, and would speak of these things
for the good of others, but he may not. (3.) That it would be an ease
and satisfaction to himself to deliver his mind ([Job
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#020)): I will speak, that I may be
refreshed, not only that I may be eased of the pain of stifling my
thoughts, but that I may have the pleasure of endeavouring, according to
my place and capacity, to do good. It is a great refreshment to a good
man to have liberty to speak for the glory of God and the edification of
others.

3\. That he was resolved to speak, with all possible freedom and
sincerity, what he thought was true, not what he thought would please
([Job 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#021), [Job
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#022)): "Let me not accept any man's
person, as partial judges do, that aim to enrich themselves, not to do
justice. I am resolved to flatter no man." He would not speak otherwise
than he thought, either, (1.) In compassion to Job, because he was poor
and in affliction, would not make his case better than he really took it
to be, for fear of increasing his grief; "but, let him bear it as he
can, he shall be told the truth." Those that are in affliction must not
be flattered, but dealt faithfully with. When trouble is upon any it is
foolish pity to suffer sin upon them too ([Lev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017)), for that is the worst addition
that can be to their trouble. Thou shalt not countenance, any more than
discountenance, a poor man in his cause ([Exo
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#003)), nor regard a sad look any more
than a big look, so as, for the sake of it, to pervert justice, for that
is accepting persons. Or, (2.) In compliment to Job's friends, because
they were in prosperity and reputation. Let them not expect that he
should say as they said, any further than he was convinced that they say
right, nor applaud their dictates for the sake of their dignities. No,
though Elihu is a young man, and upon his preferment, he will not
dissemble truth to court the favour of great men. It is a good
resolution he has taken up - "I know not to give flattering titles to
men; I never used myself to flattering language;" and it is a good
reason he gives for that resolution - in so doing my Maker would soon
take my away. It is good to keep ourselves in awe with a holy fear of
God's judgments. He that made us will take us away in his wrath is we do
not conduct ourselves as we should. He hates all dissimulation and
flattery, and will soon put lying lips to silence and cut off flattering
lips, [Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003). The more closely we
eye the majesty of God as our Maker, and the more we dread his wrath and
justice, the less danger shall we be in of a sinful fearing or
flattering of men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 33](job033)

</div>
