<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job038)  [Next](job040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 39:0</span></span>

God proceeds here to show Job what little reason he had to charge him
with unkindness who was so compassionate to the inferior creatures and
took such a tender care of them, or to boast of himself, and his own
good deeds before God, which were nothing to the divine mercies. He
shows him also what great reason he had to be humble who knew so little
of the nature of the creatures about him and had so little influence
upon them, and to submit to that God on whom they all depend. He
discourses particularly, I. Concerning the wild goats and hinds ([Job
39:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001)). II. Concerning the wild ass
([Job 39:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005)). III. Concerning the
unicorn ([Job 39:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009)). IV. Concerning
the horse ([Job 39:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#019)). VII.
Concerning the hawk and the eagle ([Job
39:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#026)).

[Job 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 39:1</span></span>

God here shows Job what little acquaintance he had with the untamed
creatures that run wild in the deserts and live at large, but are the
care of the divine Providence. As,

I. The wild goats and the hinds. That which is taken notice of
concerning them is the bringing forth and bringing up of their young
ones. For, as every individual is fed, so every species of animals is
preserved, by the care of the divine Providence, and, for aught we know,
none extinct to this day. Observe here, 1. Concerning the production of
their young, (1.) Man is wholly ignorant of the time when they bring
forth, [Job 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001), [Job
39:2](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#002). Shall we pretend to tell what is
in the womb of Providence, or what a day will bring forth, who know not
the time of the pregnancy of a hind or a wild goat? (2.) Though they
bring forth their young with a great deal of difficulty and sorrow, and
have no assistance from man, yet, by the good providence of God, their
young ones are safely produced, and their sorrows cast out and
forgotten, [Job 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#003). Some think it is
intimated ([Psa 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009)) that God by
thunder helps the hinds in calving. Let it be observed, for the comfort
of women in labour, that God helps even the hinds to bring forth their
young; and shall he not much more succour them, and save them in
child-bearing, who are his children in covenant with him? 2. Concerning
the growth of their young, ([Job
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#004)): They are in good liking; though
they are brought forth in sorrow, after their dams have suckled them
awhile they shift for themselves in the corn-fields, and are no more
burdensome to them, which is an example to children, when they have
grown up, not to be always hanging upon their parents and craving from
them, but to put forth themselves to get their own livelihood and to
requite their parents.

II\. The wild ass, a creature we frequently read of in Scripture, some
say untameable. Man is said to be born as the wild ass's colt, so hard
to be governed. Two things Providence has allotted to the wild ass: - 1.
An unbounded liberty ([Job 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005)): Who
but God has sent out the wild ass free? He has given a disposition to
it, and therefore a dispensation for it. The tame ass is bound to
labour; the wild ass has no bonds on him. Note, Freedom from service,
and liberty to range at pleasure, are but the privileges of a wild ass.
It is a pity that any of the children of men should covet such a
liberty, or value themselves on it. It is better to labour and be good
for something than ramble and be good for nothing. But if, among men,
Providence sets some at liberty and suffers them to live at ease, while
others are doomed to servitude, we must not marvel at the matter: it is
so among the brute-creatures. 2. An unenclosed lodging ([Job
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#006)): Whose house I have made the
wilderness, where he has room enough to traverse his ways, and snuff up
the wind at his pleasure, as the wild ass is said to do ([Jer
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024)), as if he had to live upon the
air, for it is the barren land that is his dwelling. Observe, The tame
ass, that labours, and is serviceable to man, has his master's crib to
go to both for shelter and food, and lives in a fruitful land: but the
wild ass, that will have his liberty, must have it in a barren land. He
that will not labour, let him not eat. He that will shall eat the labour
of his hands, and have also to give to him that needs. Jacob, the
shepherd, has good red pottage to spare, when Esau, a sportsman, is
ready to perish for hunger. A further description of the liberty and
livelihood of the wild ass we have, [Job
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#007), [Job
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#008). (1.) He has no owner, nor will
he be in subjection: He scorns the multitude of the city. If they
attempt to take him, and in order to that surround him with a multitude,
he will soon get clear of them, and the crying of the driver is nothing
to him. He laughs at those that live in the tumult and bustle of cities
(so bishop Patrick), thinking himself happier in the wilderness; and
opinion is the rate of things. (2.) Having no owner, he has no feeder,
nor is any provision made for him, but he must shift for himself: The
range of the mountains is his pasture, and a bare pasture it is; there
he searches after here and there a green thing, as he can find it and
pick it up; whereas the labouring asses have green things in plenty,
without their searching for them. From the untameableness of this and
other creatures we may infer how unfit we are to give law to Providence,
who cannot give law even to a wild ass's colt.

III\. The unicorn - rhem, a strong creature ([Num
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#022)), a stately proud creature, [Psa
112:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#010). He is able to serve, but not
willing; and God here challenges Job to force him to it. Job expected
every thing should be just as he would have it. "Since thou dost
pretend" (says God) "to bring every thing beneath thy sway, begin with
the unicorn, and try thy skill upon him. Now that thy oxen and asses are
all gone, try whether he will be willing to serve thee in their stead
([Job 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009)) and whether he will be
content with the provision thou usedst to make for them: Will he abide
by thy crib? No;" 1. "Thou canst not tame him, nor bind him with his
band, nor set him to draw the harrow," [Job
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#010). There are creatures that are
willing to serve man, that seem to take a pleasure in serving him, and
to have a love for their masters; but there are such as will never be
brought to serve him, which is the effect of sin. Man has revolted from
his subjection to his Maker, and is therefore justly punished with the
revolt of the inferior creatures from their subjection to him; and yet,
as an instance of God's good-will to man, there are some that are still
serviceable to him. Though the wild bull (which some think is meant here
by the unicorn) will not serve him, nor submit to his hand in the
furrows, yet there are tame bullocks that will, and other animals that
are not ferae naturae - of a wild nature, in whom man may have a
property, for whom he provides, and to whose service he is entitled.
Lord, what is man, that thou art thus mindful of him? 2. "Thou darest
not trust him; though his strength is great, yet thou wilt not leave thy
labour to him, as thou dost with thy asses or oxen, which a little child
may lead or drive, leaving to them all the pains. Thou wilt never depend
upon the wild bull, as likely to come to thy harvest-work, much less to
go through it, to bring home thy seed and gather it into thy barn," [Job
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#011), [Job
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#012). And, because he will not serve
about the corn, he is not so well fed as the tame ox, whose mouth was
not to be muzzled in treading out the corn; but therefore he will not
draw the plough, because he that made him never designed him for it. A
disposition to labour is as much the gift of God as an ability for it;
and it is a great mercy if, where God gives strength for service, he
gives a heart; it is what we should pray for, and reason ourselves into,
which the brutes cannot do; for, as among beasts, so among men, those
may justly be reckoned wild and abandoned to the deserts who have no
mind either to take pains or to do good.

[Job 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 39:13</span></span>

The ostrich is a wonderful animal, a very large bird, but it never
flies. Some have called it a winged camel. God here gives an account of
it, and observes,

I. Something that it has in common with the peacock, that is, beautiful
feathers ([Job 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013)): Gavest thou
proud wings unto the peacocks? so some read it. Fine feathers make proud
birds. The peacock is an emblem of pride; when he struts, and shows his
fine feathers, Solomon in all his glory is not arrayed like him. The
ostrich too has goodly feathers, and yet is a foolish bird; for wisdom
does not always go along with beauty and gaiety. Other birds do not envy
the peacock or the ostrich their gaudy colours, nor complain for want of
them; why then should we repine if we see others wear better clothes
than we can afford to wear? God gives his gifts variously, and those
gifts are not always the most valuable that make the finest show. Who
would not rather have the voice of the nightingale than the tail of the
peacock, the eye of the eagle and her soaring wing, and the natural
affection of the stork, than the beautiful wings and feathers of the
ostrich, which can never rise above the earth, and is without natural
affection?

II\. Something that is peculiar to itself,

1\. Carelessness of her young. It is well that this is peculiar to
herself, for it is a very bad character. Observe, (1.) How she exposes
her eggs; she does not retire to some private place, and make a nest
there, as the sparrows and swallows do ([Psa
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003)), and there lay eggs and hatch
her young. Most birds, as well as other animals, are strangely guided by
natural instinct in providing for the preservation of their young. But
the ostrich is a monster in nature, for she drops her eggs any where
upon the ground and takes no care to hatch them. If the sand and the sun
will hatch them, well and good; they may for her, for she will not warm
them, [Job 39:14](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#014). Nay, she takes no
care to preserve them: The foot of the traveller may crush them, and the
wild beast break them, [Job 39:15](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#015). But
how then are any young ones brought forth, and whence is it that the
species has not perished? We must suppose either that God, by a special
providence, with the heat of the sun and the sand (so some think),
hatches the neglected eggs of the ostrich, as he feeds the neglected
young ones of the raven, or that, though the ostrich often leaves her
eggs thus, yet not always. (2.) The reason why she does thus expose her
eggs. It is, \[1.\] For want of natural affection ([Job
39:16](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#016)): She is hardened against her
young ones. To be hardened against any is unamiable, even in a
brute-creature, much more in a rational creature that boasts of
humanity, especially to be hardened against young ones, that cannot help
themselves and therefore merit compassion, that give no provocation and
therefore merit no hard usage: but it is worst of all for her to be
hardened against her own young ones, as though they were not hers,
whereas really they are parts of herself. Her labour in laying her eggs
is in vain and all lost, because she has not that fear and tender
concern for them that she should have. Those are most likely to lose
their labour that are least in fear of losing it. \[2.\] For want of
wisdom ([Job 39:17](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#017)): God has deprived
her of wisdom. This intimates that the art which other animals have to
nourish and preserve their young is God's gift, and that, where it
exists not, God denies it, that by the folly of the ostrich, as well as
by the wisdom of the ant, we may learn to be wise; for, First, As
careless as the ostrich is of her eggs so careless many people are of
their own souls; they make no provision for them, no proper nest in
which they may be safe, leave them exposed to Satan and his temptations,
which is a certain evidence that they are deprived of wisdom. Secondly,
So careless are many parents of their children; some of their bodies,
not providing for their own house, their own bowels, and therefore worse
than infidels, and as bad as the ostrich; but many more are thus
careless of their children's souls, take no care of their education,
send them abroad into the world untaught, unarmed, forgetting what
corruption there is in the world through lust, which will certainly
crush them. Thus their labour in rearing them comes to be in vain; it
were better for their country that they had never been born. Thirdly, So
careless are too many ministers of their people, with whom they should
reside; but they leave them in the earth, and forget how busy Satan is
to sow tares while men sleep. They overlook those whom they should
oversee, and are really hardened against them.

2\. Care of herself. She leaves her eggs in danger, but, if she herself
be in danger, no creature shall strive more to get out of the way of it
than the ostrich, [Job 39:18](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#018). Then she
lifts up her wings on high (the strength of which then stands her in
better stead than their beauty), and, with the help of them, runs so
fast that a horseman at full speed cannot overtake her: She scorneth the
horse and his rider. Those that are least under the law of natural
affection often contend most for the law of self-preservation. Let not
the rider be proud of the swiftness of his horse when such an animal as
the ostrich shall out-run him.

[Job 39:19](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 39:19</span></span>

God, having displayed his own power in those creatures that are strong
and despise man, here shows it in one scarcely inferior to any of them
in strength, and yet very tame and serviceable to man, and that is the
horse, especially the horse that is prepared against the day of battle
and is serviceable to man at a time when he has more than ordinary
occasion for his service. It seems, there was, in Job's country, a noble
generous breed of horses. Job, it is probable, kept many, though they
are not mentioned among his possessions, cattle for use in husbandry
being there valued more than those for state and war, which alone horses
were then reserved for, and they were not then put to such mean services
as with us they are commonly put to. Concerning the great horse, that
stately beast, it is here observed, 1. That he has a great deal of
strength and spirit (v. 19): Hast thou given the horse strength? He uses
his strength for man, but has it not from him: God gave it to him, who
is the fountain of all the powers of nature, and yet he himself delights
not in the strength of the horse ([Psa
147:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010)), but has told us that a horse
is a vain thing for safety, [Psa
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#017). For running, drawing, and
carrying, no creature that is ordinarily in the service of man has so
much strength as the horse has, nor is of so stout and bold a spirit,
not to be made afraid as a grasshopper, but daring and forward to face
danger. It is a mercy to man to have such a servant, which, though very
strong, submits to the management of a child, and rebels not against his
owner. But let not the strength of a horse be trusted to, [Hos
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003); [Psa
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007); [Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001), [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003). 2. That his neck and nostrils
look great. His neck is clothed with thunder, with a large and flowing
mane, which makes him formidable and is an ornament to him. The glory of
his nostrils, when he snorts, flings up his head, and throws foam about,
is terrible, [Job 39:20](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#020). Perhaps there
might be at that time, and in that country, a more stately breed of
horses than any we have now. 3. That he is very fierce and furious in
battle, and charges with an undaunted courage, though he pushes on in
imminent danger of his life. (1.) See how frolicsome he is ([Job
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#021)): He paws in the valley,
scarcely knowing what ground he stands upon. He is proud of his
strength, and he has much more reason to be so as using his strength in
the service of man, and under his direction, than the wild ass that uses
it in contempt of man, and in a revolt from him [Job
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#008). (2.) See how forward he is to
engage: He goes on to meet the armed men, animated, not by the goodness
of the cause, or the prospect of honour, but only by the sound of the
trumpet, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting of the soldiers,
which are as bellows to the fire of his innate courage, and make him
spring forward with the utmost eagerness, as if he cried, Ha! ha! [Job
39:25](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#025). How wonderfully are the
brute-creatures fitted for and inclined to the services for which they
were designed. (3.) See how fearless he is, how he despises death and
the most threatening dangers, ([Job
39:22](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#022)): He mocks at fear, and makes a
jest of it; slash at him with a sword, rattle the quiver, brandish the
spear, to drive him back, he will not retreat, but press forward, and
even inspires courage into his rider. (4.) See how furious he is. He
curvets and prances, and runs on with so much violence and heat against
the enemy that one would think he even swallowed the ground with
fierceness and rage, [Job 39:24](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#024). High
mettle is the praise of a horse rather than of a man, whom fierceness
and rage ill become. This description of the war-horse will help to
explain that character which is given of presumptuous sinners, [Jer
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006). Every one turneth to his course,
as the horse rusheth into the battle. When a man's heart is fully set in
him to do evil, and he is carried on in a wicked way by the violence of
inordinate appetites and passions, there is no making him afraid of the
wrath of God and the fatal consequences of sin. Let his own conscience
set before him the curse of the law, the death that is the wages of sin,
and all the terrors of the Almighty in battle-array; he mocks at this
fear, and is not affrighted, neither turns he back from the flaming
sword of the cherubim. Let ministers lift up their voice like a trumpet,
to proclaim the wrath of God against him, he believes not that it is the
sound of the trumpet, nor that God and his heralds are in earnest with
him; but what will be in the end hereof it is easy to foresee.

[Job 39:26](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 39:26</span></span>

The birds of the air are proofs of the wonderful power and providences
of God, as well as the beasts of the earth; God here refers particularly
to two stately ones: - 1. The hawk, a noble bird of great strength and
sagacity, and yet a bird of prey, [Job
39:26](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#026). This bird is here taken notice
of for her flight, which is swift and strong, and especially for the
course she steers towards the south, whither she follows the sun in
winter, out of the colder countries in the north, especially when she is
to cast her plumes and renew them. This is her wisdom, and it was God
that gave her this wisdom, not man. Perhaps the extraordinary wisdom of
the hawk's flight after her prey was not used then for men's diversion
and recreation, as it has been since. It is a pity that the reclaimed
hawk, which is taught to fly at man's command and to make him sport,
should at any time be abused to the dishonour of God, since it is from
God that she receives that wisdom which makes her flight entertaining
and serviceable. 2. The eagle, a royal bird, and yet a bird of prey too,
the permission of which, nay, the giving of power to which, may help to
reconcile us to the prosperity of oppressors among men. The eagle is
here taken notice of, (1.) For the height of her flight. No bird soars
so high, has so strong a wind, nor can so well bear the light of the
sun. Now, "Doth she mount at thy command? [Job
39:27](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#027). Is it by any strength she has
from thee? or dost thou direct her flight? No; it is by the natural
power and instinct God has given her that she will soar out of thy
sight, much more out of thy call." (2.) For the strength of her nest.
Her house is her castle and strong-hold; she makes it on high and on the
rock, the crag of the rock ([Job
39:28](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#028)), which sets her and her young
out of the reach of danger. Secure sinners think themselves as safe in
their sins as the eagle in her nest on high, in the clefts of the rock;
but I will bring thee down thence, saith the Lord, [Jer
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#016). The higher bad men sit above
the resentments of the earth the nearer they ought to think themselves
to the vengeance of Heaven. (3.) For her quicksightedness ([Job
39:29](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#029)): Her eyes behold afar off, not
upwards, but downwards, in quest of her prey. In this she is an emblem
of a hypocrite, who, while, in the profession of religion, he seems to
rise towards heaven, keeps his eye and heart upon the prey on earth,
some temporal advantage, some widow's house or other that he hopes to
devour, under pretence of devotion. (4.) For the way she has of
maintaining herself and her young. She preys upon living animals, which
she seizes and tears to pieces, and thence carries to her young ones,
which are taught to suck up blood; they do it by instinct, and know no
better; but for men that have reason and conscience to thirst after
blood is what could scarcely be believed if there had not been in every
age wretched instances of it. She also preys upon the dead bodies of
men: Where the slain are, there is she, These birds of prey (in another
sense than the horse, [Job 39:25](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#025))
smell the battle afar off. Therefore, when a great slaughter is to be
made among the enemies of the church, the fowls are invited to the
supper of the great God, to eat the flesh of kings and captains, [Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017), [Rev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018). Our Saviour refers to this
instinct of the eagle, [Mat 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028).
Wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered together.
Every creature will make towards that which is its proper food; for he
that provides the creatures their food has implanted in them that
inclination. These and many such instances of natural power and sagacity
in the inferior creatures, which we cannot account for, oblige us to
confess our own weakness and ignorance and to give glory to God as the
fountain of all being, power, wisdom, and perfection.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 40](job040)

</div>
