<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job040)  [Next](job042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 41:0</span></span>

The description here given of the leviathan, a very large, strong,
formidable fish, or water-animal, is designed yet further to convince
Job of his own impotency, and of God's omnipotence, that he might be
humbled for his folly in making so bold with him as he had done. I. To
convince Job of his own weakness he is here challenged to subdue and
tame this leviathan if he can, and make himself master of him ([Job
41:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001)), and, since he cannot do this,
he must own himself utterly unable to stand before the great God ([Job
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#010)). II. To convince Job of God's
power and terrible majesty several particular instances are here given
of the strength and terror of the leviathan, which is no more than what
God has given him, nor more than he has under his check, ([Job
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#011), [Job
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#012)). The face of the leviathan is
here described to be terrible ([Job
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#012), [Job
41:14](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#014)), his scales close ([Job
41:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#015)), his breath and neesings
sparkling ([Job 41:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#018)), his flesh
firm ([Job 41:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#022)), his strength and
spirit, when he is attacked, insuperable ([Job
41:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#025)), his motions turbulent, and
disturbing to the waters ([Job 41:31](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#031),
[Job 41:32](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#032)), so that, upon the whole,
he is a very terrible creature, and man is no match for him ([Job
41:33](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#033), [Job
41:34](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#034)).

[Job 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 41:1</span></span>

Whether this leviathan be a whale or a crocodile is a great dispute
among the learned, which I will not undertake to determine; some of the
particulars agree more easily to the one, others to the other; both are
very strong and fierce, and the power of the Creator appears in them.
The ingenious Sir Richard Blackmore, though he admits the more received
opinion concerning the behemoth, that it must be meant of the elephant,
yet agrees with the learned Bochart's notion of the leviathan, that it
is the crocodile, which was so well known in the river of Egypt. I
confess that that which inclines me rather to understand it of the whale
is not only because it is much larger and a nobler animal, but because,
in the history of the Creation, there is such an express notice taken of
it as is not of any other species of animals whatsoever ([Gen
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021), God created great whales), by
which it appears, not only that whales were well known in those parts in
the time of Moses, who lived a little after Job, but that the creation
of whales was generally looked upon as a most illustrious proof of the
eternal power and godhead of the Creator; and we may conjecture that
this was the reason (for otherwise it seems unaccountable) why Moses
there so particularly mentions the creation of the whales, because God
had so lately insisted upon the bulk and strength of that creature than
of any other, as the proof of his power; and the leviathan is here
spoken of as an inhabitant of the sea ([Job
41:31](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#031)), which the crocodile is not;
and [Psa 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025), [Psa
104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026), there in the great and wide
sea, is that leviathan. Here in these verses,

I. He shows how unable Job was to master the leviathan. 1. That he could
not catch him, as a little fish, with angling, [Job
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001), [Job
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#002). He had no bait wherewith to
deceive him, no hook wherewith to catch him, no fish-line wherewith to
draw him out of the water, nor a thorn to run through his gills, on
which to carry him home. 2. That he could not make him his prisoner, nor
force him to cry for quarter, or surrender himself at discretion, [Job
41:3](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#003), [Job
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#004). "He knows his own strength too
well to make many supplications to thee, and to make a covenant with
thee to be thy servant on condition thou wilt save his life." 3. That he
could not entice him into a cage, and keep him there as a bird for the
children to play with, [Job 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#005).
There are creatures so little, so weak, as to be easily restrained thus,
and triumphed over; but the leviathan is not one of these: he is made to
be the terror, not the sport and diversion, of mankind. 4. That he could
not have him served up to his table; he and his companions could not
make a banquet of him; his flesh is too strong to be fit for food, and,
if it were not, he is not easily caught. 5. That they could not enrich
themselves with the spoil of him: Shall they part him among the
merchants, the bones to one, the oil to another? If they can catch him,
they will; but it is probable that the art of fishing for whales was not
brought to perfection then, as it has been since. 6. That they could not
destroy him, could not fill his head with fish-spears, [Job
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#007). He kept out of the reach of
their instruments of slaughter, or, if they touched him, they could not
touch him to the quick. 7. That it was to no purpose to attempt it: The
hope of taking him is in vain, [Job
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#009). If men go about to seize him, so
formidable is he that the very sight of him will appal them, and make a
stout man ready to faint away: Shall not one be cast down even at the
sight of him? and will not that deter the pursuers from their attempt?
Job is told, at his peril, to lay his hand upon him, [Job
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#008). "Touch him if thou dare;
remember the battle, how unable thou art to encounter such a force, and
what is therefore likely to be the issue of the battle, and do no more,
but desist from the attempt." It is good to remember the battle before
we engage in a war, and put off the harness in time if we foresee it
will be to no purpose to gird it on. Job is hereby admonished not to
proceed in his controversy with God, but to make his peace with him,
remembering what the battle will certainly end in if he come to an
engagement. See [Isa 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#004), [Isa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005).

II\. Thence he infers how unable he was to contend with the Almighty.
None is so fierce, none so fool-hardy, that he dares to stir up the
leviathan ([Job 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#010)), it being known
that he will certainly be too hard for them; and who then is able to
stand before God, either to impeach and arraign his proceedings or to
out-face the power of his wrath? If the inferior creatures that are put
under the feet of man, and over whom he has dominion, keep us in awe
thus, how terrible must the majesty of our great Lord be, who has a
sovereign dominion over us and against whom man has been so long in
rebellion! Who can stand before him when once he is angry?

[Job 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 41:11</span></span>

God, having in the foregoing verses shown Job how unable he was to deal
with the leviathan, here sets forth his own power in that massy mighty
creature. Here is,

I. God's sovereign dominion and independency laid down, [Job
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#011). 1. That he is indebted to none
of his creatures. If any pretend he is indebted to them, let them make
their demand and prove their debt, and they shall receive it in full and
not by composition: "Who has prevented me?" that is, "who has laid any
obligations upon me by any services he has done me? Who can pretend to
be before-hand with me? If any were, I would not long be behind-hand
with them; I would soon repay them." The apostle quotes this for the
silencing of all flesh in God's presence, [Rom
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#035). Who hath first given to him,
and it shall be recompensed to him again? As God does not inflict upon
us the evils we have deserved, so he does bestow upon us the favours we
have not deserved. 2. That he is the rightful Lord and owner of all the
creatures: "Whatsoever is under the whole heaven, animate or inanimate,
is mine (and particularly this leviathan), at my command and disposal,
what I have an incontestable property in and dominion over." All is his;
we are his, all we have and do; and therefore we cannot make God our
debtor; but of thy own, Lord, have we given thee. All is his, and
therefore, if he were indebted to any, he has wherewithal to repay them;
the debt is in good hands. All is his, and therefore he needs not our
services, nor can he be benefited by them. If I were hungry I would not
tell thee, for the world is mind and the fulness thereof, [Psa
50:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#012).

II\. The proof and illustration of it, from the wonderful structure of
the leviathan, [Job 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#012).

1\. The parts of his body, the power he exerts, especially when he is
set upon, and the comely proportion of the whole of him, are what God
will not conceal, and therefore what we must observe and acknowledge the
power of God in. Though he is a creature of monstrous bulk, yet there is
in him a comely proportion. In our eye beauty lies in that which is
small (inest sua gratia parvis - little things have a gracefulness all
their own) because we ourselves are so; but in God's eye even the
leviathan is comely; and, if he pronounce even the whale, event he
crocodile, so, it is not for us to say of any of the works of his hands
that they are ugly of ill-favoured; it is enough to say so, as we have
cause, of our own works. God here goes about to give us an anatomical
view (as it were) of the leviathan; for his works appear most beautiful
and excellent, and his wisdom and power appear most in them, when they
are taken in pieces and viewed in their several parts and proportions.
(1.) The leviathan, even prima facie - at first sight, appears
formidable and inaccessible, [Job
41:13](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#013), [Job
41:14](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#014). Who dares come so near him
while he is alive as to discover or take a distinct view of the face of
the garment, the skin with which he is clothed as with a garment, so
near him as to bridle him like a horse and so lead him away, so near him
as to be within reach of his jaws, which are like a double bridle? Who
will venture to look into his mouth, as we do into a horse's mouth? He
that opens the doors of his face will see his teeth terrible round
about, strong and sharp, and fitted to devour; it would make a man
tremble to think of having a leg or an arm between them. (2.) His scales
are his beauty and strength, and therefore his pride, [Job
41:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#015). The crocodile is indeed
remarkable for his scales; if we understand it of the whale, we must
understand by these shields (for so the word is) the several coats of
his skin; or there might be whales in that country with scales. That
which is remarkable concerning the scales is that they stick so close
together, by which he is not only kept warm, for no air can pierce him,
but kept safe, for no sword can pierce him through those scales. Fishes,
that live in the water, are fortified accordingly by the wisdom of
Providence, which gives clothes as it gives cold. (3.) He scatters
terror with his very breath and looks; if he sneeze or spout up water,
it is like a light shining, either with the froth or the light of the
sun shining through it, [Job 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#018).
The eyes of the whale are reported to shine in the night-time like a
flame, or, as here, like the eye-lids of the morning; the same they say
of the crocodile. The breath of this creature is so hot and fiery, from
the great natural heat within, that burning lamps and sparks of fire,
smoke and a flame, are said to go out of his mouth, even such as one
would think sufficient to set coals on fire, [Job
41:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#019). Probably these hyperbolical
expressions are used concerning the leviathan to intimate the terror of
the wrath of God, for that is it which all this is designed to convince
us of. Fire out of his mouth devours, [Psa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007), [Psa
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008). The breath of the Almighty, like
a stream of brimstone, kindles Tophet, and will for ever keep it
burning, [Isa 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033). The wicked one
shall be consumed with the breath of his mouth, [Th2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008). (4.) He is of invincible strength
and most terrible fierceness, so that he frightens all that come in his
way, but is not himself frightened by any. Take a view of his neck, and
there remains strength, [Job 41:22](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#022).
his head and his body are well set together. Sorrow rejoices (or rides
in triumph) before him, for he makes terrible work wherever he comes.
Or, Those storms which are the sorrow of others are his joys; what is
tossing to others is dancing to him. His flesh is well knit, [Job
41:23](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#023). The flakes of it are joined so
closely together, and are so firm, that it is hard to pierce it; he is
as if he were all bone. His flesh is of brass, which Job had complained
his was not, [Job 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#012). His heart is
as firm as a stone, [Job 41:24](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#024). He has
spirit equal to his bodily strength, and, though he is bulky, he is
sprightly, and not unwieldy. As his flesh and skin cannot be pierced, so
his courage cannot be daunted; but, on the contrary, he daunts all he
meets and puts them into a consternation ([Job
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#025)): When he raises up himself like
a moving mountain in the great waters even the mighty are afraid lest he
should overturn their ships or do them some other mischief. By reason of
the breakings he makes in the water, which threaten death, they purify
themselves, confess their sins, betake themselves to their prayers, and
get ready for death. We read ([Job
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#008)) of those who, when they raise up
a leviathan, are in such a fright that they curse the day. It was a fear
which, it seems, used to drive some to their curses and others to their
prayers; for, as now, so then there were seafaring men of different
characters and on whom the terrors of the sea have contrary effects; but
all agree there is a great fright among them when the leviathan raises
up himself. (5.) All the instruments of slaughter that are used against
him do him no hurt and therefore are not error to him, [Job
41:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#026). The sword and the spear,
which wound nigh at hand, are nothing to him; the darts, arrows, and
sling-stones, which wound at a distance, do him no damage; nature has so
well armed him cap-a-pie - at all points, against them all. The
defensive weapons which men use when they engage with the leviathan, as
the habergeon, or breast-plate, often serve men no more than their
offensive weapons; iron and brass are to him as straw and rotten wood,
and he laughs at them. It is the picture of a hard-hearted sinner, that
despises the terrors of the Almighty and laughs at all the threatenings
of his word. The leviathan so little dreads the weapons that are used
against him that, to show how hardy he is, he chooses to lie on the
sharp stones, the sharp-pointed things ([Job
41:30](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#030)), and lies as easy there as if
he lay on the soft mire. Those that would endure hardness must inure
themselves to it. (6.) His very motion in the water troubles it and puts
it into a ferment, [Job 41:31](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#031), [Job
41:32](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#032). When he rolls, and tosses, and
makes a stir in the water, or is in pursuit of his prey, he makes the
deep to boil like a pot, he raises a great froth and foam upon the
water, such as is upon a boiling pot, especially a pot of boiling
ointment; and he makes a path to shine after him, which even a ship in
the midst of the sea does not, [Pro
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#019). One may trace the leviathan
under water by the bubbles on the surface; and yet who can take that
advantage against him in pursuing him? Men track hares in the snow and
kill them, but he that tracks the leviathan dares not come near him.

2\. Having given this particular account of his parts, and his power,
and his comely proportion, he concludes with four things in general
concerning this animal: - (1.) That he is a non-such among the inferior
creatures: Upon earth there is not his like, [Job
41:33](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#033). No creature in this world is
comparable to him for strength and terror. Or the earth is here
distinguished from the sea: His dominion is not upon the earth (so
some), but in the waters. None of all the savage creatures upon earth
come near him for bulk and strength, and it is well for man that he is
confined to the waters and there has a watch set upon him ([Job
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#012)) by the divine Providence, for,
if such a terrible creature were allowed to roam and ravage upon this
earth, it would be an unsafe and uncomfortable habitation for the
children of men, for whom it is intended. (2.) That he is more bold and
daring than any other creature whatsoever: He is made without fear. The
creatures are as they are made; the leviathan has courage in his
constitution, nothing can frighten him; other creatures, quite contrary,
seem as much designed for flying as this for fighting. So, among men,
some are in their natural temper bold, others are timorous. (3.) That he
is himself very proud; though lodged in the deep, yet he beholds all
high things, [Job 41:34](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#034). The rolling
waves, the impending rocks, the hovering clouds, and the ships under
sail with top and top-gallant, this mighty animal beholds with contempt,
for he does not think they either lessen him or threaten him. Those that
are great are apt to be scornful. (4.) That he is a king over all the
children of pride, that is, he is the proudest of all proud ones. He has
more to be proud of (so Mr. Caryl expounds it) than the proudest people
in the world have; and so it is a mortification to the haughtiness and
lofty looks of men. Whatever bodily accomplishments men are proud of,
and puffed up with, the leviathan excels them and is a king over them.
Some read it so as to understand it of God: He that beholds all high
things, even he, is King over all the children of pride; he can tame the
behemoth ([Job 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#019)) and the
leviathan, big as they are, and stout-hearted as they are. This
discourse concerning those two animals was brought in to prove that it
is God only who can look upon proud men and abase them, bring them low
and tread them down, and hide them in the dust ([Job
40:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#011)), and so it concludes with a
quod erat demonstrandum - which was to be demonstrated; there is one
that beholds all high things, and, wherein men deal proudly, is above
them; he is King over all the children of pride, whether brutal or
rational, and can make them all either bend or break before him, [Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011). The lofty looks of man shall be
humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and thus the
Lord alone shall be exalted.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 42](job042)

</div>
