<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job009)  [Next](job011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 10:0</span></span>

Job owns here that he was full of confusion ([Job
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015)), and as he was so was his
discourse: he knew not what to say, and perhaps sometimes scarcely knew
what he said. In this chapter, I. He complains of the hardships he was
under ([Job 10:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001)), and then comforts
himself with this, that he was in the hand of the God that made him, and
pleads that ([Job 10:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#008)). II. He
complains again of the severity of God's dealings with him ([Job
10:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#014)), and then comforts himself
with this, that death would put an end to his troubles ([Job
10:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#018)).

[Job 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 10:1</span></span>

Here is, I. A passionate resolution to persist in his complaint, [Job
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001). Being daunted with the dread of
God's majesty, so that he could not plead his cause with him, he
resolves to give himself some ease by giving vent to his resentments. He
begins with vehement language: "My soul is weary of my life, weary of
this body, and impatient to get clear of it, fallen out with life, and
displeased at it, sick of it, and longing for death." Through the
weakness of grace he went contrary to the dictates even of nature
itself. We should act more like men did we act more like saints. Faith
and patience would keep us from being weary of our lives (and cruel to
them, as some read it), even when Providence has made them most
wearisome to us; for that is to be weary of God's correction. Job, being
weary of his life and having ease no other way, resolves to complain,
resolves to speak. He will not give vent to his soul by violent hands,
but he will give vent to the bitterness of his soul by violent words.
Losers think they may have leave to speak; and unbridled passions, as
well as unbridled appetites, are apt to think it an excuse for their
excursions that they cannot help them: but what have we wisdom and grace
for, but to keep the mouth as with a bridle? Job's corruption speaks
here, yet grace puts in a word. 1. He will complain, but he will leave
his complaint upon himself. He would not impeach God, nor charge him
with unrighteousness or unkindness; but, though he knew not particularly
the ground of God's controversy with him and the cause of action, yet,
in the general, he would suppose it to be in himself and willingly bear
all the blame. 2. He will speak, but it shall be the bitterness of his
soul that he will express, not his settled judgment. If I speak amiss,
it is not I, but sin that dwells in me, not my soul, but its bitterness.

II\. A humble petition to God. He will speak, but the first word shall
be a prayer, and, as I am willing to understand it, it is a good prayer,
[Job 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#002). 1. That he might be
delivered from the sting of his afflictions, which is sin: "Do not
condemn me; do not separate me for ever from thee. Though I lie under
the cross, let me not lie under the curse; though I smart by the rod of
a Father, let me not be cut off by the sword of a Judge. Thou dost
correct me; I will bear that as well as I can; but O do not condemn me!"
It is the comfort of those who are in Christ Jesus that, though they are
in affliction, there is no condemnation to them, [Rom
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001). Nay, they are chastened of the
Lord that they may not be condemned with the world, [Co1
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032). This therefore we should
deprecate above any thing else, when we are in affliction. "However thou
art pleased to deal with me, Lord, do not condemn me; my friends condemn
me, but do not thou." 2. That he might be made acquainted with the true
cause of his afflictions, and that is sin too: Lord, show me wherefore
thou contendest with me. When God afflicts us he contends with us, and
when he contends with us there is always a reason. He is never angry
without a cause, though we are; and it is desirable to know what the
reason is, that we may repent of, mortify, and forsake the sin for which
God has a controversy with us. In enquiring it out, let conscience have
leave to do its office and to deal faithfully with us, as [Gen
42:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021).

III\. A peevish expostulation with God concerning his dealings with him.
Now he speaks in the bitterness of his soul indeed, not without some
ill-natured reflections upon the righteousness of his God.

1\. He thinks it unbecoming the goodness of God, and the mercifulness of
his nature, to deal so hardly with his creature as to lay upon him more
than he can bear ([Job 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003)): Is it
good unto thee that thou shouldst oppress? No, certainly it is not; what
he approves no in men ([Lam 3:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034))
he will not do himself. "Lord, in dealing with me, thou seemest to
oppress thy subject, to despise thy workmanship, and to countenance thy
enemies. Now, Lord, what is the meaning of this? Such is thy nature that
this cannot be a pleasure to thee; and such is thy name that it cannot
be an honour to thee. Why then dealest thou thus with me? What profit is
there in my blood?" Far be it from Job to think that God did him wrong,
but he is quite at a loss how to reconcile his providences with his
justice, as good men have often been, and must wait until the day shall
declare it. Let us therefore now harbour no hard thoughts of God,
because we shall then see there was no cause for them.

2\. He thinks it unbecoming the infinite knowledge of God to put his
prisoner thus upon the rack, as it were, by torture, to extort a
confession from him, [Job 10:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#004). (1.)
He is sure that God does not discover things, nor judge of them, as men
do: He has not eyes of flesh ([Job
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#004)), for he is a Spirit. Eyes of
flesh cannot see in the dark, but darkness hides not from God. Eyes of
flesh are but in one place at a time, and can see but a little way; but
the eyes of the Lord are in every place, and run to and fro through the
whole earth. Many things are hidden from eyes of flesh, the most curious
and piercing; there is a path which even the vulture's eye has not seen:
but nothing is, or can be, hidden from the eye of God, to which all
things are naked and open. Eyes of flesh see the outward appearance
only, and may be imposed upon by a deceptio visus - an illusion of the
senses; but God sees every thing truly. His sight cannot be deceived,
for he tries the heart, and is a witness to the thoughts and intents of
that. Eyes of flesh discover things gradually, and, when we gain the
sight of one thing, we lose the sight of another; but God sees every
thing at one view. Eyes of flesh are soon tired, must be closed every
night but the keeper of Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps, nor does his
sight ever decay. God sees not as man sees, that is, he does not judge
as man judges, at the best secundum allegata et probata - according to
what is alleged and proved, as the thing appears rather than as it is,
and too often according to the bias of the affections, passions,
prejudices, and interest; but we are sure that the judgment of God is
according to truth, and that he knows truth, not by information, but by
his own inspection. Men discover secret things by search, and
examination of witnesses, comparing evidence and giving conjectures upon
it, wheedling or forcing the parties concerned to confess; but God needs
not any of these ways of discovery: he sees not as man sees. (2.) He is
sure that as God is not short-sighted, like man, so he is not
short-lived ([Job 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#005)): "Are thy days
as the days of man, few and evil? Do they roll on in succession, or are
they subject to change, like the days of man? No, by no means." Men grow
wiser by experience and more knowing by daily observation; with them
truth is the daughter of time, and therefore they must take time for
their searches, and, if one experiment fail, must try another. But it is
not so with God; to him nothing is past, nothing future, but every thing
present. The days of time, by which the life of man is measured, are
nothing to the years of eternity, in which the life of God is wrapped
up. (3.) He therefore thinks it strange that God should thus prolong his
torture, and continue him under the confinement of this affliction, and
neither bring him to a trial nor grant him a release, as if he must take
time to enquire after his iniquity and use means to search after his
sin, [Job 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#006). Not as if Job thought
that God did thus torment him that he might find occasion against him;
but his dealings with him had such an aspect, which was dishonourable to
God, and would tempt men to think him a hard master. "Now, Lord, if thou
wilt not consult my comfort, consult thy own honour; do something for
thy great name, and do not disgrace the throne of thy glory," [Jer
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#021).

3\. He thinks it looked like an abuse of his omnipotence to keep a poor
prisoner in custody, whom he knew to be innocent, only because there was
none that could deliver him out of his hand ([Job
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#007)): Thou knowest that I am not
wicked. He had already owned himself a sinner, and guilty before God;
but he here stands to it that he was not wicked, not devoted to sin, not
an enemy to God, not a dissembler in his religion, that he had not
wickedly departed from his God, [Psa
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#021). "But there is none that can
deliver out of thy hand, and therefore there is no remedy; I must be
content to lie there, waiting thy time, and throwing myself on thy
mercy, in submission to thy sovereign will." Here see, (1.) What ought
to quiet us under our troubles - that it is to no purpose to contend
with Omnipotence. (2.) What will abundantly comfort us - if we are able
to appeal to God, as Job here, "Lord, thou knowest that I am not wicked.
I cannot say that l am not wanting, or I am not weak; but, through
grace, I can say, I am not wicked: thou knowest I am not, for thou
knowest I love thee."

[Job 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 10:8</span></span>

In these verses we may observe,

I. How Job eyes God as his Creator and preserver, and describes his
dependence upon him as the author and upholder of his being. This is one
of the first things we are all concerned to know and consider.

1\. That God made us, he, and not our parents, who were only the
instruments of his power and providence in our production. He made us,
and not we ourselves. His hands have made and fashioned these bodies of
ours and every part of them ([Job
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#008)), and they are fearfully and
wonderfully made. The soul also, which animates the body, is his gift.
Job takes notice of both here. (1.) The body is made as the clay (v. 9),
cast into shape, into this shape, as the clay is formed into a vessel,
according to the skill and will of the potter. We are earthen vessels,
mean in our original, and soon broken in pieces, made as the clay. Let
not therefore the thing formed say unto him that formed it, Why hast
thou made me thus? We must not be proud of our bodies, because the
matter is from the earth, yet not dishonour our bodies, because the
mould and shape are from the divine wisdom. The formation of human
bodies in the womb is described by an elegant similitude (v. 10, Thou
hast poured me out like milk, which is coagulated into cheese), and by
an induction of some particulars, v. 11. Though we come into the world
naked, yet the body is itself both clothed and armed. The skin and flesh
are its clothing; the bones and sinews are its armour, not offensive,
but defensive. The vital parts, the heart and lungs, are thus clothed,
not to be seen - thus fenced, not to be hurt. The admirable structure of
human bodies is an illustrious instance of the wisdom, power, and
goodness of the Creator. What a pity is it that these bodies should be
instruments of unrighteousness which are capable of being temples of the
Holy Ghost! (2.) The soul is the life, the soul is the man, and this is
the gift of God: Thou hast granted me life, breathed into me the breath
of life, without which the body would be but a worthless carcase. God is
the Father of spirits: he made us living souls, and endued us with the
power of reason; he gave us life and favour, and life is a favour - a
great favour, more than meat, more than raiment - a distinguishing
favour, a favour that puts us into a capacity of receiving other
favours. Now Job was in a better mind than he was when he quarrelled
with life as a burden, and asked, Why died I not from the womb? Or by
life and favour may be meant life and all the comforts of life,
referring to his former prosperity. Time was when he walked in the light
of the divine favour, and thought, as David, that through that favour
his mountain stood strong.

2\. That God maintains us. Having lighted the lamp of life, he does not
leave it to burn upon its own stock, but continually supplies it with
fresh oil: "Thy visitation has preserved my spirit, kept me alive,
protected me from the adversaries of life, the death we are in the midst
of and the dangers we are continually exposed to, and blessed me with
all the necessary supports of life and the daily supplies it needs and
craves."

II\. How he pleads this with God, and what use he makes of it. He
reminds God of it ([Job 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#009)):
Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me. What then? Why, 1"Thou
hast made me, and therefore thou hast a perfect knowledge of me ([Psa
139:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001)), and needest not to examine
me by scourging, nor to put me upon the rack for the discovery of what
is within me." 2. "Thou hast made me, as the clay, by an act of
sovereignty; and wilt thou by a like act of sovereignty unmake me again?
If so, I must submit." 3. "Wilt thou destroy the work of thy own hands?"
It is a plea the saints have often used in prayer, We are the clay and
thou our potter, [Isa 64:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008). Thy hands
have made me and fashioned me, [Psa
119:73](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#073). So here, Thou madest me; and
wilt thou destroy me ([Job 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#008)), wilt
thou bring me into dust again? [Job
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#009). "Wilt thou not pity me? Wilt
thou not spare and help me, and stand by the work of thy own hands? [Psa
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008). Thou madest me, and knowest my
strength; wilt thou then suffer me to be pressed above measure? Was I
made to be made miserable? Was I preserved only to be reserved for these
calamities?" If we plead this with ourselves as an inducement to duty,
"God made me and maintains me, and therefore I will serve him and submit
to him," we may plead it with God as an argument for mercy: Thou hast
made me, new - make me; I am thine, save me. Job knew not how to
reconcile God's former favours and his present frowns, but concludes
([Job 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#013)), "These things hast thou
hidden in thy heart. Both are according to the counsel of thy own will,
and therefore undoubtedly consistent, however they seem." When God thus
strangely changes his way, though we cannot account for it, we are bound
to believe there are good reasons for it hidden in his heart, which will
be manifested shortly. It is not with us, or in our reach, to assign the
cause, but I know that this is with thee. Known unto God are all his
works.

[Job 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 10:14</span></span>

Here we have,

I. Job's passionate complaints. On this harsh and unpleasant string he
harps much, in which, though he cannot be justified, he may be excused.
He complained not for nothing, as the murmuring Israelites, but had
cause to complain. If we think it looks ill in him, let it be a warning
to us to keep our temper better.

1\. He complains of the strictness of God's judgment and the rigour of
his proceedings against him, and is ready to call it summum jus -
justice bordering on severity. (1.) That he took all advantages against
him: "If I sin, then thou markest me, [Job
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#014).(1.) If I do but take one false
step, misplace a word, or cast a look awry, I shall be sure to hear of
it. Conscience, thy deputy, will be sure to upbraid me with it, and to
tell me that this gripe, this twitch of pain, is to punish me for that."
If God should thus mark iniquities, we should be undone; but we must
acknowledge the contrary, that, though we sin, God does not deal in
extremity with us. (2.) That he prosecuted those advantages to the
utmost: Thou wilt not acquit me from my iniquity. While his troubles he
could not take the comfort of his pardon, nor hear that voice of joy and
gladness; so hard is it to see love in God's heart when we see frowns in
his face and a rod in his hand. (3.) That, whatever was his character,
his case at present was very uncomfortable, [Job
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015). \[1.\] If he be wicked, he is
certainly undone in the other world: If I be wicked, woe to me. Note, A
sinful state is a woeful state. This we should each of us believe, as
Job here, with application to ourselves: "If I be wicked, though
prosperous and living in pleasure, yet woe to me." Some especially have
reason to dread double woes if they be wicked. "I that have knowledge,
that have made a great profession of religion, that have been so often
under strong convictions, and have made so many fair promises - I that
was born of such good parents, blessed with a good education, that have
lived in good families, and long enjoyed the means of grace - if I be
wicked, woe, and a thousand woes, to me." \[2.\] If he be righteous, yet
he dares not lift up his head, dares not answer as before, [Job
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015). He is so oppressed and
overwhelmed with his troubles that he cannot look up with any comfort or
confidence. Without were fightings, within were fears; so that, between
both, he was full of confusion, not only confusion of face for the
disgrace he was brought down to and the censures of his friends, but
confusion of spirit; his mind was in a constant hurry, and he was almost
distracted, [Psa 88:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#015).

2\. He complains of the severity of the execution. God (he thought) did
not only punish him for every failure, but punish him in a high degree,
[Job 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#016), [Job
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#017). His affliction was, (1.)
Grievous, very grievous, marvellous, exceedingly marvellous. God hunted
him as a lion, as a fierce lion hunts and runs down his prey. God was
not only strange to him, but showed himself marvellous upon him, by
bringing him into uncommon troubles and so making him prodigy, a wonder
unto many. All wondered that God would inflict and that Job could bear
so much. That which made his afflictions most grievous was that he felt
God's indignation in them; it was this that made them taste so bitter
and lie so heavy. They were God's witnesses against him, tokens of his
displeasure; this made the sores of his body wounds in his spirit. (2.)
It was growing, still growing worse and worse. This he insists much
upon; when he hoped the tide would turn, and begin to ebb, still it
flowed higher and higher. His affliction increased, and God's
indignation in the affliction. He found himself no better, no way
better. These witnesses were renewed against him, that, if one did not
reach to convict him, another might. Changes and war were against him.
If there was any change with him, it was not for the better; still he
was kept in a state of war. As long as we are here in this world we must
expect that the clouds will return after the rain, and perhaps the
sorest and sharpest trials may be reserved for the last. God was at war
with him, and it was a great change. He did not use to be so, which
aggravated the trouble and made it truly marvellous. God usually shows
himself kind to his people; if at any time he shows himself otherwise,
it is his strange work, his strange act, and he does in it show himself
marvellous.

3\. He complains of his life, and that ever he was born to all this
trouble and misery ([Job 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#018), [Job
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#019)): "If this was designed for my
lot, why was I brought out of the womb, and not smothered there, or
stifled in the birth?" This was the language of his passion, and it was
a relapse into the same sin he fell into before. He had just now called
life a favour ([Job 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#012)), yet now he
calls it a burden, and quarrels with God for giving it, or rather laying
it upon him. Mr. Caryl gives this a good turn in favour of Job. "We may
charitably suppose," says he, "that what troubled Job was that he was in
a condition of life which (as he conceived) hindered the main end of his
life, which was the glorifying of God. His harp was hung on the
willow-tress, and he was quite out of tune for praising God. Nay, he
feared lest his troubles should reflect dishonour upon God and give
occasion to his enemies to blaspheme; and therefore he wishes, O that I
had given up the ghost! A godly man reckons that he lives to no purpose
if he do not live to the praise and glory of God." If that was his
meaning, it was grounded on a mistake; for we may glorify the Lord in
the fires. But this use we may make of it, not to be over-fond of life,
since the case has been such sometimes, even with wise and good men,
that they have complained of it. Why should we dread giving up the
ghost, or covet to be seen of men, since the time may come when we may
be ready to wish we had given up the ghost and no eye had seen us? Why
should we inordinately lament the death of our children in their
infancy, that are as if they had not been, and are carried from the womb
to the grave, when perhaps we ourselves may sometimes wish it had been
our own lot?

II\. Job's humble requests. He prays, 1. That God would see his
affliction ([Job 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015)), take
cognizance of his case, and take it into his compassionate
consideration. Thus David prays ([Psa
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018)), Look upon my affliction and my
pain. Thus we should, in our troubles, refer ourselves to God, and may
comfort ourselves with this, that he knows our souls in adversity. 2.
That God would grant him some ease. If he could not prevail for the
removal of his trouble, yet might he not have some intermission? "Lord,
let me not be always upon the rack, always in extremity: O let me alone,
that I may take comfort a little! [Job
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#020). Grant me some respite, some
breathing-time, some little enjoyment of myself." This he would reckon a
great favour. Those that are not duly thankful for constant ease should
think how welcome one hour's ease would be if they were in constant
pain. Two things he pleads: - (1.) That life and its light were very
short: "Are not my days few? [Job
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#020). Yes, certainly they are, very
few. Lord, let them not be all miserable, all in the extremity of
misery. I have but a little time to live; let me have some comfort of
life while it does last." This plea fastens on the goodness of God's
nature, the consideration of which is very comfortable to an afflicted
spirit. And, if we would use this as a plea with God for mercy ("Are not
my days few? Lord, pity me"), we should use it as a plea with ourselves,
to quicken us to duty: "Are not my days few? Then it concerns me to
redeem time, to improve opportunities, what my hand finds to do to do it
with all my might, that I may be ready for the days of eternity, which
shall be many." (2.) That death and its darkness were very near and
would be very long ([Job 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021), [Job
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#022)): "Lord, give me some ease
before I die," that is, "lest I die of my pain." Thus David pleads ([Psa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003)), "Lest I sleep the sleep of
death, and then it will be too late to expect relief; for wilt thou show
wonders to the dead?" [Psa 88:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010). "Let
me have a little comfort before I die, that I may take leave of this
world calmly, and not in such confusion as I am now in." Thus earnest
should we be for grace, and thus we should plead, "Lord, renew me in the
inward man; Lord, sanctify me before I die, for otherwise it will never
be done." See how he speaks here of the state of the dead. \[1.\] It is
a fixed state, whence we shall not return ever again to live such a life
as we now live, [Job 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#010). At death we
must bid a final farewell to this world. The body must then be laid
where it will lie long, and the soul adjudged to that state in which it
must be for ever. That had need be well done which is to be done but
once, and done for eternity. \[2.\] It is a very melancholy state; so it
appears to us. Holy souls, at death, remove to a land of light, where
there is no death; but their bodies they leave to a land of darkness and
the shadow of death. He heaps up expressions here of the same import to
show that he has as dreadful apprehensions of death and the grave as
other men naturally have, so that it was only the extreme misery he was
in that made him wish for it. Come and let us look a little into the
grave, and we shall find, First, That there is no order there: it is
without any order, perpetual night, and no succession of day. All there
lie on the same level, and there is no distinction between prince and
peasant, but the servant is there free from his master, [Job
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#019). No order is observed in bringing
people to the grave, not the eldest first, not the richest, not the
poorest, and yet every one in his own order, the order appointed by the
God of life. Secondly, That there is no light there. In the grave there
is thick darkness, darkness that cannot be felt indeed, yet cannot but
be feared by those that enjoy the light of life. In the grave there is
no knowledge, no comfort, no joy, no praising God, no working out our
salvation, and therefore no light. Job was so much ashamed that others
should see his sores, and so much afraid to see them himself, that the
darkness of the grave, which would hide them and huddle them up, would
upon that account be welcome to him. Darkness comes upon us; and
therefore let us walk and work while we have the light with us. The
grave being a land of darkness, it is well we are carried thither with
our eyes closed, and then it is all one. The grave is a land of darkness
to man; our friends that have gone thither we reckon removed into
darkness, [Psa 88:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#018). But that it is
not so to God will appear by this, that the dust of the bodies of the
saints, though scattered, though mingled with other dust, will none of
it be lost, for God's eye is upon every grain of it and it shall be
forth-coming in the great day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 11](job011)

</div>
