<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job030)  [Next](job032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 31:0</span></span>

Job had often protested his integrity in general; here he does it in
particular instances, not in a way of commendation (for he does not here
proclaim his good deeds), but in his own just and necessary vindication,
to clear himself from those crimes with which his friends had falsely
charged him, which is a debt every man owes to his own reputation. Job's
friends had been particular in their articles of impeachment against
him, and therefore he is so in his protestation, which seems to refer
especially to what Eliphaz had accused him of, [Job
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006), etc. They had produced no
witnesses against him, neither could they prove the things whereof they
now accused him, and therefore he may well be admitted to purge himself
upon oath, which he does very solemnly, and with many awful imprecations
of God's wrath if he were guilty of those crimes. This protestation
confirms God's character of him, that there was none like him in the
earth. Perhaps some of his accusers durst not have joined with him; for
he not only acquits himself from those gross sins which lie open to the
eye of the world, but from many secret sins which, if he had been guilty
of them, nobody could have charged him, with, because he will prove
himself no hypocrite. Nor does he only maintain the cleanness of his
practices, but shows also that in them he went upon good principles,
that the reason of his eschewing evil was because he feared God, and his
piety was at the bottom of his justice and charity; and this crowns the
proof of his sincerity. I. The sins from which he here acquits himself
are, 1. Wantonness and uncleanness of heart ([Job
31:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001)). 2. Fraud and injustice in
commerce ([Job 31:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#004)). 3. Adultery
([Job 31:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009)). 4. Haughtiness and
severity towards his servants ([Job
31:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#013)). 5. Unmercifulness to the
poor, the widows, and the fatherless ([Job
31:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016)). 6. Confidence in his
worldly wealth ([Job 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#024), [Job
31:25](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#025)). 7. Idolatry ([Job
31:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026)). 8. Revenge ([Job
31:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#029)). 9. Neglect of poor
strangers ([Job 31:32](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#032)). 10. Hypocrisy
in concealing his own sins and cowardice in conniving at the sins of
others ([Job 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#033), [Job
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#034)). 11. Oppression, and the
violent invasion of other people's rights ([Job
31:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#038)). And towards the close, he
appeals to God's judgment concerning his integrity ([Job
31:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#035)). Now, II. In all this we may
see, 1. The sense of the patriarchal age concerning good and evil and
what was so long ago condemned as sinful, that is, both hateful and
hurtful. 2. A noble pattern of piety and virtue proposed to us for our
imitation, which, if our consciences can witness for us that we conform
to it, will be our rejoicing, as it was Job's in the day of evil.

[Job 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 31:1</span></span>

The lusts of the flesh, and the love of the world, are the two fatal
rocks on which multitudes split; against these Job protests he was
always careful to stand upon his guard.

I. Against the lusts of the flesh. He not only kept himself clear from
adultery, from defiling his neighbour's wives ([Job
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009)), but from all lewdness with any
women whatsoever. He kept no concubine, no mistress, but was inviolably
faithful to the marriage bed, though his wife was none of the wisest,
best, or kindest. From the beginning it was so, that a man should have
but one wife and cleave to her only; and Job kept closely to that
institution and abhorred the thought of transgressing it; for, though
his greatness might tempt him to it, his goodness kept him from it. Job
was now in pain and sickness of body, and under that affliction it is in
a particular manner comfortable if our consciences can witness for us
that we have been careful to preserve our bodies in chastity and to
possess those vessels in sanctification and honour, pure from the lusts
of uncleanness. Now observe here,

1\. What the resolutions were which, in this matter, he kept to ([Job
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001)): I made a covenant with my eyes,
that is, "I watched against the occasions of the sin; why then should I
think upon a maid?" that is, "by that means, through the grace of God, I
kept myself from the very first step towards it." So far was he from
wanton dalliances, or any act of lasciviousness, that, (1.) He would not
so much as admit a wanton look. He made a covenant with his eyes, made
this bargain with them, that he would allow them the pleasure of
beholding the light of the sun and the glory of God shining in the
visible creation, provided they would never fasten upon any object that
might occasion any impure imaginations, much less any impure desires, in
his mind; and under this penalty, that, if they did, they must smart for
it in penitential tears. Note, Those that would keep their hearts pure
must guard their eyes, which are both the outlets and inlets of
uncleanness. Hence we read of wanton eyes ([Isa
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016)) and eyes full of adultery, [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014). The first sin began in the eye,
[Gen 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006). What we must not meddle with
we must not lust after; and what we must not lust after we must not look
at; not the forbidden wealth ([Pro
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#005)), not the forbidden wine ([Pro
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#031)), not the forbidden woman, [Mat
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028). (2.) He would not so much as
allow a wanton thought: "Why then should I think upon a maid with any
unchaste fancy or desire towards her?" Shame and sense of honour might
restrain him from soliciting the chastity of a beautiful virgin, but
only grace and the fear of God would restrain him from so much as
thinking of it. Those are not chaste that are not so in spirit as well
as body, [Co1 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034). See how Christ's
exposition of the seventh commandment agrees with the ancient sense of
it, and how much better Job understood it than the Pharisees, though
they sat in Moses's chair.

2\. What the reasons were which, in this matter, he was governed by. It
was not for fear of reproach among men, though that is to be considered
([Pro 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#033)), but for fear of the wrath
and curse of God. He knew very well, (1.) That uncleanness is a sin that
forfeits all good, and shuts us out from the hope of it ([Job
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#002)): What portion of God is there
from above? What blessing can such impure sinners expect from the pure
and holy God, or what token of his favour? What inheritance of the
Almighty can they look for from on high? There is no portion, no
inheritance, no true happiness, for a soul, but what is in God, in the
Almighty, and what comes from above, from on high. Those that wallow in
uncleanness render themselves utterly unfit for communion with God,
either in grace here or in glory hereafter, and become allied to unclean
spirits, which are for ever separated from him; and then what portion,
what inheritance, can they have with God? No unclean thing shall enter
into the New Jerusalem, that holy city. (2.) It is a sin that incurs
divine vengeance, [Job 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#003). It will
certainly be the sinner's ruin if it be not repented of in time. Is not
destruction, a swift and sure destruction, to those wicked people, and a
strange punishment to the workers of this iniquity? Fools make a mock at
this sin, make a jest of it; it is with them a peccadillo, a trick of
youth. But they deceive themselves with vain words, for because of these
things, how light soever they make of them, the wrath of God, the
unsupportable wrath of the eternal God, comes upon the children of
disobedience, [Eph 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006). There are some
sinners whom God sometimes out of the common road of Providence to meet
with; such are these. The destruction of Sodom is a strange punishment.
Is there not alienation (so some read it) to the workers of iniquity?
This is the sinfulness of the sin that it alienates the mind from God
([Eph 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018), [Eph
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019)), and this is the punishment of
the sinners that they shall be eternally set at a distance from him,
[Rev 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015). (3.) It cannot be hidden
from the all-seeing God. A wanton thought cannot be so close, nor a
wanton look so quick, as to escape his cognizance, much less any act of
uncleanness so secretly done as to be out of his sight. If Job was at
any time tempted to this sin, he restrained himself from it, and all
approaches to it, with this pertinent thought ([Job
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#004)), Doth not he see my ways; as
Joseph did ([Gen 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#009)), How can I do
it, and sin against God? Two things Job had an eye to: - \[1.\] God's
omniscience. It is a great truth that God's eyes are upon all the ways
of men ([Pro 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#020), [Pro
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#021)); but Job here mentions it with
application to himself and his own actions: Doth not he see my ways? O
God! thou hast searched me and known me. God sees what rule we walk by,
what company w walk with, what end we walk towards, and therefore what
ways we walk in. \[2.\] His observance. "He not only sees, but takes
notice; he counts all my steps, all my false steps in the way of duty,
all my by-steps into the way of sin." He not only sees our ways in
general, but takes cognizance of our particular steps in these ways,
every action, every motion. He keeps account of all, because he will
call us to account, will bring every work into judgment. God takes a
more exact notice of us than we do of ourselves; for who ever counted
his own steps? yet God counts them. Let us therefore walk circumspectly.

II\. He stood upon his guard against the love of the world, and
carefully avoided all sinful indirect means of getting wealth. He
dreaded all forbidden profit as much as all forbidden pleasure. Let us
see,

1\. What his protestation is. In general, he had been honest and just in
all his dealings, and never, to his knowledge, did any body any wrong.
(1.) He never walked with vanity ([Job
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#005)), that is, he never durst tell a
lie to get a good bargain. It was never his way to banter, or
equivocate, or make many words in his dealings. Some men's constant walk
is a constant cheat. They either make what they have more than it is,
that they may be trusted, or less than it is, that nothing may be
expected from them. But Job was a different man. His wealth was not
acquired by vanity, though now diminished, [Pro
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#011). (2.) He never hasted to deceit.
Those that deceive must be quick and sharp, but Job's quickness and
sharpness were never turned that way. He never made haste to be rich by
deceit, but always acted cautiously, lest, through inconsideration, he
should do an unjust thing. Note, What we have in the world may be either
used with comfort or lost with comfort if it was honestly obtained. (3.)
His steps never turned out of the way, the way of justice and fair
dealing; from that he never deviated, [Job
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#007). He not only took care not to
walk in a constant course and way of deceit, but he did not so much as
take one step out of the way of honesty. In every particular action and
affair we must closely tie ourselves up to the rules of righteousness.
(4.) His heart did not walk after his eyes, that is, he did not covet
what he saw that was another's, nor wish it his own. Covetousness is
called the lust of the eye, [Jo1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016).
Achan saw, and then took, the accursed thing. That heart must needs
wander that walks after the eyes; for then it looks no further than the
things that are seen, whereas it ought to be in heaven whither the eyes
cannot reach: it should follow the dictates of religion and right
reason: if it follow the eye, it will be misled to that for which God
will bring men into judgment, [Ecc
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009). (5.) That no blot had cleaved to
his hands, that is, he was not chargeable with getting any thing
dishonestly, or keeping that which was another's, whenever it appeared
to be so. Injustice is a blot, a blot to the estate, a blot to the
owner; it spoils the beauty of both, and therefore is to be dreaded.
Those that deal much in the world may perhaps have a blot come upon
their hands, but they must wash it off again by repentance and
restitution, and not let it cleave to their hands. See [Isa
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#015).

2\. How he ratifies his protestation. So confident is he of his own
honesty that, (1.) He is willing to have his goods searched ([Job
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#006)): Let me be weighed in an even
balance, that is, "Let what I have got be enquired into and it will be
found to weigh well" - a sign that it was not obtained by vanity, for
then Tekel would have been written on it - weighed in the balance and
found too light. An honest man is so far from dreading a trial that he
desires it rather, being well assured that God knows his integrity and
will approve it, and that the trial of it will be to his praise and
honour. (2.) He is willing to forfeit the whole cargo if there be found
any prohibited or contraband goods, any thing but what he came honestly
by ([Job 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#008)): "Let me sow, and let
another eat," which was already agreed to be the doom of oppressors
([Job 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#005)), "and let my offspring, all
the trees that I have planted, be rooted out." This intimates that he
believed the sin did deserve this punishment, that usually it is thus
punished, but that though now his estate was ruined (and at such a time,
if ever, his conscience would have brought his sin to his mind), yet he
knew himself innocent and would venture all the poor remains of his
estate upon the issue of the trial.

[Job 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 31:9</span></span>

Two more instances we have here of Job's integrity: -

I. That he had a very great abhorrence of the sin of adultery. As he did
not wrong his own marriage bed by keeping a concubine (he did not so
much as think upon a maid, v. 1), so he was careful not to offer any
injury to his neighbour's marriage bed. Let us see here, 1. How clear he
was from this sin, [Job 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009). (1.) He
did not so much as covet his neighbour's wife; for even his heart was
not deceived by a woman. The beauty of another man's wife did not kindle
in him any unchaste desires, nor was he ever moved by the allurements of
an adulterous woman, such as is described, [Pro
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#006), etc. See the original of all the
defilements of the life; they come from a deceived heart. Every sin is
deceitful, and none more so than the sin of uncleanness. (2.) He never
compassed or imagined any unchaste design. He never laid wait at his
neighbour's door, to get an opportunity to debauch his wife in his
absence, when the good man was not at home, [Pro
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#019). See [Job
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015). 2. What a dread he had of this
sin, and what frightful apprehensions he had concerning the malignity of
it - that it was a heinous crime ([Job
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#011)), one of the greatest vilest
sins a man can be guilty of, highly provoking to God, and destructive to
the prosperity of the soul. With respect to the mischievousness of it,
and the punishment it deserved, he owns that, if he were guilty of that
heinous crime, (1.) His family might justly be made infamous in the
highest degree ([Job 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#010)): Let my
wife grind to another. Let her be a slave (so some), a harlot, so
others. God often punishes the sins of one with the sin of another, the
adultery of the husband with the adultery of the wife, as in David's
case ([Sa2 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011)), which does not in
the least excuse the treachery of the adulterous wife; but, how
unrighteous soever she is, God is righteous. See [Hos
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#013), Your spouses shall commit
adultery. Note, Those who are not just and faithful to their relations
must not think it strange if their relations be unjust and unfaithful to
them. (2.) He himself might justly be made a public example: For it is
an iniquity to be punished by the judges; yea, though those who are
guilty of it are themselves judges, as Job was. Note, Adultery is a
crime which the civil magistrate ought to take cognizance of and punish:
so it was adjudged even in the patriarchal age, before the law of Moses
made it capital. It is an evil work, to which the sword of justice ought
to be a terror. (3.) It might justly become the ruin of his estate; nay,
he knew it would be so ([Job 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#012)):
It is a fire. Lust is a fire in the soul: those that indulge it are said
to burn. It consumes all that is good there (the convictions, the
comforts), and lays the conscience waste. It kindles the fire of God's
wrath, which, if not extinguished by the blood of Christ, will burn to
the lowest hell. It will consume even to that eternal destruction. It
consumes the body, [Pro 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#011). It
consumes the substance; it roots out all the increase. Burning lusts
bring burning judgments. Perhaps it alludes to the burning of Sodom,
which was intended for an example to those who should afterwards, in
like manner, live ungodly.

II\. That he had a very great tenderness for his servants and ruled them
with a gentle hand. He had a great household and he managed it well. By
this he evidenced his sincerity that he had grace to govern his passion
as well as his appetite; and he that in these two things has the rule of
his own spirit is better than the mighty, [Pro
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#032). Here observe, 1. What were
Job's condescensions to his servants ([Job
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#013)): He did not despise the cause
of his man-servant, no, nor of his maid-servant, when they contended
with him. If they contradicted him in any thing, he was willing to hear
their reasons. If they had offended him, or were accused to him, he
would patiently hear what they had to say for themselves, in their own
vindication or excuse. Nay, if they complained of any hardship he put
upon them, he did not browbeat them, and bid them hold their tongues,
but gave them leave to tell their story, and redressed their grievances
as far as it appeared they had right on their side. He was tender of
them, not only when they served and pleased him, but even when they
contended with him. Herein he was a great example to masters, to give to
their servants that which is just and equal; nay, to do the same things
to them that they expect from them ([Col
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001), [Eph
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)), and not to rule them with
rigour, and carry it with a high hand. Many of Job's servants were slain
in his service ([Job 1:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#015)); the
rest were unkind and undutiful to him, and despised his cause, though he
never despised theirs ([Job 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#015),
[Job 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#016)); but he had this comfort
that in his prosperity he had behaved well towards them. Note, When
relations are either removed from us or embittered to us the testimony
of our consciences that we have done our duty to them will be a great
support and comfort to us. 2. What were the considerations that moved
him to treat his servants thus kindly. He had, herein, an eye to God,
both as his Judge and their Maker. (1.) As his Judge. He considered, "If
I should be imperious and severe with my servants, what then shall I do
when God riseth up?" He considered that he had a Master in heaven, to
whom he was accountable, who will rise up and will visit; and we are
concerned to consider what we shall do in the day of his visitation
([Isa 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#003)), and, considering that we
should be undone if God should then be strict and severe with us, we
ought to be very mild and gentle towards all with whom we have to do.
Consider what would become of us if God should be extreme to mark what
we do amiss, should take all advantages against us and insist upon all
his just demands from us - if he should visit every offence, and take
every forfeiture - if he should always chide, and keep his anger for
ever. And let not us be rigorous with our inferiors. Consider what will
become of us if we be cruel and unmerciful to our brethren. The cries of
the injured will be heard; the sins of the injurious will be punished.
Those that showed no mercy shall find none; and what shall we do then?
(2.) As his and his servants' Creator, [Job
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#015). When he was tempted to be harsh
with his servants, to deny them their right and turn a deaf ear to their
reasonings, this thought came very seasonably into his mind, "Did not he
that made me in the womb make him? I am a creature as well as he, and my
being is derived and depending as well as his. He partakes of the same
nature that I do and is the work of the same hand: Have we not all one
Father?" Note, Whatever difference there is among men in their outward
condition, in their capacity of mind, or strength of body, or place in
the world, he that made the one made the other also, which is a good
reason why we should not mock at men's natural infirmities, nor trample
upon those that are in any way our inferiors, but, in every thing, do as
we would be done by. It is a rule of justice, Parium par sit ratio - Let
equals be equally estimated and treated; and therefore since there is so
great a parity among men, they being all made of the same mould, by the
same power, for the same end, notwithstanding the disparity of our
outward condition, we are bound so far to set ourselves upon the level
with those we deal with as to do to them, in all respects, as we would
they should do to us.

[Job 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 31:16</span></span>

Eliphaz had particularly charged Job with unmercifulness to the poor
([Job 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006), etc.): Thou hast
withholden bread from the hungry, stripped the naked of their clothing,
and sent widows away empty. One would think he could not have been so
very positive and express in his charge unless there had been some truth
in it, some ground, for it; and yet it appears, by Job's protestation,
that it was utterly false and groundless; he was never guilty of any
such thing. See here,

I. The testimony which Job's conscience gave in concerning his constant
behaviour towards the poor. He enlarges most upon this head because in
this matter he was most particularly accused. He solemnly protests,

1\. That he had never been wanting to do good to them, as there was
occasion, to the utmost of his ability. He was always compassionate to
the poor, and careful of them, especially the widows and fatherless,
that were destitute of help. (1.) He was always ready to grant their
desires and answer their expectations, [Job
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016). If a poor person begged a
kindness of his, he was ready to gratify him; if he could but perceive
by the widow's mournful craving look that she expected an alms from him,
though she had not confidence enough to ask it, he had compassion enough
to give it, and never caused the eyes of the widow to fail. (2.) He put
a respect upon the poor, and did them honour; for he took the fatherless
children to eat with him at his own table: they should fare as he fared,
and be familiar with him, and he would show himself pleased with their
company as if they had been his own, [Job
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#017). As it is one of the greatest
grievances of poverty that it exposes to contempt, so it is none of the
least supports to the poor to be respected. (3.) He was very tender of
them, and had a fatherly concern for them, [Job
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#018). He was a father to the
fatherless, took care of orphans, brought them up with him under his own
eye, and gave them, not only maintenance, but education. He was a guide
to the widow, who had lost the guide of her youth; he advised her in her
affairs, took cognizance of them, and undertook the management of them.
Those that need not our alms may yet have occasion for our counsel, and
it may be a real kindness to them. This Job says he did from his youth,
from his mother's womb. He had something of tenderness and compassion
woven in his nature; he began betimes to do good, ever since he could
remember; he had always some poor widow or fatherless child under his
care. His parents taught him betimes to pity and relieve the poor, and
brought up orphans with him. (4.) He provided food convenient for them;
they ate of the same morsels that he did ([Job
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#017)), did not eat after him, of the
crumbs that fell from his table, but with him, of the best dish upon his
table. Those that have abundance must not eat their morsels alone, as if
they had none but themselves to take care of, nor indulge their appetite
with a dainty bit by themselves, but take others to share with them, as
David took Mephibosheth. (5.) He took particular care to clothe those
that were without covering, which would be more expensive to him than
feeding them, [Job 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#019). Poor people
may perish for want of clothing as well as for want of food - for want
of clothing to lie in by night or to go abroad in by day. If Job knew of
any that were in this distress, he was forward to relieve them, and
instead of giving rich and gaudy liveries to his servants, while the
poor were turned off with rags that were ready to be thrown to the
dunghill, he had good warm strong clothes made on purpose for them of
the fleece of his sheep ([Job 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#020)),
so that their loins, whenever they girt those garments about them,
blessed him; they commended his charity, blessed God for him, and prayed
God to bless him. Job's sheep were burned with fire from heaven, but
this was his comfort that, when he had them, he came honestly by them,
and used them charitably, fed the poor with their flesh and clothed them
with their wool.

2\. That he had never been accessory to the wronging of any that were
poor. It might be said, perhaps, that he was kind here and there to a
poor orphan that was a favourite, but to others he was oppressive. No,
he was tender to all and injurious to none. He never so much as lifted
up his hand against the fatherless ([Job
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#021)), never threatened or frightened
them, or offered to strike them; never used his power to crush those
that stood in his way or squeeze what he could out of them, though he
saw his help in the gate, that is, though he had interest enough, both
in the people and in the judges, both to enable him to do it and to bear
him out when he had done it. Those that have it in their power to do a
wrong thing and go through with it, and a prospect of getting by it, and
yet do justly, and love mercy, and are firm to both, may afterwards
reflect upon their conduct with much comfort, as Job does here.

II\. The imprecation with which he confirms this protestation ([Job
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#022)): "If I have been oppressive to
the poor, let my arm fall from my shoulder-blade and my arm be broken
from the bone," that is, "let the flesh rot off from the bone and one
bone be disjointed and broken off from another." Had he not been
perfectly clear in this matter, he durst not thus have challenged the
divine vengeance. And he intimates that it is a righteous thing with God
to break the arm that is lifted up against the fatherless, as he
withered Jeroboam's arm that was stretched out against a prophet.

III\. The principles by which Job was restrained from all
uncharitableness and unmercifulness. He durst not abuse the poor; for
though, with his help in the gate, he could overpower them, yet he could
not make his part good against that God who is the patron of oppressed
poverty and will not let oppressors go unpunished ([Job
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#023)): "Destruction from God was a
terror to me, whenever I was tempted to this sin, and by reason of his
highness I could not endure the thought of making him my enemy." He
stood in awe, 1. Of the majesty of God, as a God above him. He thought
of his highness, the infinite distance between him and God, which
possessed him with such a reverence of him as made him very circumspect
in his whole conversation. Those who oppress the poor, and pervert
judgment and justice, forget that he who is higher than the highest
regards, and there is a higher than they, who is able to deal with them
([Ecc 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#008)); but Job considered this.
2. Of the wrath of God, as a God that would certainly be against him if
he should wrong the poor. Destruction from God, because it would be a
certain and an utter ruin to him if he were guilty of this sin, was a
constant terror to him, to restrain him from it. Note, Good men, even
the best, have need to restrain themselves from sin with the fear of
destruction from God, and all little enough. This should especially
restrain us from all acts of injustice and oppression that God himself
is the avenger thereof. Even when salvation from God is a comfort to us,
yet destruction from God should be a terror to us. Adam, in innocency,
was awed with a threatening.

[Job 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 31:24</span></span>

Four articles more of Job's protestation we have in these verses, which,
as all the rest, not only assure us what he was and did, but teach us
what we should be and do: -

I. He protests that he never set his heart upon the wealth of this
world, nor took the things of it for his portions and happiness. He had
gold; he had fine gold. His wealth was great, and he had gotten much.
Our wealth is either advantageous or pernicious to us according as we
stand affected to it. If we make it our rest and our ruler, it will be
our ruin; if we make it our servant, and an instrument of righteousness,
it will be a blessing to us. Job here tells us how he stood affected to
his worldly wealth. 1. He put no great confidence in it: he did not make
gold his hope, [Job 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#024). Those are
very unwise that do, and enemies to themselves, who depend upon it as
sufficient to make them happy, who think themselves safe and honourable,
and sure of comfort, in having abundance of this world's goods. Some
make it their hope and confidence for another world, as if it were a
certain token of God's favour; and those who have so much sense as not
to think so yet promise themselves that it will be a portion for them in
this life, whereas the things themselves are uncertain and our
satisfaction in them is much more so. It is hard to have riches and not
to trust in riches; and it is this which makes it so difficult for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God, [Mat
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023); [Mar
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#024). 2. He took no great complacency
in it ([Job 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#025)): If I rejoiced
because my wealth was great and boasted that my hand had gotten much. He
took no pride in his wealth, as if it added any thing to his real
excellency, nor did he think that his might and the power of his hand
obtained it for him, [Deu 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#017). He
took no pleasure in it in comparison with the spiritual things which
were the delight of his soul. His joy did not terminate in the gift, but
passed through it to the giver. When he was in the midst of his
abundance he never said, Soul, take thy ease in these things, eat,
drink, and be merry, nor blessed himself in his riches. He did not
inordinately rejoice in his wealth, which helped him to bear the loss of
it so patiently as he did. The way to weep as though we wept not is to
rejoice as though we rejoiced not. The less pleasure the enjoyment is
the less pain the disappointment will be.

II\. He protests that he never gave the worship and glory to the
creature which are due to God only; he was never guilty of idolatry,
[Job 31:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026). We do not find that
Job's friends charged him with this. But there were those, it seems, at
that time, who were so sottish as to worship the sun and moon, else Job
would not have mentioned it. Idolatry is one of the old ways which
wicked men have trodden, and the most ancient idolatry was the
worshipping of the sun and moon, to which the temptation was most
strong, as appears [Deu 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019), where
Moses speaks of the danger which the people were in of being driven to
worship them. But as yet it was practised secretly, and durst not appear
in open view, as afterwards the most abominable idolatries did. Observe,

1\. How far Job kept from this sin. He not only never bowed the knee to
Baal (which, some think, was designed to represent the sun), never fell
down and worshipped the sun, but he kept his eye, his heart, and his
lips, clean from this sin. (1.) He never so much as beheld the sun or
the moon in their pomp and lustre with any other admiration of them than
what led him to give all the glory of their brightness and usefulness to
their Creator. Against spiritual as well as corporal adultery he made a
covenant with his eyes; and this was his covenant, that, whenever he
looked at the lights of heaven, he should by faith look through them,
and beyond them, to the Father of lights. (2.) He kept his heart with
all diligence, that that should not be secretly enticed to think that
there is a divine glory in their brightness, or a divine power in their
influence, and that therefore divine honours are to be paid to them.
Here is the source of idolatry; it begins in the heart. Every man is
tempted to that, as to other sins, when he is drawn away by his own lust
and enticed. (3.) He did not so much as put a compliment upon these
pretended deities, did not perform the least and lowest act of
adoration: His mouth did not kiss his hand, which, it is likely, was a
ceremony then commonly used even by some that yet would not be thought
idolaters. It is an old-fashioned piece of civil respect among
ourselves, in making a bow, to kiss the hand, a form which, it seems,
was anciently used in giving divine honours to the sun and moon. They
could not reach to kiss them, as the men that sacrificed kissed the
calves ([Hos 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#002), [Kg1
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)); but, to show their good will,
they kissed their hand, reverencing those as their masters which God has
made servants to this lower world, to hold the candle for us. Job never
did it.

2\. How ill Job thought of this sin, [Job
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#028). (1.) He looked upon it as an
affront to the civil magistrate: It were an iniquity to be punished by
the judge, as a public nuisance, and hurtful to kings and provinces.
Idolatry debauches men's minds, corrupts their manners, takes off the
true sense of religion which is the great bond of societies, and
provokes God to give men up to a reprobate sense, and to send judgments
upon a nation; and therefore the conservators of the public peace are
concerned to restrain it by punishing it. (2.) He looked upon it as a
much greater affront to the God of heaven, and no less than high treason
against his crown and dignity: For I should have denied the God that is
above, denied his being as God and his sovereignty as God above.
Idolatry is, in effect, atheism; hence the Gentiles are said to be
without God (atheists) in the world. Note, We should be afraid of every
thing that does but tacitly deny the God above, his providence, or any
of his perfections.

III\. He protests that he was so far from doing or designing mischief to
any that he neither desired nor delighted in the hurt of the worst enemy
he had. The forgiving of those that do us evil, it seems, was Old
Testament duty, though the Pharisees made the law concerning it of no
effect, by teaching, Thou shalt love thy neighbour and hate thy enemy,
[Mat 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043). Observe here,

1\. Job was far from revenge. He did not only not return the injuries
that were done him, not only not destroy those who hated him; but, (1.)
He did not so much as rejoice when any mischief befel them, [Job
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#029). Many who would not wilfully
hurt those who stand in their light, or have done them a diskindness,
yet are secretly pleased and laugh in their sleeve (as we say) when hurt
is done them. But Job was not of that spirit. Though Job was a very good
man, yet, it seems, there were those that hated him; but evil found
them. He saw their destruction, and was far from rejoicing in it; for
that would justly have brought the destruction upon him, as it is
intimated, [Pro 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#017), [Pro
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#018). (2.) He did not so much as wish
in his own mind that evil might befel them, [Job
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#030). He never wished a curse to his
soul (curses to the soul are the worst of curses), never desired his
death; he knew that, if he did, it would turn into sin to him. He was
careful not to offend with his tongue ([Psa
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)), would not suffer his mouth to
sin, and therefore durst not imprecate any evil, no, not to his worst
enemy. If others bear malice to us, that will not justify us in bearing
malice to them.

2\. He was violently urged to revenge, and yet he kept himself thus
clear from it ([Job 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#031)): The men of
his tabernacle, his domestics, his servants, and those about him, were
so enraged at Job's enemy who hated him, that they could have eaten him,
if Job would but have set them on or given them leave. "O that we had of
his flesh! Our master is satisfied to forgive him, but we cannot be so
satisfied." See how much beloved Job was by his family, how heartily
they espoused his cause, and what enemies they were to his enemies; but
see what a strict hand Job kept upon his passions, that he would not
avenge himself, though he had those about him that blew the coals of his
resentment. Note, (1.) A good man commonly does not himself lay to heart
the affronts that are done him so much as his friends do for him. (2.)
Great men have commonly those about them that stir them up to revenge.
David had so, [Sa1 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004); [Sa1
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#008); [Sa2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009). But if they keep their temper,
notwithstanding the spiteful insinuations of those about them,
afterwards it shall be no grief of heart to them, but shall turn very
much to their praise.

IV\. He protests that he had never been unkind or inhospitable to
strangers ([Job 31:32](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#032)): The stranger
lodged not in the street, as angels might lately have done in the
streets of Sodom if Lot alone had not entertained them. Perhaps by that
instance Job was taught (as we are, [Heb
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002)) not to be forgetful to entertain
strangers. He that is at home must consider those that are from home,
and put his soul into their soul's stead, and then do as he would be
done by. Hospitality is a Christian duty, [Pe1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#009). Job, in his prosperity, was noted
for good house-keeping: He opened his door to the road (so it may be
read); he kept the street-door open, that he might see who passed by and
invite them in, as Abraham, [Gen 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001).

[Job 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 31:33</span></span>

We have here Job's protestation against three more sins, together with
his general appeal to God's bar and his petition for a hearing there,
which, it is likely, was intended to conclude his discourse (and
therefore we will consider it last), but that another particular sin
occurred, from which he thought it requisite to acquit himself. He
clears himself from the charge,

I. Of dissimulation and hypocrisy. The general crime of which his
friends accused him was that, under the cloak of a profession of
religion, he had kept up secret haunts of sin, and that really he was as
bad as other people, but had the art of concealing it. Zophar insinuated
([Job 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#012)) that he hid his iniquity
under his tongue. "No," says Job, "I never did ([Job
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#033)), I never covered my
transgression as Adam, never palliated a sin with frivolous excuses, nor
made fig-leaves the shelter of my shame, nor ever hid my iniquity in my
bosom, as a fondling, a darling, that I could by no means part with, or
as stolen goods which I dreaded the discovery of." It is natural to us
to cover our sins; we have it from our first parents. We are loth to
confess our faults, willing to extenuate them and make the best of
ourselves, to devolve the blame upon others, as Adam on his wife, not
without a tacit reflection upon God himself. But he that thus covers his
sins shall not prosper, [Pro 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013).
Job, in this protestation, intimates two things, which were certain
evidences of his integrity: - 1. That he was not guilty of any great
transgression or iniquity, inconsistent with sincerity, which he had now
industriously concealed. In this protestation he had dealt fairly, and,
while he denies some sins, was not conscious to himself that he allowed
himself in any. 2. That what transgression and iniquity he had been
guilty of (Who is there that lives and sins not?) he had always been
ready to own it, and, as soon as ever he perceived he had said or done
amiss, he was ready to unsay it and undo it, as far as he could, by
repentance, confessing it both to God and man, and forsaking it: this is
doing honestly.

II\. From the charge of cowardice and base fear. His courage in that
which is good he produces as an evidence of his sincerity in it ([Job
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#034)): Did I fear a great multitude,
that I kept silence? No, all that knew Job knew him to be a man of
undaunted resolution in a good cause, that boldly appeared, spoke, and
acted, in defence of religion and justice, and did not fear the face of
man nor was ever threatened or brow-beaten out of his duty, but set his
face as a flint. Observe, 1. What great conscience Job had made of his
duty as a magistrate, or a man of reputation, in the place where he
lived. He did not, he durst not, keep silence when he had a call to
speak in an honest cause, or keep within doors when he had a call to go
abroad to do good. The case may be such that it may be our sin to be
silent and retired, as when we are called to reprove sin and bear our
testimony against it, to vindicate the truths and ways of God, to do
justice to those who are injured or oppressed, or in any way to serve
the public or to do honour to our religion. 2. What little account Job
made of the discouragements he met with in the way of his duty. He
valued not the clamours of the mob, feared not a great multitude, nor
did he value the menaces of the mighty: The contempt of families never
terrified him. He was not deterred by the number or quality, the scorns
or insults, or the injurious from doing justice to the injured; no, he
scorned to be swayed and biassed by any such considerations, nor ever
suffered a righteous cause to be run down by a high hand. He feared the
great God, not the multitude, and his curse, not the contempt of
families.

III\. From the charge of oppression and violence, and doing wrong to his
poor neighbours. And here observe,

1\. What his protestation is - that the estate he had he both got and
used honestly, so that his land could not cry out against him nor the
furrows thereof complain ([Job 31:38](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#038)),
as they do against those who get the possession of them by fraud and
extortion, [Hab 2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#009). The whole
creation is said to groan under the sin of man; but that which is
unjustly gained and held cries out against a man, and accuses him,
condemns him, and demands justice against him for the injury. Rather
than his oppression shall go unpunished the very ground and the furrows
of it shall witness against him, and be his prosecutors. Two things he
could say safely concerning his estate: - (1.) That he never ate the
fruits of it without money, [Job
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#039). What he purchased he paid for,
as Abraham for the land he bought ([Gen
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#016)), and David, [Sa2
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#024). The labourers that he employed
had their wages duly paid them, and, if he made use of the fruits of
those lands that he let out, he paid his tenants for them, or allowed it
in their rent. (2.) That he never caused the owners thereof to lose
their life, never got an estate, as Ahab got Naboth's vineyard, by
killing the heir and seizing the inheritance, never starved those that
held lands of him nor killed them with hard bargains and hard usage. No
tenant, no workman, no servant, he had, could complain of him.

2\. How he confirms his protestation. He does it, as often before, with
a suitable imprecation ([Job 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#040)):
"If I have got my estate unjustly, let thistles grow instead of wheat,
the worst of weeds instead of the best of grains." When men get estates
unjustly they are justly deprived of the comfort of them, and
disappointed in their expectations from them. They sow their land, but
they sow not that body that shall be. God will give it a body. It was
sown wheat, but shall come up thistles. What men do not come honestly by
will never do them any good. Job, towards the close of his protestation,
appeals to the judgment-seat of God concerning the truth of it ([Job
31:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#035)): O that he would hear me,
even that the Almighty would answer me! This was what he desired and
often complained that he could not obtain; and, now that he had drawn up
his own defence so particularly, he leaves it upon record, in
expectation of a hearing, files it, as it were, till his cause be
called.

(1.) A trial is moved for, and the motion earnestly pressed: "O that
one, any one, would hear me; my cause is so good, and my evidence so
clear, that I am willing to refer it to any indifferent person
whatsoever; but my desire is that the Almighty himself would determine
it." An upright heart does not dread a scrutiny. He that means honestly
wishes he had a window in his breast, that all men might see the intents
of his heart. But an upright heart does particularly desire to be
determined in every thing by the judgment of God, which we are sure is
according to the truth. It was holy David's prayer, Search me, O God!
and know my heart; and it was blessed Paul's comfort, He that judgeth me
is the Lord.

(2.) The prosecutor is called, the plaintiff summoned, and ordered to
bring in his information, to say what he has to say against the
prisoner, for he stands upon his deliverance: "O that my adversary had
written a book - that my friends, who charge me with hypocrisy, would
draw up their charge in writing, that it might be reduced to a
certainty, and that we might the better join issue upon it." Job would
be very glad to see the libel, to have a copy of his indictment. He
would not hide it under his arm, but take it upon his shoulder, to be
seen and read of all men, nay, he would bind it as a crown to him, would
be pleased with it, and look upon it as his ornament; for, \[1.\] If it
discovered to him any sin he had been guilty of, which he did not yet
see, he should be glad to know it, that he might repent of it and get it
pardoned. A good man is willing to know the worst of himself and will be
thankful to those that will faithfully tell him of his faults. \[2.\] If
it charged him with what was false, he doubted not but to disprove the
allegations, that his innocency would be cleared up as the light, and he
should come off with so much the more honour. But, \[3.\] He believed
that, when his adversaries came to consider the matter so closely as
they must do if they put the charge in writing, the accusations would be
trivial and minute, and every one that saw them would say, "If this was
all they had to say against him, it was a shame they gave him so much
trouble."

(3.) The defendant is ready to make his appearance and to give his
accusers all the fair play they can desire. He will declare unto them
the number of his steps, [Job 31:37](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#037).
He will let them into the history of his own life, will show them all
the stages and scenes of it. He will give them a narrative of his
conversation, what would make against him as well as what would make for
him, and let them make what use they pleased of it; and so confident he
is of his integrity that as a prince to be crowned, rather than a
prisoner to be tried, he would go near to him, both to his accuser to
hear his charge and to his judge to hear his doom. Thus the testimony of
his conscience was his rejoicing.

Hic murus aheneus esto, nil conscire sibi -

Be this thy brazen bulwark of defence,

Still to preserve thy conscience innocence.

Those that have kept their hands without spot from the world, as Job
did, may lift up their faces without spot unto God, and may comfort
themselves with the prospect of his judgment when they lie under the
unjust censures of men. If our hearts condemn us not, then have we
confidence towards God.

Thus the words of Job are ended; that is, he has now said all he would
say in answer to his friends: he afterwards said something in a way of
self-reproach and condemnation ([Job
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004), [Job
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#005), [Job
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#002), etc.), but here ends what he had
to say in a way of self-defence and vindication. If this suffice not he
will say no more; he knows when he has said enough and will submit to
the judgment of the bench. Some think the manner of expression intimates
that he concluded with an air of assurance and triumph. He now keeps the
field and doubts not but to win the field. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 32](job032)

</div>
