<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job003)  [Next](job005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 4:0</span></span>

Job having warmly given vent to his passion, and so broken the ice, his
friends here come gravely to give vent to their judgment upon his case,
which perhaps they had communicated to one another apart, compared notes
upon it and talked it over among themselves, and found they were all
agreed in their verdict, that Job's afflictions certainly proved him to
be a hypocrite; but they did not attack Job with this high charge till
by the expressions of his discontent and impatience, in which they
thought he reflected on God himself, he had confirmed them in the bad
opinion they had before conceived of him and his character. Now they set
upon him with great fear. The dispute begins, and it soon becomes
fierce. The opponents are Job's three friends. Job himself is
respondent. Elihu appears, first, as moderator, and at length God
himself gives judgment upon the controversy and the management of it.
The question in dispute is whether Job was an honest man or no, the same
question that was in dispute between God and Satan in the first two
chapters. Satan had yielded it, and durst not pretend that his cursing
his day was a constructive cursing of his God; no, he cannot deny but
that Job still holds fast his integrity; but Job's friends will needs
have it that, if Job were an honest man, he would not have been thus
sorely and thus tediously afflicted, and therefore urge him to confess
himself a hypocrite in the profession he had made of religion: "No,"
says Job, "that I will never do; I have offended God, but my heart,
notwithstanding, has been upright with him;" and still he holds fast the
comfort of his integrity. Eliphaz, who, it is likely, was the senior, or
of the best quality, begins with him in this chapter, in which, I. He
bespeaks a patient hearing ([Job 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#002)).
II. He compliments Job with an acknowledgment of the eminence and
usefulness of the profession he had made of religion ([Job
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#003), [Job
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#004)). III. He charges him with
hypocrisy in his profession, grounding his charge upon his present
troubles and his conduct under them ([Job
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#005), [Job
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#006)). IV. To make good the inference,
he maintains that man's wickedness is that which always brings God's
judgments ([Job 4:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)). V. He
corroborates his assertion by a vision which he had, in which he was
reminded of the incontestable purity and justice of God, and the
meanness, weakness, and sinfulness of man ([Job
4:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012)). By all this he aims to bring
down Job's spirit and to make him both penitent and patient under his
afflictions.

[Job 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 4:1</span></span>

In these verses,

I. Eliphaz excuses the trouble he is now about to give to Job by his
discourse ([Job 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#002)): "If we assay a
word with thee, offer a word of reproof and counsel, wilt thou be
grieved and take it ill?" We have reason to fear thou wilt; but there is
no remedy: "Who can refrain from words?" Observe, 1. With what modesty
he speaks of himself and his own attempt. He will not undertake the
management of the cause alone, but very humbly joins his friends with
him: "We will commune with thee." Those that plead God's cause must be
glad of help, lest it suffer through their weakness. He will not promise
much, but begs leave to assay or attempt, and try if he could propose
any thing that might be pertinent, and suit Job's case. In difficult
matters it becomes us to pretend no further, but only to try what may be
said or done. Many excellent discourses have gone under the modest title
of Essays. 2. With what tenderness he speaks of Job, and his present
afflicted condition: "If we tell thee our mind, wilt thou be grieved?
Wilt thou take it ill? Wilt thou lay it to thy own heart as thy
affliction or to our charge as our fault? Shall we be reckoned unkind
and cruel if we deal plainly and faithfully with thee? We desire we may
not; we hope we shall not, and should be sorry if that should be ill
resented which is well intended." Note, We ought to be afraid of
grieving any, especially those that are already in grief, lest we add
affliction to the afflicted, as David's enemies, [Psa
69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026). We should show ourselves
backward to say that which we foresee will be grievous, though ever so
necessary. God himself, though he afflicts justly, does not afflict
willingly, [Lam 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#033). 3. With what
assurance he speaks of the truth and pertinency of what he was about to
say: Who can withhold himself from speaking? Surely it was a pious zeal
for God's honour, and the spiritual welfare of Job, that laid him under
this necessity of speaking. "Who can forbear speaking in vindication of
God's honour, which we hear reproved, in love to thy soul, which we see
endangered?" Note, It is foolish pity not to reprove our friends, even
our friends in affliction, for what they say or do amiss, only for fear
of offending them. Whether men take it well or ill, we must with wisdom
and meekness do our duty and discharge a good conscience.

II\. He exhibits a twofold charge against Job.

1\. As to his particular conduct under this affliction. He charges him
with weakness and faint-heartedness, and this article of his charge
there was too much ground for, [Job
4:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#003). And here,

(1.) He takes notice of Job's former serviceableness to the comfort of
others. He owns that Job had instructed many, not only his own children
and servants, but many others, his neighbours and friends, as many as
fell within the sphere of his activity. He did not only encourage those
who were teachers by office, and countenance them, and pay for the
teaching of those who were poor, but he did himself instruct many.
Though a great man, he did not think it below him (king Solomon was a
preacher); though a man of business, he found time to do it, went among
his neighbours, talked to them about their souls, and gave them good
counsel. O that this example of Job were imitated by our great men! If
he met with those who were ready to fall into sin, or sink under their
troubles, his words upheld them: a wonderful dexterity he had in
offering that which was proper to fortify persons against temptations,
to support them under their burdens, and to comfort afflicted
consciences. He had, and used, the tongue of the learned, knew how to
speak a word in season to those that were weary, and employed himself
much in that good work. With suitable counsels and comforts he
strengthened the weak hands for work and service and the spiritual
warfare, and the feeble knees for bearing up the man in his journey and
under his load. It is not only our duty to lift up our own hands that
hang down, by quickening and encouraging ourselves in the way of duty
([Heb 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012)), but we must also
strengthen the weak hands of others, as there is occasion, and do what
we can to confirm their feeble knees, by saying to those that are of a
fearful heart, Be strong, [Isa 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003),
[Isa 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#004). The expressions seem to be
borrowed thence. Note, Those should abound in spiritual charity. A good
word, well and wisely spoken, may do more good than perhaps we think of.
But why does Eliphaz mention this here? \[1.\] Perhaps he praises him
thus for the good he had done that he might make the intended reproof
the more passable with him. Just commendation is a good preface to a
just reprehension, will help to remove prejudices, and will show that
the reproof comes not from ill will. Paul praised the Corinthians before
he chided them, [Co1 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002). \[2.\] He
remembers how Job had comforted others as a reason why he might justly
expect to be himself comforted; and yet, if conviction was necessary in
order to comfort, they must be excused if they applied themselves to
that first. The Comforter shall reprove, [Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008). \[3.\] He speaks this, perhaps,
in a way of pity, lamenting that through the extremity of his affliction
he could not apply those comforts to himself which he had formerly
administered to others. It is easier to give good counsel than to take
it, to preach meekness and patience than to practise them. Facile omnes,
cum valemus, rectum consilium aegrotis damus - We all find it easy, when
in health, to give good advice to the sick. - Terent. \[4.\] Most think
that he mentions it as an aggravation of his present discontent,
upbraiding him with his knowledge, and the good offices he had done for
others, as if he had said, "Thou that hast taught others, why dost thou
not teach thyself? Is not this an evidence of thy hypocrisy, that thou
hast prescribed that medicine to others which thou wilt not now take
thyself, and so contradictest thyself, and actest against thy own know
principles? Thou that teachest another to faint, dost thou faint? [Rom
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021). Physician, heal thyself." Those
who have rebuked others must expect to hear of it if they themselves
become obnoxious to rebuke.

(2.) He upbraids him with his present low-spiritedness, [Job
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#005). "Now that it has come upon thee,
now that it is thy turn to be afflicted, and the bitter cup that goes
round is put into thy hand, now that it touches thee, thou faintest,
thou art troubled." Here, \[1.\] He makes too light of Job's
afflictions: "It touches thee." The very word that Satan himself had
used, [Job 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011), [Job
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#005). Had Eliphaz felt but the one-half
of Job's affliction, he would have said, "It smites me, it wounds me;"
but, speaking of Job's afflictions, he makes a mere trifle of it: "It
touches thee and thou canst not bear to be touched." Noli me tangere -
Touch me not. \[2.\] He makes too much of Job's resentments, and
aggravates them: "Thou faintest, or thou art beside thyself; thou
ravest, and knowest not what thou sayest." Men in deep distress must
have grains of allowance, and a favourable construction put upon what
they say; when we make the worst of every word we do not as we would be
done by.

2\. As to his general character before this affliction. he charges him
with wickedness and false-heartedness, and this article of his charge
was utterly groundless and unjust. How unkindly does he banter him, and
upbraid him with the great profession of religion he had made, as if it
had all now come to nothing and proved a sham ([Job
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#006)): "Is not this thy fear, thy
confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness of thy ways? Does it not all
appear now to be a mere pretence? For, hadst thou been sincere in it,
God would not thus have afflicted thee, nor wouldst thou have behaved
thus under the affliction." This was the very thing Satan aimed at, to
prove Job a hypocrite, and disprove the character God had given of him.
When he could not himself do this to God, but he still saw and said, Job
is perfect and upright, then he endeavoured, by his friends, to do it to
Job himself, and to persuade him to confess himself a hypocrite. Could
he have gained that point he would have triumphed. Habes confitentem
reum - Out of thy own mouth will I condemn thee. But, by the grace of
God, Job was enabled to hold fast his integrity, and would not bear
false witness against himself. Note, Those that pass rash and
uncharitable censures upon their brethren, and condemn them as
hypocrites, do Satan's work, and serve his interest, more than they are
aware of. I know not how it comes to pass that this verse is differently
read in several editions of our common English Bibles; the original, and
all the ancient versions, put thy hope before the uprightness of thy
ways. So does the Geneva, and most of the editions of the last
translation; but I find one of the first, in 1612, has it, Is not this
thy fear, thy confidence, the uprightness of thy ways, and thy hope?
Both the Assembly's Annotations and Mr. Pool's have that reading: and an
edition in 1660 reads it, "Is not thy fear thy confidence, and the
uprightness of thy ways thy hope? Does it not appear now that all the
religion both of thy devotion and of thy conversation was only in hope
and confidence that thou shouldst grow rich by it? Was it not all
mercenary?" The very thing that Satan suggested. Is not thy religion thy
hope, and are not thy ways thy confidence? so Mr. Broughton. Or, "Was it
not? Didst thou not think that that would be thy protection? But thou
art deceived." Or, "Would it not have been so? If it had been sincere,
would it not have kept thee from this despair?" It is true, if thou
faint in the day of adversity, thy strength, thy grace, is small ([Pro
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#010)); but it does not therefore
follow that thou hast no grace, no strength at all. A man's character is
not to be taken from a single act.

[Job 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 4:7</span></span>

Eliphaz here advances another argument to prove Job a hypocrite, and
will have not only his impatience under his afflictions to be evidence
against him but even his afflictions themselves, being so very great and
extraordinary, and there being no prospect at all of his deliverance out
of them. To strengthen his argument he here lays down these two
principles, which seem plausible enough: -

I. That good men were never thus ruined. For the proof of this he
appeals to Job's own observation ([Job
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)): "Remember, I pray thee;
recollect all that thou hast seen, heard, or read, and give me an
instance of any one that was innocent and righteous, and yet perished as
thou dost, and was cut off as thou art." If we understand it of a final
and eternal destruction, his principle is true. None that are innocent
and righteous perish for ever: it is only a man of sin that is a son of
perdition, [Th2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003). But then it is
ill applied to Job; he did not thus perish, nor was he cut off: a man is
never undone till he is in hell. But, if we understand it of any
temporal calamity, his principle is not true. The righteous perish ([Isa
57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)): there is one event both to the
righteous and to the wicked ([Ecc
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#002)), both in life and death; the
great and certain difference is after death. Even before Job's time (as
early as it was) there were instances sufficient to contradict this
principle. Did not righteous Abel perish being innocent? and was he not
cut off in the beginning of his days? Was not righteous Lot burnt out of
house and harbour, and forced to retire to a melancholy cave? Was not
righteous Jacob a Syrian ready to perish? [Deu
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#005). Other such instances, no doubt,
there were, which are not on record.

II\. That wicked men were often thus ruined. For the proof of this he
vouches his own observation ([Job
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#008)): "Even as I have seen, many a
time, those that plough iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap accordingly;
by the blast of God they perish, [Job
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#009). We have daily instances of that;
and therefore, since thou dost thus perish and art consumed, we have
reason to think that, whatever profession of religion thou hast made,
thou hast but ploughed iniquity and sown wickedness. Even as I have seen
in others, so do I see in thee."

1\. He speaks of sinners in general, politic busy sinners, that take
pains in sin, for they plough iniquity; and expect gain by sin, for they
sow wickedness. Those that plough plough in hope, but what is the issue?
They reap the same. They shall of the flesh reap corruption and ruin,
[Gal 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007), [Gal
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008). The harvest will be a heap in the
day of grief and desperate sorrow, [Isa
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#011). He shall reap the same, that
is, the proper product of that seedness. That which the sinner sows, he
sows not that body that shall be, but God will give it a body, a body of
death, the end of those things, [Rom
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021). Some, by iniquity and
wickedness, understand wrong and injury done to others. Those who plough
and sow them shall reap the same, that is, they shall be paid in their
own coin. Those who are troublesome shall be troubled, [Th2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006); [Jos
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#025). The spoilers shall be spoiled
([Isa 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001)), and those that led
captive shall go captive, [Rev 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010).
He further describes their destruction ([Job
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#009)): By the blast of God they perish.
The projects they take so much pains in are defeated; God cuts asunder
the cords of those ploughers, [Psa
129:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003), [Psa
129:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#004). They themselves are destroyed,
which is the just punishment of their iniquity. They perish, that is,
they are destroyed utterly; they are consumed, that is, they are
destroyed gradually; and this by the blast and breath of God, that is,
(1.) By his wrath. His anger is the ruin of sinners, who are therefore
called vessels of wrath, and his breath is said to kindle Tophet, [Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033). Who knows the power of his
anger? [Psa 90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011). (2.) By his word.
He speaks and it is done, easily and effectually. The Spirit of God, in
the word, consumes sinners; with that he slays them, [Hos
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005). Saying and doing are not two
things with God. The man of sin is said to be consumed with the breath
of Christ's mouth, [Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008). Compare
[Isa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004); [Rev
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#021). Some think that in attributing
the destruction of sinners to the blast of God, and the breath of his
nostrils, he refers to the wind which blew the house down upon Job's
children, as if they were therefore sinners above all men because they
suffered such things. [Luk 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#002).

2\. He speaks particularly of tyrants and cruel oppressors, under the
similitude of lions, [Job 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#010), [Job
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#011). Observe, (1.) How he describes
their cruelty and oppression. The Hebrew tongue has five several names
for lions, and they are all here used to set forth the terrible tearing
power, fierceness, and cruelty, of proud oppressors. They roar, and
rend, and prey upon all about them, and bring up their young ones to do
so too, [Eze 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#003). The devil is a
roaring lion; and they partake of his nature, and do his lusts. They are
strong as lions, and subtle ([Psa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009); [Psa
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#012)); and, as far as they prevail,
they lay all desolate about them. (2.) How he describes their
destruction, the destruction both of their power and of their persons.
They shall be restrained from doing further hurt and reckoned with for
the hurt they have done. An effectual course shall be taken, \[1.\] That
they shall not terrify. The voice of their roaring shall be stopped.
\[2.\] That they shall not tear. God will disarm them, will take away
their power to do hurt: The teeth of the young lions are broken. See
[Psa 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007). Thus shall the remainder of
wrath be restrained. \[3.\] That they shall not enrich themselves with
the spoil of their neighbours. Even the old lion is famished, and
perishes for lack of prey. Those that have surfeited on spoil and rapine
are perhaps reduced to such straits as to die of hunger at last. \[4.\]
That they shall not, as they promise themselves, leave a succession: The
stout lion's whelps are scattered abroad, to seek for food themselves,
which the old ones used to bring in for them, [Nah
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#012). The lion did tear in pieces for
his whelps, but now they must shift for themselves. Perhaps Eliphaz
intended, in this, to reflect upon Job, as if he, being the greatest of
all the men of the east, had got his estate by spoil and used his power
in oppressing his neighbours, but now his power and estate were gone,
and his family was scattered: if so, it was a pity that a man whom God
praised should be thus abused.

[Job 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 4:12</span></span>

Eliphaz, having undertaken to convince Job of the sin and folly of his
discontent and impatience, here vouches a vision he had been favoured
with, which he relates to Job for his conviction. What comes immediately
from God all men will pay a particular deference to, and Job, no doubt,
as much as any. Some think Eliphaz had this vision now lately, since he
came to Job, putting words into his mouth wherewith to reason with him;
and it would have been well if he had kept to the purport of this
vision, which would serve for a ground on which to reprove Job for his
murmuring, but not to condemn him as a hypocrite. Others think he had it
formerly; for God did, in this way, often communicate his mind to the
children of men in those first ages of the world, [Job
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015). Probably God had sent Eliphaz
this messenger and message some time or other, when he was himself in an
unquiet discontented frame, to calm and pacify him. Note, As we should
comfort others with that wherewith we have been comforted ([Co2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#004)), so we should endeavour to
convince others with that which has been powerful to convince us. The
people of God had not then any written word to quote, and therefore God
sometimes notified to them even common truths by the extraordinary ways
of revelation. We that have Bibles have there (thanks be to God) a more
sure word to depend upon than even visions and voices, [Pe2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019). Observe,

I. The manner in which this message was sent to Eliphaz, and the
circumstances of the conveyance of it to him. 1. It was brought to him
secretly, or by stealth. Some of the sweetest communion gracious souls
have with God is in secret, where no eye sees but that of him who is all
eye. God has ways of bringing conviction, counsel, and comfort, to his
people, unobserved by the world, by private whispers, as powerfully and
effectually as by the public ministry. His secret is with them, [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014). As the evil spirit often steals
good words out of the heart ([Mat
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#019)), so the good Spirit sometimes
steals good words into the heart, or ever we are aware. 2. He received a
little thereof, [Job 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012). And it is
but a little of divine knowledge that the best receive in this world. We
know little in comparison with what is to be known, and with what we
shall know when we come to heaven. How little a portion is heard of God!
[Job 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#014). We know but in part, [Co1
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012). See his humility and modesty.
He pretends not to have understood it fully, but something of it he
perceived. 3. It was brought to him in the visions of the night ([Job
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013)), when he had retired from the
world and the hurry of it, and all about him was composed and quiet.
Note, The more we are withdrawn from the world and the things of it the
fitter we are for communion with God. When we are communing with our own
hearts, and are still ([Psa 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)), then
is a proper time for the Holy Spirit to commune with us. When others
were asleep Eliphaz was ready to receive this visit from Heaven, and
probably, like David, was meditating upon God in the night-watches; in
the midst of those good thoughts this thing was brought to him. We
should hear more from God if we thought more of him; yet some are
surprised with convictions in the night, [Job
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014), [Job
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015). 4. It was prefaced with
terrors: Fear came upon him, and trembling, [Job
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#014). It should seem, before he either
heard or saw any thing, he was seized with this trembling, which shook
his bones, and perhaps the bed under him. A holy awe and reverence of
God and his majesty being struck upon his spirit, he was thereby
prepared for a divine visit. Whom God intends to honour he first humbles
and lays low, and will have us all to serve him with holy fear, and to
rejoice with trembling.

II\. The messenger by whom it was sent - a spirit, one of the good
angels, who are employed not only as the ministers of God's providence,
but sometimes as the ministers of his word. Concerning this apparition
which Eliphaz saw we are here told ([Job
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#015), [Job
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#016)), 1. That it was real, and not a
dream, not a fancy. An image was before his eyes; he plainly saw it; at
first it passed and repassed before his face, moved up and down, but at
length it stood still to speak to him. If some have been so knavish as
to impose false visions on others, and some so foolish as to be
themselves imposed upon, it does not therefore follow but that there may
have been apparitions of spirits, both good and bad. 2. That it was
indistinct, and somewhat confused. He could not discern the form
thereof, so as to frame any exact idea of it in his own mind, much less
to give a description of it. His conscience was to be awakened and
informed, not his curiosity gratified. We know little of spirits; we are
not capable of knowing much of them, nor is it fit that we should: all
in good time; we must shortly remove to the world of spirits, and shall
then be better acquainted with them. 3. That it puts him into a great
consternation, so that his hair stood on end. Ever since man sinned it
has been terrible to him to receive an express from heaven, as conscious
to himself that he can expect no good tidings thence; apparitions
therefore, even of good spirits, have always made deep impressions of
fear, even upon good men. How well it is for us that God sends us his
messages, not by spirits, but by men like ourselves, whose terror shall
not make us afraid! See [Dan 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028);
[Dan 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008), [Dan
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#009).

III\. The message itself. Before it was delivered there was silence,
profound silence, [Job 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#016). When we
are to speak either from God or to him it becomes us to address
ourselves to it with a solemn pause, and so to set bounds about the
mount on which God is to come down, and not be hasty to utter any thing.
It was in a still small voice that the message was delivered, and this
was it ([Job 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017)): "Shall mortal man
be more just than God, the immortal God? Shall a man be thought to be,
or pretend to be, more pure than his Maker? Away with such a thought!"
1. Some think that Eliphaz aims hereby to prove that Job's great
afflictions were a certain evidence of his being a wicked man. A mortal
man would be thought unjust and very impure if he should thus correct
and punish a servant or subject, unless he had been guilty of some very
great crime: "If therefore there were not some great crimes for which
God thus punishes thee, man would be more just than God, which is not to
be imagined." 2. I rather think it is only a reproof of Job's murmuring
and discontent: "Shall a man pretend to be more just and pure than God?
more truly to understand, and more strictly to observe, the rules and
laws of equity than God? Shall Enosh, mortal and miserable man, be so
insolent; nay, shall Geber, the strongest and most eminent man, man at
his best estate, pretend to compare with God, or stand in competition
with him?" Note, It is most impious and absurd to think either others or
ourselves more just and pure than God. Those that quarrel and find fault
with the directions of the divine law, the dispensations of the divine
grace, or the disposals of the divine providence, make themselves more
just and pure than God; and those who thus reprove God, let them answer
it. What! sinful man! (for he would not have been mortal if he had not
been sinful) short-sighted man! Shall he pretend to be more just, more
pure, than God, who, being his Maker, is his Lord and owner? Shall the
clay contend with the potter? What justice and purity there is in man,
God is the author of it, and therefore is himself more just and pure.
See [Psa 94:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#009), [Psa
94:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#010).

IV\. The comment which Eliphaz makes upon this, for so it seems to be;
yet some take all the following verses to be spoken in vision. It comes
all to one.

1\. He shows how little the angels themselves are in comparison with
God, [Job 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018). Angels are God's
servants, waiting servants, working servants; they are his ministers
([Psa 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)); bright and blessed
beings they are, but God neither needs them nor is benefited by them and
is himself infinitely above them, and therefore, (1.) He puts no trust
in them, did not repose a confidence in them, as we do in those we
cannot live without. There is no service in which he employs them but,
if he pleased, he could have it done as well without them. he never made
them his confidants, or of his cabinet-council, [Mat
24:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036). He does not leave his business
wholly to them, but his own eyes run to and fro through the earth, [Ch2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#009). See this phrase, [Job
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#011). Some give this sense of it: "So
mutable is even the angelical nature that God would not trust angels
with their own integrity; if he had, they would all have done as some
did, left their first estate; but he saw it necessary to give them
supernatural grace to confirm them." (2.) He charges them with folly,
vanity, weakness, infirmity, and imperfection, in comparison with
himself. If the world were left to the government of the angels, and
they were trusted with the sole management of affairs, they would take
false steps, and everything would not be done for the best, as now it
is. Angels are intelligences, but finite ones. Though not chargeable
with iniquity, yet with imprudence. This last clause is variously
rendered by the critics. I think it would bear this reading, repeating
the negation, which is very common: He will put no trust in his saints;
nor will he glory in his angels (in angelis suis non ponet gloriationem)
or make his boast of them, as if their praises, or services, added any
thing to him: it is his glory that he is infinitely happy without them.

2\. Thence he infers how much less man is, how much less to be trusted
in or gloried in. If there is such a distance between God and angels,
what is there between God and man! See how man is represented here in
his meanness.

(1.) Look upon man in his life, and he is very mean, [Job
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019). Take man in his best estate, and
he is a very despicable creature in comparison with the holy angels,
though honourable if compared with the brutes. It is true, angels are
spirits, and the souls of men are spirits; but, \[1.\] Angels are pure
spirits; the souls of men dwell in houses of clay: such the bodies of
men are. Angels are free; human souls are housed, and the body is a
cloud, a clog, to it; it is its cage; it is its prison. It is a house of
clay, mean and mouldering; an earthen vessel, soon broken, as it was
first formed, according to the good pleasure of the potter. It is a
cottage, not a house of cedar or a house of ivory, but of clay, which
would soon be in ruins if not kept in constant repair. \[2.\] Angels are
fixed, but the very foundation of that house of clay in which man dwells
is in the dust. A house of clay, if built upon a rock, might stand long;
but, if founded in the dust, the uncertainty of the foundation will
hasten its fall, and it will sink with its own weight. As man was made
out of the earth, so he is maintained and supported by that which cometh
out of the earth. Take away that, and his body returns to its earth. We
stand but upon the dust; some have a higher heap of dust to stand upon
than others, but still it is the earth that stays us up and will shortly
swallow us up. \[3.\] Angels are immortal, but man is soon crushed; the
earthly house of his tabernacle is dissolved; he dies and wastes away,
is crushed like a moth between one's fingers, as easily, as quickly; one
may almost as soon kill a man as kill a moth. A little thing will
destroy his life. He is crushed before the face of the moth, so the word
is. If some lingering distemper, which consumes like a moth, be
commissioned to destroy him, he can no more resist it than he can resist
an acute distemper, which comes roaring upon him like a lion. See [Hos
5:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#012). Is such a creature as this to
be trusted in, or can any service be expected from him by that God who
puts no trust in angels themselves?

(2.) Look upon him in his death, and he appears yet more despicable, and
unfit to be trusted. Men are mortal and dying, [Job
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#020), [Job
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#021). \[1.\] In death they are
destroyed, and perish for ever, as to this world; it is the final period
of their lives, and all the employments and enjoyments here; their place
will know them no more. \[2.\] They are dying daily, and continually
wasting: Destroyed from morning to evening. Death is still working in
us, like a mole digging our grave at each remove, and we so continually
lie exposed that we are killed all the day long. \[3.\] Their life is
short, and in a little time they are cut off. It lasts perhaps but from
morning to evening. It is but a day (so some understand it); their birth
and death are but the sun-rise and sun-set of the same day. \[4.\] In
death all their excellency passes away; beauty, strength, learning, not
only cannot secure them from death, but must die with them, nor shall
their pomp, their wealth, or power, descend after them. \[5.\] Their
wisdom cannot save them from death: They die without wisdom, die for
want of wisdom, by their own foolish management of themselves, digging
their graves with their own teeth. \[6.\] It is so common a thing that
nobody heeds it, nor takes any notice of it: They perish without any
regarding it, or laying it to heart. The deaths of others are much the
subject of common talk, but little the subject of serious thought. Some
think the eternal damnation of sinners is here spoken of, as well as
their temporal death: They are destroyed, or broken to pieces, by death,
from morning to evening; and, if they repent not, they perish for ever
(so some read it), [Job 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#020). They
perish for ever because they regard not God and their duty; they
consider not their latter end, [Lam
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009). They have no excellency but that
which death takes away, and they die, they die the second death, for
want of wisdom to lay hold on eternal life. Shall such a mean, weak,
foolish, sinful, dying creature as this pretend to be more just than God
and more pure than his Maker? No, instead of quarrelling with his
afflictions, let him wonder that he is out of hell.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 5](job005)

</div>
