<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job016)  [Next](job018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 17:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. Job reflects upon the harsh censures which his
friends had passed upon him, and looking upon himself as a dying man
([Job 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001)), he appeals to God, and
begs of him speedily to appear for him, and right him, because they had
wronged him, and he knew not how to right himself ([Job
17:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002)). But he hopes that, though it
should be a surprise, it will be no stumbling-block, to good people, to
see him thus abused ([Job 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008), [Job
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009)). II. He reflects upon the vain
hopes they had fed him with, that he should yet see good days, showing
that his days were just at an end, and with his body all his hopes would
be buried in the dust ([Job 17:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010)).
His friends becoming strange to him, which greatly grieved him, he makes
death and the grave familiar to him, which yielded him some comfort.

[Job 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 17:1</span></span>

Job's discourse is here somewhat broken and interrupted, and he passes
suddenly from one thing to another, as is usual with men in trouble; but
we may reduce what is here said to three heads: -

I. The deplorable condition which poor Job was now in, which he
describes, to aggravate the great unkindness of his friends to him and
to justify his own complaints. Let us see what his case was.

1\. He was a dying man, [Job 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001). He
had said ([Job 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#022)), "When a few
years have come, I shall go that long journey." But here he corrects
himself. "Why do I talk of years to come? Alas! I am just setting out on
that journey, am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure
is at hand. My breath is already corrupt, or broken off; my spirits are
spent; I am a gone man." It is good for every one of us thus to look
upon ourselves as dying, and especially to think of it when we are sick.
We are dying, that is, (1.) Our life is going; for the breath of life is
going. It is continually going forth; it is in our nostrils ([Isa
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022)), the door at which it entered
([Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)); there it is upon the
threshold, ready to depart. Perhaps Job's distemper obstructed his
breathing, and short breath will, after a while, be no breath. Let the
Anointed of the Lord be the breath of our nostrils, and let us get
spiritual life breathed into us, and that breath will never be
corrupted. (2.) Our time is ending: My days are extinct, are put out, as
a candle which, from the first lighting, is continually wasting and
burning down, and will by degrees burn out of itself, but may by a
thousand accidents be extinguished. Such is life. It concerns us
therefore carefully to redeem the days of time, and to spend them in
getting ready for the days of eternity, which will never be extinct.
(3.) We are expected in our long home: The graves are ready for me. But
would not one grave serve? Yes, but he speaks of the sepulchres of his
fathers, to which he must be gathered: "The graves where they are laid
are ready for me also," graves in consort, the congregation of the dead.
Wherever we go there is but a step between us and the grave. Whatever is
unready, that is ready; it is a bed soon made. If the graves be ready
for us, it concerns us to be ready for the graves. The graves for me (so
it runs), denoting not only his expectation of death, but his desire of
it. "I have done with the world, and have nothing now to wish for but a
grave."

2\. He was a despised man ([Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006)):
"He" (that is, Eliphaz, so some, or rather God, whom he all along
acknowledges to be the author of his calamities) "has made me a byword
of the people, the talk of the country, a laughing-stock to many, a
gazing-stock to all; and aforetime (or to men's faces, publicly) I was
as a tabret, that whoever chose might play upon." They made ballads of
him; his name became a proverb; it is so still, As poor as Job. "He has
now made me a byword," a reproach of men, whereas, aforetime, in my
prosperity, I was as a tabret, deliciae humani generis - the darling of
the human race, whom they were all pleased with. It is common for those
who were honoured in their wealth to be despised in their poverty.

3\. He was a man of sorrows, [Job
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#007). He wept so much that he had
almost lost his sight: My eye is dim by reason of sorrow, [Job
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#016). The sorrow of the world thus
works darkness and death. He grieved so much that he had fretted all the
flesh away and become a perfect skeleton, nothing but skin and bones:
"All my members are as a shadow. I have become so poor and thin that I
am not to be called a man, but the shadow of a man."

II\. The ill use which his friends made of his miseries. They trampled
upon him, and insulted over him, and condemned him as a hypocrite,
because he was thus grievously afflicted. Hard usage! Now observe,

1\. How Job describes it, and what construction he puts upon their
discourses with him. He looks upon himself as basely abused by them.
(1.) They abused him with their foul censures, condemning him as a bad
man, justly reduced thus and exposed to contempt, [Job
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002). "They are mockers, who deride my
calamities, and insult over me, because I am thus brought low. They are
so with me, abusing me to my face, pretending friendship in their visit,
but intending mischief. I cannot get clear of them; they are continually
tearing me, and they will not be wrought upon, either by reason or pity,
to let fall the prosecution." (2.) They abused him too with their fair
promises, for in them they did but banter him. He reckons them ([Job
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#005)) among those that speak flattery
to their friends. They all came to mourn with him. Eliphaz began with a
commendation of him, [Job 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#003). They
had all promised him that he would be happy if he would take their
advice. Now all this he looked upon as flattery, and as designed to vex
him so much the more. All this he calls their provocation, [Job
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002). They did what they could to
provoke him and then condemned him for his resentment of it; but he
thinks himself excusable when his eye continued thus in their
provocation: it never ceased, and he never could look off it. Note, The
unkindness of those that trample upon their friends in affliction, that
banter and abuse them then, is enough to try, if not to tire, the
patience even of Job himself.

2\. How he condemns it. (1.) It was a sign that God had hidden their
heart from understanding ([Job 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#004)),
and that in this matter they were infatuated, and their wonted wisdom
had departed from them. Wisdom is a gift of God, which he grants to some
and withholds from others, grants at some times and withholds at other
times. Those that are void of compassion are so far void of
understanding. Where there is not the tenderness of a man one may
question whether there be the understanding of a man. (2.) It would be a
lasting reproach and diminution to them: Therefore shalt thou not exalt
them. Those are certainly kept back from honour whose hearts are hidden
from understanding. When God infatuates men he will abase them. Surely
those who discover so little acquaintance with the methods of Providence
shall not have the honour of deciding this controversy! That is reserved
for a man of better sense and better temper, such a one as Elihu
afterwards appeared to be. (3.) It would entail a curse upon their
families. He that thus violates the sacred laws of friendship forfeits
the benefit of it, not only for himself, but for his posterity: "Even
the eyes of his children shall fail, and, when they look for succour and
comfort from their own and their father's friends, they shall look in
vain as I have done, and be as much disappointed as I am in you." Note,
Those that wrong their neighbours may thereby, in the end, wrong their
own children more than they are aware of.

3\. How he appeals from them to God ([Job
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#003)): Lay down now, put me in a
surety with thee, that is, "Let me be assured that God will take the
hearing and determining of the cause into his own hands, and I desire no
more. Let some one engage for God to bring on this matter." Thus those
whose hearts condemn them not have confidence towards God, and can with
humble and believing boldness beg of him to search and try them. Some
make Job here to glance at the mediation of Christ, for he speaks of a
surety with God, without whom he durst not appear before God, nor try
his cause at his bar; for, though his friends' accusations of him were
utterly false, yet he could not justify himself before God but in a
mediator. Our English annotations give this reading of the verse:
"Appoint, I pray thee, my surety with thee, namely, Christ who is with
thee in heaven, and has undertaken to be my surety let him plead my
cause, and stand up for me; and who is he then that will strike upon my
hand?" that is, "Who dares then contend with me? Who shall lay any thing
to my charge if Christ be an advocate for me?" [Rom
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032), [Rom
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033). Christ is the surety of the
better testament ([Heb 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022)), a surety
of God's appointing; and, if he undertake for us, we need not fear what
can be done against us.

III\. The good use which the righteous should make of Job's afflictions
from God, from his enemies, and from his friends, [Job
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008), [Job
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009). Observe here,

1\. How the saints are described. (1.) They are upright men, honest and
sincere, and that act from a steady principle, with a single eye. This
was Job's own character ([Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)),
and probably he speaks of such upright men especially as had been his
intimates and associates. (2.) They are the innocent, not perfectly so,
but innocence is what they aim at and press towards. Sincerity is
evangelical innocency, and those that are upright are said to be
innocent from the great transgression, [Psa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013). (3.) They are the righteous,
who walk in the way of righteousness. (4.) They have clean hands, kept
clean from the gross pollutions of sin, and, when spotted with
infirmities, washed with innocency, [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006).

2\. How they should be affected with the account of Job's troubles.
Great enquiry, no doubt, would be made concerning him, and every one
would speak of him and his case; and what use will good people make of
it? (1.) It will amaze them: Upright men shall be astonished at this;
they will wonder to hear that so good a man as Job should be so
grievously afflicted in body, name, and estate, that God should lay his
hand so heavily upon him, and that his friends, who ought to have
comforted him, should add to his grief, that such a remarkable saint
should be such a remarkable sufferer, and so useful a man laid aside in
the midst of his usefulness; what shall we say to these things? Upright
men, though satisfied in general that God is wise and holy in all he
does, yet cannot but be astonished at such dispensations of Providence,
paradoxes which will not be unfolded till the mystery of God shall be
finished. (2.) It will animate them. Instead of being deterred from and
discouraged in the service of God, by the hard usage which this faithful
servant of God met with, they shall be so much the more emboldened to
proceed and persevere in it. That which was St. Paul's care ([Th1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#003)) was Job's, that no good man
should be moved, either from his holiness or his comfort, by these
afflictions, that none should, for the sake hereof, think the worse of
the ways or work of God. And that which was St. Paul's comfort was his
too, that the brethren in the Lord would wax confident by his bonds,
[Phi 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014). They would hereby be
animated, \[1.\] To oppose sin and to confront the corrupt and
pernicious inferences which evil men would draw from Job's sufferings,
as that God has forsaken the earth, that it is in vain to serve him, and
the like: The innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite, will
not bear to hear this ([Rev 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#002)), but
will withstand him to his face, will stir up himself to search into the
meaning of such providences and study these hard chapters, that he may
read them readily, will stir up himself to maintain religion's just but
injured cause against all its opposers. Note, The boldness of the
attacks which profane people make upon religion should sharpen the
courage and resolution of its friends and advocates. It is time to stir
when proclamation is made in the gate of the camp, Who is on the Lord's
side? When vice is daring it is no time for virtue, through fear, to
hide itself. \[2.\] To persevere in religion. The righteous, instead of
drawing back, or so much as starting back, at this frightful spectacle,
or standing still to deliberate whether he should proceed or no (allude
to [Sa2 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#023)), shall with so much the
more constancy and resolution hold on his way and press forward. "Though
in me he foresees that bonds and afflictions abide him, yet none of
these things shall move him," [Act
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024). Those who keep their eye upon
heaven as their end will keep their feet in the paths of religion as
their way, whatever difficulties and discouragements they meet with in
it \[3.\] In order thereunto to grow in grace. He will not only hold on
his way notwithstanding, but will grow stronger and stronger. By the
sight of other good men's trials, and the experience of his own, he will
be made more vigorous and lively in his duty, more warm and
affectionate, more resolute and undaunted; the worse others are the
better he will be; that which dismays others emboldens him. The
blustering wind makes the traveller gather his cloak the closer about
him and gird it the faster. Those that are truly wise and good will be
continually growing wiser and better. Proficiency in religion is a good
sign of sincerity in it.

[Job 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 17:10</span></span>

Job's friends had pretended to comfort him with the hopes of his return
to a prosperous estate again; now he here shows,

I. That it was their folly to talk so ([Job
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010)): "Return, and come now, be
convinced that you are in an error, and let me persuade you to be of my
mind; for I cannot find one wise man among you, that knows how to
explain the difficulties of God's providence or how to apply the
consolations of his promises." Those do not go wisely about the work of
comforting the afflicted who fetch their comforts from the possibility
of their recovery and enlargement in this world; though that is not to
be despaired of, it is at the best uncertain; and if it should fail, as
perhaps it may, the comfort built upon it will fail too. It is therefore
our wisdom to comfort ourselves, and others, in distress, with that
which will not fail, the promise of God, his love and grace, and a
well-grounded hope of eternal life.

II\. That it would he much more his folly to heed them; for,

1\. All his measures were already broken and he was full of confusion,
[Job 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#011), [Job
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#012). He owns he had, in his
prosperity, often pleased himself both with projects of what he should
do and prospects of what he should enjoy; but now he looked upon his
days as past, or drawing towards a period; all those purposes were
broken off and those expectations dashed. He had had thoughts about
enlarging his border, increasing his stock, and settling his children,
and many pious thoughts, it is likely, of promoting religion in his
country, redressing grievances, reforming the profane, relieving the
poor, and raising funds perhaps for charitable uses; but he concluded
that all these thoughts of his heart were now at an end, and that he
should never have the satisfaction of seeing his designs effected. Note,
The period of our days will be the period of all our contrivances and
hopes for this world; but, if with full purpose of heart we cleave to
the Lord, death will not break off that purpose. Job, being thus put
upon new counsels, was under a constant uneasiness ([Job
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#012)): The thoughts of his heart
being broken, they changed the night into day and shortened the light.
Some, in their vanity and riot, turn night into day and day into night;
but Job did so through trouble and anguish of spirit, which were a
hindrance, (1.) To the repose of the night, keeping his eyes waking, so
that the night was as wearisome to him as the day, and the tossings of
the night tired him as much as the toils of the day. (2.) To the
entertainments of the day. "The light of the morning is welcome, but, by
reason of this inward darkness, the comfort of it is soon gone, and the
day is to me as dismal as the black and dark night," [Deu
28:67](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#067). See what reason we have to be
thankful for the health and ease which enable us to welcome both the
shadows of the evening and the light of the morning.

2\. All his expectations from this world would very shortly be buried in
the grave with him; so that it was a jest for him to think of such
mighty things as they had flattered him with the hopes of, [Job
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019); [Job
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#021); [Job
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#017). "Alas! you do but make a fool
of me."

(1.) He saw himself just dropping into the grave. A convenient house, an
easy bed, and agreeable relations, are some of those things in which we
take satisfaction in this world: Job expected not any of these above
ground; all he felt, and all he had in view, was unpleasing and
disagreeable, but under ground he expected them. \[1.\] He counted upon
no house but the grave ([Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013)):
"If I wait, if there be any place where I shall ever be easy again, it
must be in the grave. I should deceive myself if I should count upon any
out-let from my trouble but what death will give me. Nothing is so sure
as that." Note, In all our prosperity it is good to keep death in
prospect. Whatever we expect, let us be sure to expect that; for that
may prevent other things which we expect, but nothing will prevent that.
But see how he endeavours not only to reconcile himself to the grave,
but to recommend it to himself: "It is my house." The grave is a house;
to the wicked it is a prison-house ([Job
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#019), [Job
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#020)); to the godly it is Bethabara,
a passage-house in their way home. "It is my house, mine by descent, I
am born to it; it is my father's house. It is mine by purchase. I have
made myself obnoxious to it." We must everyone of us shortly remove to
this house, and it is our wisdom to provide accordingly; let us think of
removing, and send before to our long home. \[2.\] He counted upon no
quiet bed but in the darkness: "There," says he, "I have made my bed. It
is made, for it is ready, and I am just going to it." The grave is a
bed, for we shall rest in it in the evening of our day on earth, and
rise from it in the morning of our everlasting day, [Isa
57:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002). Let this make good people
willing to die; it is but going to bed; they are weary and sleepy, and
it is time that they were in their beds. Why should they not go
willingly, when their father calls? "Nay, I have made my bed, by
preparation for it, have endeavoured to make it easy, by keeping
conscience pure, by seeing Christ lying in this bed, and so turning it
into a bed of spices, and by looking beyond it to the resurrection."
\[3.\] He counted upon no agreeable relations but what he had in the
grave ([Job 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#014)): I have cried to
corruption (that is, to the grave, where the body will corrupt), Thou
art my father (for our bodies were formed out of the earth), and to the
worms there, You are my mother and my sister, to whom I am allied (for
man is a worm) and with whom I must be conversant, for the worms shall
cover us, [Job 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#026). Job complained
that his kindred were estranged from him ([Job
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013), [Job
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#014)); therefore here he claims
acquaintance with other relations that would cleave to him when those
disowned him. Note, First, We are all of us near akin to corruption and
the worms. Secondly, It is therefore good to make ourselves familiar
with them, by conversing much with them in our thoughts and meditations,
which would very much help us above the inordinate love of life and fear
of death.

(2.) He saw all his hopes from this world dropping into the grave with
him ([Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015), [Job
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016)): "Seeing I must shortly leave
the world, where is now my hope? How can I expect to prosper who do not
expect to live?" He is not hopeless, but his hope is not where they
would have it be. If in this life only he had hope, he was of all men
most miserable. "No, as for my hope, that hope which I comfort and
support myself with, who shall see it? It is something out of sight that
I hope for, not things that are seen, that are temporal, but things not
seen, that are eternal." What is his hope he will tell us ([Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)), Non est mortale quod opto,
immortale peto - I seek not for that which perishes, but for that which
abides for ever. "But, as for the hopes you would buoy me up with, they
shall go down with me to the bars of the pit. You are dying men, and
cannot make good your promises. I am a dying man, and cannot enjoy the
good you promise. Since, therefore, our rest will be together in the
dust, let us all lay aside the thoughts of this world and set our hearts
upon another." We must shortly be in the dust, for dust we are, dust and
ashes in the pit, under the bars of the pit, held fast there, never to
loose the bands of death till the general resurrection. But we shall
rest there; we shall rest together there. Job and his friends could not
agree now, but they will both be quiet in the grave; the dust of that
will shortly stop their mouths and put an end to the controversy. Let
the foresight of this cool the heat of all contenders and moderate the
disputers of this world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 18](job018)

</div>
