<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job025)  [Next](job027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 26:0</span></span>

This is Job's short reply to Bildad's short discourse, in which he is so
far from contradicting him that he confirms what he had said, and
out-does him in magnifying God and setting forth his power, to show what
reason he had still to say, as he did ([Job
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#002)), "What you know, the same do I
know also." I. He shows that Bildad's discourse was foreign to the
matter he was discoursing of - though very true and good, yet not to the
purpose ([Job 26:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#002)). II. That it was
needless to the person he was discoursing with; for he knew it, and
believed it, and could speak of it as well as he and better, and could
add to the proofs which he had produced of God's power and greatness,
which he does in the rest of his discourse ([Job
26:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#005)), concluding that, when they
had both said what they could, all came short of the merit of the
subject and it was still far from being exhausted ([Job
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#014)).

[Job 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 26:1</span></span>

One would not have thought that Job, when he was in so much pain and
misery, could banter his friend as he does here and make himself merry
with the impertinency of his discourse. Bildad thought that he had made
a fine speech, that the matter was so weighty, and the language so fine,
that he had gained the reputation both of an oracle and of an orator;
but Job peevishly enough shows that his performance was not so valuable
as he thought it and ridicules him for it. He shows,

I. That there was no great matter to be found in it ([Job
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#003)): How hast thou plentifully
declared the thing as it is? This is spoken ironically, upbraiding
Bildad with the good conceit he himself had of what he had said. 1. He
thought he had spoken very clearly, had declared the thing as it is. He
was very fond (as we are all apt to be) of his own notions, and thought
they only were right, and true, and intelligible, and all other notions
of the thing were false, mistaken, and confused; whereas, when we speak
of the glory of God, we cannot declare the thing as it is, for we see it
through a glass darkly, or but by reflection, and shall not see him as
he is till we come to heaven. Here we cannot order our speech concerning
him, [Job 37:19](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#019). 2. He thought he had
spoken very fully, though in few words, that he had plentifully declared
it, and, alas! it was but poorly and scantily that he declared it, in
comparison with the vast compass and copiousness of the subject.

II\. That there was no great use to be made of it. Cui bono - What good
hast thou done by all that thou hast said? How hast thou, with all this
mighty flourish, helped him that is without power? [Job
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#002). How hast thou, with thy grave
dictates, counselled him that has no wisdom? [Job
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#003). Job would convince him, 1. That
he had done God no service by it, nor made him in the least beholden to
him. It is indeed our duty, and will be our honour, to speak on God's
behalf; but we must not think that he needs our service, or is indebted
to us for it, nor will he accept it if it come from a spirit of
contention and contradiction, and not from a sincere regard to God's
glory. 2. That he had done his cause no service by it. He thought his
friends were mightily beholden to him for helping them, at a dead lift,
to make their part good against Job, when they were quite at a loss, and
had no strength, no wisdom. Even weak disputants, when warm, are apt to
think truth more beholden to them than it really is. 3. That he had done
him no service by it. He pretended to convince, instruct, and comfort,
Job; but, alas! what he had said was so little to the purpose that it
would not avail to rectify any mistakes, nor to assist him either in
bearing his afflictions or in getting good by them: "To whom has thou
uttered words? [Job 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#004). Was it to me
that thou didst direct thy discourse? And dost thou take me for such a
child as to need these instructions? Or dost thou think them proper for
one in my condition?" Every thing that is true and good is not suitable
and seasonable. To one that was humbled, and broken, and grieved in
spirit, as Job was, he ought to have preached of the grace and mercy of
God, rather than of his greatness and majesty, to have laid before him
the consolations rather than the terrors of the Almighty. Christ knows
how to speak what is proper for the weary ([Isa
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)), and his ministers should learn
rightly to divide the word of truth, and not make those sad whom God
would not have made sad, as Bildad did; and therefore Job asks him,
Whose spirit came from thee? that is, "What troubled soul would ever be
revived, and relieved, and brought to itself, by such discourses as
these?" Thus are we often disappointed in our expectations from our
friends who should comfort us, but the Comforter, who is the Holy Ghost,
never mistakes in his operations nor misses of his end.

[Job 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 26:5</span></span>

The truth received a great deal of light from the dispute between Job
and his friends concerning those points about which they differed; but
now they are upon a subject in which they were all agreed, the infinite
glory and power of God. How does truth triumph, and how brightly does it
shine, when there appears no other strife between the contenders than
which shall speak most highly and honourably of God and be most copious
in showing forth his praise! It were well if all disputes about matters
of religion might end thus, in glorifying God as Lord of all, and our
Lord, with one mind and one mouth ([Rom
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006)); for to that we have all
attained, in that we are all agreed.

I. Many illustrious instances are here given of the wisdom and power of
God in the creation and preservation of the world.

1\. If we look about us, to the earth and waters here below, we shall
see striking instances of omnipotence, which we may gather out of these
verses. (1.) He hangs the earth upon nothing, [Job
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#007). The vast terraqueous globe
neither rests upon any pillars nor hangs upon any axle-tree, and yet, by
the almighty power of God, is firmly fixed in its place, poised with its
own weight. The art of man could not hang a feather upon nothing, yet
the divine wisdom hangs the whole earth so. It is ponderibus librata
suis - poised by its own weight, so says the poet; it is upheld by the
word of God's power, so says the apostle. What is hung upon nothing may
serve us to set our feet on, and bear the weight of our bodies, but it
will never serve us to set our hearts on, nor bear the weight of our
souls. (2.) He sets bounds to the waters of the sea, and compasses them
in ([Job 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#010)), that they may not
return to cover the earth; and these bounds shall continue unmoved,
unshaken, unworn, till the day and night come to an end, when time shall
be no more. Herein appears the dominion which Providence has over the
raging waters of the sea, and so it is an instance of his power, [Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022). We see too the care which
Providence takes of the poor sinful inhabitants of the earth, who,
though obnoxious to his justice and lying at his mercy, are thus
preserved from being overwhelmed, as they were once by the waters of a
flood, and will continue to be so, because they are reserved unto fire.
(3.) He forms dead things under the waters. Rephaim-giants, are formed
under the waters, that is, vast creatures, of prodigious bulk, as
whales, giant-like creatures, among the innumerable inhabitants of the
water. So bishop Patrick. (4.) By mighty storms and tempests he shakes
the mountains, which are here called the pillars of heaven ([Job
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#011)), and even divides the sea, and
smites through its proud waves, [Job
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#012). At the presence of the Lord the
sea flies and the mountains skip, [Psa
114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003), [Psa
114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004). See [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006), etc. A storm furrows the waters,
and does, as it were, divide them; and then a calm smites through the
waves, and lays them flat again. See [Psa
89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009), [Psa
89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010). Those who think Job lived at,
or after, the time of Moses, apply this to the dividing of the Red Sea
before the children of Israel, and the drowning of the Egyptians in it.
By his understanding he smiteth through Rahab; so the word is, and Rahab
is often put for Egypt; as [Psa 87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004);
[Isa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009).

2\. If we consider hell beneath, though it is out of our sight, yet we
may conceive the instances of God's power there. By hell and destruction
([Job 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#006)) we may understand the
grave, and those who are buried in it, that they are under the eye of
God, though laid out of our sight, which may strengthen our belief of
the resurrection of the dead. God knows where to find, and whence to
fetch, all the scattered atoms of the consumed body. We may also
consider them as referring to the place of the damned, where the
separate souls of the wicked are in misery and torment. That is hell and
destruction, which are said to be before the Lord ([Pro
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#011)), and here to be naked before
him, to which it is probable there is an allusion, [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010), where sinners are to be
tormented in the presence of the holy angels (who attended the
Shechinah) and in the presence of the Lamb. And this may give light to
[Job 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#005), which some ancient versions
read thus (and I think more agreeably to the signification of the word
Rephaim): Behold, the giants groan under the waters, and those that
dwell with them; and then follows, Hell is naked before him, typified by
the drowning of the giants of the old world; so the learned Mr. Joseph
Mede understands it, and with it illustrates [Pro
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#016), where hell is called the
congregation of the dead; and it is the same word which is here used,
and which he would there have rendered the congregation of the giants,
in allusion to the drowning of the sinners of the old world. And is
there any thing in which the majesty of God appears more dreadful than
in the eternal ruin of the ungodly and the groans of the inhabitants of
the land of darkness? Those that will not with angels fear and worship
shall for ever with devils fear and tremble; and God therein will be
glorified.

3\. If we look up to heaven above, we shall see instances of God's
sovereignty and power. (1.) He stretches out the north over the empty
place, [Job 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#007). So he did at first,
when he stretched out the heavens like a curtain ([Psa
104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)); and he still continues to keep
them stretched out, and will do so till the general conflagration, when
they shall be rolled together as a scroll, [Rev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014). He mentions the north because
his country (as ours) lay in the northern hemisphere; and the air is the
empty place over which it is stretched out. See [Psa
89:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#012). What an empty place is this
world in comparison with the other! (2.) He keeps the waters that are
said to be above the firmament from pouring down upon the earth, as once
they did ([Job 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#008)): He binds up the
waters in his thick clouds, as if they were tied closely in a bag, till
there is occasion to use them; and, notwithstanding the vast weight of
water so raised and laid up, yet the cloud is not rent under them, for
then they would burst and pour out as a spout; but they do, as it were,
distil through the cloud, and so come drop by drop, in mercy to the
earth, in small rain, or great rain, as he pleases. (3.) He conceals the
glory of the upper world, the dazzling lustre of which we poor mortals
could not bear ([Job 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#009)): He holds
back the face of his throne, that light in which he dwells, and spreads
a cloud upon it, through which he judges, [Job
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#013). God will have us to live by
faith, not by sense; for this is agreeable to a state of probation. It
were not a fair trial if the face of God's throne were visible now as it
will be in the great day.

Lest his high throne, above expression bright,

With deadly glory should oppress our sight,

To break the dazzling force he draws a screen

Of sable shades, and spreads his clouds between.

\- Sir R. Blackmore

(4.) The bright ornaments of heaven are the work of his hands ([Job
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013)): By his Spirit, the eternal
Spirit that moved upon the face of the waters, the breath of his mouth
([Psa 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)), he has garnished the
heavens, not only made them, but beautified them, has curiously
bespangled them with stars by night and painted them with the light of
the sun by day. God, having made man to look upward (Os homini sublime
dedit - To man he gave an erect countenance), has therefore garnished
the heavens, to invite him to look upward, that, by pleasing his eye
with the dazzling light of the sun and the sparkling light of the stars,
their number, order, and various magnitudes, which, as so many golden
studs, beautify the canopy drawn over our heads, he may be led to admire
the great Creator, the Father and fountain of lights, and to say, "If
the pavement be so richly inlaid, what must the palace be! If the
visible heavens be so glorious, what are those that are out of sight!"
From the beauteous garniture of the ante-chamber we may infer the
precious furniture of the presence-chamber. If stars be so bright, what
are angels! What is meant here by the crooked serpent which his hands
have formed is not certain. Some make it part of the garnishing of the
heavens, the milky-way, say some; some particular constellation, so
called, say others. It is the same word that is used for leviathan ([Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)), and probably may be meant of
the whale or crocodile, in which appears much of the power of the
Creator; and why may not Job conclude with that inference, when God
himself does so? ch. 41.

II\. He concludes, at last, with an awful et caetera ([Job
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#014)): Lo, these are parts of his
ways, the out-goings of his wisdom and power, the ways in which he walks
and by which he makes himself known to the children of men. Here, 1. He
acknowledges, with adoration, the discoveries that were made of God.
These things which he himself had said, and which Bildad had said, are
his ways, and this is heard of him; this is something of God. But, 2. He
admires the depth of that which is undiscovered. This that we have said
is but part of his ways, a small part. What we know of God is nothing in
comparison with what is in God and what God is. After all the
discoveries which God has made to us, and all the enquiries we have made
after God, still we are much in the dark concerning him, and must
conclude, Lo, these are but parts of his ways. Something we hear of him
by his works and by his word; but, alas! how little a portion is heard
of him? heard by us, heard from us! We know but in part; we prophesy but
in part. When we have said all we can, concerning God, we must even do
as St. Paul does ([Rom 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033));
despairing to find the bottom, we must sit down at the brink, and adore
the depth: O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God! It is but a
little portion that we hear and know of God in our present state. He is
infinite and incomprehensible; our understandings and capacities are
weak and shallow, and the full discoveries of the divine glory are
reserved for the future state. Even the thunder of his power (that is,
his powerful thunder), one of the lowest of his ways here in our own
region, we cannot understand. See [Job
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#004), [Job
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#005). Much less can we understand the
utmost force and extent of his power, the terrible efforts and
operations of it, and particularly the power of his anger, [Psa
90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011). God is great, and we know him
not.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 27](job027)

</div>
