<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job012)  [Next](job014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 13:0</span></span>

Job here comes to make application of what he had said in the foregoing
chapter; and now we have him not in so good a temper as he was in then:
for, I. He is very bold with his friends, comparing himself with them,
notwithstanding the mortifications he was under ([Job
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#001), [Job
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#002)). Condemning them for their
falsehood, their forwardness to judge, their partiality and
deceitfulness under colour of pleading God's cause ([Job
13:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#004)), and threatening them with the
judgments of God for their so doing ([Job
13:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#009)), desiring them to be silent
([Job 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#005), [Job
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#013), [Job
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#017)), and turning from them to God
([Job 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003)). II. He is very bold with
his God. 1. In some expressions his faith is very bold, yet that is not
more bold than welcome ([Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015),
[Job 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#016), [Job
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#018)) But, 2. In other expressions
his passion is rather too bold in expostulations with God concerning the
deplorable condition he was in ([Job
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#014), [Job
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#019), etc.), complaining of the
confusion he was in ([Job 13:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#020)),
and the loss he was at to find out the sin that provoked God thus to
afflict him, and in short of the rigour of God's proceedings against him
([Job 13:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#023)).

[Job 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 13:1</span></span>

Job here warmly expresses his resentment of the unkindness of his
friends.

I. He comes up with them as one that understood the matter in dispute as
well as they, and did not need to be taught by them, [Job
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#001), [Job
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#002). They compelled him, as the
Corinthians did Paul, to commend himself and his own knowledge, yet not
in a way of self-applause, but of self-justification. All he had before
said his eye had seen confirmed by many instances, and his ear had heard
seconded by many authorities, and he well understood it and what use to
make of it. Happy are those who not only see and hear, but understand,
the greatness, glory, and sovereignty of God. This, he thought, would
justify what he had said before ([Job
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#003)), which he repeats here ([Job
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#002)): "What you know, the same do I
know also, so that I need not come to you to be taught; I am not
inferior unto you in wisdom." Note, Those who enter into disputation
enter into temptation to magnify themselves and vilify their brethren
more than is fit, and therefore ought to watch and pray against the
workings of pride.

II\. He turns from them to God ([Job
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003)): Surely I would speak to the
Almighty; as if he had said, "I can promise myself no satisfaction in
talking to you. O that I might have liberty to reason with God! He would
not be so hard upon me as you are." The prince himself will perhaps give
audience to a poor petitioner with more mildness, patience, and
condescension, than the servants will. Job would rather argue with God
himself than with his friends. See here, 1. What confidence those have
towards God whose hearts condemn them not of reigning hypocrisy: they
can, with humble boldness, appear before him and appeal to him. 2. What
comfort those have in God whose neighbours unjustly condemn them: if
they may not speak to them with any hopes of a fair hearing, yet they
may speak to the Almighty; they have easy access to him and shall find
acceptance with him.

III\. He condemns them for their unjust and uncharitable treatment of
him, [Job 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#004). 1. They falsely
accused him, and that was unjust: You are forgers of lies. They framed a
wrong hypothesis concerning the divine Providence, and misrepresented
it, as if it did never remarkably afflict any but wicked men in this
world, and thence they drew a false judgment concerning Job, that he was
certainly a hypocrite. For this gross mistake, both in doctrine and
application, he thinks an indictment of forgery lies against them. To
speak lies is bad enough, though but at second hand, but to forge them
with contrivance and deliberation is much worse; yet against this wrong
neither innocency nor excellency will be a fence. 2. They basely
deceived him, and that was unkind. They undertook his cure, and
pretended to be his physicians; but they were all physicians of no
value, "idol-physicians, who can do me no more good than an idol can."
They were worthless physicians, who neither understood his case nor knew
how to prescribe to him - mere empirics, who pretended to great things,
but in conference added nothing to him: he was never the wiser for all
they said. Thus to broken hearts and wounded consciences all creatures,
without Christ, are physicians of no value, on which one may spend all
and be never the better, but rather grow worse, [Mar
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#026).

IV\. He begs they would be silent and give him a patient hearing, [Job
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#005), [Job
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#006). 1. He thinks it would be a
credit to them if they would say no more, having said too much already:
"Hold your peace, and it shall be your wisdom, for thereby you will
conceal your ignorance and ill-nature, which now appear in all you say."
They pleaded that they could not forbear speaking ([Job
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#002), [Job
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#002), [Job
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#003)); but he tells them that they
would better have consulted their own reputation if they had enjoined
themselves silence. Better say nothing than nothing to the purpose or
that which tends to the dishonour of God and the grief of our brethren.
Even a fool, when he holds his peace, is accounted wise, because nothing
appears to the contrary, [Pro 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#028).
And, as silence is an evidence of wisdom, so it is a means of it, as it
gives time to think and hear. 2. He thinks it would be a piece of
justice to him to hear what he had to say: Hear now my reasoning.
Perhaps, though they did not interrupt him in his discourse, yet they
seemed careless, and did not much heed what he said. He therefore begged
that they would not only hear, but hearken. Note, We should be very
willing and glad to hear what those have to say for themselves whom,
upon any account, we are tempted to have hard thoughts of. Many a man,
if he could but be fairly heard, would be fairly acquitted, even in the
consciences of those that run him down.

V. He endeavours to convince them of the wrong they did to God's honour,
while they pretended to plead for him, [Job
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#007), [Job
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#008). They valued themselves upon it
that they spoke for God, were advocates for him, and had undertaken to
justify him and his proceedings against Job; and, being (as they
thought) of counsel for the sovereign, they expected not only the ear of
the court and the last word, but judgment on their side. But Job tells
them plainly, 1. That God and his cause did not need such advocates:
"Will you think to contend for God, as if his justice were clouded and
wanted to be cleared up, or as if he were at a loss what to say and
wanted you to speak for him? Will you, who are so weak and passionate,
put in for the honour of pleading God's cause?" Good work ought not to
be put into bad hands. Will you accept his person? If those who have not
right on their side carry their cause, it is by the partiality of the
judge in favour of their persons; but God's cause is so just that it
needs no such methods for the support of it. He is a God, and can plead
for himself ([Jdg 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#031)); and, if you
were for ever silent, the heavens would declare his righteousness. 2.
That God's cause suffered by such management. Under pretence of
justifying God in afflicting Job they magisterially condemned him as a
hypocrite and a bad man. "This" (says he) "is speaking wickedly" (for
uncharitableness and censoriousness are wickedness, great wickedness; it
is an offence to God to wrong our brethren); "it is talking deceitfully,
for you condemn one whom yet perhaps your own consciences, at the same
time, cannot but acquit. Your principles are false and your arguings
fallacious, and will it excuse you to say, It is for God?" No, for a
good intention will not justify, much less will it sanctify, a bad word
or action. God's truth needs not our lie, nor God's cause either our
sinful policies or our sinful passions. The wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God, nor may we do evil that good may come, [Rom
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#007), [Rom
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008). Pious frauds (as they call them)
are impious cheats; and devout persecutions are horrid profanations of
the name of God, as theirs who hated their brethren, and cast them out,
saying, Let the Lord be glorified, [Isa
66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005); [Joh
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002).

VI\. He endeavours to possess them with a fear of God's judgment, and so
to bring them to a better temper. Let them not think to impose upon God
as they might upon a man like themselves, nor expect to gain his
countenance in their bad practices by pretending a zeal for him and his
honour. "As one man mocks another by flattering him, do you think so to
mock him and deceive him?" Assuredly those who think to put a cheat upon
God will prove to have put a cheat upon themselves. Be not deceived, God
is not mocked. That they might not think thus to jest with God, and
affront him, Job would have them to consider both God and themselves,
and then they would find themselves unable to enter into judgment with
him.

1\. Let them consider what a God he is into whose service they had thus
thrust themselves, and to whom they really did so much disservice, and
enquire whether they could give him a good account of what they did.
Consider, (1.) The strictness of his scrutiny and enquiries concerning
them ([Job 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#009)) "Is it good that he
should search you out? Can you bear to have the principles looked into
which you go upon in your censures, and to have the bottom of the matter
found out?" Note, It concerns us all seriously to consider whether it
will be to our advantage or no that God searches the heart. It is good
to an upright man who means honestly that God should search him;
therefore he prays for it: Search me, O God! and know my heart. God's
omniscience is a witness of his sincerity. But it is bad to him who
looks one way and rows another that God should search him out, and lay
him open to his confusion. (2.) The severity of his rebukes and
displeasure against them ([Job 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#010)):
"If you do accept persons, though but secretly and in heart, he will
surely reprove you; he will be so far from being pleased with your
censures of me, though under colour of vindicating him, that he will
resent them as a great provocation, as any prince or great man would if
a base action were done under the sanction of his name and under the
colour of advancing his interest." Note, What we do amiss we shall
certainly be reproved for, one way or other, one time or other, though
it be done ever so secretly. (3.) The terror of his majesty, which if
they would duly stand in awe of they would not do that which would make
them obnoxious to his wrath ([Job
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#011)): "Shall not his excellency make
you afraid? You that have great knowledge of God, and profess religion
and a fear of him, how dare you talk at this rate and give yourselves so
great a liberty of speech? Ought you not to walk and talk in the fear of
God? [Neh 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#009). Should not his dread
fall upon you, and give a check to your passions?" Methinks Job speaks
this as one that did himself know the terror of the Lord, and lived in a
holy fear of him, whatever his friends suggested to the contrary. Note,
\[1.\] There is in God a dreadful excellency. He is the most excellent
Being, has all excellencies in himself and in each infinitely excels any
creature. His excellencies in themselves are amiable and lovely. He is
the most beautiful Being; but considering man's distance from God by
nature, and his defection and degeneracy by sin, his excellencies are
dreadful. His power, holiness, justice, yea, and his goodness too, are
dreadful excellencies. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness. \[2.\]
A holy awe of this dreadful excellency should fall upon us and make us
afraid. This would awaken impenitent sinners and bring them to
repentance, and would influence all to be careful to please him and
afraid of offending him.

2\. Let them consider themselves, and what an unequal match they were
for this great God ([Job 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#012)): "Your
remembrances (all that in you for which you hope to be remembered when
you are gone) are like unto ashes, worthless and weak, and easily
trampled on and blown away. Your bodies are like bodies of clay,
mouldering and coming to nothing. Your memories, you think, will survive
your bodies, but, alas! they are like ashes which will be shovelled up
with your dust." Note, the consideration of our own meanness and
mortality should make us afraid of offending God, and furnishes a good
reason why we should not despise and trample upon our brethren. Bishop
Patrick gives another sense of this verse: "Your remonstrances on God's
behalf are no better than dust, and the arguments you accumulate but
like so many heaps of dirt."

[Job 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 13:13</span></span>

Job here takes fresh hold, fast hold, of his integrity, as one that was
resolved not to let it go, nor suffer it to be wrested from him. His
firmness in this matter is commendable and his warmth excusable.

I. He entreats his friends and all the company to let him alone, and not
interrupt him in what he was about to say ([Job
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#013)), but diligently to hearken to
it, [Job 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#017). He would have his own
protestation to be decisive, for none but God and himself knew his
heart. "Be silent therefore, and let me hear no more of you, but hearken
diligently to what I say, and let my own oath for confirmation be an end
of the strife."

II\. He resolves to adhere to the testimony his own conscience gave of
his integrity; and though his friends called it obstinacy that should
not shake his constancy: "I will speak in my own defence, and let come
on me what will, [Job 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#013). Let my
friends put what construction they please upon it, and think the worse
of me for it; I hope God will not make my necessary defence to be my
offence, as you do. He will justify me ([Job
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#018)) and then nothing can come amiss
to me." Note, Those that are upright, and have the assurance of their
uprightness, may cheerfully welcome every event. Come what will, bene
praeparatum pectus - they are ready for it. He resolves ([Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015)) that he will maintain his own
ways. He would never part with the satisfaction he had in having walked
uprightly with God; for, though he could not justify every word he had
spoken, yet, in the general, his ways were good, and he would maintain
his uprightness; and why should he not, since that was his great support
under his present exercises, as it was Hezekiah's, Now, Lord, remember
how I have walked before thee? Nay, he would not only not betray his own
cause, or give it up, but he would openly avow his sincerity; for ([Job
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#019)) "If hold my tongue, and do not
speak for myself, my silence now will for ever silence me, for I shall
certainly give up the ghost," [Job
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#019). "If I cannot be cleared, yet
let me be eased, by what I say," as Elihu, [Job
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#017), [Job
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#020).

III\. He complains of the extremity of pain and misery he was in ([Job
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#014)): Wherefore do I take my flesh
in my teeth? That is, 1. "Why do I suffer such agonies? I cannot but
wonder that God should lay so much upon me when he knows I am not a
wicked man." He was ready, not only to rend his clothes, but even to
tear his flesh, through the greatness of his affliction, and saw himself
at the brink of death, and his life in his hand, yet his friends could
not charge him with any enormous crime, nor could he himself discover
any; no marvel then that he was in such confusion. 2. "Why do I stifle
and smother the protestations of my innocency?" When a man with great
difficulty keeps in what he would say, he bites his lips. "Now," says
he, "why may not I take liberty to speak, since I do but vex myself, add
to my torment, and endanger my life, by refraining?" Note, It would vex
the most patient man, when he has lost every thing else, to be denied
the comfort (if he deserves it) of a good conscience and a good name.

IV\. He comforts himself in God, and still keeps hold of his confidence
in him. Observe here,

1\. What he depends upon God for - justification and salvation, the two
great things we hope for through Christ. (1.) Justification ([Job
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#018)): I have ordered my cause, and,
upon the whole matter, I know that I shall be justified. This he knew
because he knew that his Redeemer lived, [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025). Those whose hearts are upright
with God, in walking not after the flesh but after the Spirit, may be
sure that through Christ there shall be no condemnation to them, but
that, whoever lays any thing to their charge, they shall be justified:
they may know that they shall. (2.) Salvation ([Job
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#016)): He also shall be my salvation.
He means it not of temporal salvation (he had little expectation of
that); but concerning his eternal salvation he was very confident that
God would not only be his Saviour to make him happy, but his salvation,
in the vision and fruition of whom he should be happy. And the reason
why he depended on God for salvation was because a hypocrite shall not
come before him. He knew himself not to be a hypocrite, and that none
but hypocrites are rejected of God, and therefore concluded he should
not be rejected. Sincerity is our evangelical perfection; nothing will
ruin us but the want of that.

2\. With what constancy he depends upon him: Though he slay me, yet will
I trust in him, [Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015). This is a
high expression of faith, and what we should all labour to come up to -
to trust in God, though he slay us, that is, we must be well pleased
with God as a friend even when he seems to come forth against us as an
enemy, [Job 23:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008). We must believe
that all shall work for good to us even when all seems to make against
us, [Jer 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#005). We must proceed and
persevere in the way of our duty, though it cost us all that is dear to
us in this world, even life itself, [Heb
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#035). We must depend upon the
performance of the promise when all the ways leading to it are shut up,
[Rom 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018). We must rejoice in God when
we have nothing else to rejoice in, and cleave to him, yea, though we
cannot for the present find comfort in him. In a dying hour we must
derive from him living comforts; and this is to trust in him though he
slay us.

V. He wishes to argue the case even with God himself, if he might but
have leave to settle the preliminaries of the treaty, [Job
13:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#020). He had desired ([Job
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003)) to reason with God, and is still
of the same mind. He will not hide himself, that is, he will not decline
the trial, nor dread the issue of it, but under two provisos: - 1. That
his body might not be tortured with this exquisite pain: "Withdraw thy
hand far from me; for, while I am in this extremity, I am fit for
nothing. l can make a shift to talk with my friends, but I know not how
to address myself to thee." When we are to converse with God we have
need to be composed, and as free as possible from every thing that may
make us uneasy. 2. That his mind might not be terrified with the
tremendous majesty of God: "Let not thy dread make me afraid; either let
the manifestations of thy presence be familiar or let me be enabled to
bear them without disorder and disturbance." Moses himself trembled
before God, so did Isaiah and Habakkuk. O God! thou art terrible even in
thy holy places. "Lord," says Job, "let me not be put into such a
consternation of spirit, together with this bodily affliction; for then
I must certainly drop the cause, and shall make nothing of it." See what
a folly it is for men to put off their repentance and conversion to a
sick-bed and a death-bed. How can even a good man, much less a bad man,
reason with God, so as to be justified before him, when he is upon the
rack of pain and under the terror of the arrests of death? At such a
time it is very bad to have the great work to do, but very comfortable
to have it done, as it was to Job, who, if he might but have a little
breathing-time, was ready either, (1.) To hear God speaking to him by
his word, and return an answer: Call thou, and I will answer; or, (2.)
To speak to him by prayer, and expect an answer: Let me speak, and
answer thou me, v. 22. Compare this with [Job
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034), [Job
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#035), where he speaks to the same
purport. In short, the badness of his case was at present such a damp
upon him as he could not get over; otherwise he was well assured of the
goodness of his cause, and doubted not but to have the comfort of it at
last, when the present cloud was over. With such holy boldness may the
upright come to the throne of grace, not doubting but to find mercy
there.

[Job 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 13:23</span></span>

Here, I. Job enquires after his sins, and begs to have them discovered
to him. He looks up to God, and asks him what was the number of them
(How many are my iniquities?) and what were the particulars of them:
Make me to know my transgressions, [Job
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#023). His friends were ready enough
to tell him how numerous and how heinous they were, [Job
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#005). "But, Lord," says he, "let me
know them from thee; for thy judgment is according to truth, theirs is
not." This may be taken either, 1. As a passionate complaint of hard
usage, that he was punished for his faults and yet was not told what his
faults were. Or, 2. As a prudent appeal to God from the censures of his
friends. He desired that all his sins might be brought to light, as
knowing they would then appear not so many, nor so mighty, as his
friends suspected him to be guilty of. Or, 3. As a pious request, to the
same purport with that which Elihu directed him to, [Job
34:32](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#032). That which I see not, teach
thou me. Note, A true penitent is willing to know the worst of himself;
and we should all desire to know what our transgressions are, that we
may be particular in the confession of them and on our guard against
them for the future.

II\. He bitterly complains of God's withdrawings from him ([Job
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#024)): Wherefore hidest thou thy
face? This must be meant of something more than his outward afflictions;
for the loss of estate, children, health, might well consist with God's
love; when that was all, he blessed the name of the Lord; but his soul
was also sorely vexed, and that is it which he here laments. 1. That the
favours of the Almighty were suspended. God hid his face as one strange
to him, displeased with him, shy and regardless of him. 2. That the
terrors of the Almighty were inflicted and impressed upon him. God held
him for his enemy, shot his arrows at him ([Job
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004)), and set him as a mark, [Job
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#020). Note, The Holy Ghost sometimes
denies his favours and discovers his terrors to the best and dearest of
his saints and servants in this world. This case occurs, not only in the
production, but sometimes in the progress of the divine life. Evidences
for heaven are eclipsed, sensible communications interrupted, dread of
divine wrath impressed, and the returns of comfort, for the present,
despaired of, [Psa 77:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#007); [Psa
88:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#007), [Psa
88:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#015), [Psa
88:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#016). These are grievous burdens to a
gracious soul, that values God's loving-kindness as better than life,
[Pro 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#014). A wounded spirit who can
bear? Job, by asking here, Why hidest thou thy face? teaches us that,
when at any time we are under the sense of God's withdrawings, we are
concerned to enquire into the reason of them - what is the sin for which
he corrects us and what the good he designs us. Job's sufferings were
typical of the sufferings of Christ, from whom not only men hid their
faces ([Isa 53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)), but God hid his,
witness the darkness which surrounded him on the cross when he cried
out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? If this were done to
these green trees, what shall be done to the dry? They will for ever be
forsaken.

III\. He humbly pleads with God his own utter inability to stand before
him ([Job 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#025)): "Wilt thou break a
leaf, pursue the dry stubble? Lord, is it for thy honour to trample upon
one that is down already, or to crush one that neither has nor pretends
to any power to resist thee?" Note, We ought to have such an
apprehension of the goodness and compassion of God as to believe that he
will not break the bruised reed, [Mat
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#020).

IV\. He sadly complains of God's severe dealings with him. He owns it
was for his sins that God thus contended with him, but thinks it hard,

1\. That his former sins, long since committed, should now be remembered
against him, and he should he reckoned with for the old scores ([Job
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#026)): Thou writest bitter things
against me. Afflictions are bitter things. Writing them denotes
deliberation and determination, written as a warrant for execution; it
denotes also the continuance of his affliction, for that which is
written remains, and, "Herein thou makest me to possess the iniquities
of my youth," that is, "thou punishest me for them, and thereby puttest
me in mind of them, and obligest me to renew my repentance for them."
Note, (1.) God sometimes writes very bitter things against the best and
dearest of his saints and servants, both in outward afflictions and
inward disquiet; trouble in body and trouble in mind, that he may humble
them, and prove them, and do them good in their latter end. (2.) That
the sins of youth are often the smart of age both in respect of sorrow
within ([Jer 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018), [Jer
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019)) and suffering without, [Job
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011). Time does not wear out the
guilt of sin. (3.) That when God writes bitter things against us his
design therein is to make us possess our iniquities, to bring forgotten
sins to mind, and so to bring us to remorse for them as to break us off
from them. This is all the fruit, to take away our sin.

2\. That his present mistakes and miscarriages should be so strictly
taken notice of, and so severely animadverted upon ([Job
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027)): "Thou puttest my feet also in
the stocks, not only to afflict me and expose me to shame, not only to
keep me from escaping the strokes of thy wrath, but that thou mayest
critically remark all my motions and look narrowly to all my paths, to
correct me for every false step, nay, for but a look awry or a word
misapplied; nay, thou settest a print upon the heels of my feet, scorest
down every thing I do amiss, to reckon for it; or no sooner have I
trodden wrong, though ever so little, than immediately I smart for it;
the punishment treads upon the very heels of the sin. Guilt, both of the
oldest and of the freshest date, is put together to make up the cause of
my calamity." Now, (1.) It was not true that God did thus seek
advantages against him. He is not thus extreme to mark what we do amiss;
if he were, there were no abiding for us, [Psa
130:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003). But he is so far from this that
he deals not with us according to the desert, no, not of our manifest
sins, which are not found by secret search, [Jer
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#034). This therefore was the language
of Job's melancholy; his sober thoughts never represented God thus as a
hard Master. (2.) But we should keep such a strict and jealous eye as
this upon ourselves and our own steps, both for the discovery of sin
past and the prevention of it for the future. It is good for us all to
ponder the path of our feet.

V. He finds himself wasting away apace under the heavy hand of God, [Job
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#028). He (that is, man) as a rotten
thing, the principle of whose putrefaction is in itself, consumes, even
like a moth-eaten garment, which becomes continually worse and worse.
Or, He (that is, God) like rottenness, and like a moth, consumes me.
Compare this with [Hos 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#012), I will be
unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness; and see
[Psa 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011). Note, Man, at the best,
wears fast; but, under God's rebukes especially, he is soon gone. While
there is so little soundness in the soul, no marvel there is so little
soundness in the flesh, [Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 14](job014)

</div>
