<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job018)  [Next](job020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 19:0</span></span>

This chapter is Job's answer to Bildad's discourse in the foregoing
chapter. Though his spirit was grieved and much heated, and Bildad was
very peevish, yet he gave him leave to say all he designed to say, and
did not break in upon him in the midst of his argument; but, when he had
done, he gave him a fair answer, in which, I. He complains of unkind
usage. And very unkindly he takes it. 1. That his comforters added to
his affliction ([Job 19:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#002)). 2. That
his God was the author of his affliction ([Job
19:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#008)). 3. That his relations and
friends were strange to him, and shy of him, in his affliction ([Job
19:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020)). II. He comforts himself
with the believing hopes of happiness in the other world, though he had
so little comfort in this, making a very solemn confession of his faith,
with a desire that it might be recorded as an evidence of his sincerity
([Job 19:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023)). III. He concludes
with a caution to his friends not to persist in their hard censures of
him ([Job 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028), [Job
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#029)) If the remonstrance Job here
makes of his grievances may serve sometimes to justify our complaints,
yet his cheerful views of the future state, at the same time, may shame
us Christians, and may serve to silence our complaints, or at least to
balance them.

[Job 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 19:1</span></span>

Job's friends had passed a very severe censure upon him as a wicked man
because he was so grievously afflicted; now here he tells them how ill
he took it to be so censured. Bildad had twice begun with a How long
([Job 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#002), [Job
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#002)), and therefore Job, being now to
answer him particularly, begins with a How long too, [Job
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#002). What is not liked is commonly
thought long; but Job had more reason to think those long who assaulted
him than they had to think him long who only vindicated himself. Better
cause may be shown for defending ourselves, if we have right on our
side, than for offending our brethren, though we have right on our side.
Now observe here,

I. How he describes their unkindness to him and what account he gives of
it. 1. They vexed his soul, and that is more grievous than the vexation
of the bones, [Psa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002), [Psa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#003). They were his friends; they came
to comfort him, pretended to counsel him for the best; but with a great
deal of gravity, and affectation of wisdom and piety, they set
themselves to rob him of the only comfort he had now left him in a good
God, a good conscience, and a good name; and this vexed him to his
heart. 2. They broke him in pieces with words, and those were surely
hard and very cruel words that would break a man to pieces: they grieved
him, and so broke him; and therefore there will be a reckoning hereafter
for all the hard speeches spoken against Christ and his people, [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015). 3. They reproached him, ([Job
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003)), gave him a bad character and
laid to his charge things that he knew not. To an ingenuous mind
reproach is a cutting thing. 4. They made themselves strange to him,
were shy of him now that he was in his troubles, and seemed as if they
did not know him ([Job 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012)), were not
free with him as they used to be when he was in his prosperity. Those
are governed by the spirit of the world, and not by any principles of
true honour or love, who make themselves strange to their friends, or
God's friends, when they are in trouble. A friend loves at all times. 5.
They not only estranged themselves from him, but magnified themselves
against him ([Job 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005)), not only
looked shy of him, but looked big upon him, and insulted over him,
magnifying themselves to depress him. It is a mean thing, it is a base
thing, thus to trample upon those that are down. 6. They pleaded against
him his reproach, that is, they made use of his affliction as an
argument against him to prove him a wicked man. They should have pleaded
for him his integrity, and helped him to take the comfort of that under
his affliction, and so have pleaded that against his reproach (as St.
Paul, [Co2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)); but, instead of
that, they pleaded his reproach against his integrity, which was not
only unkind, but very unjust; for where shall we find an honest man if
reproach may be admitted for a plea against him?

II\. How he aggravates their unkindness. 1. They had thus abused him
often ([Job 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003)): These ten times you
have reproached me, that is, very often, as [Gen
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007); [Num
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#022). Five times they had spoken, and
every speech was a double reproach. He spoke as if he had kept a
particular account of their reproaches, and could tell just how many
they were. It is but a peevish and unfriendly thing to do so, and looks
like a design of retaliation and revenge. We better befriend our own
peace by forgetting injuries and unkindnesses than by remembering them
and scoring them up. 2. They continued still to abuse him, and seemed
resolved to persist in it: "How long will you do it?" [Job
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#002), [Job
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005). "I see you will magnify
yourselves against me, notwithstanding all I have said in my own
justification." Those that speak too much seldom think they have said
enough; and, when the mouth is opened in passion, the ear is shut to
reason. 3. They were not ashamed of what they did, [Job
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003). They had reason to be ashamed of
their hard-heartedness, so ill becoming men, of their uncharitableness,
so ill becoming good men, and of their deceitfulness, so ill becoming
friends: but were they ashamed? No, though they were told of it again
and again, yet they could not blush.

III\. How he answers their harsh censures, by showing them that what
they condemned was capable of excuse, which they ought to have
considered. 1. The errors of his judgment were excusable ([Job
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#004)): "Be it indeed that I have
erred, that I am in the wrong through ignorance or mistake," which may
well be supposed concerning men, concerning good men. Humanum est errare
- Error cleaves to humanity; and we must be willing to suppose it
concerning ourselves. It is folly to think ourselves infallible. "But be
it so," said Job, "my error remaineth with myself," that is, "I speak
according to the best of my judgment, with all sincerity, and not from a
spirit of contradiction." Or, "If I be in an error, I keep it to myself,
and do not impose it upon others as you do. I only prove myself and my
own work by it. I meddle not with other people, either to teach them or
to judge them." Men's errors are the more excusable if they keep them to
themselves, and do not disturb others with them. Hast thou faith? Have
it to thyself. Some give this sense of these words: "If I be in an
error, it is I that must smart for it; and therefore you need not
concern yourselves: nay, it is I that do smart, and smart severely, for
it; and therefore you need not add to my misery by your reproaches." 2.
The breakings out of his passion, though not justifiable, yet were
excusable, considering the vastness of his grief and the extremity of
his misery. "If you will go on to cavil at every complaining word I
speak, will make the worst of it and improve it against me, yet take the
cause of the complaint along with you, and weigh that, before you pass a
judgment upon the complaint, and turn it to my reproach: Know then that
God has overthrown me," [Job 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#006).
Three things he would have them consider: - (1.) That his trouble was
very great. He was overthrown, and could not help himself, enclosed as
in a net, and could not get out. (2.) That God was the author of it, and
that, in it, he fought against him: "It was his hand that overthrew me;
it is in his net that I am enclosed; and therefore you need not appear
against me thus. I have enough to do to grapple with God's displeasure;
let me not have yours also. Let God's controversy with me be ended
before you begin yours." It is barbarous to persecute him whom God hath
smitten and to talk to the grief of one whom he hath wounded, [Psa
69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026). (3.) That he could not obtain
any hope of the redress of his grievances, [Job
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#007). He complained of his pain, but
got no ease - begged to know the cause of his affliction, but could not
discover it - appealed to God's tribunal for the clearing of his
innocency, but could not obtain a hearing, much less a judgment, upon
his appeal: I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard. God, for a time, may
seem to turn away his ear from his people, to be angry at their prayers
and overlook their appeals to him, and they must be excused if, in that
case, they complain bitterly. Woe unto us if God be against us!

[Job 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 19:8</span></span>

Bildad had very disingenuously perverted Job's complaints by making them
the description of the miserable condition of a wicked man; and yet he
repeats them here, to move their pity, and to work upon their good
nature, if they had any left in them.

I. He complains of the tokens of God's displeasure which he was under,
and which infused the wormwood and gall into the affliction and misery.
How doleful are the accents of his complaints! "He hath kindled his
wrath against me, which flames and terrifies me, which burns and pains
me," [Job 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011). What is the fire of
hell but the wrath of God? Seared consciences will feel it hereafter,
but do not fear it now. Enlightened consciences fear it now, but shall
not feel it hereafter. Job's present apprehension was that God counted
him as one of his enemies; and yet, at the same time, God loved him, and
gloried in him, as his faithful friend. It is a gross mistake, but a
very common one, to think that whom God afflicts he treats as his
enemies; whereas, on the contrary, as many as he loves he rebukes and
chastens; it is the discipline of his sons. Which way soever Job looked
he thought he saw the tokens of God's displeasure against him. 1. Did he
look back upon his former prosperity? He saw God's hand putting an end
to that ([Job 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#009)): "He has stripped
me of my glory, my wealth, honour, power, and all the opportunity I had
of doing good. My children were my glory, but I have lost them; and
whatever was a crown to my head he has taken it from me, and has laid
all my honour in the dust." See the vanity of worldly glory: it is what
we may be soon stripped of; and, whatever strips us, we must see and own
God's hand in it and comply with his design. 2. Did he look down upon
his present troubles? He saw God giving them their commission, and their
orders to attack him. They are his troops, that act by his direction,
which encamp against me, [Job 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#012).
It did not so much trouble him that his miseries came upon him in troops
as that they were God's troops, in whom it seemed as if God fought
against him and intended his destruction. God's troops encamped around
his tabernacle, as soldiers lay siege to a strong city, cutting off all
provisions from being brought into it and battering it continually; thus
was Job's tabernacle besieged. Time was when God's hosts encamped round
him for safety: Hast thou not made a hedge about him? Now, on the
contrary, they surrounded him, to his terror, and destroyed him on every
side, [Job 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#010). 3. Did he look
forward for deliverance? He saw the hand of God cutting off all hopes of
that ([Job 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#008)): "He hath fenced up
my way, that I cannot pass. I have now no way left to help myself,
either to extricate myself out of my troubles or to ease myself under
them. Would I make any motion, take any steps towards deliverance? I
find my way hedged up; I cannot do what I would; nay, if I would please
myself with the prospect of a deliverance hereafter, I cannot do it; it
is not only out of my reach, but out of my sight: God hath set darkness
in my paths, and there is none to tell me how long," [Psa
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009). He concludes ([Job
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#010)), "I am gone, quite lost and
undone for this world; my hope hath he removed like a tree cut down, or
plucked up by the roots, which will never grow again." Hope in this life
is a perishing thing, but the hope of good men, when it is cut off from
this world, is but removed like a tree, transplanted from this nursery
to the garden of the Lord. We shall have no reason to complain if God
thus remove our hopes from the sand to the rock, from things temporal to
things eternal.

II\. He complains of the unkindness of his relations and of all his old
acquaintance. In this also he owns the hand of God ([Job
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013)): He has put my brethren far
from me, that is, "He has laid those afflictions upon me which frighten
them from me, and make them stand aloof from my sores." As it was their
sin God was not the author of it; it is Satan that alienates men's minds
from their brethren in affliction. But, as it was Job's trouble, God
ordered it for the completing of his trial. As we must eye the hand of
God in all the injuries we receive from our enemies ("the Lord has
bidden Shimei curse David"), so also in all the slights and unkindnesses
we receive from our friends, which will help us to bear them the more
patiently. Every creature is that to us (kind or unkind, comfortable or
uncomfortable) which God makes it to be. Yet this does not excuse Job's
relations and friends from the guilt of horrid ingratitude and injustice
to him, which he had reason to complain of; few could have borne it so
well as he did. He takes notice of the unkindness, 1. Of his kindred and
acquaintance, his neighbours, and such as he had formerly been familiar
with, who were bound by all the laws of friendship and civility to
concern themselves for him, to visit him, to enquire after him, and to
be ready to do him all the good offices that lay in their power; yet
these were estranged from him, [Job
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013). They took no more care about
him than if he had been a stranger whom they never knew. His kinsfolk,
who claimed relation to him when he was in prosperity, now failed him;
they came short of their former professions of friendship to him and his
present expectations of kindness from them. Even his familiar friends,
whom he was mindful of, had now forgotten him, had forgotten both his
former friendliness to them and his present miseries: they had heard of
his troubles, and designed him a visit; but truly they forgot it, so
little affected were they with it. Nay, his inward friends, the men of
his secret, whom he was most intimate with and laid in his bosom, not
only forgot him, but abhorred him, kept as far off from him as they
could, because he was poor and could not entertain them as he used to
do, and because he was sore and a loathsome spectacle. Those whom he
loved, and who therefore were worse than publicans if they did not love
him now that he was in distress, not only turned from him, but were
turned against him, and did all they could to make him odious, so to
justify themselves in being so strange to him, [Job
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#019). So uncertain is the friendship
of men; but, if God be our friend, he will not fail us in a time of
need. But let none that pretend either to humanity or Christianity ever
use their friends as Job's friends used him: adversity is the proof of
friendship. 2. Of his domestics and family relations. Sometimes indeed
we find that, beyond our expectation, there is a friend that sticks
closer than a brother; but the master of a family ordinarily expects to
be attended on and taken care of by those of his family, even when,
through weakness of body or mind, he has become despicable to others.
But poor Job was misused by his own family, and some of his worst foes
were those of his own house. He mentions not his children; they were all
dead, and we may suppose that the unkindness of his surviving relations
made him lament the death of his children so much the more: "If they had
been alive," would he think, "I should have had comfort in them." As for
those that were now about him, (1.) His own servants slighted him. His
maids did not attend him in his illness, but counted him for a stranger
and an alien, [Job 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#015). His other
servants never heeded him; if he called to them they would not come at
his call, but pretended that they did not hear him. If he asked them a
question, they would not vouchsafe to give him an answer, [Job
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#016). Job had been a good master to
them, and did not despise their cause when they pleaded with him ([Job
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#013)), and yet they were rude to him
now, and despised his cause when he pleaded with them. We must not think
it strange if we receive evil at the hand of those from whom we have
deserved well. Though he was now sickly, yet he was not cross with his
servants, and imperious, as is too common, but he entreated his servants
with his mouth, when he had authority to command; and yet they would not
be civil to him, neither kind nor just. Note, Those that are sick and in
sorrow are apt to take things ill, and be jealous of a slight, and to
lay to heart the least unkindness done to them: when Job was in
affliction even his servants' neglect of him troubled him. (2.) But, one
would think, when all forsook him, the wife of his bosom should have
been tender of him: no, because he would not curse God and die, as she
persuaded him, his breath was strange to her too; she did not care for
coming near him, nor took any notice of what he said, [Job
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017). Though he spoke to her, not
with the authority, but with the tenderness of a husband, did not
command, but entreated her by that conjugal love which their children
were the pledges of, yet she regarded him not. Some read it, "Though I
lamented, or bemoaned myself, for the children," that is, "for the death
of the children of my own body," an affliction in which she was equally
concerned with him. Now, it appeared, the devil spared her to him, not
only to be his tempter, but to be his tormentor. By what she said to him
at first, Curse God and die, it appeared that she had little religion in
her; and what can one expect that is kind and good from those that have
not the fear of God before their eyes and are not governed by
conscience? (3.) Even the little children who were born in his house,
the children of his own servants, who were his servants by birth,
despised him, and spoke against him ([Job
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#018)); though he arose in civility to
speak friendly to them, or with authority to check them, they let him
know that they neither feared him nor loved him.

III\. He complains of the decay of his body; all the beauty and strength
of that were gone. When those about him slighted him, if he had been in
health, and at ease, he might have enjoyed himself. But he could take as
little pleasure in himself as others took in him ([Job
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020)): My bone cleaves now to my
skin, as formerly it did to my flesh; it was this that filled him with
wrinkles ([Job 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008)); he was a perfect
skeleton, nothing but skin and bones. Nay, his skin too was almost gone,
little remained unbroken but the skin of his teeth, his gums and perhaps
his lips; all the rest was fetched off by his sore boils. See what
little reason we have to indulge the body, which, after all our care,
may be thus consumed by the diseases which it has in itself the seeds
of.

IV\. Upon all these accounts he recommends himself to the compassion of
his friends, and justly blames their harshness with him. From this
representation of his deplorable case, it was easy to infer, 1. That
they ought to pity him, [Job 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021).
This he begs in the most moving melting language that could be, enough
(one would think) to break a heart of stone: "Have pity upon me, have
pity upon me, O you my friends! if you will do nothing else for me, be
sorry for me, and show some concern for me; have pity upon me, for the
hand of God hath touched me. My case is sad indeed, for I have fallen
into the hands of the living God, my spirit is touched with the sense of
his wrath, a calamity of all other the most piteous." Note, It becomes
friends to pity one another when they are in trouble, and not to shut up
the bowels of compassion. 2. That, however, they ought not to persecute
him; if they would not ease his affliction by their pity, yet they must
not be so barbarous as to add to it by their censures and reproaches
([Job 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#022)): "Why do you persecute me
as God? Surely his rebukes are enough for one man to bear; you need not
add your wormwood and gall to the cup of affliction he puts into my
hand, it is bitter enough without that: God has a sovereign power over
me, and may do what he pleases with me; but do you think that you may do
so too?" No, we must aim to be like the Most Holy and the Most Merciful,
but not like the Most High and Most Mighty. God gives not account of any
of his matters, but we must give account of ours. If they did delight in
his calamity, let them be satisfied with his flesh, which was wasted and
gone, but let them not, as if that were too little, wound his spirit,
and ruin his good name. Great tenderness is due to those that are in
affliction, especially to those that are troubled in mind.

[Job 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 19:23</span></span>

In all the conferences between Job and his friends we do not find any
more weighty and considerable lines than these; would one have expected
it? Here is much both of Christ and heaven in these verses: and he that
said such things as these declared plainly that he sought the better
country, that is, the heavenly; as the patriarchs of that age did, [Heb
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#014). We have here Job's creed, or
confession of faith. His belief in God the Father Almighty, the Maker of
heaven and earth, and the principles of natural religion, he had often
professed: but here we find him no stranger to revealed religion; though
the revelation of the promised Seed, and the promised inheritance, was
then discerned only like the dawning of the day, yet Job was taught of
God to believe in a living Redeemer, and to look for the resurrection of
the dead and the life of the world to come, for of these, doubtless, he
must be understood to speak. These were the things he comforted himself
with the expectation of, and not a deliverance from his trouble or a
revival of his happiness in this world, as some would understand him;
for besides that the expressions he here uses, of the Redeemer's
standing at the latter day upon the earth, of his seeing God, and seeing
him for himself, are wretchedly forced if they be understood of any
temporal deliverance, it is very plain that he had no expectation at all
of his return to a prosperous condition in this world. He had just now
said that his way was fenced up, ([Job
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#008)) and his hope removed like a
tree, [Job 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#010). Nay, and after this
he expressed his despair of any comfort in this life, [Job
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008), [Job
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#009); [Job
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#023). So that we must necessarily
understand him of the redemption of his soul from the power of the
grave, and his reception to glory, which is spoken of, [Psa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015). We have reason to think that
Job was just now under an extraordinary impulse of the blessed Spirit,
which raised him above himself, gave him light, and gave him utterance,
even to his own surprise. And some observe that, after this, we do not
find Job's discourses such passionate, peevish, unbecoming, complaints
of God and his providence as we have before met with: this hope quieted
his spirit, stilled the storm and, having here cast anchor within the
veil, his mind was kept steady from this time forward. Let us observe,

I. To what intent Job makes this confession of his faith here. Never did
any thing come in more pertinently, or to better purpose. 1. Job was now
accused, and this was his appeal. His friends reproached him as a
hypocrite and contemned him as a wicked man; but he appeals to his
creed, to his faith, to his hope, and to his own conscience, which not
only acquitted him from reigning sin, but comforted him with the
expectation of a blessed resurrection. These are not the words of him
that has a devil. He appeals to the coming of the Redeemer, from this
wrangle at the bar to the judgment of the bench, even to him to whom all
judgment is committed, who he knew would right him. The consideration of
God's day coming will make it a very small thing with us to be judged of
man's judgment, [Co1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003), [Co1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004). How easily may we bear the unjust
calumnies and reproaches of men while we expect the glorious appearance
of our Redeemer, and his redeemed, at the last day, and that there will
then be a resurrection of names, as well as bodies! 2. Job was now
afflicted, and this was his cordial; when he was pressed above measure
this kept him from fainting - he believed that he should see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living; not in this world, for
that is the land of the dying.

II\. With what a solemn preface he introduces it, [Job
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023), [Job
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#024). He breaks off his complaints
abruptly, to triumph his comforts, which he does, not only for his own
satisfaction, but for the edification of others. Those now about him, he
feared, would little regard what he said, and so it proved, He therefore
wished it might be recorded for the generations to come. O that my words
were now written, the words I am now about to say! As if he had said, "I
own I have spoken many unadvised words, which I could wish might be
forgotten, for they will neither do me credit nor do others good. But I
am now going to speak deliberately, and that which I desire may be
published to all the world and preserved for the generations to come, in
perpetuam rei memoriam - for an abiding memorial, and therefore that it
may be written plainly and printed, or drawn out in large and legible
characters, so that he that runs may read it; and that it may not be
left in loose papers, but put into a book; or, if that should perish,
that it may be engraven like an inscription upon a monument, with an
iron pen in lead, or in the stone; let the engraver use all his art to
make it a durable appeal to posterity." That which Job here somewhat
passionately wished for God graciously granted him. His words are
written; they are printed in God's book; so that, wherever that book is
read, there shall this be told for a memorial concerning Job. He
believed, therefore he spoke.

III\. What his confession itself is; what are the words which he would
have to be written; we here have them written, [Job
19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025). Let us observe them.

1\. He believes the glory of the Redeemer and his own interest in him
([Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)): I know that my Redeemer
liveth, that he is in being and is my life, and that he shall stand at
last, or stand the last, or at the latter day, upon (or above) the
earth. He shall be raised up, or, He shall be, at the latter day, (that
is, in the fulness of time: the gospel day is called the last time
because that is the last dispensation) upon the earth: so it points at
his incarnation; or, He shall be lifted up from the earth (so it points
at his crucifixion), or raised up out of the earth (so it is applicable
to his resurrection), or, as we commonly understand it, At the end of
time he shall appear over the earth, for he shall come in the clouds,
and every eye shall see him, so close shall he come to this earth. He
shall stand upon the dust (so the word is), upon all his enemies, which
shall be put a dust under his feet; and he shall tread upon them and
triumph over them. Observe here, (1.) That there is a Redeemer provided
for fallen man, and Jesus Christ is that Redeemer. The word is Goel
which is used for the next of kin, to whom, by the law of Moses, the
right of redeeming a mortgaged estate did belong, [Lev
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025). Our heavenly inheritance was
mortgaged by sin; we are ourselves utterly unable to redeem it; Christ
is near of kin to us, the next kinsman that is able to redeem; he has
paid our debt, satisfied God's justice for sin, and so has taken off the
mortgage and made a new settlement of the inheritance. Our persons also
want a Redeemer; we are sold for sin, and sold under sin; our Lord Jesus
has wrought out a redemption for us, and proclaims redemption for us,
and proclaims redemption to us, and so he is truly the Redeemer. (2.) He
is a living Redeemer. As we are made by a living God, so we are saved by
a living Redeemer, who is both almighty and eternal, and is therefore
able to save to the uttermost. Of him it is witnessed that he liveth,
[Heb 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#008); [Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018). We are dying, but he liveth, and
hath assured us that because he lives we shall live also, [Joh
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019). (3.) There are those that
through grace have an interest in this Redeemer, and can, upon good
grounds, call him theirs. When Job had lost all his wealth and all his
friends, yet he was not separated from Christ, nor cut off from his
relation to him: "Still he is my Redeemer." That next kinsman adhered to
him when all his other kindred forsook him, and he had the comfort of
it. (4.) Our interest in the Redeemer is a thing that may be known; and,
where it is known, it may be triumphed in, as sufficient to balance all
our griefs: I know (observe with what an air of assurance he speaks it,
as one confident of this very thing), I know that my Redeemer lives. His
friends have often charged him with ignorance or vain knowledge; but he
knows enough, and knows to good purpose, who knows Christ to be his
Redeemer. (5.) There will be a latter day, a last day, a day when time
shall be no more, [Rev 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#006). That is a
day we are concerned to think of every day. (6.) Our Redeemer will at
that day stand upon the earth, or over the earth, to summon the dead out
of their graves, and determine them to an unchangeable state; for to him
all judgment is committed. He shall stand, at the last, on the dust to
which this earth will be reduced by the conflagration.

2\. He believes the happiness of the redeemed, and his own title to that
happiness, that, at Christ's second coming, believers shall be raised up
in glory and so made perfectly blessed in the vision and fruition of
God; and this he believes with application to himself. (1.) He counts
upon the corrupting of his body in the grave, and speaks of it with a
holy carelessness and unconcernedness: Though, after my skin (which is
already wasted and gone, none of it remaining but the skin of my teeth,
[Job 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020)) they destroy (those that
are appointed to destroy it, the grave and the worms in it of which he
had spoken, [Job 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#014)) this body. The
word body is added: "Though they destroy this, this skeleton, this
shadow ([Job 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#007)), this that I lay my
hand upon," or (pointing perhaps to his weak and withered limbs) "this
that you see, call it what you will; I expect that shortly it will be a
feast for the worms." Christ's body saw not corruption, but ours must.
And Job mentions this, that the glory of the resurrection he believed
and hoped for might shine the more brightly. Note, It is good for us
often to think, not only of the approaching death of our bodies, but of
their destruction and dissolution in the grave; yet let not that
discourage our hope of their resurrection, for the same power that made
man's body at first, out of common dust, can raise it out of its own
dust. This body which we now take such care about, and make such
provision for, will in a little time be destroyed. Even my reins (says
Job) shall be consumed within me ([Job
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#027)); the innermost part of the
body, which perhaps putrefies first. (2.) He comforts himself with the
hopes of happiness on the other side death and the grave: After I shall
awake (so the margin reads it), though this body be destroyed, yet out
of my flesh shall I see God. \[1.\] Soul and body shall come together
again. That body which must be destroyed in the grave shall be raised
again, a glorious body: Yet in my flesh I shall see God. The separate
soul has eyes wherewith to see God, eyes of the mind; but Job speaks of
seeing him with eyes of flesh, in my flesh, with my eyes; the same body
that died shall rise again, a true body, but a glorified body, fit for
the employments and entertainments of that world, and therefore a
spiritual body, [Co1 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044). Let us
therefore glorify God with our bodies because there is such a glory
designed for them. \[2.\] Job and God shall come together again: In my
flesh shall I see God, that is, the glorified Redeemer, who is God. I
shall see God in my flesh (so some read it), the Son of God clothed with
a body which will be visible even to eyes of flesh. Though the body, in
the grave, seem despicable and miserable, yet it shall be dignified and
made happy in the vision of God. Job now complained that he could not
get a sight of God ([Job 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008), [Job
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#009)), but hoped to see him shortly,
never more to lose the sight of him, and that sight of him will be the
more welcome after the present darkness and distance. Note, It is the
blessedness of the blessed that they shall see God, shall see him as he
is, see him face to face, and no longer through a glass darkly. See with
what pleasure holy Job enlarges upon this ([Job
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#027)): "Whom I shall see for myself,"
that is, "see and enjoy, see to my own unspeakable comfort and
satisfaction. I shall see him as mine, as mine with an appropriating
sight," [Rev 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003). God himself shall
be with them and be their God; they shall be like him, for they shall
see him as he is, that is seeing for themselves, [Jo1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002). My eyes shall behold him, and not
another. First, "He, and not another for him, shall be seen, not a type
or figure of him, but he himself." Glorified saints are perfectly sure
that they are not imposed upon; it is no deceptio visus - illusion of
the senses. Secondly, "I, and not another for me, shall see him. Though
my flesh and body be consumed, yet I shall not need a proxy; I shall see
him with my own eyes." This was what Job hoped for, and what he
earnestly desired, which, some think, is the meaning of the last clause:
My reins are spent in my bosom, that is, "all my desires are summed up
and concluded in this; this will crown and complete them all; let me
have this, and I shall have nothing more to desire; it is enough; it is
all." With this the prayers of David, the son of Jesse, are ended.

IV\. The application of this to his friends. His creed spoke comfort to
himself, but warning and terror to those that set themselves against
him.

1\. It was a word of caution to them not to proceed and persist in their
unkind usage of him, [Job 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028). He
had reproved them for what they had said, and now tells them what they
should say for the reducing of themselves and one another to a better
temper. "Why persecute we him thus? Why do we grieve him and vex him, by
censuring and condemning him, seeing the root of the matter, or the root
of the word, is found in him?" Let this direct us, (1.) In our care
concerning ourselves. We are all concerned to see to it that the root of
the matter be found in us. A living, quickening, commanding, principle
of grace in the heart, is the root of the matter, as necessary to our
religion as the root to the tree, to which it owes both its fixedness
and its fruitfulness. Love to God and our brethren, faith in Christ,
hatred of sin - these are the root of the matter; other things are but
leaves in comparison with these. Serious godliness is the one thing
needful. (2.) In our conduct towards our brethren. We are to believe
that many have the root of the matter in them who are not in every thing
of our mind - who have their follies, and weaknesses, and mistakes - and
to conclude that it is at our peril if we persecute any such. Woe be to
him that offends one of those little ones! God will resent and revenge
it. Job and his friends differed in some notions concerning the methods
of Providence, but they agreed in the root of the matter, the belief of
another world, and therefore should not persecute one another for these
differences.

2\. It was a word of terror to them. Christ's second coming will be very
dreadful to those that are found smiting their fellow servants ([Mat
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#049)), and therefore (v. 29), "Be you
afraid of the sword, the flaming sword of God's justice, which turns
every way; fear, lest you make yourselves obnoxious to it." Good men
need to be frightened from sin by the terrors of the Almighty,
particularly from the sin of rashly judging their brethren, [Mat
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001); [Jam
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001). Those that are peevish and
passionate with their brethren, censorious of them and malicious towards
them, should know, not only that their wrath, whatever it pretends,
works not the righteousness of God, but that, (1.) They may expect to
smart for it in this world: It brings the punishments of the sword.
Wrath leads to such crimes as expose men to the sword of the magistrate.
God himself often takes vengeance for it, and those that showed no mercy
shall find no mercy. (2.) If they repent not, that will be an earnest of
worse. By these you may know there is a judgment, not only a present
government, but a future judgment, in which hard speeches must be
accounted for.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 20](job020)

</div>
