<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joel Index](joe)  
  [Previous](joe001)  [Next](joe003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)

[Joel](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joe 2:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. A further description of that terrible
desolation which should be made in the land of Judah by the locusts and
caterpillars ([Joe 2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)). II. A
serious call to the people, when they are under this sore judgment, to
return and repent, to fast and pray, and to seek unto God for mercy,
with directions how to do this aright ([Joe
2:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012)). III. A promise that, upon
their repentance, God would remove the judgment, would repair the
breaches made upon them by it, and restore unto them plenty of all good
things ([Joe 2:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#018)). IV. A
prediction of the setting up of the kingdom of the Messiah in the world,
by the pouring out of the Spirit in the latter days ([Joe
2:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)). Thus the beginning of this
chapter is made terrible with the tokens of God's wrath, but the latter
end of it made comfortable with the assurances of his favour, and it is
in the way of repentance that this blessed change is made; so that,
though it is only the last paragraph of the chapter that points directly
at gospel-times, yet the whole may be improved as a type and figure,
representing the curses of the law invading men for their sins, and the
comforts of the gospel flowing in to them upon their repentance.

[Joel 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joe 2:1</span></span>

Here we have God contending with his own professing people for their
sins and executing upon them the judgment written in the law ([Deu
28:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#042)), The fruit of thy land shall
the locust consume, which was one of those diseases of Egypt that God
would bring upon them, [Deu 28:60](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#060).

I. Here is the war proclaimed ([Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)): Blow the trumpet in Zion, either
to call the invading army together, and then the trumpet sounds a
charge, or rather to give notice to Judah and Jerusalem of the approach
of the judgment, that they might prepare to meet their God in the way of
his judgments and might endeavor by prayers and tears, the church's best
artillery, to put by the stroke. It was the priests' business to sound
the trumpet ([Num 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#008)), both as an
appeal to God in the day of their distress and a summons to the people
to come together to seek his face. Note, It is the work of ministers to
give warning from the word of God of the fatal consequences of sin, and
to reveal his wrath from heaven against the ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men. And though it is not the privilege of Zion and
Jerusalem to be exempted from the judgments of God, if they provoke him,
yet it is their privilege to be warned of them, that they might make
their peace with him. Even in the holy mountain the alarm must be
sounded, and then it sounds most dreadful, [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002). Now, shall a trumpet be blown in
the city, in the holy city, and the people not be afraid? Surely they
will. [Amo 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006). Let all the
inhabitants of the land tremble; they shall be made to tremble by the
judgment itself; let them therefore tremble at the alarm of it.

II\. Here is a general idea given of the day of battle, which cometh,
which is nigh at hand, and there is no avoiding it. It is the day of the
Lord, the day of his judgment, in which he will both manifest and
magnify himself. It is a day of darkness and gloominess ([Joe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002)), literally so, the swarms of
locusts and caterpillars being so large and so thick as to darken the
sky ([Exo 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#015)), or rather
figuratively; it will be a melancholy time, a time of grievous
affliction. And it will come as the morning spread upon the mountains;
the darkness of this day will come as suddenly as the morning light, as
irresistibly, will spread as far, and grow upon them as the morning
light.

III\. Here is the army drawn up in array ([Joe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002)): They are a great people, and a
strong. Any one sees the vast numbers that there shall be of locusts and
caterpillars, destroying the land, will say (as we are all apt to be
most affected with what is present), "Surely, never was the like before,
nor ever will be the like again." Note, Extraordinary judgments are rare
things, and seldom happen, which is an instance of God's patience. When
God had drowned the world once he promised never to do it again. The
army is here describe to be, 1. Very bold and daring: They are as
horses, as war-horses, that rush into the battle and are not affrighted
([Job 39:22](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#022)); and as horsemen, carried
on with martial fire and fury, so they shall run, [Joe
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#004). Some of the ancients have
observed that the head of a locust is very like, in shape, to the head
of a horse. 2. Very loud and noisy - like the noise of chariots, of many
chariots, when driven furiously over rough ground, on the tops of the
mountains, [Joe 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#005). Hence is borrowed
part of the description of the locusts which St. John saw rise out of
the bottomless pit. [Rev 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007), [Rev
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#009), The shapes of the locusts were
like unto horses prepared to the battle; and the sound of their wings
was as the sound of chariots, of many horses running to the battle.
Historians tell us that the noise made by swarms of locusts in those
countries that are infested with them has sometimes been heard six miles
off. The noise is likewise compared to that of a roaring fire; it is
like the noise of a flame that devours the stubble, which noise is the
more terrible because that which it is the indication of is devouring.
Note, When God's judgments are abroad they make a great noise; and it is
necessary for the awakening of a secure and stupid world that they
should do so. (3.) They are very regular, and keep ranks in their march;
though numerous and greedy of spoil, yet they are as a strong people set
in battle array ([Joe 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#005).): They
shall march every one on his ways, straight forward, as if they had been
trained up by the discipline of war to keep their post and observe their
right-hand man. They shall not break their ranks, nor one thrust
another, [Joe 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#007), [Joe
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#008). Their number and swiftness shall
breed no confusion. See how God can make creatures to act by rule that
have no reason to act by, when he designs to serve his own purposes by
them. And see how necessary it is that those who are employed in any
service for God should observe order, and keep ranks, should diligently
go on in their own work and stand in one another's way. 4. They are very
swift; they run like horsemen ([Joe
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#004)), run like mighty men ([Joe
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#007)); they run to and fro in the city,
and run upon the wall, [Joe 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#009). When
God sends forth his command on earth his word runs very swiftly, [Psa
147:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#015). Angels have wings, and so have
locusts, when God makes use of them.

IV\. Here is the terrible execution done by this formidable army, 1. In
the country, [Joe 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#003). View the army
in the front, and you will see a fire devouring before them; they
consume all as if they breathed fire. View it in the rear, and you will
see those that come behind as furious as the foremost: Behind them a
flame burns. When they are gone, then it will appear what destruction
they have made. Look upon the fields that they have not yet invaded, and
they are as the garden of Eden, pleasant to the eye, and full of good
fruits; they are the pride and glory of the country. But look upon the
fields that they have eaten up and they are as a desolate wilderness;
one would not think that these had ever been like the former, and yet so
they were perhaps but the day before, or that those should ever be made
like these, and yet so they shall be perhaps by tomorrow night; yea, and
nothing shall escape them than can possibly be made food for them. Let
none be proud of the beauty of their grounds any more than of their
bodies, for God can soon change the face of both. 2. In the city. They
shall climb the wall ([Joe 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#007)), they
shall run upon the houses, and enter in at the windows like a thief
([Joe 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#009)); when Egypt was plagued
with locusts, they filled Pharaoh's houses and the houses of his
servants, [Exo 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#005), [Exo
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#006). The locusts out of the
bottomless pit, Satan's emissaries, and missionaries of the man of sin,
do as these locusts. God's judgments too, when they come with
commission, cannot be kept out with bars and bolts; they will find or
force their way.

V. The impressions that should hereby be made upon the people. They
shall find it to no purpose to make opposition. These enemies are
invulnerable and therefore irresistible: When they fall upon the sword
they shall not be wounded, [Joe 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#008).
And those that cannot be hurt cannot be stopped; and therefore before
their faces the people shall be much pained ([Joe
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006)), as the merchants are in pain for
their trading ships when they hear they are just in the mouth of a
squadron of the enemies. "One is in pain for his field, another for his
vineyard, and all faces gather blackness," which denotes the utmost
consternation imaginable. Men in fear look pale, but men in despair look
black; the whiteness of a sudden fright, when it is settled, turns into
blackness. What is the matter of our pride and pleasure God can soon
make the matter of our pain. The terror that the country should be in is
described ([Joe 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010)) by figurative
expressions: The earth shall quake and the heavens tremble; even the
hearts that seemed undaunted, so firm that nothing would frighten them,
as immovable as heaven or earth, shall be seized with astonishment. Or
when the inhabitants of the land are made to quake it seems to them as
if all about them trembled too. Through the prevalency of their fear, or
for want of the supports of life which they used to have, their eye
shall wax dim and their sight fail them, so that to them the sun and
moon shall seem to be dark, and the stars to withdraw their shining.
Note, When God frowns upon men the lights of heaven will be small joy to
them; for man, by rebelling against his Creator, has forfeited the
benefit of all the creatures. But, though this is to be understood
figuratively, there is a day coming when it will be accomplished in the
letter, when the heavens shall be rolled together like a scroll, and the
earth, and all the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Particular
judgments should awaken us to think of the general judgment.

VI\. We are here directed to look up both him who is the
commander-in-chief of this formidable army, and that is God himself,
[Joe 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011). It is his army; it is his
camp. He raised it; he gives it commission; he utters his voice before
it, as the general gives orders to his army what to do and makes a
speech to animate the soldiers; it is the Lord that gives the word of
command to all these animals, which they exactly observe. Some think
that with this cloud of locusts God sent terrible thunder, for that is
called, The voice of the Lord, and was another of the plagues of Egypt,
and this made the heavens and the earth tremble. It is the day of the
Lord (as it was called, [Joe 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)), for
in this war we are sure he carries the day; it must needs be his, for
his camp is great and numerous. Those whom he makes war upon he can, as
here, overpower with numbers; and whoever he employs to execute his
word, as the minister of his justice, is sure to be made strong and par
negotio - equal to what he undertakes; whom God gives commission to he
girds with strength for the executing of that commission. And this makes
the great day of the Lord very terrible to all those who in that day are
to be made the monuments of his justice; for who can abide it? None can
escape the arrests of God's wrath, can make head against the force of
it, or bear up under the weight of it, [Sa1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#020); [Psa
76:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007).

[Joel 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joe 2:12</span></span>

We have here an earnest exhortation to repentance, inferred from that
desolating judgment described and threatened in the foregoing verses:
Therefore now turn you to the Lord. 1. "Thus you must answer the end and
intention of the judgment; for it was sent for this end, to convince you
of your sins, to humble you for them, to reduce you to your right minds
and to your allegiance." God brings us into straits, that he may bring
us to repentance and so bring us to himself. 2. "Thus you may stay the
progress of the judgment. Things are bad with you, but thus you may
prevent their growing worse; nay, if you take this course, they will
soon grow better." Here is a gracious invitation,

I. To a personal repentance, exercised in the soul, every family apart,
and their wives apart, [Zac 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#012).
When the judgments of God are abroad, each person is concerned to
contribute his quota to the common supplications, having contributed to
the common guilt. Every one must mend one and mourn for one, and then we
should all be mended and all found among God's mourners. Observe,

1\. What we are here called to, which will teach us what it is to
repent, for it is the same that the Lord our God still requires of us,
we having all made work for repentance. (1.) We must be truly humbled
for our sins, must be sorry we have by sin offended God, and ashamed we
have by sin wronged ourselves, both wronged our judgments and wronged
our interests. There must be outward expressions of sorrow and shame,
fasting, and weeping, and mourning; tears for the sin that procured it.
But what will the outward expressions of sorrow avail if the inward
impressions be not agreeable, and not only accompany them, but be the
root and spring of them, and give rise to them? And therefore it
follows, Rend your heart, and not your garments; not but that, according
to the custom of that age, it was proper for them to rend their
garments, in token of great grief for their sins and a holy indignation
against themselves for their folly; but, "Rest not in the doing of that,
as if that were sufficient, but be more in care to accommodate your
spirits than to accommodate your dress to a day of fasting and
humiliation; nay, rend not your garments at all, unless withal you rend
your hearts, for the sign without the thing signified is but a jest and
a mockery, and an affront to God." Rending the heart is that which God
looks for and requires; that is the broken and contrite heart which he
will not despise, [Psa 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017). When we
are greatly grieved in soul for sin, so that it even cuts us to the
heart to think how we have dishonoured God and disparaged ourselves by
it, when we conceive an aversion to sin, and earnestly desire and
endeavor to get clear of the principles of it and never to return to the
practice of it, then we rend our hearts for it, and then will God rend
the heavens and come down to us with mercy. (2.) We must be thoroughly
converted to our God, and come home to him when we fall out with sin.
Turn you even to me, said the Lord ([Joe
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012)), and again ([Joe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013)), Turn unto the Lord your God.
Our fasting and weeping are worth nothing if we do not with them turn to
God as our God. When we are fully convinced that it is our duty and
interest to keep in with him, and are heartily sorry we have ever turned
the back upon him, and thereupon, by a firm and fixed resolution, make
his glory our end, his will our rule, and his favour our felicity, then
we return to the Lord our God, and this we are all commanded and invited
to do, and to do it quickly.

2\. What arguments are here used to persuade this people thus to turn to
the Lord, and to turn to him with all their hearts. When the heart is
rent for sin, and rent from it, then it is prepared to turn entirely to
God, and to be devoted entirely to him, and he will have it all or none.
Now, to bring ourselves to this, let us consider, (1.) We are sure that
he is, in general, a good God. We must turn to the Lord our God, not
only because he has been just and righteous in punishing us for our
sins, the fear of which should drive us to him, but because he is
gracious and merciful, in receiving upon us our repentance, the hope of
which should draw us to him. He is gracious and merciful, delights not
in the death of sinners, but desires that they may turn and live. He is
slow to anger against those that offend him, but of great kindness
towards those that desire to please him. These very expressions are used
in God's proclamation of his name when he caused his goodness, and with
it all his glory, to pass before Moses, [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006), [Exo
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007). He repents him of the evil, not
that he changes his mind, but, when the sinner's mind is changed, God's
way towards him is changed; the sentence is reversed, and the curse of
the law is taken off. Note, That is genuine, ingenuous, and evangelical
repentance, which arises from a firm belief of the mercy of God, which
we have sinned against, and yet are not in despair. Repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand. The goodness of God, if it be rightly
understood, instead of emboldening us to go on in sin, will be the most
powerful inducement to repentance, [Psa
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004). The act of indemnity brings
those to God whom the act of attainder frightened from him. (2.) We have
reason to hope that he will, upon our repentance, give us that good
which by sin we have forfeited and deprived ourselves of ([Joe
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#014)), that he will return and repent,
that he will not proceed against us as he has done, but will act in
favour of us. Therefore let us repent of our sins against him, and
return to him in a way of duty, because then we may hope that he will
repent of his judgments against us and return to us in a way of mercy.
Now observe, \[1.\] The manner of expectation is very humble and modest:
Who knows if he will? Some think it is expressed thus doubtfully to
check the presumption and security of the people, and to quicken them to
a holy carefulness and liveliness in their repentance, as [Jos
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019). Or, rather, it is expressed
doubtfully because it is the removal of a temporal judgment that they
here promise themselves, of which we cannot be so confident as we can
that, in general, God is gracious and merciful. There is no question at
all to be made but that if we truly repent of our sins God will forgive
them, and be reconciled to us; but whether he will remove this or the
other affliction which we are under may well be questioned, and yet the
probability of it should encourage us to repent. Promises of temporal
good things are often made with a peradventure. It may be, you shall be
hid, [Zep 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#003). David's sin is
pardoned, and yet the child shall die, and, when David prayed for its
life, he said, as here, Who can tell whether God will begracious to me
in this matter likewise? [Sa2 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#022).
The Ninevites repented and reformed upon such a consideration as this,
[Jon 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#009). \[2.\] The matter of
expectation is very pious. They hope God will return and repent, and
leave a blessing behind him, not as if he were about to go from them,
and they could be content with any blessing in lieu of his presence, but
behind him, that is, "After he has ceased his controversy with us, he
will bestow a blessing upon us;" and what is it? It is a meat-offering
and a drink-offering to the Lord our God. The fruits of the earth are
called a blessing ([Isa 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#008)) because
they depend upon God's blessing and are necessary blessings to us. They
had been deprived of these, and that which grieved them most while they
were so was that God's altar was deprived of its offerings and God's
priests of their maintenance; that therefore which they comfort
themselves with the prospect of in their return of plenty is that then
there shall be meat-offerings and drink-offerings in abundance brought
to God's altar, which they more desired than to see the wonted abundance
of meat and drink brought to their own tables. Thus when Hezekiah was in
hopes that he should recover of his sickness he asked, What is the sign
that I shall go up, not to the thrones of judgment, or to the
councilboard, but to the house of the Lord? [Isa
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#022). Note, The plentiful enjoyment
of God's ordinances in their power and purity is the most valuable
instance of a nation's prosperity and the greatest blessing that can be
desired. If God give the blessing of meat-offering and the
drink-offering, that will bring along with it other blessings, will
sanctify them, sweeten them, and secure them.

II\. They are here called to a public national repentance, to be
exercised in the solemn assembly, as a national act, for the glory of
God and the excitement of one another, and that the neighbouring nations
might know and observe what it was that qualified them for God's
gracious returns in mercy to them, which they would be the admiring
witnesses of. Let us see here, 1. How the congregation must be called
together, [Joe 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015), [Joe
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#016). The trumpet was blown ([Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)), to sound an alarm of war; but
now it must be blown in order to a treaty of peace. God is willing to
show mercy to his people if he do but find them in a frame fit for it;
and therefore, Call them together; sanctify a fast. By the law many
annual feasts were appointed, but only one day in the year was to be
observed as a fast, the day of atonement, a day to afflict the soul;
and, if they had kept close to God and their duty, there would have been
no occasion to observe any more; but now that they had by sin brought
the judgments of God upon them they are often called to fasting. What
was said [Joe 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014) is here repeated:
"Call a solemn assembly; gather the people (press them to come together
upon this errand); sanctify the congregation; appoint a time for solemn
preparation beforehand and put them in mind to prepare themselves. Let
not the greatest be excused, but assemble the elders, the judges and
magistrates. Let not the meanest be passed by, but gather the children,
and those that suck the breasts." It is good to bring little children,
as soon as they are capable of understanding any thing, to religious
assemblies, that they may be trained up betimes in the way wherein they
should go; but these were brought even when they were at the breast and
were kept fasting, that by their cries for the breast the hearts of the
parents might be moved to repent of sin, which God might justly so visit
upon their children that the tongue of the sucking child might cleave to
the roof of his mouth ([Lam 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#004)), and
that on them God might have compassion, as he had on the infants of
Nineveh, [Jon 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#011). New-married people
must not be exempted: Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber and the
bride out of her closet; let them not take state upon them as usual, not
put on their ornaments, nor indulge themselves in mirth, but address
themselves to the duties of the public fast with as much gravity and
sadness as any of their neighbours. Note, Private joys must always give
way to public sorrows, both those for affliction and those for sin. 2.
How the work of the day must be carried on, [Joe
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017). (1.) The priests, the Lord's
ministers, must preside in the congregation, and be God's mouth to the
people, and theirs to God; who should stand in the gap to turn away the
wrath of God but those whose business it was to make intercession upon
ordinary occasions? (2.) They must officiate between the porch and the
altar. There they used to attend about the sacrifices, and therefore now
that they have no sacrifices to offer, or next to none, there they must
offer up spiritual sacrifices. There the people must see them weeping
and wrestling, like their father Jacob, and be helped into the same
devout frame. Ministers must themselves be affected with those things
wherewith they desire to affect others. It was between the porch and the
altar that Zechariah the son of Jehoiada was put to death for his
faithfulness; that precious blood God would require at their hands, and
therefore, to turn away the judgment threatened for it, there they must
weep. (3.) They must pray. Words here are put into their mouths, which
they might in their prayers enlarge upon. Their petition must be, Spare
thy people, O Lord! God's people, when they are in distress, can expect
no relief against God's justice but what comes from his mercy. They
cannot say, Lord, right us, but, Lord, spare us. We deserve the
correction; we need it; but, Lord, mitigate it. The sinner's
supplication is, Spare us, good Lord. Their plea must be taken from the
relation wherein they stand to God ("They are thy people, and thy
heritage, therefore have compassion on them"), but especially from the
concern of God's glory in their trouble - "Lord, give not thy heritage
to reproach, to the reproach of famine; let not the land of Canaan, that
has so long been celebrated as the glory of all lands, now be made the
scorn of all lands; let not the heathen rule over them, as they will
easily do when thy heritage is thus impoverished and disabled to
subsist. Let not the heathen make them a proverb, or a by-word" (so some
read it); "let it never be said, As poor and beggarly as an Israelite."
Note, The maintaining of the credit of the nation among its neighbours
is a blessing to be desired and prayed for by all that wish well to it.
But that reproach of the church is especially to be dreaded and
deprecated which reflects upon God: "Let them not say among the people,
Where is their God - that God who has promised to help them, whom they
have boasted so much of and put such a confidence in?" If God's heritage
be destroyed, the neighbours will say, "God was either weak and could
not relieve them or unkind and would not." [Deu
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037), Where are now their gods in
whom they trusted? And Sennacherib thus triumphs over them. Where are
they gods of Hamath and Arpad? But it must by no means be suffered that
they should say of Israel, Where is their God? For we are sure that our
God is in the heavens ([Psa 115:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#002),
[Psa 115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003)), is in his temple, [Psa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004).

[Joel 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joe 2:18</span></span>

See how ready God is to succour and relieve his people, how he waits to
be gracious; as soon as ever they humble themselves under this hand, and
pray, and seek his face, he immediately meets them with his favours.
They prayed that God would spare them, and see here with what good words
and comfortable words he answered them; for God's promises are real
answers to the prayers of faith, because with him saying and doing are
not two things. Now observe,

I. Whence this mercy promised shall take rise ([Joe
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#018)): God will be jealous for his
land and pity his people. He will have an eye, 1. To his own honour, and
the reputation of his covenant with Israel, by which he had conveyed to
them that good land and had given in the value of it very high; now he
will not suffer it to be despised nor disparaged, but will be jealous
for the credit of his land, and the inhabitants of it, who had been
praised as a happy people and therefore must not lie open to reproach as
a miserable people. 2. To their distress: He will pity his people, and,
in pity to them, he will restore them their forfeited comforts. God's
compassion is a great encouragement to those that come humbly to him as
penitents and as petitioners.

II\. What his mercy shall be, in several instances: - 1. The destroying
army shall be dispersed and defeated ([Joe
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#020)): "I will remove far off from you
the northern army, that army of locusts and caterpillars that invaded
you from the north, brought in upon the wings of a north wind, an army
which you could put no stop to the progress of; but, when you have made
your peace with God, he will ease you of these soldiers that are
quartered upon you and will drive them into a land barren and desolate,
into that vast howling wilderness that Israel wandered in, where, after
having surfeited upon the plenty of Canaan, they shall perish for want
of sustenance. Those that have their face to the east sea (the Dead Sea,
which lay east of Judea) shall perish in that, and the rear of the army
shall be lost in the Great Sea," called here the utmost sea. They had
made the land barren and desolate, and now God will cast them into a
land barren and desolate. Thus those whom God employs for the correction
of his people come afterwards to be themselves reckoned with; and the
rod is thrown into the fire. Nothing shall remain of these swarms of
insects but the ill savour of them. When Egypt was eased of the plague
of locusts they were carried away to the Red Sea, [Exo
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#019). Note, When an affliction has
done its work it shall be removed in mercy, as the locusts of Canaan
were from a penitent people, not as the locusts of Egypt were removed,
in wrath, from an impenitent prince, only to make room for another
plague. Many interpreters, by this northern army, understand that of
Sennacherib, which was dispersed when God by it had accomplished his
whole work upon Mount Zion and upon Jerusalem, [Isa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012). This enemy shall be driven
away, because he has done great things, has done a great deal of
mischief, and has magnified to do it, has done it in the pride of his
heart; therefore it follows ([Joe
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#021)), The Lord will do great things
for his people, as the enemy has done great things against them, to
convince them that wherein they deal proudly he is, and will be, above
them, that, what great things soever they did, they did no more than God
commissioned them to do; and as, when he said to them, Go, they went,
so, when he said to them, Come, they came, to show that they were
soldiers under him. 2. The destroyed land shall be watered and made
fruitful. When the army is scattered, yet what shall we do if the
desolation they have made continue? It is therefore promised ([Joe
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#022)) that the pastures of the
wilderness, the pastures which the locusts had left as bare as the
wilderness, shall again spring and the trees shall again bear their
fruit, particularly the fig-tree and the vine. But, when we see how the
country is wasted, we are tempted to say, Can these dry bones live? If
the Lord should make windows in heaven, it cannot be; but it shall be,
for ([Joe 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023)) the Lord has given and
will give you the former rain and the latter rain, and, if he give them
in mercy, he will give them moderately, so that the rain shall not turn
into a judgment, and he will give them in due season, the latter rain in
the first month, when it was wanted and expected. It would make it
comfortable to them to see it coming from the hand of God, and ordered
by his wisdom, for then we are sure it is well ordered. He has given you
a teacher of righteousness, (so the margin reads it, for the same word
that signifies the rain signifies a teacher. and that which we translate
moderately is according to righteousness), and this teacher of
righteousness, says one of the rabbin, is the King Messias, and of him
many others understand this; for he is a teacher come from God, and he
shows us the way of righteousness. But others understand it of any
prophet that instructs unto righteousness, and some of Hezekiah
particularly, others of Isaiah. Note, It is a good sign that God has
mercy in store for a people when he sends them teachers of
righteousness, pastors after his own heart. 3. All their losses shall be
repaired ([Joe 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)): "I will restore
to you the years that the locust has eaten; you shall be comforted
according to the time that you have been afflicted, and shall have years
of plenty to balance the years of famine." Thus does it repent the Lord
concerning his servants, when they repent, and, to show how perfectly he
is reconciled to them, he makes good the damage they have sustained by
his judgments, and, like the jailer, washes their stripes. Though, in
justice, he distrained upon them, and did them no wrong, yet, in
compassion, he makes restitution; as the father of the prodigal, upon
his return, made up all he had lost by his sin and folly, and took him
into his family, as in his former estate. The locusts and caterpillars
are here called God's great army which he sent among them, and he will
repair what they had devoured because they were his army. 4. They shall
have great abundance of all good things. The earth shall yield her
increase, and they shall enjoy it. Look into the stores where they lay
up, and you shall find the floors full of wheat, and the fats
overflowing with wine and oil ([Joe
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#024)), whereas, in the day of their
distress, the wine and oil languished and the barns were broken down,
[Joe 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#010), [Joe
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#017). Look upon their tables, where
they lay out what they have laid up, and you shall find that they eat in
plenty and are satisfied, [Joe 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026).
They do not eat to excess, nor are surfeited; we hope the drunkards are
cured by the late affliction of their inordinate love of wine and strong
drink, for, though they were brought in howling for their scarcity ([Joe
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#005)), they are now brought in again
here singing for the plenty of it; but now all shall have enough, and
shall known when they have enough, for God will make their food
nourishing and give them to be content with it.

These are the mercies promised, and in these God does great things ([Joe
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#021)), He deals wondrously with his
people, [Joe 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026). Herein he glorifies
his power, and shows that he can relieve his people though their
distress be ever so great, and glorifies his goodness, that he will do
it upon their repentance though their provocations were ever so great.
Note, When God deals graciously with poor sinners that return to him it
must be acknowledged that he deals wondrously and does great things.
Some expositors understand these promises figuratively, as pointing at
gospel-grace, and having their accomplishment in the abundant comforts
that are treasured up for believers in the covenant of grace and the
satisfaction of soul they have therein. When God sends us his promises
to be the matter of our comfort, his graces to be the grounds of it, and
his Spirit to be the author of it, we may well own that he has sent us
(according to his promise here, [Joe
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#019)) corn, and wine, and oil, or that
which is unspeakably better, and we have reason to be satisfied
therewith.

III\. What use shall be made of these returns of God's mercy to them and
the good account they shall turn to.

1\. God shall have the glory thereof, for they shall rejoice in the Lord
their God ([Joe 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023)), and what is the
matter of their rejoicing shall be the matter of their thanksgiving;
they shall praise the name of the Lord their God ([Joe
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026)) and not praise their idols, nor
call their corn and wine the rewards that their lovers had given them.
Note, The plenty of our creature-comforts is a mercy indeed to us when
by them our hearts are enlarged in love and thankfulness to God, who
gives us all things richly to enjoy, though we serve him but poorly.
When God restores to us plenty after we have known scarcity, as it is
doubly pleasant to us, so it should make us the more thankful to God.
When Israel comes out of a wilderness into a Canaan, and there eats and
is full, surely he will then bless the Lord, with a very sensible
pleasure, for that good land which he has given him, [Deu
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#010).

2\. They shall have the credit, and comfort, and spiritual benefit,
thereof. When God gives them plenty again, and gives them to be
satisfied with it, (1.) Their reputation shall be retrieved; they and
their God shall be no more reflected upon as unfaithful to one another
when they have returned to him in a way of duty and he to them in a way
of mercy ([Joe 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#019)): "I will no more
make you a reproach among the heathen, that triumphed in your calamities
and insulted over you;" and [Joe 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026),
[Joe 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#027), "My people shall never be
ashamed, as they have been, of their good land which they used to boast
of, but shall again and ever have the same occasion to boast of it."
Note, It redounds much to the honour of God when he does that which
saves the honour of his people; and those that are his people indeed,
though they may be for a time, shall not be always, a reproach among the
heathens; if we be rightly ashamed of our sins against God, we shall
never be ashamed of our glorying in God. (2.) Their joys shall be
revived ([Joe 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023)): Be glad and
rejoice, O land! and all the inhabitants of it. Times of plenty are
commonly times of joy; yet the favour of God puts gladness into the
heart more than those who have corn, and wine, and oil increase. But
especially be glad them, you children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord
your God, [Joe 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023). They mourned in
Zion ([Joe 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015)), and therefore there
in a particular manner they shall rejoice; for those that sow in
penitential tears shall certainly reap in thankful joys. The children of
Zion, who led the rest in fasting, must lead the rest in rejoicing. But
observe, They shall rejoice in the Lord their God, not so much in the
good themselves that are given them as in the good hand that gives them
and in the return of his favour to them, as theirs in covenant, which
these good things are the tokens and pledges of. The joy of harvest and
the joy of a feast must both terminate in God, whose love we should
taste in all the gifts of his bounty, that we may make him our chief
joy, as he is our chief good, and the fountain of all good to us. (3.)
Their faith in God shall be confirmed and increased. When temporal
mercies are made by the grace of God to be of spiritual advantage to us,
and plenty for the body is so far from being an enemy (as with many it
proves) that it becomes a friend to the prosperity of the soul, then
they are mercies indeed to us. This is promised here ([Joe
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#027)): You shall know that I am in the
midst of Israel, the Holy One in the midst of thee ([Hos
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009)), and that I am the Lord your
God, and none else. As it proves that the Lord is God, and there is none
other, because he wounds and he heals, he forms light and darkness, he
does good and evil ([Isa 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007); [Deu
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)), so it proves him to be God of
Israel, a God in covenant with his people and a father to them, that as
a father he both corrects them when they offend and comforts them when
they repent. It was the burden of the threatenings in Ezekiel's
prophecy, Such and such evils I will bring upon you, and you shall know
that I am the Lord; and the same is here made the crown of the promises:
You shall eat, and be satisfied, and rejoice, and thus you shall know
that I am the Lord. Note, We should labour to grow in our acquaintance
with God by all providences, both merciful and afflictive. When God
gives to his people plenty, and peace, and joy, upon their return to
him, he thereby gives them to understand that he is pleased with their
repentance, that he has pardoned their sins, and that he is theirs as
much as ever - that they are taken into the same covenant with him, for
he is the Lord their God, and into the same communion, for he is in the
midst of them, nigh unto them in all that they call upon him for, and,
as the sun in the centre of the worlds, so in the midst of them as to
diffuse his benign influences to all the parts of his land.

3\. Even the inferior creatures shall share therein and be made easy
thereby: Fear not, O land! [Joe 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#021).
Be not afraid, you beasts of the field, [Joe
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#022). They had suffered for the sin of
man, and for God's quarrel with him; and now they shall fare the better
for man's repentance and God's reconciliation to him. Nay, the beasts
were said to cry unto God ([Joe 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020));
and now that cry is answered, and they are directed not to be afraid,
for they shall have plenty of all that which their nature craves. God,
in sparing Nineveh, had an eye to the cattle ([Jon
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#011)), for the cattle had fasted, [Joe
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#008). This may lead us to think of the
restitution of all things, when the creature, that is now made subject
to vanity and groans under it, shall be brought, though not into the
glorious joy, yet into the glorious liberty, of the children of God,
[Rom 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021).

[Joel 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joe 2:28</span></span>

The promises of corn, and wine, and oil, in the foregoing verses, would
be very acceptable to a wasted country; but here we are taught that we
must not rest in those things. God has reserved some better things for
us, and these verses have reference to those better things, both the
kingdom of grace and the kingdom of glory, with the happiness of true
believers in both. We are here told,

I. How the kingdom of grace shall be introduced by a plentiful effusion
of the Spirit, ([Joe 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028), [Joe
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#029)). We are not at a loss about the
meaning of this promise, nor in doubt what it refers to and wherein it
had its accomplishment, for the apostle Peter has given us an infallible
explication and application of it, assuring us that when the Spirit was
poured out upon the apostles, on the day of Pentecost ([Act
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001), etc.), that was the very thing
which was spoken of here by the prophet Joel, [Joe
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#016), [Joe
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017). That was the gift of the Spirit,
which, according to this prediction, was to come, and we are not to look
for any other, any more than for another accomplishment of the promise
of the Messiah. Now, 1. The blessing itself here promised is the pouring
out of the Spirit of God, his gifts, graces, and comforts, which the
blessed Spirit is the author of. We often read in the Old Testament of
the Spirit of the Lord coming by drops, as it were, upon the judges and
prophets whom God raised up for extraordinary services; but now the
Spirit shall be poured out plentifully in a full stream, as was promised
with an eye to gospel-times, [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003). I will pour my Spirit upon thy
seed. 2. The time fixed for this is afterwards; after the fulfilling of
the foregoing promises this shall be fulfilled. St. Peter expounds this
of the last days, the days of the Messiah, by whom the world was to have
its last revelation of the divine will and grace in the last days of the
Jewish church, a little before its dissolution. 3. The extent of this
blessing, in respect of the persons on whom it shall be bestowed. The
Spirit shall be poured out upon all flesh, not as hitherto upon Jews
only, but upon Gentiles also; for in Christ there is no distinction
between Jew and Greek, [Rom 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011),
[Rom 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012). Hitherto divine revelation
was confined to the seed of Abraham, none but those of the land of
Israel had the Spirit of prophecy; but, in the last days, all flesh
shall see the glory of God ([Isa 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005))
and shall come to worship before him, [Isa
66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023). The Jews understand it of all
flesh in the land of Israel, and Peter himself did not fully understand
it as speaking of the Gentiles till he saw it accomplished in the
descent of the Holy Ghost upon Cornelius and his friends, who were
Gentiles ([Act 10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044), [Act
10:45](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#045)), which was but a continuation
of the same gift which was bestowed on the day of Pentecost. The Spirit
shall be poured out upon all flesh, that is, upon all those whose hearts
are made hearts of flesh, soft and tender, and so prepared to receive
the impressions and influences of the Holy Ghost. Upon all flesh, that
is, upon some of all sorts of men; the gifts of the Spirit shall not be
so sparing, or so much confined, as they have been, but shall be more
general and diffusive of themselves. (1.) The Spirit shall be poured out
upon some of each sex. Not your sons only, but your daughters, shall
prophesy; we read of four sisters in one family that were prophetesses,
[Act 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009). Not the parents only, but
the children, shall be filled with the Spirit, which intimates the
continuance of this gift for some ages successively in the church. (2.)
Upon some of each age: "Your old men, who are past their vigour and
whose spirits begin to decay, your young men, who have yet but little
acquaintance with and experience of divine things, shall yet dream
dreams and see visions;" God will reveal himself by dreams and visions
both to the young and old. (3.) Upon those of the meanest rank and
condition, even upon the servants and the handmaids. The Jewish doctors
say, Prophecy does not reside on any but such as are wise, valiant, and
rich, not upon the soul of a poor man, or a man in sorrow. But in Christ
Jesus there is neither bond nor free, [Gal
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028). There were many that were called
being servants ([Co1 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#021)), but that
was no obstruction to their receiving the Holy Ghost. (4.) The effect of
this blessing: They shall prophesy; they shall receive new discoveries
of divine things, and that not for their own use only, but for the
benefit of the church. They shall interpret scripture, and speak of
things secret, distant, and future, which by the utmost sagacities of
reason, and their natural powers, they could not have any insight into
nor foresight of. By these extraordinary gifts the Christian church was
first founded and set up, and the scriptures were written, and the
ministry settled, by which, with the ordinary operations and influences
of the Spirit, it was to be afterwards maintained and kept up.

II\. How the kingdom of glory shall be introduced by the universal
change of nature, [Joe 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#030), [Joe
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031). The pouring out of the Spirit
will be very comfortable to the righteous; but let the unrighteous hear
this, and tremble. There is a great and terrible day of the Lord coming,
which shall be ushered in with wonders in heaven and earth, blood, and
fire, and pillars of smoke, the turning of the sun into darkness and the
moon into blood. This is to have its full accomplishment (as the learned
Dr. Pocock thinks) in the day of judgment, at the end of time, before
which these signs will be performed in the letter of them, yet so that
it was accomplished in part in the death of Christ (which is called the
judgment of this world, when the earth quaked and the sun was darkened,
and a great and terrible day it was), and more fully in the destruction
of Jerusalem, which was a type and figure of the general judgment, and
before which there were many amazing prodigies, besides the convulsions
of states and kingdoms prophesied of under the figurative expressions of
turning the sun into darkness and the moon into blood, and the wars and
rumours of wars, and distress of nations, which our Saviour spoke of as
the beginning of these sorrows, [Mat
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006), [Mat
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007). But before the last judgment
there will be wonders indeed in heaven and earth, the dissolution of
both, without a metaphor. The judgments of God upon a sinful world, and
the frequent destruction of wicked kingdoms by fire and sword, are
prefaces to and presages of the judgment of the world in the last day.
Those on whom the Spirit is poured out shall foresee and foretel that
great and terrible day of the Lord, and expound the wonders in heaven
and earth that go before it; for, as to his first coming, so to his
second, all the prophets did and do bear witness, [Rev
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007).

III\. The safety and happiness of all true believers both in the first
and second coming of Jesus Christ, [Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032). This speaks of particular
persons, for to them the New Testament has more respect, and less to
kingdoms and nations, than the Old. Now observe here, 1. That there is a
salvation wrought out. Though the day of the Lord will be great and
terrible, yet in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there shall be deliverance
from the terror of it. It is the day of the Lord, the day of his
judgment, who knows how to separate between the precious and the vile.
In the everlasting gospel, which went from Zion, in the church of the
first-born typified by Mount Zion, and which is the Jerusalem that is
from above, there is deliverance; a way of escaping the wrath to come is
found out and laid open. Christ is himself not only the Saviour, but the
salvation; he is so to the ends of the earth. This deliverance, laid up
for us in the covenant of grace, is in performance of the promises made
to the fathers. There shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said. See
[Luk 1:72](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#072). Note, This is ground of
comfort and hope to sinners, that, whatever danger there is in their
case, there is also deliverance, deliverance for them, if it be not
their own fault. And, if we would share in this deliverance, we must
ourselves apply to the gospel - Zion, to God's Jerusalem. 2. That there
is a remnant interested in this salvation, and for whom the deliverance
is wrought. It is in that remnant (that is, among them) that the
deliverance is, or in their souls and spirits; there are the earnests
and evidences of it. Christ in you, the hope of glory. They are called a
remnant, because they are but a few in comparison with the multitudes
that are left to perish; a little remnant but a chosen one, a remnant
according to the election of grace. And here we are told who they are
that shall be delivered in the great day. (1.) Those that sincerely call
upon God: Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, whether Jew or
Gentile (for the apostle so expounds it, [Rom
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013), where he lays this down as the
great rule of the gospel by which we must all be judged), shall be
delivered. This calling on God supposes knowledge of him, faith in him,
desire towards him, dependence on him, and, as an evidence of the
sincerity of all this, a conscientious obedience to him; for, without
that, crying Lord, Lord, will not stand us in any stead. Note, It is the
praying remnant that shall be the saved remnant. And it will aggravate
the ruin of those who perish that they might have been saved on such
easy terms. (2.) Those that are effectually called to God. The
deliverance is sure to the remnant whom the Lord shall call, not only
with the common call of the gospel, with which many are called that are
not chosen, but with a special call into the fellowship of Jesus Christ,
whom the Lord predestinates, or prepares, so the Chaldee. St. Peter
borrows this phrase, [Act 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039). Note,
Those only shall be delivered in the great day that are now effectually
called from sin to God, from self to Christ, from things below to things
above.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Chapter 3](joe003)

</div>
