<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh005)  [Next](joh007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 6:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The miracle of the loaves ([Joh
6:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001)). II. Christ's walking upon the
water ([Joh 6:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015)). III. The
people's flocking after him to Capernaum ([Joh
6:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#022)). IV. His conference with
them, occasioned by the miracle of the loaves, in which he reproves them
for seeking carnal food, and directs them to spiritual food ([Joh
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#026), [Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)), showing them how they must
labour for spiritual food ([Joh 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#028),
[Joh 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029)), and what that spiritual
food is (v. 30-59). V. Their discontent at what he said, and the reproof
he gave them for it ([Joh 6:60-65](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060)).
VI. The apostasy of many from him, and his discourse with his disciples
that adhered to him upon that occasion ([Joh
6:66-71](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#066)).

[John 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 6:1</span></span>

We have here an account of Christ's feeding five thousand men with five
loaves and two fishes, which miracle is in this respect remarkable, that
it is the only passage of the actions of Christ's life that is recorded
by all the four evangelists. John, who does not usually relate what had
been recorded by those who wrote before him, yet relates this, because
of the reference the following discourse has to it. Observe,

I. The place and time where and when this miracle was wrought, which are
noted for the greater evidence of the truth of the story; it is not said
that it was done once upon a time, nobody knows where, but the
circumstances are specified, that the fact might be enquired into.

1\. The country that Christ was in ([Joh
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001)): He went over the sea of Galilee,
called elsewhere the lake of Gennesareth, here the sea of Tiberias, from
a city adjoining, which Herod had lately enlarged and beautified, and
called so in honour of Tiberius the emperor, and probably had made his
metropolis. Christ did not go directly over cross this inland sea, but
made a coasting voyage to another place on the same side. It is not
tempting God to choose to go by water, when there is convenience for it,
even to those places whither we might go by land; for Christ never
tempted the Lord his God, [Mat 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007).

2\. The company that he was attended with: A great multitude followed
him, because they saw his miracles, [Joh
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#002). Note, (1.) Our Lord Jesus, while
he went about doing good, lived continually in a crowd, which gave him
more trouble than honour. Good and useful men must not complain of a
hurry of business, when they are serving God and their generation; it
will be time enough to enjoy ourselves when we come to that world where
we shall enjoy God. (2.) Christ's miracles drew many after him that were
not effectually drawn to him. They had their curiosity gratified by the
strangeness of them, who had not their consciences convinced by the
power of them.

3\. Christ's posting himself advantageously to entertain them ([Joh
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#003)): He went up into a mountain, and
there he sat with his disciples, that he might the more conveniently be
seen and heard by the multitude that crowded after him; this was a
natural pulpit, and not, like Ezra's, made for the purpose. Christ was
now driven to be a field preacher; but his word was never the worse, nor
the less acceptable, for that, to those who knew how to value it, who
followed him still, not only when he went out to a desert place, but
when he went up to a mountain, though up-hill be against heart. He sat
there, as teachers do in cathedra - in the chair of instruction. He did
not sit at ease, not sit in state, yet he sat as one having authority,
sat ready to receive addresses that were made to him; whoever would
might come, and find him there. He sat with his disciples; he
condescended to take them to sit with him, to put a reputation upon them
before the people, and give them an earnest of the glory in which they
should shortly sit with him. We are said to sit with him, [Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006).

4\. The time when it was. The first words, After those things, do not
signify that this immediately followed what was related in the foregoing
chapter, for it was a considerable time after, and they signify no more
than in process of time; but we are told ([Joh
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#004)) that it was when the passover was
nigh, which is here noted, (1.) Because, perhaps, that had brought in
all the apostles from their respective expeditions, whither they were
sent as itinerant preachers, that they might attend their Master to
Jerusalem, to keep the feast. (2.) Because it was a custom with the Jews
religiously to observe the approach of the passover thirty days before,
with some sort of solemnity; so long before they had it in their eye,
repaired the roads, mended bridges, if there was occasion, and
discoursed of the passover and the institution of it. (3.) Because,
perhaps, the approach of the passover, when every one knew Christ would
go up to Jerusalem, and be absent for some time, made the multitude
flock the more after him and attend the more diligently on him. Note,
The prospect of losing our opportunities should quicken us to improve
them with double diligence; and, when solemn ordinances are approaching,
it is good to prepare for them by conversing with the word of Christ.

II\. The miracle itself. And here observe,

1\. The notice Christ took of the crowd that attended him ([Joh
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#005)): He lifted up his eyes, and saw a
great company come to him, poor, mean, ordinary people, no doubt, for
such make up the multitudes, especially in such remote corners of the
country; yet Christ showed himself pleased with their attendance, and
concerned for their welfare, to teach us to condescend to those of low
estate, and not to set those with the dogs of our flock whom Christ hath
set with the lambs of his. The souls of the poor are as precious to
Christ, and should be so to us, as those of the rich.

2\. The enquiry he made concerning the way of providing for them. He
directed himself to Philip, who had been his disciple from the first,
and had seen all his miracles, and particularly that of his turning
water into wine, and therefore it might be expected that he should have
said, "Lord, if thou wilt, it is easy to thee to feed them all." Those
that, like Israel, have been witnesses of Christ's works, and have
shared in the benefit of them, are inexcusable if they say, Can he
furnish a table in the wilderness? Philip was of Bethsaida, in the
neighbourhood of which town Christ now was, and therefore he was most
likely to help them to provision at the best hand; and probably much of
the company was known to him, and he was concerned for them. Now Christ
asked, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat? (1.) He takes it
for granted that they must all eat with him. One would think that when
he had taught and healed them he had done his part; and that now they
should rather have been contriving how to treat him and his disciples,
for some of the people were probably rich, and we are sure that Christ
and his disciples were poor; yet he is solicitous to entertain them.
Those that will accept Christ's spiritual gifts, instead of paying for
them, shall be paid for their acceptance of them. Christ, having fed
their souls with the bread of life, feeds their bodies also with food
convenient, to show that the Lord is for the body, and to encourage us
to pray for our daily bread, and to set us an example of compassion to
the poor, [Jam 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015), [Jam
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#016). (2.) His enquiry is, Whence
shall we buy bread? One would think, considering his poverty, that he
should rather have asked, Where shall we have money to buy for them? But
he will rather lay out all he has than they shall want. He will buy to
give, and we must labour, that we may give, [Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028).

3\. The design of this enquiry; it was only to try the faith of Philip,
for he himself knew what he would do, [Joh
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#006). Note, (1.) Our Lord Jesus is
never at a loss in his counsels; but, how difficult soever the case is,
he knows what he has to do and what course he will take, [Act
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#018). He knows the thoughts he has
towards his people ([Jer 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#011)) and is
never at uncertainty; when we know not, he himself knows what he will
do. (2.) When Christ is pleased to puzzle his people, it is only with a
design to prove them. The question put Philip to a nonplus, yet Christ
proposed it, to try whether he would say, "Lord, if thou wilt exert thy
power for them, we need not buy bread."

4\. Philip's answer to this question: "Two hundred pennyworth of bread
is not sufficient, [Joh 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#007). Master,
it is to no purpose to talk of buying bread for them, for neither will
the country afford so much bread, nor can we afford to lay out so much
money; ask Judas, who carries the bag." Two hundred pence of their money
amount to about six pounds of ours, and, if they lay out all that at
once, it will exhaust their fund, and break them, and they must starve
themselves. Grotius computes that two hundred pennyworth of bread would
scarcely reach to two thousand, but Philip would go as near hand as he
could, would have every one to take a little; and nature, we say, is
content with a little. See the weakness of Philip's faith, that in this
strait, as if the Master of the family had been an ordinary person, he
looked for supply only in an ordinary way. Christ might now have said to
him, as he did afterwards, Have I been so long time with you, and yet
hast thou not known me, Philip? Or, as God to Moses in a like case, Is
the Lord's hand waxen short? We are apt thus to distrust God's power
when visible and ordinary means fail, that is, to trust him no further
than we can see him.

5\. The information which Christ received from another of his disciples
concerning the provision they had. It was Andrew, here said to be Simon
Peter's brother; though he was senior to Peter in discipleship, and
instrumental to bring Peter to Christ, yet Peter afterwards so far
outshone him that he is described by his relation to Peter: he
acquainted Christ with what they had at hand; and in this we may see,

(1.) The strength of his love to those for whom he saw his Master
concerned, in that he was willing to bring out all they had, though he
knew not but they might want themselves, and any one would have said,
Charity begins at home. He did not go about to conceal it, under
pretence of being a better husband of their provision than the master
was, but honestly gives in an account of all they had. There is a lad
here, paidarion - a little lad, probably one that used to follow this
company, as settlers do the camp, with provisions to sell, and the
disciples had bespoken what he had for themselves; and it was five
barley-loaves, and two small fishes. Here, \[1.\] The provision was
coarse and ordinary; they were barley loaves. Canaan was a land of wheat
([Deu 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008)); its inhabitants were
commonly fed with the finest wheat ([Psa
81:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#016)), the kidneys of wheat ([Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014)); yet Christ and his disciples
were glad of barley-bread. It does not follow hence that we should tie
ourselves to such coarse fare, and place religion in it (when God brings
that which is finer to our hands, let us receive it, and be thankful);
but it does follow that therefore we must not be desirous of dainties
([Psa 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#003)); nor murmur if we be
reduced to coarse fare, but be content and thankful, and well reconciled
to it; barley-bread is what Christ had, and better than we deserve. Nor
let us despise the mean provision of the poor, nor look upon it with
contempt, remembering how Christ was provided for. \[2.\] It was but
short and scanty; there were but five loaves, and those so small that
one little lad carried them all; and we find ([Kg2
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#042), [Kg2
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#043)) that twenty barley-loaves, with
some other provision to help out, would not dine a hundred men without a
miracle. There were but two fishes, and those small ones (duo opsaria),
so small that one of them was but a morsel, pisciculi assati. I take the
fish to have been pickled, or soused, for they had not fire to dress
them with. The provision of bread was little, but that of fish was less
in proportion to it, so that many a bit of dry bread they must eat
before they could make a meal of this provision; but they were content
with it. Bread is meat for our hunger; but of those that murmured for
flesh it is said, They asked meat for their lust, [Psa
78:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#018). Well, Andrew was willing that
the people should have this, as far as it would go. Note, A distrustful
fear of wanting ourselves should not hinder us from needful charity to
others.

(2.) See here the weakness of his faith in that word, "But what are they
among so many? To offer this to such a multitude is but to mock them."
Philip and he had not that actual consideration of the power of Christ
(of which they had had such large experience) which they should have
had. Who fed the camp of Israel in the wilderness? He that could make
one man chase a thousand could make one loaf feed a thousand.

6\. The directions Christ gave the disciples to seat the guests ([Joh
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#010)): "Make the men sit down, though
you have nothing to set before them, and trust me for that." This was
like sending providence to market, and going to buy without money:
Christ would thus try their obedience. Observe, (1.) The furniture of
the dining-room: there was much grass in that place, though a desert
place; see how bountiful nature is, it makes grass to grow upon the
mountains, [Psa 147:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#008). This grass was
uneaten; God gives not only enough, but more then enough. Here was this
plenty of grass where Christ was preaching; the gospel brings other
blessings along with it: Then shall the earth yield her increase, [Psa
67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006). This plenty of grass made the
place the more commodious for those that must sit on the ground, and
served them for cushions, or beds (as they called what they sat on at
meat, [Est 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#006)), and, considering what
Christ says of the grass of the field ([Mat
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#029), [Mat
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#030)), these beds excelled those of
Ahasuerus: nature's pomp is the most glorious. (2.) The number of the
guests: About five thousand: a great entertainment, representing that of
the gospel, which is a feast for all nations ([Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006)), a feast for all comers.

7\. The distribution of the provision, [Joh
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#011). Observe,

(1.) It was done with thanksgiving: He gave thanks. Note, \[1.\] We
ought to give thanks to God for our food, for it is a mercy to have it,
and we have it from the hand of God, and must receive it with
thanksgiving, [Ti1 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004), [Ti1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005). And this is the sweetness of our
creature-comforts, that they will furnish us with matter, and give us
occasion, for that excellent duty of thanksgiving. \[2.\] Though our
provision be coarse and scanty, though we have neither plenty nor
dainty, yet we must give thanks to God for what we have.

(2.) It was distributed from the hand of Christ by the hands of his
disciples, [Joh 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#011). Note, \[1.\] All
our comforts come to us originally from the hand of Christ; whoever
brings them, it is he that sends them, he distributes to those who
distribute to us. \[2.\] In distributing the bread of life to those that
follow him, he is pleased to make use of the ministration of his
disciples; they are the servitors at Christ's table, or rather rulers in
his household, to give to every one his portion of meat in due season.

(3.) It was done to universal satisfaction. They did not every one take
a little, but all had as much as they would; not a short allowance, but
a full meal; and considering how long they had fasted, with what an
appetite they sat down, how agreeable this miraculous food may be
supposed to have been, above common food, it was not a little that
served them when they ate as much as they would and on free cost. Those
whom Christ feeds with the bread of life he does not stint, [Psa
81:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010). There were but two small
fishes, and yet they had of them too as much as they would. He did not
reserve them for the better sort of the guests, and put off the poor
with dry bread, but treated them all alike, for they were all alike
welcome. Those who call feeding upon fish fasting reproach the
entertainment Christ here made, which was a full feast.

8\. The care that was taken of the broken meat. (1.) The orders Christ
gave concerning it ([Joh 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#012)): When
they were filled, and every man had within him a sensible witness to the
truth of the miracle, Christ said to the disciples, the servants he
employed, Gather up the fragments. Note, We must always take care that
we make no waste of any of God's good creatures; for the grant we have
of them, though large and full, is with this proviso, wilful waste only
excepted. It is just with God to bring us to the want of that which we
make waste of. The Jews were very careful not to lose any bread, nor let
it fall to the ground, to be trodden upon. Qui panem contemnit in gravem
incidit paupertatem - He who despises bread falls into the depths of
poverty, was a saying among them. Though Christ could command supplies
whenever he pleased, yet he would have the fragments gathered up. When
we are filled we must remember that others want, and we may want. Those
that would have wherewith to be charitable must be provident. Had this
broken meat been left upon the grass, the beasts and fowls would have
gathered it up; but that which is fit to be meat for men is wasted and
lost if it be thrown to the brute-creatures. Christ did not order the
broken meat to be gathered up till all were filled; we must not begin to
hoard and lay up till all is laid out that ought to be, for that is
withholding more than is meet. Mr. Baxter notes here, "How much less
should we lose God's word, or helps, or our time, or such greater
mercies!" (2.) The observance of these orders ([Joh
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#013)): They filled twelve baskets with
the fragments, which was an evidence not only of the truth of the
miracle, that they were fed, not with fancy, but with real food (witness
those remains), but of the greatness of it; they were not only filled,
but there was all this over and above. See how large the divine bounty
is; it not only fills the cup, but makes it run over; bread enough, and
to spare, in our Father's house. The fragments filled twelve baskets,
one for each disciple; they were thus repaid with interest for their
willingness to part with what they had for public service; see [Ch2
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#010). The Jews lay it as a law upon
themselves, when they have eaten a meal, to be sure to leave a piece of
bread upon the table, upon which the blessing after meat may rest; for
it is a curse upon the wicked man ([Job
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021)) that there shall none of his
meat be left.

III\. Here is the influence which this miracle had upon the people who
tasted of the benefit of it ([Joh
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#014)): They said, This is of a truth
that prophet. Note, 1. Even the vulgar Jews with great assurance
expected the Messiah to come into the world, and to be a great prophet,
They speak here with assurance of his coming. The Pharisees despised
them as not knowing the law; but, it should seem, they knew more of him
that is the end of the law than the Pharisees did. 2. The miracles which
Christ wrought did clearly demonstrate that he was the Messiah promised,
a teacher come from God, the great prophet, and could not but convince
the amazed spectators that this was he that should come. There were many
who were convinced he was that prophet that should come into the world
who yet did not cordially receive his doctrine, for they did not
continue in it. Such a wretched incoherence and inconsistency there is
between the faculties of the corrupt unsanctified soul, that it is
possible for men to acknowledge that Christ is that prophet, and yet to
turn a deaf ear to him.

[John 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 6:15</span></span>

Here is, I. Christ's retirement from the multitude.

1\. Observe what induced him to retire; because he perceived that those
who acknowledged him to be that prophet that should come into the world
would come, and take him by force, to make him a king, [Joh
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015). Now here we have an instance,

(1.) Of the irregular zeal of some of Christ's followers; nothing would
serve but they would make him a king. Now, \[1.\] This was an act of
zeal for the honour of Christ, and against the contempt which the ruling
part of the Jewish church put upon him. They were concerned to see so
great a benefactor to the world so little esteemed in it; and therefore,
since royal titles are counted the most illustrious, they would make him
a king, knowing that the Messiah was to be a king; and if a prophet,
like Moses, then a sovereign prince and lawgiver, like him; and, if they
cannot set him up upon the holy hill of Zion, a mountain in Galilee
shall serve for the present. Those whom Christ has feasted with the
royal dainties of heaven should, in return for his favour, make him
their king, and set him upon the throne in their souls: let him that has
fed us rule us. But, \[2.\] It was an irregular zeal; for First, It was
grounded upon a mistake concerning the nature of Christ's kingdom, as if
it were to be of this world, and he must appear with outward pomp, a
crown on his head, and an army at his foot; such a king as this they
would make him, which was as great a disparagement to his glory as it
would be to lacquer gold or paint a ruby. Right notions of Christ's
kingdom would keep us to right methods for advancing it. Secondly, It
was excited by the love of the flesh; they would make him their king who
could feed them so plentifully without their toil, and save them from
the curse of eating their bread in the sweat of their face. Thirdly, It
was intended to carry on a secular design; they hoped this might be a
fair opportunity of shaking off the Roman yoke, of which they were
weary. If they had one to head them who could victual an army cheaper
than another could provide for a family, they were sure of the sinews of
the war, and could not fail of success, and the recovery of their
ancient liberties. Thus is religion often prostituted to a secular
interest, and Christ is served only to serve a turn, [Rom
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018). Vix quaritur Jesus properter
Jesusm, sed propter aliud - Jesus is usually sought after for something
else, not for his own sake. - Augustine. Nay, Fourthly, It was a
tumultuous, seditious attempt, and a disturbance of the public peace; it
would make the country a seat of war, and expose it to the resentments
of the Roman power. Fifthly, It was contrary to the mind of our Lord
Jesus himself; for they would take him by force, whether he would or no.
Note, Those who force honours upon Christ which he has not required at
their hands displease him, and do him the greatest dishonour. Those that
say I am of Christ, in opposition to those that are of Apollos and
Cephas (so making Christ the head of a party), take him by force, to
make him a king, contrary to his own mind.

(2.) Here is an instance of the humility and self-denial of the Lord
Jesus, that, when they would have made him a king, he departed; so far
was he from countenancing the design that he effectually quashed it.
Herein he has left a testimony, \[1.\] Against ambition and affectation
of worldly honour, to which he was perfectly mortified, and has taught
us to be so. Had they come to take him by force and make him a prisoner,
he could not have been more industrious to abscond than he was when they
would make him a king. Let us not then covet to be the idols of the
crowd, nor be desirous of vainglory. \[2.\] Against faction and
sedition, treason and rebellion, and whatever tends to disturb the peace
of kings and provinces. By this it appears that he was no enemy to
Caesar, nor would have his followers be so, but the quiet in the land;
that he would have his ministers decline every thing that looks like
sedition, or looks towards it, and improve their interest only for their
work's sake.

2\. Observe whither he retired: He departed again into a mountain, eis
to oros - into the mountain, the mountain where he had preached ([Joh
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#003)), whence he came down into the
plain, to feed the people, and then returned to it alone, to be private.
Christ, though so useful in the places of concourse, yet chose sometimes
to be alone, to teach us to sequester ourselves from the world now and
then, for the more free converse with God and our own souls; and never
less alone, says the serious Christian, than when alone. Public services
must not jostle out private devotions.

II\. Here is the disciples' distress at sea. They that go down to the
sea in ships, these see the works of the Lord, for he raiseth the stormy
wind, [Psa 107:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023), [Psa
107:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#024). Apply this to these disciples.

1\. Here is their going down to the sea in a ship ([Joh
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#016), [Joh
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#017)): When even was come, and they
had done their day's work, it was time to look homeward, and therefore
they went aboard, and set sail for Capernaum. This they did by
particular direction from their Master, with design (as it should seem)
to get them out of the way of the temptation of countenancing those that
would have made him a king.

2\. Here is the stormy wind arising and fulfilling the word of God. They
were Christ's disciples, and were now in the way of their duty, and
Christ was now in the mount praying for them; and yet they were in this
distress. The perils and afflictions of this present time may very well
consist with our interest in Christ and his intercession. They had
lately been feasted at Christ's table; but after the sun-shine of
comfort expect a storm. (1.) It was now dark; this made the storm the
more dangerous and uncomfortable. Sometimes the people of God are in
trouble, and cannot see their way out; in the dark concerning the cause
of their trouble, concerning the design and tendency of it, and what the
issue will be. (2.) Jesus was not come to them. When they were in that
storm ([Mat 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#023), etc.) Jesus was with
them; but now their beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. The
absence of Christ is the great aggravation of the troubles of
Christians. (3.) The sea arose by reason of a great wind. It was calm
and fair when they put to sea (they were not so presumptuous as to
launch out in a storm), but it arose when they were at sea. In times of
tranquillity we must prepare for trouble, for it may arise when we
little think of it. Let it comfort good people, when they happen to be
in storms at sea, that the disciples of Christ were so; and let the
promises of a gracious God balance the threats of an angry sea. Though
in a storm, and in the dark, they are no worse off than Christ's
disciples were. Clouds and darkness sometimes surround the children of
the light, and of the day.

3\. Here is Christ's seasonable approach to them when they were in this
peril, [Joh 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#019). They had rowed
(being forced by the contrary winds to betake themselves to their oars)
about twenty-five or thirty furlongs. The Holy Spirit that indicted this
could have ascertained the number of furlongs precisely, but this, being
only circumstantial, is left to be expressed according to the conjecture
of the penman. And, when they were got off a good way at sea, they see
Jesus walking on the sea. See here, (1.) The power Christ has over the
laws and customs of nature, to control and dispense with them at his
pleasure. It is natural for heavy bodies to sink in water, but Christ
walked upon the water as upon dry land, which was more than Moses's
dividing the water and walking through the water. (2.) The concern
Christ has for his disciples in distress: He drew nigh to the ship; for
therefore he walked upon the water, as he rides upon the heavens, for
the help of his people, [Deu 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026). He
will not leave them comfortless when they seem to be tossed with
tempests and not comforted. When they are banished (as John) into remote
places, or shut up (as Paul and Silas) in close places, he will find
access to them, and will be nigh them. (3.) The relief Christ gives to
his disciples in their fears. They were afraid, more afraid of an
apparition (for so they supposed him to be) than of the winds and waves.
It is more terrible to wrestle with the rulers of the darkness of this
world than with a tempestuous sea. When they thought a demon haunted
them, and perhaps was instrumental to raise the storm, they were more
terrified than they had been while they saw nothing in it but what was
natural. Note, \[1.\] Our real distresses are often much increased by
our imaginary ones, the creatures of our own fancy. \[2.\] Even the
approaches of comfort and deliverance are often so misconstrued as to
become the occasions of fear and perplexity. We are often not only worse
frightened than hurt, but then most frightened when we are ready to be
helped. But, when they were in this fright, how affectionately did
Christ silence their fears with that compassionate word ([Joh
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#020)), It is I, be not afraid! Nothing
is more powerful to convince sinners than that word, I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest; nothing more powerful to comfort saints than this, "I
am Jesus whom thou lovest; it is I that love thee, and seek thy good; be
not afraid of me, nor of the storm." When trouble is nigh Christ is
nigh.

4\. Here is their speedy arrival at the port they were bound for, [Joh
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#017). (1.) They welcomed Christ into
the ship; they willingly received him. Note, Christ's absenting himself
for a time is but so much the more to endear himself, at his return, to
his disciples, who value his presence above any thing; see [Sol
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004). (2.) Christ brought them safely
to the shore: Immediately the ship was at the land whither they went.
Note, \[1.\] The ship of the church, in which the disciples of Christ
have embarked themselves and their all, may be much shattered and
distressed, yet it shall come safe to the harbour at last; tossed at
sea, but not lost; cast down, but not destroyed; the bush burning, but
not consumed. \[2.\] The power and presence of the church's King shall
expedite and facilitate her deliverance, and conquer the difficulties
which have baffled the skill and industry of all her other friends. The
disciples had rowed hard, but could not make their point till they had
got Christ in the ship, and then the work was done suddenly. If we have
received Christ Jesus the Lord, have received him willingly, though the
night be dark and the wind high, yet we may comfort ourselves with this,
that we shall be at shore shortly, and are nearer to it than we think we
are. Many a doubting soul is fetched to heaven by a pleasing surprise,
or ever it is aware.

[John 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 6:22</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. The careful enquiry which the people made after Christ, [Joh
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#023), [Joh
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#024). They saw the disciples go to
sea; they saw Christ retire to the mountain, probably with an intimation
that he desired to be private for some time; but, their hearts being set
upon making him a king, they way-laid his return, and the day following,
the hot fit of their zeal still continuing,

1\. They were much at a loss for him. He was gone, and they knew not
what was become of him. They saw there was no boat there but that in
which the disciples went off, Providence so ordering it for the
confirming of the miracle of his walking on the sea, for there was no
boat for him to go in. They observed also that Jesus did not go with his
disciples, but that they went off alone, and left him among them on
their side of the water. Note, Those that would find Christ must
diligently observe all his motions, and learn to understand the tokens
of his presence and absence, that they may steer accordingly.

2\. They were very industrious in seeking him. They searched the places
thereabouts, and when they saw that Jesus was not there, nor his
disciples (neither he nor any one that could give tidings of him), they
resolved to search elsewhere. Note, Those that would find Christ must
accomplish a diligent search, must seek till they find, must go from sea
to sea, to seek the word of God, rather than live without it; and those
whom Christ has feasted with the bread of life should have their souls
carried out in earnest desires towards him. Much would have more, in
communion with Christ. Now, (1.) They resolved to go to Capernaum in
quest of him. There were his head-quarters, where he usually resided.
Thither his disciples were gone; and they knew he would not be long
absent from them. Those that would find Christ must go forth by the
footsteps of the flock. (2.) Providence favoured them with an
opportunity of going thither by sea, which was the speediest way; for
there came other boats from Tiberias, which lay further off upon the
same shore, nigh, though not so nigh to the place where they did eat
bread, in which they might soon make a trip to Capernaum, and probably
the boats were bound for that port. Note, Those that in sincerity seek
Christ, and seek opportunities of converse with him, are commonly owned
and assisted by Providence in those pursuits. The evangelist, having
occasion to mention their eating the multiplied bread, adds, After that
the Lord had given thanks, [Joh 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#011).
So much were the disciples affected with their Master's giving thanks
that they could never forget the impressions made upon them by it, but
took a pleasure in remembering the gracious words that then proceeded
out of his mouth. This was the grace and beauty of that meal, and made
it remarkable; their hearts burned within them.

3\. They laid hold of the opportunity that offered itself, and they also
took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus. They did not
defer, in hopes to see him again on this side the water; but their
convictions being strong, and their desires warm, they followed him
presently. Good motions are often crushed, and come to nothing, for want
of being prosecuted in time. They came to Capernaum, and, for aught that
appears, these unsound hypocritical followers of Christ had a calm and
pleasant passage, while his sincere disciples had a rough and stormy
one. It is not strange if it fare worst with the best men in this evil
world. They came, seeking Jesus. Note, Those that would find Christ, and
find comfort in him, must be willing to take pains, and, as here, to
compass sea and land to seek and serve him who came from heaven to earth
to seek and save us.

II\. The success of this enquiry: They found him on the other side of
the sea, [Joh 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#025). Note, Christ will
be found of those that seek him, first or last; and it is worth while to
cross a sea, nay, to go from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends
of the earth, to seek Christ, if we may but find him at last. These
people appeared afterwards to be unsound, and not actuated by any good
principle, and yet were thus zealous. Note, Hypocrites may be very
forward in their attendance on God's ordinances. If men have no more to
show for their love to Christ than their running after sermons and
prayers, and their pangs of affection to good preaching, they have
reason to suspect themselves no better than this eager crowd. But though
these people were no better principled, and Christ knew it, yet he was
willing to be found of them, and admitted them into fellowship with him.
If we could know the hearts of hypocrites, yet, while their profession
is plausible, we must not exclude them from our communion, much less
when we do not know their hearts.

III\. The question they put to him when they found him: Rabbi, when
camest thou hither? It should seem by [Joh
6:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#059) that they found him in the
synagogue. They knew this was the likeliest place to seek Christ in, for
it was his custom to attend public assemblies for religious worship,
[Luk 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016). Note, Christ must be
sought, and will be found, in the congregations of his people and in the
administration of his ordinances; public worship is what Christ chooses
to own and grace with his presence and the manifestations of himself.
There they found him, and all they had to say to him was, Rabbi, when
camest thou hither? They saw he would not be made a king, and therefore
say no more of this, but call him Rabbi, their teacher. Their enquiry
refers not only to the time, but to the manner, of his conveying himself
thither; not only When, but, "How, camest thou thither?" for there was
no boat for him to come in. They were curious in asking concerning
Christ's motions, but not solicitous to observe their own.

IV\. The answer Christ gave them, not direct to their question (what was
it to them when and how he came thither?) but such an answer as their
case required.

1\. He discovers the corrupt principle they acted from in following him
([Joh 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#026)): "Verily, verily, I say
unto you, I that search the heart, and know what is in man, I the Amen,
the faithful witness, [Rev 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014), [Rev
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#015). You seek me; that is well, but
it is not from a good principle." Christ knows not only what we do, but
why we do it. These followed Christ, (1.) Not for his doctrine's sake:
Not because you saw the miracles. The miracles were the great
confirmation of his doctrine; Nicodemus sought for him for the sake of
them ([Joh 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002)), and argued from the
power of his works to the truth of his word; but these were so stupid
and mindless that they never considered this. But, (2.) It was for their
own bellies' sake: Because you did eat of the loaves, and were filled;
not because he taught them, but because he fed them. He had given them,
\[1.\] A full meal's meat: They did eat, and were filled; and some of
them perhaps were so poor that they had not known of a long time before
now what it was to have enough, to eat and leave. \[2.\] A dainty meal's
meat; it is probable that, as the miraculous wine was the best wine, so
was the miraculous food more than usually pleasant. \[3.\] A cheap
meal's meat, that cost them nothing; no reckoning was brought in. Note,
Many follow Christ for loaves, and not for love. Thus those do who aim
at secular advantage in their profession of religion, and follow it
because by this craft they get their preferments. Quantis profuit nobis
haec fabula de Christo - This fable respecting Christ, what a gainful
concern we have made of it! said one of the popes. These people
complimented Christ with Rabbi, and showed him great respect, yet he
told them thus faithfully of their hypocrisy; his ministers must hence
learn not to flatter those that flatter them, nor to be bribed by fair
words to cry peace to all that cry rabbi to them, but to give faithful
reproofs where there is cause for them.

2\. He directs them to better principles ([Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)): Labour for that meat which
endures to everlasting life. With the woman of Samaria he had discoursed
of spiritual things under the similitude of water; here he speaks of
them under the similitude of meat, taking occasion from the loaves they
had eaten. His design is,

(1.) To moderate our worldly pursuits: Labour not for the meat that
perishes. This does not forbid honest labour for food convenient, [Th2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#012). But we must not make the things
of this world our chief care and concern. Note, \[1.\] The things of the
world are meat that perishes. Worldly wealth, honour, and pleasure, are
meat; they feed the fancy (and many times this is all) and fill the
belly. These are things which mean hunger after as meat, and glut
themselves with, and which a carnal heart, as long as they last, may
make a shift to live upon; but they perish, are of a perishing nature,
wither of themselves, and are exposed to a thousand accidents; those
that have the largest share of them are not sure to have them while they
live, but are sure to leave them and lose them when they die. \[2.\] It
is therefore folly for us inordinately to labour after them. First, We
must not labour in religion, nor work the works thereof, for this
perishing meat, with an eye to this; we must not make our religion
subservient to a worldly interest, nor aim at secular advantages in
sacred exercises. Secondly, We must not at all labour for this meat;
that is, we must not make these perishing things our chief good, nor
make our care and pains about them our chief business; not seek those
things first and most, [Pro 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#004), [Pro
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#005).

(2.) To quicken and excite our gracious pursuits: "Bestow your pains to
better purpose, and labour for that meat which belongs to the soul," of
which he shows,

\[1.\] That it is unspeakably desirable: It is meat which endures to
everlasting life; it is a happiness which will last as long as we must,
which not only itself endures eternally, but will nourish us up to
everlasting life. The blessings of the new covenant are our preparative
for eternal life, our preservative to it, and the pledge and earnest of
it.

\[2.\] It is undoubtedly attainable. Shall all the treasures of the
world be ransacked, and all the fruits of the earth gathered together,
to furnish us with provisions that will last to eternity? No, The sea
saith, It is not in me, among all the treasures hidden in the sand. It
cannot be gotten for gold; but it is that which the Son of man shall
give; hēn dōsei, either which meat, or which life, the Son of man shall
give. Observe here, First, Who gives this meat: the Son of man, the
great householder and master of the stores, who is entrusted with the
administration of the kingdom of God among men, and the dispensation of
the gifts, graces, and comforts of that kingdom, and has power to give
eternal life, with all the means of it and preparatives for it. We are
told to labour for it, as if it were to be got by our own industry, and
sold upon that valuable consideration, as the heathen said, Dii
laboribus omnia vendunt - The gods sell all advantages to the
industrious. But when we have laboured ever so much for it, we have not
merited it as our hire, but the Son of man gives it. And what more free
than gift? It is an encouragement that he who has the giving of it is
the Son of man, for then we may hope the sons of men that seek it, and
labour for it, shall not fail to have it. Secondly, What authority he
has to give it; for him has God the Father sealed, touton gar ho Patēr
esphragisen̂ ho Theos - for him the Father has sealed (proved and
evidenced) to be God; so some read it; he has declared him to be the Son
of God with power. He has sealed him, that is, has given him full
authority to deal between God and man, as God's ambassador to man and
man's intercessor with God, and has proved his commission by miracles.
Having given him authority, he has given us assurance of it; having
entrusted him with unlimited powers, he has satisfied us with undoubted
proofs of them; so that as he might go on with confidence in his
undertaking for us, so may we in our resignations to him. God the Father
scaled him with the Spirit that rested on him, by the voice from heaven,
by the testimony he bore to him in signs and wonders. Divine revelation
is perfected in him, in him the vision and prophecy is sealed up ([Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)), to him all believers seal that
he is true ([Joh 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033)), and in him
they are all sealed, [Co2 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022).

[John 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 6:28</span></span>

Whether this conference was with the Capernaites, in whose synagogue
Christ now was, or with those who came from the other side of the sea,
is not certain nor material; however, it is an instance of Christ's
condescension that he gave them leave to ask him questions, and did not
resent the interruption as an affront, no, not from his common hearers,
though not his immediate followers. Those that would be apt to teach
must be swift to hear, and study to answer. It is the wisdom of
teachers, when they are asked even impertinent unprofitable questions,
thence to take occasion to answer in that which is profitable, that the
question may be rejected, but not the request. Now,

I. Christ having told them that they must work for the meat he spoke of,
must labour for it, they enquire what work they must do, and he answers
them, [Joh 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#028), [Joh
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029). 1. Their enquiry was pertinent
enough ([Joh 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#028)): What shall we do,
that we may work the works of God? Some understand it as a pert
question: "What works of God can we do more and better than those we do
in obedience to the law of Moses?" But I rather take it as a humble
serious question, showing them to be, at least for the present, in a
good mind, and willing to know and do their duty; and I imagine that
those who asked this question, How and What ([Joh
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#030)), and made the request ([Joh
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#034)), were not the same persons with
those that murmured ([Joh 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#041), [Joh
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#042)), and strove ([Joh
6:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#052)), for those are expressly called
the Jews, who came out of Judea (for those were strictly called Jews) to
cavil, whereas these were of Galilee, and came to be taught. This
question here intimates that they were convinced that those who would
obtain this everlasting meat, (1.) Must aim to do something great. Those
who look high in their expectations, and hope to enjoy the glory of God,
must aim high in those endeavours, and study to do the works of God,
works which he requires and will accept, works of God, distinguished
from the works of worldly men in their worldly pursuits. It is not
enough to speak the words of God, but we must do the works of God. (2.)
Must be willing to do any thing: What shall we do? Lord, I am ready to
do whatever thou shalt appoint, though ever so displeasing to flesh and
blood, [Act 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006). 2. Christ's answer
was plain enough ([Joh 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029)): This is
the work of God that ye believe. Note, (1.) The work of faith is the
work of God. They enquire after the works of God (in the plural number),
being careful about many things; but Christ directs them to one work,
which includes all, the one thing needful: that you believe, which
supersedes all the works of the ceremonial law; the work which is
necessary to the acceptance of all the other works, and which produces
them, for without faith you cannot please God. It is God's work, for it
is of his working in us, it subjects the soul to his working on us, and
quickens the soul in working for him, (2.) That faith is the work of God
which closes with Christ, and relies upon him. It is to believe on him
as one whom God hath sent, as God's commissioner in the great affair of
peace between God and man, and as such to rest upon him, and resign
ourselves to him. See [Joh 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001).

II\. Christ having told them that the Son of man would give them this
meat, they enquire concerning him, and he answers their enquiry.

1\. Their enquiry is after a sign ([Joh
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#030)): What sign showest thou? Thus
far they were right, that, since he required them to give him credit, he
should produce his credentials, and make it out by miracle that he was
sent of God. Moses having confirmed his mission by signs, it was
requisite that Christ, who came to set aside the ceremonial law, should
in like manner confirm his: "What dost thou work? What doest thou drive
at? What lasting characters of a divine power does thou design to leave
upon thy doctrine?" But herein they missed it,

(1.) That they overlooked the many miracles which they had seen wrought
by him, and which amounted to an abundant proof of his divine mission.
Is this a time of day to ask, "What sign showest thou?" especially at
Capernaum, the staple of miracles, where he had done so many mighty
works, signs so significant of his office and undertaking? Were not
these very persons but the other day miraculously fed by him? None so
blind as they that will not see; for they may be so blind as to question
whether it be day or no, when the sun shines in their faces.

(2.) That they preferred the miraculous feeding of Israel in the
wilderness before all the miracles Christ wrought ([Joh
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#031)): Our fathers did eat manna in
the desert; and, to strengthen the objection, they quote a scripture for
it: He gave them bread from heaven (taken from [Psa
78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024)), he gave them of the corn of
heaven. What a good use might be made of this story to which they here
refer! It was a memorable instance of God's power and goodness, often
mentioned to the glory of God ([Neh
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#020), [Neh
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#021)), yet see how these people
perverted it, and made an ill use of it. \[1.\] Christ reproved them for
their fondness of the miraculous bread, and bade them not set their
hearts upon meat which perisheth; "Why," say they, "meat for the belly
was the great good thing that God gave to our fathers in the desert; and
why should not we then labour for that meat? If God made much of them,
why should not we be for those that will make much of us?" \[2.\] Christ
had fed five thousand men with five loaves, and had given them that as
one sign to prove him sent of God; but, under colour of magnifying the
miracles of Moses, they tacitly undervalue this miracle of Christ, and
evade the evidence of it. "Christ fed his thousands; but Moses his
hundreds of thousands; Christ fed them but once, and then reproved those
who followed him in hope to be still fed, and put them off with a
discourse of spiritual food; but Moses fed his followers forty years,
and miracles were not their rarities, but their daily bread: Christ fed
them with bread out of the earth, barley-bread, and fishes out of the
sea; but Moses fed Israel with bread from heaven, angel's food." Thus
big did these Jews talk of the manna which their fathers did eat; but
their fathers had slighted it as much as they did now the barley-loaves,
and called light bread, [Num 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#005).
Thus apt are we to slight and overlook the appearances of God's power
and grace in our own times, while we pretend to admire the wonders of
which our fathers told us. Suppose this miracle of Christ was outdone by
that of Moses, yet there were other instances in which Christ's miracles
outshone his; and, besides, all true miracles prove a divine doctrine,
though not equally illustrious in the circumstances, which were ever
diversified according as the occasion did require. As much as the manna
excelled the barley-loaves, so much, and much more, did the doctrine of
Christ excel the law of Moses, and his heavenly institutions the carnal
ordinances of that dispensation.

2\. Here is Christ's reply to this enquiry, wherein,

(1.) He rectifies their mistake concerning the typical manna. It was
true that their fathers did eat manna in the desert. But, \[1.\] It was
not Moses that gave it to them, nor were they obliged to him for it; he
was but the instrument, and therefore they must look beyond him to God.
We do not find that Moses did so much as pray to God for the manna; and
he spoke unadvisedly when he said, Must we fetch water out of the rock?
Moses gave them not either that bread or that water. \[2.\] It was not
given them, as they imagined, from heaven, from the highest heavens, but
only from the clouds, and therefore not so much superior to that which
had its rise from the earth as they thought. Because the scripture
saith, He gave them bread from heaven, it does not follow that it was
heavenly bread, or was intended to be the nourishment of souls.
Misunderstanding scripture language occasions many mistakes in the
things of God.

(2.) He informs them concerning the true manna, of which that was a
type: But my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven; that which is
truly and properly the bread from heaven, of which the manna was but a
shadow and figure, is now given, not to your fathers, who are dead and
gone, but to you of this present age, for whom the better things were
reserved: he is now giving you that bread from heaven, which is truly so
called. As much as the throne of God's glory is above the clouds of the
air, so much does the spiritual bread of the everlasting gospel excel
the manna. In calling God his Father, he proclaims himself greater than
Moses; for Moses was faithful but as a servant, Christ as a Son, [Heb
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#005), [Heb
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006).

III\. Christ, having replied to their enquiries, takes further occasion
from their objection concerning the manna to discourse of himself under
the similitude of bread, and of believing under the similitude of eating
and drinking; to which, together with his putting both together in the
eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood, and with the remarks made
upon it by the hearers, the rest of this conference may be reduced.

1\. Christ having spoken of himself as the great gift of God, and the
true bread ([Joh 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032)), largely
explains and confirms this, that we may rightly know him.

(1.) He here shows that he is the true bread; this he repeats again and
again, [Joh 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033), [Joh
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035), [Joh
6:48-51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#048). Observe, \[1.\] That Christ
is bread is that to the soul which bread is to the body, nourishes and
supports the spiritual life (is the staff of it) as bread does the
bodily life; it is the staff of life. The doctrines of the gospel
concerning Christ - that he is the mediator between God and man, that he
is our peace, our righteousness, our Redeemer; by these things do men
live. Our bodies could better live without food than our souls without
Christ. Bread-corn is bruised ([Isa
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#028)), so was Christ; he was born at
Bethlehem, the house of bread, and typified by the show-bread. \[2.\]
That he is the bread of God ([Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033)), divine bread; it is he that is
of God ([Joh 6:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)), bread which my
Father gives ([Joh 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032)), which he has
made to be the food of our souls; the bread of God's family, his
children's bread. The Levitical sacrifices are called the bread of God
([Lev 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#021), [Lev
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#022)), and Christ is the great
sacrifice; Christ, in his word and ordinances, the feast upon the
sacrifice. \[3.\] That he is the bread of life ([Joh
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035), and again, [Joh
6:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#048)), that bread of life, alluding to
the tree of life in the midst of the garden of Eden, which was to Adam
the seal of that part of the covenant, Do this and live, of which he
might eat and live. Christ is the bread of life, for he is the fruit of
the tree of life. First, He is the living bread (so he explains himself,
[Joh 6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)): I am the living bread.
Bread is itself a dead thing, and nourishes not but by the help of the
faculties of a living body; but Christ is himself living bread, and
nourishes by his own power. Manna was a dead thing; if kept but one
night, it putrefied and bred worms; but Christ is ever living,
everlasting bread, that never moulds, nor waxes old. The doctrine of
Christ crucified is now as strengthening and comforting to a believer as
ever it was, and his mediation still of as much value and efficacy as
ever. Secondly, He gives life unto the world ([Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033)), spiritual and eternal life; the
life of the soul in union and communion with God here, and in the vision
and fruition of him hereafter; a life that includes in it all happiness.
The manna did only reserve and support life, did not preserve and
perpetuate life, much less restore it; but Christ gives life to those
that were dead in sin. The manna was ordained only for the life of the
Israelites, but Christ is given for the life of the world; none are
excluded from the benefit of this bread, but such as exclude themselves.
Christ came to put life into the minds of men, principles productive of
acceptable performances. \[4.\] That he is the bread which came down
from heaven; this is often repeated here, [Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033), [Joh
6:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#050), [Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051), [Joh
6:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#058). This denotes, First, The
divinity of Christ's person. As God, he had a being in heaven, whence he
came to take our nature upon him: I came down from heaven, whence we may
infer his antiquity, he was in the beginning with God; his ability, for
heaven is the firmament of power; and his authority, he came with a
divine commission. Secondly, The divine original of all that good which
flows to us through him. He comes, not only katabas - that came down
([Joh 6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)), but katabainōi - that
comes down; he is descending, denoting a constant communication of
light, life, and love, from God to believers through Christ, as the
manna descended daily; see [Eph 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003).
Omnia desuper - All things from above. \[5.\] That he is that bread of
which the manna was a type and figure ([Joh
6:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#058)), that bread, the true bread,
[Joh 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032). As the rock that they drank
of was Christ, so was the manna they ate of spiritual bread, [Co1
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003), [Co1
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004). Manna was given to Israel; so
Christ to the spiritual Israel. There was manna enough for them all; so
in Christ a fulness of grace for all believers; he that gathers much of
this manna will have none to spare when he comes to use it; and he that
gathers little, when his grace comes to be perfected in glory, shall
find that he has no lack. Manna was to be gathered in the morning; and
those that would find Christ must seek him early. Manna was sweet, and,
as the author of the Wisdom of Solomon tells us (Wisd. 16:20), was
agreeable to every palate; and to those that believe Christ is precious.
Israel lived upon manna till they came to Canaan; and Christ is our
life. There was a memorial of the manna preserved in the ark; so of
Christ in the Lord's supper, as the food of souls.

(2.) He here shows what his undertaking was, and what his errand into
the world. Laying aside the metaphor, he speaks plainly, and speaks no
proverb, giving us an account of his business among men, [Joh
6:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038).

\[1.\] He assures us, in general, that he came from heaven upon his
Father's business ([Joh 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)), not do
his own will, but the will of him that sent him. He came from heaven,
which bespeaks him an intelligent active being, who voluntarily
descended to this lower world, a long journey, and a great step
downward, considering the glories of the world he came from and the
calamities of the world he came to; we may well ask with wonder, "What
moved him to such an expedition?" Here he tells that he came to do, not
his own will, but the will of his Father; not that he had any will that
stood in competition with the will of his Father, but those to whom he
spoke suspected he might. "No," saith he, "my own will is not the spring
I act fRom. nor the rule I go by, but I am come to do the will of him
that sent me." That is, First, Christ did not come into the world as a
private person, that acts for himself only, but under a public
character, to act for others as an ambassador, or plenipotentiary,
authorized by a public commission; he came into the world as God's great
agent and the world's great physician. It was not any private business
that brought him hither, but he came to settle affairs between parties
no less considerable than the great Creator and the whole creation.
Secondly, Christ, when he was in the world, did not carry on any private
design, nor had any separate interest at all, distinct from theirs for
whom he acted. The scope of his whole life was to glorify God and do
good to men. He therefore never consulted his own ease, safety, or
quiet; but, when he was to lay down his life, though he had a human
nature which startled at it, he set aside the consideration of that, and
resolved his will as man into the will of God: Not as I will, but as
thou wilt.

\[2.\] He acquaints us, in particular, with that will of the Father
which he came to do; he here declares the decree, the instructions he
was to pursue.

First, The private instructions given to Christ, that he should be sure
to save all the chosen remnant; and this is the covenant of redemption
between the Father and the Son ([Joh
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)): "This is the Father's will, who
hath sent me; this is the charge I am entrusted with, that of all whom
he hath given me I should lose none." Note, 1. There is a certain number
of the children of men given by the Father to Jesus Christ, to be his
care, and so to be to him for a name and a praise; given him for an
inheritance, for a possession. Let him do all that for them which their
case requires; teach them, and heal them, pay their debt, and plead
their cause, prepare them for, and preserve them to, eternal life, and
then let him make his best of them. The Father might dispose of them as
he pleased: as creatures, their lives and beings were derived from him;
as sinners, their lives and beings were forfeited to him. He might have
sold them for the satisfaction of his justice, and delivered them to the
tormentors; but he pitched upon them to be the monuments of his mercy,
and delivered them to the Saviour. Those whom God chose to be the
objects of his special love he lodged as a trust in the hands of Christ.
2. Jesus Christ has undertaken that he will lose none of those that were
thus given him of the Father. The many sons whom he was to bring to
glory shall all be forth-coming, and none of them missing, [Mat
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#014). None of them shall be lost, for
want of a sufficient grace to sanctify them. If I bring him not unto
thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever, [Gen
43:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#009). 3. Christ's undertaking for
those that are given him extends to the resurrection of their bodies. I
will raise it up again at the last day, which supposes all that goes
before, but this is to crown and complete the undertaking. The body is a
part of the man, and therefore a part of Christ's purchase and charge;
it pertains to the promises, and therefore it shall not be lost. The
undertaking is not only that he shall lose none, no person, but that he
shall lose nothing, no part of the person, and therefore not the body.
Christ's undertaking will never be accomplished till the resurrection,
when the souls and bodies of the saints shall be re-united and gathered
to Christ, that he may present them to the Father: Behold I, and the
children that thou has given me, [Heb
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013); [Ti2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012). 4. The spring and original of
all this is the sovereign will of God, the counsels of his will,
according to which he works all this. This was the commandment he gave
to his Son, when he sent him into the world, and to which the Son always
had an eye.

Secondly, The public instructions which were to be given to the children
of men, in what way, and upon what terms, they might obtain salvation by
Christ; and this is the covenant of grace between God and man. Who the
particular persons were that were given to Christ is a secret: The Lord
knows them that are his, we do not, nor is it fit we should; but, though
their names are concealed, their characters are published. An offer is
made of life and happiness upon gospel terms, that by it those that were
given to Christ might be brought to him, and others left inexcusable
([Joh 6:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040)): "This is the will, the
revealed will, of him that sent me, the method agreed upon, upon which
to proceed with the children of men, that every one, Jew or Gentile,
that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I
will raise him up." This is gospel indeed, good news. Is it now reviving
to hear this? 1. That eternal life may be had, if it be not our own
fault; that whereas, upon the sin of the first Adam, the way of the tree
of life was blocked up, by the grace of the second Adam it is laid upon
again. The crown of glory is set before us as the prize of our high
calling, which we may run for and obtain. 2. Every one may have it. This
gospel is to be preached, this offer made, to all, and none can say, "It
belongs not to me," [Rev 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017). 3.
This everlasting life is sure to all those who believe in Christ, and to
them only. He that sees the Son, and believes on him, shall be saved.
Some understand this seeing as a limitation of this condition of
salvation to those only that have the revelation of Christ and his grace
made to them. Every one that has the opportunity of being acquainted
with Christ, and improves this so well as to believe in him, shall have
everlasting life, so that none shall be condemned for unbelief (however
they maybe for other sins) but those who have had the gospel preached to
them, who, like these Jews here ([Joh
6:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#036)), have seen, and yet have not
believed; have known Christ, and yet not trusted in him. But I rather
understand seeing here to mean the same thing with believing, for it is
theōrōn, which signifies not so much the sight of the eye (as [Joh
6:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#036), heōrakate me - ye have seen me)
as the contemplation of the mind. Every one that sees the Son, that is,
believes on him, sees him with an eye of faith, by which we come to be
duly acquainted and affected with the doctrine of the gospel concerning
him. It is to look upon him, as the stung Israelites upon the brazen
serpent. It is not a blind faith that Christ requires, that we should be
willing to have our eyes put out, and then follow him, but that we
should see him, and see what ground we go upon in our faith. It is then
right when it is not taken up upon hearsay (believing as the church
believes), but is the result of a due consideration of, and insight
into, the motives of credibility: Now mine eye sees thee. We have heard
him ourselves. 4. Those who believe in Jesus Christ, in order to their
having everlasting life, shall be raised up by his power at the last
day. He had it in charge as his Father's will ([Joh
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039)), and here he solemnly makes it
his own undertaking: I will raise him up, which signifies not only the
return of the body to life, but the putting of the whole man into a full
possession of the eternal life promised.

2\. Now Christ discoursing thus concerning himself, as the bread of life
that came down from heaven, let us see what remarks his hearers made
upon it.

(1.) When they heard of such a thing as the bread of God, which gives
life, they heartily prayed for it ([Joh
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#034)): Lord, evermore give us this
bread. I cannot think that this is spoken scoffingly, and in a way of
derision, as most interpreters understand it: "Give us such bread as
this, if thou canst; let us be fed with it, not for one meal, as with
the five loaves, but evermore;" as if this were no better a prayer than
that of the impenitent thief: If thou be the Christ, save thyself and
us. But I take this request to be made, though ignorantly, yet honestly,
and to be well meant; for they call him Lord, and desire a share in what
he gives, whatever he means by it. General and confused notions of
divine things produce in carnal hearts some kind of desires towards
them, and wishes of them; like Balaam's wish, to die the death of the
righteous. Those who have an indistinct knowledge of the things of God,
who see men as trees walking, make, as I may call them, inarticulate
prayers for spiritual blessings. They think the favour of God a good
thing, and heaven a fine place, and cannot but wish them their own,
while they have no value nor desire at all for that holiness which is
necessary both to the one and to the other. Let this be the desire of
our souls; have we tasted that the Lord is gracious, been feasted with
the word of God, and Christ in the word? Let us say, "Lord, evermore
give us this bread; let the bread of life be our daily bread, the
heavenly manna our continual feast, and let us never know the want of
it."

(2.) But, when they understood that by this bread of life Jesus meant
himself, then they despised it. Whether they were the same persons that
had prayed for it ([Joh 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#034)), or some
others of the company, does not appear; it seems to be some others, for
they are called Jews. Now it is said ([Joh
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#041)), They murmured at him. This
comes in immediately after that solemn declaration which Christ had made
of God's will and his own undertaking concerning man's salvation ([Joh
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039), [Joh
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040)), which certainly were some of
the most weighty and gracious words that ever proceeded out of the mouth
of our Lord Jesus, the most faithful, and best worthy of all
acceptation. One would think that, like Israel in Egypt, when they heard
that God had thus visited them, they should have bowed their heads and
worshipped; but on the contrary, instead of closing with the offer made
them, they murmured, quarrelled with what Christ said, and, though they
did not openly oppose and contradict it, yet they privately whispered
among themselves in contempt of it, and instilled into one another's
minds prejudices against it. Many that will not professedly contradict
the doctrine of Christ (their cavils are so weak and groundless that
they are either ashamed to own them or afraid to have them silenced),
yet say in their hearts that they do not like it. Now, \[1.\] That which
offended them was Christ's asserting his origin to be from heaven, [Joh
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#041), [Joh
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#042). How is it that he saith, I came
down from heaven? They had heard of angels coming down from heaven, but
never of a man, overlooking the proofs he had given them of his being
more than a man. \[2.\] That which they thought justified them herein
was that they knew his extraction on earth: Is not this Jesus the son of
Joseph, whose father and mother we know? They took it amiss that he
should say that he came down from heaven, when he was one of them. They
speak slightly of his blessed name, Jesus: Is not this Jesus. They take
it for granted that Joseph was really his father, though he was only
reputed to be so. Note, Mistakes concerning the person of Christ, as if
he were a mere man, conceived and born by ordinary generation, occasion
the offence that is taken at his doctrine and offices. Those who set him
on a level with the other sons of men, whose father and mother we know,
no wonder if they derogate from the honour of his satisfaction and the
mysteries of his undertaking, and, like the Jews here, murmur at his
promise to raise us up at the last day.

3\. Christ, having spoken of faith as the great work of God ([Joh
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029)), discourses largely concerning
this work, instructing and encouraging us in it.

(1.) He shows what it is to believe in Christ. \[1.\] To believe in
Christ is to come to Christ. He that comes to me is the same with him
that believes in me ([Joh 6:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035)), and
again ([Joh 6:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037)): He that comes unto
me; so [Joh 6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044), [Joh
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045). Repentance towards God is coming
to him ([Jer 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022)) as our chief good
and highest end; and so faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ is coming to
him as our prince and Saviour, and our way to the Father. It denotes the
out-goings of our affection towards him, for these are the motions of
the soul, and actions agreeable; it is to come off from all those things
that stand in opposition to him or competition with him, and to come up
to those terms upon which life and salvation are offered to us through
him. When he was here on earth it was more that barely coming where he
was; so it is now more than coming to his word and ordinances. \[2.\] It
is to feed upon Christ ([Joh 6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)): If
any man eat of this bread. The former denotes applying ourselves to
Christ; this denotes applying Christ to ourselves, with appetite and
delight, that we may receive life, and strength, and comfort from him.
To feed on him as the Israelites on the manna, having quitted the
fleshpots of Egypt, and not depending on the labour of their hands (to
eat of that), but living purely on the bread given them from heaven.

(2.) He shows what is to be got by believing in Christ. What will he
give us if we come to him? What shall we be the better of we feed upon
him? Want and death are the chief things we dread; may we but be assured
of the comforts of our being, and the continuance of it in the midst of
these comforts, we have enough; now these two are here secured to true
believers.

\[1.\] They shall never want, never hunger, never thirst, [Joh
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035). Desires they have, earnest
desires, but these so suitably, so seasonably, so abundantly satisfied,
that they cannot be called hunger and thirst, which are uneasy and
painful. Those that did eat manna, and drink of the rock, hungered and
thirsted afterwards. Manna surfeited them; water out of the rock failed
them. But there is such an over-flowing fulness in Christ as can never
be exhausted, and there are such ever-flowing communications from him as
can never be interrupted.

\[2.\] They shall never die, not die eternally; for, First, He that
believes on Christ has everlasting life ([Joh
6:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#047)); he has the assurance of it, the
grant of it, the earnest of it; he has it in the promise and
first-fruits. Union with Christ and communion with God in Christ are
everlasting life begun. Secondly, Whereas they that did eat manna died,
Christ is such bread as a man may eat of and never die, [Joh
6:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#049), [Joh
6:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#050). Observe here, 1. The
insufficiency of the typical manna: Your fathers did eat manna in the
wilderness, and are dead. There may be much good use made of the death
of our fathers; their graves speak to us, and their monuments are our
memorials, particularly of this, that the greatest plenty of the most
dainty food will neither prolong the thread of life nor avert the stroke
of death. Those that did eat manna, angel's food, died like other men.
There could be nothing amiss in their diet, to shorten their days, nor
could their deaths be hastened by the toils and fatigues of life (for
they neither sowed nor reaped), and yet they died. (1.) Many of them
died by the immediate strokes of God's vengeance for their unbelief and
murmurings; for, though they did eat that spiritual meat, yet with many
of them God was not well-pleased, but they were overthrown in the
wilderness, [Co1 10:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003). Their eating
manna was no security to them from the wrath of God, as believing in
Christ is to us. (2.) The rest of them died in a course of nature, and
their carcases fell, under a divine sentence, in that wilderness where
they did eat manna. In that very age when miracles were daily bread was
the life of man reduced to the stint it now stands at, as appears, [Psa
90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010). Let them not then boast so much
of manna. 2. The all-sufficiency of the true manna, of which the other
was a type: This is the bread that cometh down from heaven, that truly
divine and heavenly food, that a man may eat thereof and not die; that
is, not fall under the wrath of God, which is killing to the soul; not
die the second death; no, nor the first death finally and irrecoverably.
Not die, that is, not perish, not come short of the heavenly Canaan, as
the Israelites did of the earthly, for want of faith, though they had
manna. This is further explained by that promise in the next words: If
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, [Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051). This is the meaning of this
never dying: though he go down to death, he shall pass through it to
that world where there shall be no more death. To live for ever is not
to be for ever (the damned in hell shall be for ever, the soul of man
was made for an endless state), but to be happy for ever. And because
the body must needs die, and be as water spilt upon the ground, Christ
here undertakes for the gathering of that up too (as before, [Joh
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044), I will raise him up at the last
day); and even that shall live for ever.

(3.) He shows what encouragements we have to believe in Christ. Christ
here speaks of some who had seen him and yet believed not, [Joh
6:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#036). They saw his person and
miracles, and heard him preach, and yet were not wrought upon to believe
in him. Faith is not always the effect of sight; the soldiers were
eye-witnesses of his resurrection, and yet, instead of believing in him,
they belied him; so that it is a difficult thing to bring people to
believe in Christ: and, by the operation of the Spirit of grace, those
that have not seen have yet believed. Two things we are here assured of,
to encourage our faith: -

\[1.\] That the Son will bid all those welcome that come to him ([Joh
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037)): Him that cometh to me I will in
no wise cast out. How welcome should this word be to our souls which
bids us welcome to Christ! Him that cometh; it is in the singular
number, denoting favour, not only to the body of believers in general,
but to every particular soul that applies itself to Christ. Here, First,
The duty required is a pure gospel duty: to come to Christ, that we may
come to God by him. His beauty and love, those great attractives, must
draw us to him; sense of need and fear of danger must drive us to him;
any thing to bring us to Christ. Secondly, The promise is a pure gospel
promise: I will in no wise cast out - ou mē ekbagō exō. There are two
negatives: I will not, no, I will not. 1. Much favour is expressed here.
We have reason to fear that he should cast us out. Considering our
meanness, our vileness, our unworthiness to come, our weakness in
coming, we may justly expect that he should frown upon us, and shut his
doors against us; but he obviates these fears with this assurance, he
will not do it; will not disdain us though we are mean, will not reject
us though we are sinful. Do poor scholars come to him to be taught?
Though they be dull and slow, he will not cast them out. Do poor
patients come to him to be cured, poor clients come to him to be
advised? Though their case be bad, and though they come empty-handed, he
will in no wise cast them out. But, 2. More favour is implied than is
expressed; when it is said that he will no cast them out the meaning is,
He will receive them, and entertain them, and give them all that which
they come to him for. As he will not refuse them at their first coming,
so he will not afterwards, upon every displeasure, cast them out. His
gifts and callings are without repentance.

\[2.\] That the Father will, without fail, bring all those to him in due
time that were given him. In the federal transactions between the Father
and the Son, relating to man's redemption, as the Son undertook for the
justification, sanctification, and salvation, of all that should come to
him ("Let me have them put into my hands, and then leave the management
of them to me"), so the Father, the fountain and original of being,
life, and grace, undertook to put into his hand all that were given him,
and bring them to him. Now,

First, He here assures us that this shall be done: All that the Father
giveth me shall come to me, [Joh 6:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037).
Christ had complained ([Joh 6:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#036)) of
those who, though they had seen him, yet would not believe on him; and
then he adds this,

a\. For their conviction and awakening, plainly intimating that their
not coming to him, and believing on him, if they persisted in it, would
be a certain sign that they did not belong to the election of grace; for
how can we think that God gave us to Christ if we give ourselves to the
world and the flesh? [Pe2 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010).

b\. For his own comfort and encouragement: Though Israel be not
gathered, yet shall I be glorious. The election has obtained, and shall
though multitudes be blinded, [Rom
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007). Though he lose many of his
creatures, yet none of his charge: All that the Father gives him shall
come to him notwithstanding. Here we have, (a.) The election described:
All that the father giveth me, pan ho didōsi - every thing which the
Father giveth to me; the persons of the elect, and all that belongs to
them; all their services, all their interests. As all that he has is
theirs, so all that they have is his, and he speaks of them as his all:
they were given him in full recompense of his undertaking. Not only all
persons, but all things, are gathered together in Christ ([Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)) and reconciled, [Col
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020). The giving of the chosen remnant
to Christ is spoken of ([Joh 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039)) as
a thing done; he hath given them. Here it is spoken of as a thing in the
doing; he giveth them; because, when the first begotten was brought into
the world, it should seem, there was a renewal of the grant; see [Heb
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005), etc. God was now about to give
him the heathen for his inheritance ([Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)), to put him in possession of the
desolate heritages ([Isa 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)), to
divide him a portion with the great, [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012). And though the Jews, who saw
him, believed not on him, yet these (saith he) shall come to me; the
other sheep, which are not of this fold, shall be brought, [Joh
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015), [Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016). See [Act
13:45-48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045). (b.) The effect of it
secured: They shall come to me. This is not in the nature of a promise,
but a prediction, that as many as were in the counsel of God ordained to
life shall be brought to life by being brought to Christ. They are
scattered, are mingled among the nations, yet none of them shall be
forgotten; not a grain of God's corn shall be lost, as is promised, [Amo
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009). They are by nature alienated from
Christ, and averse to him, and yet they shall come. As God's omniscience
is engaged for the finding of them all out, so is his omnipotence for
the bringing of them all in. Not, They shall be driven, to me, but, They
shall come freely, shall be made willing.

Secondly, He here acquaints us how it shall be done. How shall those who
are given to Christ be brought to him? Two things are to be done in
order to it: -

a\. Their understandings shall be enlightened; this is promised, [Joh
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045), [Joh
6:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046). It is written in the prophets,
who spoke of these things before, And they shall be all taught of God;
this we find, [Isa 54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013), and [Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034). They shall all know me. Note,

(a.) In order to our believing in Jesus Christ, it is necessary that we
be taught of God; that is, \[a.\] That there be a divine revelation made
to us, discovering to us both what we are to believe concerning Christ
and why we are to believe it. There are some things which even nature
teaches, but to bring us to Christ there is need of a higher light.
\[b.\] That there be a divine work wrought in us, enabling us to
understand and receive these revealed truths and the evidence of them.
God, in giving us reason, teaches us more than the beasts of the earth;
but in giving us faith he teaches more than the natural man. Thus all
the church's children, all that are genuine, are taught of God; he hath
undertaken their education.

(b.) It follows then, by way of inference from this, that every man that
has heard and learned of the Father comes to Christ, [Joh
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045). \[a.\] It is here implied that
none will come to Christ but those that have heard and learned of the
Father. We shall never be brought to Christ but under a divine conduct;
except God by his grace enlighten our minds, inform our judgments, and
rectify our mistakes, and not only tell us that we may hear, but teach
us, that we may learn the truth as it is in Jesus, we shall never be
brought to believe in Christ. \[b.\] That this divine teaching does so
necessarily produce the faith of God's elect that we may conclude that
those who do not come to Christ have never heard nor learned of the
Father; for, if they had, doubtless they would have come to Christ. In
vain do men pretend to be taught of God if they believe not in Christ,
for he teaches no other lesson, [Gal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008), [Gal
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009). See how God deals with men as
reasonable creatures, draws them with the cords of a man, opens the
understanding first, and then by that, in a regular way, influences the
inferior faculties; thus he comes in by the door, but Satan, as a
robber, climbs up another way. But lest any should dream of a visible
appearance of God the Father to the children of men (to teach them these
things), and entertain any gross conceptions about hearing and learning
of the Father, he adds ([Joh 6:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)):
Not that any man hath seen the Father; it is implied, nor can see him,
with bodily eyes, or may expect to learn of him as Moses did, to whom he
spoke face to face; but God, in enlightening men's eyes and teaching
them, works in a spiritual way. The Father of spirits hath access to,
and influence upon, men's spirits, undiscerned. The Father of spirits
hath access to, and influence upon, men's spirits, undiscerned. Those
that have not seen his face have felt his power. And yet there is one
intimately acquainted with the Father, he who is of God, Christ himself,
he hath seen the Father, [Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018).
Note, First, Jesus Christ is of God in a peculiar manner, God of God,
light of light; not only sent of God, but begotten of God before all
worlds. Secondly, It is the prerogative of Christ to have seen the
Father, perfectly to know him and his counsels. Thirdly, Even that
illumination which is preparative to faith is conveyed to us through
Christ. Those that learn of the Father, forasmuch as they cannot see him
themselves, must learn of Christ, who alone hath seen him. As all divine
discoveries are made through Christ, so through him all divine powers
are exerted.

b\. Their wills shall be bowed. If the soul of man had now its original
rectitude there needed no more to influence the will than the
illumination of the understanding; but in the depraved soul of fallen
man there is a rebellion of the will against the right dictates of the
understanding; a carnal mind, which is enmity itself to the divine light
and law. It is therefore requisite that there be a work of grace wrought
upon the will, which is here called drawing, ([Joh
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)): No man can come to me except
the Father, who hath sent me, draw him. The Jews murmured at the
doctrine of Christ; not only would not receive it themselves, but were
angry that others did. Christ overheard their secret whisperings, and
said ([Joh 6:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#043)), "Murmur not among
yourselves; lay not the fault of your dislike of my doctrine one upon
another, as if it were because you find it generally distasted; no, it
is owing to yourselves, and your own corrupt dispositions, which are
such as amount to a moral impotency; your antipathies to the truths of
God, and prejudices against them, are so strong that nothing less than a
divine power can conquer them." And this is the case of all mankind: "No
man can come to me, can persuade himself to come up to the terms of the
gospel, except the Father, who hath sent me, draw him," [Joh
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044). Observe, (a.) The nature of the
work: It is drawing, which denotes not a force put upon the will,
whereby of unwilling we are made willing, and a new bias is given to the
soul, by which it inclines to God. This seems to be more than a moral
suasion, for by that it is in the power to draw; yet it is not to be
called a physical impulse, for it lies out of the road of nature; but he
that formed the spirit of man within him by his creating power, and
fashions the hearts of men by his providential influence, knows how to
new-mould the soul, and to alter its bent and temper, and make it
conformable to himself and his own will, without doing any wrong to its
natural liberty. It is such a drawing as works not only a compliance,
but a cheerful compliance, a complacency: Draw us, and we will run after
thee. (b.) The necessity of it: No man, in this weak and helpless state,
can come to Christ without it. As we cannot do any natural action
without the concurrence of common providence, so we cannot do any action
morally good without the influence of special grace, in which the new
man lives, and moves, and has its being, as much as the mere man has in
the divine providence. (c.) The author of it: The Father who hath sent
me. The Father, having sent Christ, will succeed him, for he would not
send him on a fruitless errand. Christ having undertaken to bring souls
to glory, God promised him, in order thereunto, to bring them to him,
and so to give him possession of those to whom he had given him a right.
God, having by promise given the kingdom of Israel to David, did at
length draw the hearts of the people to him; so, having sent Christ to
save souls, he sends souls to him to be saved by him. (d.) The crown and
perfection of this work: And I will raise him up at the last day. This
is four times mentioned in this discourse, and doubtless it includes all
the intermediate and preparatory workings of divine grace. When he
raises them up at the last day, he will put the last hand to his
undertaking, will bring forth the topstone. If he undertakes this,
surely he can do any thing, and will do every thing that is necessary in
order to do it. Let our expectations be carried out towards a happiness
reserved for the last day, when all the years of time shall be fully
complete and ended.

4\. Christ, having thus spoken of himself as the bread of life, and of
faith as the work of God, comes more particularly to show what of
himself is this bread, namely, his flesh, and that to believe is to eat
of that, [Joh 6:51-58](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051), where he still
prosecutes the metaphor of food. Observe, here, the preparation of this
food: The bread that I will give is my flesh ([Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)), the flesh of the Son of man and
his blood, [Joh 6:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053). His flesh is
meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, [Joh
6:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#055). observe, also, the participation
of this food: We must eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood ([Joh 6:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053)); and again ([Joh
6:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054)), Whoso eateth my flesh and
drinketh my blood; and the same words ([Joh
6:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056), [Joh
6:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057)), he that eateth me. This is
certainly a parable or figurative discourse, wherein the actings of the
soul upon things spiritual and divine are represented by bodily actions
about things sensible, which made the truths of Christ more intelligible
to some, and less so to others, [Mar
4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#011). Now,

(1.) Let us see how this discourse of Christ was liable to mistake and
misconstruction, that men might see, and not perceive. \[1.\] It was
misconstrued by the carnal Jews, to whom it was first delivered ([Joh
6:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#052)): They strove among themselves;
they whispered in each other's ears their dissatisfaction: How can this
man give us his flesh to eat? Christ spoke ([Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)) of giving his flesh for us, to
suffer and die; but they, without due consideration, understood it of
his giving it to us, to be eaten, which gave occasion to Christ to tell
them that, however what he said was otherwise intended, yet even that
also of eating of his flesh was no such absurd thing (if rightly
understood) as prima facie - in the first instance, they took it to be.
\[2.\] It has been wretchedly misconstrued by the church of Rome for the
support of their monstrous doctrine of transubstantiation, which gives
the lie to our senses, contradicts the nature of a sacrament, and
overthrows all convincing evidence. They, like these Jews here,
understand it of a corporal and carnal eating of Christ's body, like
Nicodemus, ch. 3, 4. The Lord's supper was not yet instituted, and
therefore it could have no reference to that; it is a spiritual eating
and drinking that is here spoken of, not a sacramental. \[3.\] It is
misunderstood by many ignorant carnal people, who hence infer that, if
they take the sacrament when they die, they shall certainly go to
heaven, which, as it makes many that are weak causelessly uneasy if they
want it, so it makes many that are wicked causelessly easy if they have
it. Therefore,

(2.) Let us see how this discourse of Christ is to be understood.

\[1.\] What is meant by the flesh and blood of Christ. It is called
([Joh 6:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053)), The flesh of the Son of
man, and his blood, his as Messiah and Mediator: the flesh and blood
which he assumed in his incarnation ([Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)), and which he gave up in his
death and suffering: my flesh which I will give to be crucified and
slain. It is said to be given for the life of the world, that is, First,
Instead of the life of the world, which was forfeited by sin, Christ
gives his own flesh as a ransom or counterprice. Christ was our bail,
bound body for body (as we say), and therefore his life must go for
ours, that ours may be spared. Here am I, let these go their way.
Secondly, In order to the life of the world, to purchase a general offer
of eternal life to all the world, and the special assurances of it to
all believers. So that the flesh and blood of the Son of man denote the
Redeemer incarnate and dying; Christ and him crucified, and the
redemption wrought out by him, with all the precious benefits of
redemption: pardon of sin, acceptance with God, the adoption of sons,
access to the throne of grace, the promises of the covenant, and eternal
life; these are called the flesh and blood of Christ, 1. Because they
are purchased by his flesh and blood, by the breaking of his body, and
shedding of his blood. Well may the purchased privileges be denominated
from the price that was paid for them, for it puts a value upon them;
write upon them pretium sanguinis - the price of blood. 2. Because they
are meat and drink to our souls. Flesh with the blood was prohibited
([Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004)), but the privileges of the
gospel are as flesh and blood to us, prepared for the nourishment of our
souls. He had before compared himself to bread, which is necessary food;
here to flesh, which is delicious. It is a feast of fat things, [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006). The soul is satisfied with
Christ as with marrow and fatness, [Psa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005). It is meat indeed, and drink
indeed; truly so, that is spiritually; so Dr. Whitby; as Christ is
called the true vine; or truly meat, in opposition to the shows and
shadows with which the world shams off those that feed upon it. In
Christ and his gospel there is real supply, solid satisfaction; that is
meat indeed, and drink indeed, which satiates and replenishes, [Jer
31:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#025), [Jer
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#026).

\[2.\] What is meant by eating this flesh and drinking this blood, which
is so necessary and beneficial; it is certain that is means neither more
nor less than believing in Christ. As we partake of meat and drink by
eating and drinking, so we partake of Christ and his benefits by faith:
and believing in Christ includes these four things, which eating and
drinking do: - First, It implies an appetite to Christ. This spiritual
eating and drinking begins with hungering and thirsting ([Mat
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)), earnest and importunate desires
after Christ, not willing to take up with any thing short of an interest
in him: "Give me Christ or else I die." Secondly, An application of
Christ to ourselves. Meat looked upon will not nourish us, but meat fed
upon, and so made our own, and as it were one with us. We must so accept
of Christ as to appropriate him to ourselves: my Lord, and my God, [Joh
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028). Thirdly, A delight in Christ
and his salvation. The doctrine of Christ crucified must be meat and
drink to us, most pleasant and delightful. We must feast upon the
dainties of the New Testament in the blood of Christ, taking as great a
complacency in the methods which Infinite Wisdom has taken to redeem and
save us as ever we did in the most needful supplies or grateful delights
of nature. Fourthly, A derivation of nourishment from him and a
dependence upon him for the support and comfort of our spiritual life,
and the strength, growth, and vigour of the new man. To feed upon Christ
is to do all in his name, in union with him, and by virtue drawn from
him; it is to live upon him as we do upon our meat. How our bodies are
nourished by our food we cannot describe, but that they are so we know
and find; so it is with this spiritual nourishment. Our Saviour was so
well pleased with this metaphor (as very significant and expressive)
that, when afterwards he would institute some outward sensible signs, by
which to represent our communicating of the benefits of his death, he
chose those of eating and drinking, and made them sacramental actions.

(3.) Having thus explained the general meaning of this part of Christ's
discourse, the particulars are reducible to two heads: -

\[1.\] The necessity of our feeding upon Christ ([Joh
6:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053)): Except you eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. That is,
First, "It is a certain sign that you have no spiritual life in you if
you have no desire towards Christ, nor delight in him." If the soul does
not hunger and thirst, certainly it does not live: it is a sign that we
are dead indeed if we are dead to such meat and drink as this. When
artificial bees, that by curious springs were made to move to and fro,
were to be distinguished from natural ones (they say), it was done by
putting honey among them, which the natural bees only flocked to, but
the artificial ones minded not, for they had no life in them. Secondly,
"It is certain that you can have no spiritual life, unless you derive it
from Christ by faith; separated from him you can do nothing." Faith in
Christ is the primum vivens - the first living principle of grace;
without it we have not the truth of spiritual life, nor any title to
eternal life: our bodies may as well live without meat as our souls
without Christ.

\[2.\] The benefit and advantage of it, in two things: -

First, We shall be one with Christ, as our bodies are with our food when
it is digested ([Joh 6:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056)): He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, that lives by faith in Christ
crucified (it is spoken of as a continued act), he dwelleth in me, and I
in him. By faith we have a close and intimate union with Christ; he is
in us, and we in him, [Joh 17:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021);
[Jo1 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024). Believers dwell in Christ
as their stronghold or city of refuge; Christ dwells in them as the
master of the house, to rule it and provide for it. Such is the union
between Christ and believers that he shares in their griefs, and they
share in his graces and joys; he sups with them upon their bitter herbs,
and they with him upon his rich dainties. It is an inseparable union,
like that between the body and digested food, [Rom
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035); [Jo1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013).

Secondly, We shall live, shall live eternally, by him, as our bodies
live by our food.

a\. We shall live by him ([Joh 6:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057)):
As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that
eateth me, even he shall live by me. We have here the series and order
of the divine life. (a.) God is the living Father, hath life in and of
himself. I am that I am is his name for ever. (b.) Jesus Christ, as
Mediator, lives by the Father; he has life in himself ([Joh
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)), but he has it of the Father. He
that sent him, not only qualified him with that life which was necessary
to so great an undertaking, but constituted him the treasury of divine
life to us; he breathed into the second Adam the breath of spiritual
lives, as into the first Adam the breath of natural lives. (c.) True
believers receive this divine life by virtue of their union with Christ,
which is inferred from the union between the Father and the Son, as it
is compared to it, [Joh 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021). For
therefore he that eateth me, or feeds on me, even he shall live by me:
those that live upon Christ shall live by him. The life of believers is
had from Christ ([Joh 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)); it is hid
with Christ ([Col 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)), we live by him
as the members by the head, the branches by the root; because he lives,
we shall live also.

b\. We shall live eternally by him ([Joh
6:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054)): Whoso eateth my flesh, and
drinketh my blood, as prepared in the gospel to be the food of souls, he
hath eternal life, he hath it now, as [Joh
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040). He has that in him which is
eternal life begun; he has the earnest and foretaste of it, and the hope
of it; he shall live for ever, [Joh
6:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#058). His happiness shall run parallel
with the longest line of eternity itself.

[John 6:60](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">joh 6:60</span></span>

We have here an account of the effects of Christ's discourse. Some were
offended and others edified by it; some driven from him and others
brought nearer to him.

I. To some it was a savour of death unto death; not only to the Jews,
who were professed enemies to him and his doctrine, but even to many of
his disciples, such as were disciples at large, who were his frequent
hearers, and followed him in public; a mixed multitude, like those among
Israel, that began all the discontents. Now here we have,

1\. Their murmurings at the doctrine they heard ([Joh
6:60](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060)): This is a hard saying, who can
hear it? (1.) They do not like it themselves: "What stuff is this? Eat
the flesh, and drink the blood, of the Son of man! If it is to be
understood figuratively, it is not intelligible; if literally, not
practicable. What! must we turn cannibals? Can we not be religious, but
we must be barbarous?" Si Christiani adorant quod comedunt (said
Averroes), sit anima mea cum philosophis - If Christians adore what they
eat, my mind shall continue with the philosophers. Now, when they found
it a hard saying, if they had humbly begged of Christ to have declared
unto them this parable, he would have opened it, and their
understandings too; for the meek will he teach his way. But they were
not willing to have Christ's sayings explained to them, because they
would not lose this pretence for rejecting them - that they were hard
sayings. (2.) They think it impossible that any one else should like it:
"Who can hear it? Surely none can." Thus the scoffers at religion are
ready to undertake that all the intelligent part of mankind concur with
them. They conclude with great assurance that no man of sense will admit
the doctrine of Christ, nor any man of spirit submit to his laws.
Because they cannot bear to be so tutored, so tied up, themselves, they
think none else can: Who can hear it? Thanks be to God, thousands have
heard these sayings of Christ, and have found them not only easy, but
pleasant, as their necessary food.

2\. Christ's animadversions upon their murmurings.

(1.) He well enough knew their murmurings, [Joh
6:61](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#061). Their cavils were secret in
their own breasts, or whispered among themselves in a corner. But,
\[1.\] Christ knew them; he saw them, he heard them. Note, Christ takes
notice not only of the bold and open defiances that are done to his name
and glory by daring sinners, but of the secret slights that are put upon
his doctrine by carnal professors; he knows that which the fool saith in
his heart, and cannot for shame speak out; he observes how his doctrine
is resented by those to whom it is preached; who rejoice in it, and who
murmur at it; who are reconciled to it, and bow before it, and who
quarrel with it, and rebel against it, though ever so secretly. \[2.\]
He knew it in himself, not by any information given him, nor any
external indication of the thing, but by his own divine omniscience. He
knew it not as the prophets, by a divine revelation made to him (that
which the prophets desired to know was sometimes hid from them, as [Kg2
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#027)), but by a divine knowledge in
him. He is that essential Word that discerns the thoughts of the heart,
[Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012), [Heb
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013). Thoughts are words to Christ; we
should therefore take heed not only what we say and do, but what we
think.

(2.) He well enough knew how to answer them: "Doth this offend you? Is
this a stumbling-block to you?" See how people by their own wilful
mistakes create offences to themselves: they take offence where there is
none given, and even make it where there is nothing to make it of. Note,
We may justly wonder that so much offence should be taken at the
doctrine of Christ for so little cause. Christ speaks of it here with
wonder: "Doth this offend you?" Now, in answer to those who condemned
his doctrine as intricate and obscure (Si non vis intelligi, debes
negligi - If you are unwilling to be understood, you ought to be
neglected),

\[1.\] He gives them a hint of his ascension into heaven, as that which
would give an irresistible evidence of the truth of his doctrine ([Joh
6:62](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#062)): What and if you shall see the
Son of man ascend up where he was before? And what then? First, "If I
should tell you of that, surely it would much more offend you, and you
would think my pretensions too high indeed. If this be so hard a saying
that you cannot hear it, how will you digest it when I tell you of my
returning to heaven, whence I came down?" See [Joh
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012). Those who stumble at smaller
difficulties should consider how they will get over greater. Secondly,
"When you see the Son of man ascend, this will much more offend you, for
then my body will be less capable of being eaten by you in that gross
sense wherein you now understand it;" so Dr. Whitby. Or, Thirdly, "When
you see that, or hear it from those that shall see it, surely then you
will be satisfied. You think I take too much upon me when I say, I came
down from heaven, for it was with this that you quarrelled ([Joh
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#042)); but will you think so when you
see me return to heaven?" If he ascended, certainly he descended, [Eph
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009), [Eph
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010). Christ did often refer himself
thus to subsequent proofs, as [Joh
1:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#050), [Joh
1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051); [Joh
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#014); [Mat
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040); [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064). Let us wait awhile, till the
mystery of God shall be finished, and then we shall see that there was
no reason to be offended at any of Christ's sayings.

\[2.\] He gives them a general key to this and all such parabolical
discourses, teaching them that they are to be understood spiritually,
and not after a corporal and carnal manner: It is the spirit that
quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing, [Joh
6:63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063). As it is in the natural body,
the animal spirits quicken and enliven it, and without these the most
nourishing food would profit nothing (what would the body be the better
for bread, if it were not quickened and animated by the spirit), so it
is with the soul. First, The bare participation of ordinances, unless
the Spirit of God work with them, and quicken the soul by them, profits
nothing; the word and ordinances, if the Spirit works with them, are as
food to a living man, if not, they are as food to a dead man. Even the
flesh of Christ, the sacrifice for sin, will avail us nothing unless the
blessed Spirit quicken our souls thereby, and enforce the powerful
influences of his death upon us, till we by his grace are planted
together in the likeness of it. Secondly, The doctrine of eating
Christ's flesh and drinking his blood, if it be understood literally,
profits nothing, but rather leads us into mistakes and prejudices; but
the spiritual sense or meaning of it quickens the soul, makes it alive
and lively; for so it follows: The words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life. To eat the flesh of Christ! this is a hard
saying, but to believe that Christ died for me, to derive from that
doctrine strength and comfort in my approaches to God, my oppositions to
sin and preparations for a future state, this is the spirit and life of
that saying, and, construing it thus, it is an excellent saying. The
reason why men dislike Christ's sayings if because they mistake them.
The literal sense of a parable does us no good, we are never the wiser
for it, but the spiritual meaning is instructive. Thirdly, The flesh
profits nothing - those that are in the flesh (so some understand it),
that are under the power of a carnal mind, profit not by Christ's
discourses; but the Spirit quickeneth - those that have the Spirit, that
are spiritual, are quickened and enlivened by them; for they are
received ad modum recipientis - so as to correspond with the state of
the receiver's mind. They found fault with Christ's sayings, whereas the
fault was in themselves; it is only to sensual minds that spiritual
things are senseless and sapless, spiritual minds relish them; see [Co1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014), [Co1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015).

\[3.\] He gives them an intimation of his knowledge of them, and that he
had expected no better from them, though they called themselves his
disciples, [Joh 6:64](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#064), [Joh
6:65](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#065). Now was fulfilled that of the
prophet, speaking of Christ and his doctrine ([Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)), Who hath believed our report?
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Both these Christ here
takes notice of.

First, They did not believe his report: "There are some of you who said
you would leave all to follow me who yet believe not;" and this was the
reason why the word preached did not profit them, because it was not
mixed with faith, [Heb 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002). They did
not believe him to be the Messiah, else they would have acquiesced in
the doctrine he preached, and not have quarrelled with it, though there
were some things in it dark, and hard to be understood. Oportet
discentum credere - Young beginners in learning must take things upon
their teacher's word. Note, 1. Among those who are nominal Christians,
there are many who are real infidels. 2. The unbelief of hypocrites,
before it discovers itself to the world, is naked and open before the
eyes of Christ. He knew from the beginning who they were of the
multitudes that followed him that believed, and who of the twelve should
betray him; he knew from the beginning of their acquaintance with him,
and attendance on him, when they were in the hottest pang of their zeal,
who were sincere, as Nathanael ([Joh
1:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)), and who were not. Before they
distinguished themselves by an overt act, he could infallibly
distinguish who believed and who did not, whose love was counterfeit and
whose cordial. We may gather hence, (1.) That the apostasy of those who
have long made a plausible profession of religion is a certain proof of
their constant hypocrisy, and that from the beginning they believed not,
but is not a proof of the possibility of the total and final apostasy of
any true believers: such revolts are not to be called the fall of real
saints, but the discovery of pretended ones; see [Jo1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019). Stella cadens non stella fuit -
The star that falls never was a star. (2.) That it is Christ's
prerogative to know the heart; he knows who they are that believe not,
but dissemble in their profession, and yet continues them room in his
church, the use of his ordinances, and the credit of his name, and does
not discover them in this world, unless they by their own wickedness
discover themselves; because such is the constitution of his visible
church, and the discovering day is yet to come. But, if we pretend to
judge men's hearts, we step into Christ's throne, and anticipate his
judgment. We are often deceived in men, and see cause to change our
sentiments of them; but this we are sure of, that Christ knows all men,
and his judgment is according to truth.

Secondly, The reason why they did not believe his report was because the
arm of the Lord was not revealed to them ([Joh
6:65](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#065)): Therefore said I unto you that
no man can come to me, except it be given unto him of my Father;
referring to [Joh 6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044). Christ
therefore could not but know who believed and who did not, because faith
is the gift and work of God, and all his Father's gifts and works could
not but be known to him, for they all passed through his hands. There he
had said that none could come to him, except the Father draw him; here
he saith, except it be given him of my Father, which shows that God
draws souls by giving them grace and strength, and a heart to come,
without which, such is the moral impotency of man, in his fallen state,
that he cannot come.

3\. We have here their final apostasy from Christ hereupon: From that
time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him, [Joh
6:66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#066). When we admit into our minds
hard thoughts of the word and works of Christ, and conceive a secret
dislike, and are willing to hear insinuations tending to their reproach,
we are then entering into temptation; it is as the letting forth of
water; it is looking back, which, if infinite mercy prevent not, will
end in drawing back; therefore Obsta principiis - Take heed of the
beginnings of apostasy. (1.) See here the backsliding of these
disciples. Many of them went back to their houses, and families, and
callings, which they had left for a time to follow him; went back, one
to his farm and another to his merchandise; went back, as Orpah did, to
their people, and to their gods, [Rut
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#015). They had entered themselves in
Christ's school, but they went back, did not only play truant for once,
but took leave of him and his doctrine for ever. Note, The apostasy of
Christ's disciples from him, though really a strange thing, yet has been
such a common thing that we need not be surprised at it. Here were many
that went back. It is often so; when some backslide many backslide with
them; the disease is infectious. (2.) The occasion of this backsliding:
From that time, from the time that Christ preached this comfortable
doctrine, that he is the bread of life, and that those who by faith feed
upon him shall live by him (which, one would think, should have engaged
them to cleave more closely to him) - from that time they withdrew.
Note, The corrupt and wicked heart of man often makes that an occasion
of offence which is indeed matter of the greatest comfort. Christ
foresaw that they would thus take offence at what he said, and yet he
said it. That which is the undoubted word and truth of Christ must be
faithfully delivered, whoever may be offended at it. Men's humours must
be captivated to God's word, and not God's word accommodated to men's
humours. (3.) The degree of their apostasy: They walked no more with
him, returned no more to him and attended no more upon his ministry. It
is hard for those who have been once enlightened, and have tasted the
good word of God, if they fall away, to renew them again to repentance,
[Heb 6:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004).

II\. This discourse was to others a savour of life unto life. Many went
back, but, thanks be to God, all did not; even then the twelve stuck to
him. Though the faith of some be overthrown, yet the foundation of God
stands sure. Observe here,

1\. The affectionate question which Christ put to the twelve ([Joh
6:67](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#067)): Will you also go away? He saith
nothing to those who went back. If the unbelieving depart, let them
depart; it was no great loss of those whom he never had; lightly come,
lightly go; but he takes this occasion to speak to the twelve, to
confirm them, and by trying their stedfastness the more to fix them:
Will you also go away? (1.) "It is at your choice whether you will or
no; if you will forsake me, now is the time, when so many do: it is an
hour of temptation; if you will go back, go now." Note, Christ will
detain none with him against their wills; his soldiers are volunteers,
not pressed men. The twelve had now had time enough to try how they
liked Christ and his doctrine, and that none of them might afterwards
say that they were trepanned into discipleship, and if it were to do
again they would not do it, he here allows them a power of revocation,
and leaves them at their liberty; as [Jos
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015); [Rut
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#015). (2.) "It is at your peril if you
do go away." If there was any secret inclination in the heart of any of
them to depart from him, he stops it with this awakening question, "Wilt
you also go away? Think not that you hang at as loose an end as they
did, and may go away as easily as they could. They have not been so
intimate with me as you have been, nor received so many favours from me;
they are gone, but will you also go? Remember your character, and say,
Whatever others do, we will never go away. Should such a man as I flee?"
[Neh 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#011). Note, The nearer we have
been to Christ and the longer we have been with him, the more
engagements we have laid ourselves under to him, the greater will be our
sin if we desert him. (3.) "I have reason to think you will not. Will
you go away? No, I have faster hold of you than so; I hope better things
of you ([Heb 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#009)), for you are they
that have continued with me," [Luk
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#028). When the apostasy of some is a
grief to the Lord Jesus, the constancy of others is so much the more his
honour, and he is pleased with it accordingly. Christ and believers know
one another too well to part upon every displeasure.

2\. The believing reply which Peter, in the name of the rest, made to
this question, [Joh 6:68](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#068), [Joh
6:69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#069). Christ put the question to them,
as Joshua put Israel to their choice whom they would serve, with design
to draw out from them a promise to adhere to him, and it had the like
effect. Nay, but we will serve the Lord, Peter was upon all occasions
the mouth of the rest, not so much because he had more of his Master's
ear than they, but because he had more tongue of his own; and what he
said was sometimes approved and sometimes reprimanded ([Mat
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017), [Mat
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)) - the common lot of those who
are swift to speak. This here was well said, admirably well; and
probably he said it by the direction, and with the express assent, of
his fellow-disciples; at least he knew their mind, and spoke the sense
of them all, and did not except Judas, for we must hope the best.

(1.) Here is a good resolution to adhere to Christ, and so expressed as
to intimate that they would not entertain the least thought of leaving
him: "Lord, to whom shall we go? It were folly to go from thee, unless
we knew where to better ourselves; no, Lord, we like our choice too well
to change." Note, Those who leave Christ would do well to consider to
whom they will go, and whether they can expect to find rest and peace
any where but in him. See [Psa 73:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#027),
[Psa 73:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028); [Hos
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#009). "Whither shall we go? Shall we
make our court to the world? It will certainly deceive us. Shall we
return to sin? It will certainly destroy us. Shall we leave the fountain
of living waters for broken cisterns?" The disciples resolve to continue
their pursuit of life and happiness, and will have a guide to it, and
will adhere to Christ as their guide, for they can never have a better.
"Shall we go to the heathen philosophers, and become their disciples?
They are become vain in their imaginations, and, professing themselves
to be wise in other things, are become fools in religion. Shall we go to
the scribes and Pharisees, and sit at their feet? What good can they do
us who have made void the commandments of God by their traditions? Shall
we go to Moses? He will send us back again to thee. Therefore, if ever
we find the way to happiness, it must be in following thee." Note,
Christ's holy religion appears to great advantage when it is compared
with other institutions, for then it will be seen how far it excels them
all. Let those who find fault with this religion find a better before
they quit it. A divine teacher we must have; can we find a better than
Christ? A divine revelation we cannot be without; if the scripture be
not such a one, where else may we look for it?

(2.) Here is a good reason for this resolution. It was not the
inconsiderate resolve of a blind affection, but the result of mature
deliberation. The disciples were resolved never to go away from Christ,

\[1.\] Because of the advantage they promised themselves by him: Thou
hast the words of eternal life. They themselves did not fully understand
Christ's discourse, for as yet the doctrine of the cross was a riddle to
them; but in the general they were satisfied that he had the words of
eternal life, that is, First, That the word of his doctrine showed the
way to eternal life, set it before us, and directed us what to do, that
we might inherit it. Secondly, That the word of his determination must
confer eternal life. His having the words of eternal life is the same
with his having power to give eternal life to as many as were given him,
[Joh 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002). He had in the foregoing
discourse assured eternal life to his followers; these disciples
fastened upon this plain saying, and therefore resolved to stick to him,
when the others overlooked this, and fastened upon the hard sayings, and
therefore forsook him. Though we cannot account for every mystery, every
obscurity, in Christ's doctrine, yet we know, in the general, that it is
the word of eternal life, and therefore must live and die by it; for if
we forsake Christ we forsake our own mercies.

\[2.\] Because of the assurance they had concerning him ([Joh
6:69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#069)): We believe, and are sure, that
thou art that Christ. if he be the promised Messiah, he must bring in an
everlasting righteousness ([Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)),
and therefore has the words of eternal life, for righteousness reigns to
eternal life, [Rom 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#021). observe,
First, The doctrine they believed: that this Jesus was the Messiah
promised to the fathers and expected by them, and that he was not a mere
man, but the Son of the living God, the same to whom God had said, Thou
art my Son, [Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007). In times of
temptation to apostasy it is good to have recourse to our first
principles, and stick to them; and, if we faithfully abide by that which
is past dispute, we shall be the better able both to find and to keep
the truth in matters of doubtful disputation. Secondly, The degree of
their faith: it rose up to a full assurance: We are sure. We have known
it by experience; this is the best knowledge. We should take occasion
from others' wavering to be so much the more established, especially in
that which is the present truth. When we have so strong a faith in the
gospel of Christ as boldly to venture our souls upon it, knowing whom we
have believed, then, and not till then, we shall be willing to venture
every thing else for it.

3\. The melancholy remark which our Lord Jesus made upon this reply of
Peter's ([Joh 6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070), [Joh
6:71](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#071)): Have not I chosen you twelve,
and one of you is a devil? And the evangelist tells us whom he meant: he
spoke of Judas Iscariot. Peter had undertaken for them all that they
would be faithful to their Master. Now Christ does not condemn his
charity (it is always good to hope the best), but he tacitly corrects
his confidence. We must not be too sure concerning any. God knows those
that are his; we do not. Observe here, (1.) Hypocrites and betrayers of
Christ are no better than devils. Judas not only had a devil, but he was
a devil. One of you is a false accuser; so diabolos sometimes signifies
([Ti2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#003)); and it is probable that
Judas, when he sold his Master to the chief priests, represented him to
them as a bad man, to justify himself in what he did. But I rather take
it as we read it: He is a devil, a devil incarnate, a fallen apostle, as
the devil a fallen angel. He is Satan, an adversary, an enemy to Christ.
He is Abaddon, and Apollyon, a son of perdition. He was of his father
the devil, did his lusts, was in his interests, as Cain, [Jo1
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012). Those whose bodies were
possessed by the devil are never called devils (demoniacs, but not
devils); but Judas, into whose heart Satan entered, and filled it, is
called a devil. (2.) Many that are seeming saints are real devils. Judas
had as fair an outside as many of the apostles; his venom was, like that
of the serpent, covered with a fine skin. He cast out devils, and
appeared an enemy to the devil's kingdom, and yet was himself a devil
all the while. Not only he will be one shortly, but he is one now. It is
strange, and to be wondered at; Christ speaks of it with wonder: Have
not I? It is sad, and to be lamented, that ever Christianity should be
made a cloak to diabolism. (3.) The disguises of hypocrites, however
they may deceive men, and put a cheat upon them, cannot deceive Christ,
for his piercing eye sees through them. He can call those devils that
call themselves Christians, like the prophet's greeting to Jeroboam's
wife, when she came to him in masquerade ([Kg1
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#006)): Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam.
Christ's divine sight, far better than any double sight, can see
spirits. (4.) There are those who are chosen by Christ to special
services who yet prove false to him: I have chosen you to the
apostleship, for it is expressly said that Judas was not chosen to
eternal life ([Joh 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018)), and yet one
of you is a devil. Note, Advancement to places of honour and trust in
the church is no certain evidence of saving grace. We have prophesied in
thy name. (5.) In the most select societies on this side heaven it is no
new thing to meet with those that are corrupt. Of the twelve that were
chosen to an intimate conversation with an incarnate Deity, as great an
honour and privilege as ever men were chosen to, one was an incarnate
devil. The historian lays an emphasis upon this, that Judas was one of
the twelve that were so dignified and distinguished. Let us not reject
and unchurch the twelve because one of them is a devil, nor say that
they are all cheats and hypocrites because one of them was so; let those
that are so bear the blame, and not those who, while they are
undiscovered, incorporate with them. There is a society within the veil
into which no unclean thing shall enter, a church of first-born, in
which are no false brethren.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 7](joh007)

</div>
