<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh007)  [Next](joh009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 8:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. Christ's evading the snare which the Jews
laid for him, in bringing to him a woman taken in adultery ([Joh
8:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001)). II. Divers discourses or
conferences of his with the Jews that cavilled at him, and sought
occasion against him, and made every thing he said a matter of
controversy. 1. Concerning his being the light of the world ([Joh
8:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)). 2. Concerning the ruin of
the unbelieving Jews ([Joh 8:21-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021)).
3. Concerning liberty and bondage ([Joh
8:31-37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031)). 4. Concerning his Father and
their father ([Joh 8:38-47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038)). 5. Here
is his discourse in answer to their blasphemous reproaches ([Joh
8:48-50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048)). 6. Concerning the
immortality of believers ([Joh
8:51-59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051)). And in all this he endured
the contradiction of sinners against himself.

[John 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 8:1</span></span>

Though Christ was basely abused in the foregoing chapter, both by the
rulers and by the people, yet here we have him still at Jerusalem, still
in the temple. How often would he have gathered them! Observe,

I. His retirement in the evening out of the town ([Joh
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001)): He went unto the mount of
olives; whether to some friend's house, or to some booth pitched there,
now at the feast of tabernacles, is not certain; whether he rested
there, or, as some think, continued all night in prayer to God, we are
not told. But he went out of Jerusalem, perhaps because he had no friend
there that had either kindness or courage enough to give him a night's
lodging; while his persecutors had houses of their own to go to ([Joh
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#053)), he could not so much as borrow
a place to lay his head on, but what he must go a mile or two out of
town for. He retired (as some think) because he would not expose himself
to the peril of a popular tumult in the night. It is prudent to go out
of the way of danger whenever we can do it without going out of the way
of duty. In the day-time, when he had work to do in the temple, he
willingly exposed himself, and was under special protection, [Isa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002). But in the night, when he had
not work to do, he withdrew into the country, and sheltered himself
there.

II\. His return in the morning to the temple, and to his work there,
[Joh 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#002). Observe,

1\. What a diligent preacher Christ was: Early in the morning he came
again, and taught. Though he had been teaching the day before, he taught
again today. Christ was a constant preacher, in season and out of
season. Three things were taken notice of here concerning Christ's
preaching. (1.) The time: Early in the morning. Though he lodged out of
town, and perhaps had spent much of the night in secret prayer, yet he
came early. When a day's work is to be done for God and souls it is good
to begin betimes, and take the day before us. (2.) The place: In the
temple; not so much because it was a consecrated place (for then he
would have chosen it at other times) as because it was now a place of
concourse; and he would hereby countenance solemn assemblies for
religious worship, and encourage people to come up to the temple, for he
had not yet left it desolate. (3.) His posture: He sat down, and taught,
as one having authority, and as one that intended to abide by it for
some time.

2\. How diligently his preaching was attended upon: All the people came
unto him; and perhaps many of them were the country-people, who were
this day to return home from the feast, and were desirous to hear one
sermon more from the mouth of Christ before they returned. They came to
him, though he came early. They that seek him early shall find him.
Though the rulers were displeased at those that came to hear him, yet
they would come; and he taught them, though they were angry at him too.
Though there were few or none among them that were persons of any
figure, yet Christ bade them welcome, and taught them.

III\. His dealing with those that brought to him the woman taken in
adultery, tempting him. The scribes and Pharisees would not only not
hear Christ patiently themselves, but they disturbed him when the people
were attending on him. Observe here,

1\. The case proposed to him by the scribes and Pharisees, who herein
contrived to pick a quarrel with him, and bring him into a snare, [Joh
8:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#003).

(1.) They set the prisoner to the bar ([Joh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#003)): they brought him a woman taken
in adultery, perhaps now lately taken, during the time of the feast of
tabernacles, when, it may be, their dwelling in booths, and their
feasting and joy, might, by wicked minds, which corrupt the best things,
be made occasions of sin. Those that were taken in adultery were by the
Jewish law to be put to death, which the Roman powers allowed them the
execution of, and therefore she was brought before the ecclesiastical
court. Observe, She was taken in her adultery. Though adultery is a work
of darkness, which the criminals commonly take all the care they can to
conceal, yet sometimes it is strangely brought to light. Those that
promise themselves secrecy in sin deceive themselves. The scribes and
Pharisees bring her to Christ, and set her in the midst of the assembly,
as if they would leave her wholly to the judgment of Christ, he having
sat down, as a judge upon the bench.

(2.) They prefer an indictment against her: Master, this woman was taken
in adultery, [Joh 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#004). Here they call
him Master whom but the day before they had called a deceiver, in hopes
with their flatteries to have ensnared him, as those, [Luk
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#020). But, though men may be imposed
upon with compliments, he that searches the heart cannot.

\[1.\] The crime for which the prisoner stands indicted is no less than
adultery, which even in the patriarchal age, before the law of Moses,
was looked upon as an iniquity to be punished by the judges, [Job
31:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009); [Gen
38:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024). The Pharisees, by their
vigorous prosecution of this offender, seemed to have a great zeal
against the sin, when it appeared afterwards that they themselves were
not free from it; nay, they were within full of all uncleanness, [Mat
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027), [Mat
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#028). Note, It is common for those
that are indulgent to their own sin to be severe against the sins of
others.

\[2.\] The proof of the crime was from the notorious evidence of the
fact, an incontestable proof; she was taken in the act, so that there
was no room left to plead not guilty. Had she not been taken in this
act, she might have gone on to another, till her heart had been
perfectly hardened; but sometimes it proves a mercy to sinners to have
their sin brought to light, that they may do no more presumptuously.
Better our sin should shame us than damn us, and be set in order before
us for our conviction than for our condemnation.

(3.) They produce the statute in this case made and provided, and upon
which she was indicted, [Joh 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#005).
Moses in the law commanded that such should be stoned. Moses commanded
that they should be put to death ([Lev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010); [Deu
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#022)), but not that they should be
stoned, unless the adulteress was espoused, not married, or was a
priest's daughter, [Deu 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#021). Note,
Adultery is an exceedingly sinful sin, for it is the rebellion of a vile
lust, not only against the command, but against the covenant, of our
God. It is the violation of a divine institution in innocency, by the
indulgence of one of the basest lusts of man in his degeneracy.

(4.) They pray his judgment in the case: "But what sayest thou, who
pretendest to be a teacher come from God to repeal old laws and enact
new ones? What hast thou to say in this case?" If they had asked this
question in sincerity, with a humble desire to know his mind, it had
been very commendable. Those that are entrusted with the administration
of justice should look up to Christ for direction; but this they said
tempting him, that they might have to accuse him, [Joh
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#006). \[1.\] If he should confirm the
sentence of the law, and let it take its course, they would censure him
as inconsistent with himself (he having received publicans and harlots)
and with the character of the Messiah, who should be meek, and have
salvation, and proclaim a year of release; and perhaps they would accuse
him to the Roman governor, for countenancing the Jews in the exercise of
a judicial power. But, \[2.\] If he should acquit her, and give his
opinion that the sentence should not be executed (as they expected he
would), they would represent him, First, As an enemy to the law of
Moses, and as one that usurped an authority to correct and control it,
and would confirm that prejudice against him which his enemies were so
industrious to propagate, that he came to destroy the law and the
prophets. Secondly, As a friend to sinners, and, consequently, a
favourer of sin; if he should seem to connive at such wickedness, and
let it go unpunished, they would represent him as countenancing it, and
being a patron of offences, if he was a protector of offenders, than
which no reflection could be more invidious upon one that professed the
strictness, purity, and business of a prophet.

2\. The method he took to resolve this case, and so to break this snare.

(1.) He seemed to slight it, and turned a deaf ear to it: He stooped
down, and wrote on the ground. It is impossible to tell, and therefore
needless to ask, what he wrote; but this is the only mention made in the
gospels of Christ's writing. Eusebius indeed speaks of his writing to
Abgarus, king of Edessa. Some think they have a liberty of conjecture as
to what he wrote here. Grotius says, It was some grave weighty saying,
and that it was usual for wise men, when they were very thoughtful
concerning any thing, to do so. Jerome and Ambrose suppose he wrote, Let
the names of these wicked men be written in the dust. Others this, The
earth accuses the earth, but the judgment is mine. Christ by this
teaches us to be slow to speak when difficult cases are proposed to us,
not quickly to shoot our bolt; and when provocations are given us, or we
are bantered, to pause and consider before we reply; think twice before
we speak once: The heart of the wise studies to answer. Our translation
from some Greek copies, which add, mē prospoioumenos (though most copies
have it not), give this account of the reason of his writing on the
ground, as though he heard them not. He did as it were look another way,
to show that he was not willing to take notice of their address, saying,
in effect, Who made me a judge or a divider? It is safe in many cases to
be deaf to that which it is not safe to answer, [Psa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013). Christ would not have his
ministers to be entangled in secular affairs. Let them rather employ
themselves in any lawful studies, and fill up their time in writing on
the ground (which nobody will heed), than busy themselves in that which
does not belong to them. But, when Christ seemed as though he heard them
not, he made it appear that he not only heard their words, but knew
their thoughts.

(2.) When they importunately, or rather impertinently, pressed him for
an answer, he turned the conviction of the prisoner upon the
prosecutors, [Joh 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#007).

\[1.\] They continued asking him, and his seeming not to take notice of
them made them the more vehement; for now they thought sure enough that
they had run him aground, and that he could not avoid the imputation of
contradicting either the law of Moses, if he should acquit the prisoner,
or his own doctrine of mercy and pardon, if he should condemn her; and
therefore they pushed on their appeal to him with vigour; whereas they
should have construed his disregard of them as a check to their design,
and an intimation to them to desist, as they tendered their own
reputation.

\[2.\] At last he put them all to shame and silence with one word: He
lifted up himself, awaking as one out of sleep ([Psa
78:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065)), and said unto them, He that is
without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.

First, Here Christ avoided the snare which they had laid for him, and
effectually saved his own reputation. He neither reflected upon the law
nor excused the prisoner's guilt, nor did he on the other hand encourage
the prosecution or countenance their heat; see the good effect of
consideration. When we cannot make our point by steering a direct
course, it is good to fetch a compass.

Secondly, In the net which they spread is their own foot taken. They
came with design to accuse him, but they were forced to accuse
themselves. Christ owns it was fit the prisoner should be prosecuted,
but appeals to their consciences whether they were fit to be the
prosecutors.

a\. He here refers to that rule which the law of Moses prescribed in the
execution of criminals, that the hand of the witnesses must be first
upon them ([Deu 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007)), as in the
stoning of Stephen, [Act 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058). The
scribes and Pharisees were the witnesses against this woman. Now Christ
puts it to them whether, according to their own law, they would dare to
be the executioners. Durst they take away that life with their hands
which they were now taking away with their tongues? would not their own
consciences fly in their faces if they did?

b\. He builds upon an uncontested maxim in morality, that it is very
absurd for men to be zealous in punishing the offences of others, while
they are every whit as guilty themselves, and they are not better than
self-condemned who judge others, and yet themselves do the same thing:
"If there be any of you who is without sin, without sin of this nature,
that has not some time or other been guilty of fornication or adultery,
let him cast the first stone at her." Not that magistrates, who are
conscious of guilt themselves, should therefore connive at others'
guilt. But therefore, (a.) Whenever we find fault with others, we ought
to reflect upon ourselves, and to be more severe against sin in
ourselves than in others. (b.) We ought to be favourable, though not to
the sins, yet to the persons, of those that offend, and to restore them
with a spirit of meekness, considering ourselves and our own corrupt
nature. Aut sumus, aut fuimus, vel possumus esse quod hic est - We
either are, or have been, or may be, what he is. Let this restrain us
from throwing stones at our brethren, and proclaiming their faults. Let
him that is without sin begin such discourse as this, and then those
that are truly humbled for their own sins will blush at it, and be glad
to let it drop. (c.) Those that are any way obliged to animadvert upon
the faults of others are concerned to look well to themselves, and keep
themselves pure ([Mat 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005)), Qui
alterum incusat probri, ipsum se intueri oportet. The snuffers of the
tabernacle were of pure gold.

c\. Perhaps he refers to the trial of the suspected wife by the jealous
husband with the waters of jealousy. The man was to bring her to the
priest ([Num 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015)), as the scribes and
Pharisees brought this woman to Christ. Now it was a received opinion
among the Jews, and confirmed by experience, that if the husband who
brought his wife to that trial had himself been at any time guilty of
adultery, Aquae non explorant ejus uxorem - The bitter water had no
effect upon the wife. "Come then," saith Christ, "according to your own
tradition will I judge you; if you are without sin, stand to the charge,
and let the adulteress be executed; but if not, though she be guilty,
while you that present her are equally so, according to your own rule
she shall be free."

d\. In this he attended to the great work which he came into the world
about, and that was to bring sinners to repentance; not to destroy, but
to save. He aimed to bring, not only the prisoner to repentance, by
showing her his mercy, but the prosecutors too, by showing them their
sins. They sought to ensnare him; he sought to convince and convert
them. Thus the blood-thirsty hate the upright, but the just seek his
soul.

\[3.\] Having given them this startling word, he left them to consider
of it, and again stooped down, and wrote on the ground, [Joh
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#008). As when they made their address
he seemed to slight their question, so now that he had given them an
answer he slighted their resentment of it, not caring what they said to
it; nay, they needed not to make any reply; the matter was lodged in
their own breasts, let them make the best of it there. Or, he would not
seem to wait for an answer, lest they should on a sudden justify
themselves, and then think themselves bound in honour to persist in it;
but gives them time to pause, and to commune with their own hearts. God
saith, I hearkened and heard, [Jer
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006). Some Greek copies here read, He
wrote on the ground, enos hekastou autōn tas hamartias - the sins of
every one of them; this he could do, for he sets our iniquities before
him; and this he will do, for he will set them in order before us too;
he seals up our transgressions, [Job
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017). But he does not write men's
sins in the sand; no, they are written as with a pen of iron and the
point of a diamond ([Jer 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)), never
to be forgotten till they are forgiven.

\[4.\] The scribes and Pharisees were so strangely thunderstruck with
the words of Christ that they let fall their persecution of Christ, whom
they durst no further tempt, and their prosecution of the woman, whom
they durst no longer accuse ([Joh
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#009)): They went out one by one.

First, Perhaps his writing on the ground frightened them, as the
hand-writing on the wall frightened Belshazzar. They concluded he was
writing bitter things against them, writing their doom. Happy they who
have no reason to be afraid of Christ's writing!

Secondly, What he said frightened them by sending them to their own
consciences; he had shown them to themselves, and they were afraid if
they should stay till he lifted up himself again his next word would
show them to the world, and shame them before men, and therefore they
thought it best to withdraw. They went out one by one, that they might
go out softly, and not by a noisy flight disturb Christ; they went away
by stealth, as people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle,
[Sa2 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#003). The order of their
departure is taken notice of, beginning at the eldest, either because
they were most guilty, or first aware of the danger they were in of
being put to the blush; and if the eldest quit the field, and retreat
ingloriously, no marvel if the younger follow them. Now see here, 1. The
force of the word of Christ for the conviction of sinners: They who
heard it were convicted by their own consciences. Conscience is God's
deputy in the soul, and one word from him will set it on work, [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012). Those that had been old in
adulteries, and long fixed in a proud opinion of themselves, were here,
even the oldest of them, startled by the word of Christ; even scribes
and Pharisees, who were most conceited of themselves, are by the power
of Christ's word made to retire with shame. 2. The folly of sinners
under these convictions, which appears in these scribes and Pharisees.
(1.) It is folly for those that are under convictions to make it their
principal care to avoid shame, as Judah ([Gen
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#023)), lest we be shamed. Our care
should be more to save our souls than to save our credit. Saul evidenced
his hypocrisy when he said, I have sinned, yet now honour me, I pray
thee. There is no way to get the honour and comfort of penitents, but by
taking the shame of penitents. (2.) It is folly for those that are under
convictions to contrive how to shift off their convictions, and to get
rid of them. The scribes and Pharisees had the wound opened, and now
they should have been desirous to have it searched, and then it might
have been healed, but this was the thing they dreaded and declined. (3.)
It is folly for those that are under convictions to get away from Jesus
Christ, as these here did, for he is the only one that can heal the
wounds of conscience, and speak peace to us. Those that are convicted by
their consciences will be condemned by their Judge, if they be not
justified by their Redeemer; and will they then go from him? To whom
will they go?

\[5.\] When the self-conceited prosecutors quitted the field, and fled
for the same, the self-condemned prisoner stood her ground, with a
resolution to abide by the judgment of our Lord Jesus: Jesus was left
alone from the company of the scribes and Pharisees, free from their
molestations, and the woman standing in the midst of the assembly that
were attending on Christ's preaching, where they set her, [Joh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#003). She did not seek to make her
escape, though she had opportunity for it; but her prosecutors had
appealed unto Jesus, and to him she would go, on him she would wait for
her doom. Note, Those whose cause is brought before our Lord Jesus will
never have occasion to remove it into any other court, for he is the
refuge of penitents. The law which accuses us, and calls for judgment
against us, is by the gospel of Christ made to withdraw; its demands are
answered, and its clamours silenced, by the blood of Jesus. Our cause is
lodged in the gospel court; we are left with Jesus alone, it is with him
only that we have now to deal, for to him all judgment is committed; let
us therefore secure our interest in him, and we are made for ever. Let
his gospel rule us, and it will infallibly save us.

\[6.\] Here is the conclusion of the trial, and the issue it was brought
to: Jesus lifted up himself, and he saw none but the woman, [Joh
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#010), [Joh
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#011). Though Christ may seem to take
no notice of what is said and done, but leave it to the contending sons
of men to deal it out among themselves, yet, when the hour of his
judgment is come, he will no longer keep silence. When David had
appealed to God, he prayed, Lift up thyself, [Psa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006), and [Psa
94:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#002). The woman, it is likely, stood
trembling at the bar, as one doubtful of the issue. Christ was without
sin, and might cast the first stone; but though none more severe than he
against sin, for he is infinitely just and holy, none more compassionate
than he to sinners, for he is infinitely gracious and merciful, and this
poor malefactor finds him so, now that she stands upon her deliverance.
Here is the method of courts of judicature observed.

First, The prosecutors are called: Where are those thine accusers? Hath
no man condemned thee? Not but that Christ knew where they were; but he
asked, that he might shame them, who declined his judgment, and
encourage her who resolved to abide by it. St. Paul's challenge is like
this, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? Where are
those their accusers? The accuser of the brethren shall be fairly cast
out, and all indictments legally and regularly quashed.

Secondly, They do not appear when the question is asked: Hath no man
condemned thee? She said, No man, Lord. She speaks respectfully to
Christ, calls him Lord, but is silent concerning her prosecutors, says
nothing in answer to that question which concerned them, Where are those
thine accusers? She does not triumph in their retreat nor insult over
them as witnesses against themselves, not against her. If we hope to be
forgiven by our Judge, we must forgive our accusers; and if their
accusations, how invidious soever, were the happy occasion of awakening
our consciences, we may easily forgive them this wrong. But she answered
the question which concerned herself, Has no man condemned thee? True
penitents find it enough to give an account of themselves to God, and
will not undertake to give an account of other people.

Thirdly, The prisoner is therefore discharged: Neither do I condemn
thee; go, and sin no more. Consider this,

(a.) As her discharge from the temporal punishment: "If they do not
condemn thee to be stoned to death, neither do I." Not that Christ came
to disarm the magistrate of his sword of justice, nor that it is his
will that capital punishments should not be inflicted on malefactors; so
far from this, the administration of public justice is established by
the gospel, and made subservient to Christ's kingdom: By me kings reign.
But Christ would not condemn this woman, (a.) Because it was none of his
business; he was no judge nor divider, and therefore would not
intermeddle in secular affairs. His kingdom was not of this world.
Tractent fabrilia fabri - Let every one act in his own province. (b.)
Because she was prosecuted by those that were more guilty than she and
could not for shame insist upon their demand of justice against her. The
law appointed the hands of the witnesses to be first upon the criminal,
and afterwards the hands of all the people, so that if they fly off, and
do not condemn her, the prosecution drops. The justice of God, in
inflicting temporal judgments, sometimes takes notice of a comparative
righteousness, and spares those who are otherwise obnoxious when the
punishing of them would gratify those that are worse than they, [Deu
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#026), [Deu
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027). But, when Christ dismissed her,
it was with this caution, Go, and sin no more. Impunity emboldens
malefactors, and therefore those who are guilty, and yet have found
means to escape the edge of the law, need to double their watch, lest
Satan get advantage; for the fairer the escape was, the fairer the
warning was to go and sin no more. Those who help to save the life of a
criminal should, as Christ here, help to save the soul with this
caution.

(b.) As her discharge from the eternal punishment. For Christ to say, I
do not condemn thee is, in effect, to say, I do forgive thee; and the
Son of man had power on earth to forgive sins, and could upon good
grounds give this absolution; for as he knew the hardness and impenitent
hearts of the prosecutors, and therefore said that which would confound
them, so he knew the tenderness and sincere repentance of the prisoner,
and therefore said that which would comfort her, as he did to that woman
who was a sinner, such a sinner as this, who was likewise looked upon
with disdain by a Pharisee ([Luk 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#048),
[Luk 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#050)): Thy sins are forgiven
thee, go in peace. So here, Neither do I condemn thee. Note, (a.) Those
are truly happy whom Christ doth not condemn, for his discharge is a
sufficient answer to all other challenges; they are all coram non judice
- before an unauthorized judge. (b.) Christ will not condemn those who,
though they have sinned, will go and sin no more, [Psa
85:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#008); [Isa
55:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#007). he will not take the advantage
he has against us for our former rebellions, if we will but lay down our
arms and return to our allegiance. (c.) Christ's favour to us in the
remission of the sins that are past should be a prevailing argument with
us to go and sin no more, [Rom 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001),
[Rom 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002). Will not Christ condemn
thee? Go then and sin no more.

[John 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 8:12</span></span>

The rest of the chapter is taken up with debates between Christ and
contradicting sinners, who cavilled at the most gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth. It is not certain whether these disputes
were the same day that the adulteress was discharged; it is probable
they were, for the evangelist mentions no other day, and takes notice
([Joh 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#002)) how early Christ began that
day's work. Though those Pharisees that accused the woman had absconded,
yet there were other Pharisees ([Joh
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013)) to confront Christ, who had
brass enough in their foreheads to keep them in countenance, though some
of their party were put to such a shameful retreat; nay perhaps that
made them the more industrious to pick quarrels with him, to retrieve,
if possible, the reputation of their baffled party. In these verses we
have,

I. A great doctrine laid down, with the application of it.

1\. The doctrine is, That Christ is the light of the world ([Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)): Then spoke Jesus again unto
them; though he had spoken a great deal to them to little purpose, and
what he had said was opposed, yet he spoke again, for he speaketh once,
yea, twice. They had turned a deaf ear to what he said, and yet he spoke
again to them, saying, I am the light of the world. Note, Jesus Christ
is the light of the world. One of the rabbies saith, Light is the name
of the Messiah, as it is written, [Dan
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#022), And light dwelleth with him. God
is light, and Christ is the image of the invisible God; God of gods,
Light of lights. He was expected to be a light to enlighten the Gentiles
([Luk 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032)), and so the light of the
world, and not of the Jewish church only. The visible light of the world
is the sun, and Christ is the Sun of righteousness. One sun enlightens
the whole world, so does one Christ, and there needs no more. Christ in
calling himself the light expresses, (1.) What he is in himself - most
excellent and glorious. (2.) What he is to the world - the fountain of
light, enlightening every man. What a dungeon would the world be without
the sun! So would it be without Christ by whom light came into the
world, [Joh 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019).

2\. The inference from this doctrine is, He that followeth me, as a
traveller follows the light in a dark night, shall not walk in darkness,
but shall have the light of life. If Christ be the light, then, (1.) It
is our duty to follow him, to submit ourselves to his guidance, and in
every thing take directions from him, in the way that leads to
happiness. Many follow false lights - ignes fatui, that lead them to
destruction; but Christ is the true light. It is not enough to look at
this light, and to gaze upon it, but we must follow it, believe in it,
and walk in it, for it is a light to our feet, not our eyes only. (2.)
It is the happiness of those who follow Christ that they shall not walk
in darkness. They shall not be left destitute of those instructions in
the way of truth which are necessary to keep them from destroying error,
and those directions in the way of duty which are necessary to keep them
from damning sin. They shall have the light of life, that knowledge and
enjoyment of God which will be to them the light of spiritual life in
this world and of everlasting life in the other world, where there will
be no death nor darkness. Follow Christ, and we shall undoubtedly be
happy in both worlds. Follow Christ, and we shall follow him to heaven.

II\. The objection which the Pharisees made against this doctrine, and
it was very trifling and frivolous: Thou bearest record of thyself; thy
record is not true, [Joh 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013). In this
objection they went upon the suspicion which we commonly have of men's
self-condemnation, which is concluded to be the native language of
self-love, such as we are all ready to condemn in others, but few are
willing to own in themselves. But in this case the objection was very
unjust, for, 1. They made that his crime, and a diminution to the
credibility of his doctrine, which in the case of one who introduced a
divine revelation was necessary and unavoidable. Did not Moses and all
the prophets bear witness of themselves when they avouched themselves to
be God's messengers? Did not the Pharisees ask John Baptist, What sayest
thou of thyself? 2. They overlooked the testimony of all the other
witnesses, which corroborated the testimony he bore of himself. Had he
only borne record of himself, his testimony had indeed been suspicious,
and the belief of it might have been suspended; but his doctrine was
attested by more than two or three credible witnesses, enough to
establish every word of it.

III\. Christ's reply to this objection, [Joh
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014). He does not retort upon them as
he might ("You profess yourselves to be devout and good men, but your
witness is not true"), but plainly vindicates himself; and, though he
had waived his own testimony ([Joh
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031)), yet here he abides by it, that
it did not derogate from the credibility of his other proofs, but was
necessary to show the force of them. He is the light of the world, and
it is the property of light to be self-evidencing. First principles
prove themselves. He urges three things to prove that his testimony,
though of himself, was true and cogent.

1\. That he was conscious to himself of his own authority, and
abundantly satisfied in himself concerning it. He did not speak as one
at uncertainty, nor propose a disputable notion, about which he himself
hesitated, but declared a decree, and gave such an account of himself as
he would abide by: I know whence I came, and whither I go. He was fully
apprised of his own undertaking from first to last; knew whose errand he
went upon, and what his success would be. He knew what he was before his
manifestation to the world, and what he should be after; that he came
from the Father, and was going to him ([Joh
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)), came from glory, and was going
to glory, ([Joh 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)). This is the
satisfaction of all good Christians, that though the world know them
not, as it knew him not, yet they know whence their spiritual life
comes, and whither it tends, and go upon sure grounds.

2\. That they are very incompetent judges of him, and of his doctrine,
and not to be regarded. (1.) Because they were ignorant, willingly and
resolvedly ignorant: You cannot tell whence I came, and whither I go. To
what purpose is it to talk with those who know nothing of the matter,
nor desire to know? He had told them of his coming from heaven and
returning to heaven, but it was foolishness to them, they received it
not; it was what the brutish man knows not, [Psa
92:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#006). They took upon them to judge of
that which they did not understand, which lay quite out of the road of
their acquaintance. Those that despise Christ's dominions and dignities
speak evil of what they know not, Jude, [Jde
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#008), [Jde
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#010). (2.) Because they were partial
([Joh 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#015)): You judge after the
flesh. When fleshly wisdom gives the rule of judgment, and outward
appearances only are given in evidence, and the case decided according
to them, then men judge after the flesh; and when the consideration of a
secular interest turns the scale in judging of spiritual matters, when
we judge in favour of that which pleases the carnal mind, and recommends
us to a carnal world, we judge after the flesh; and the judgment cannot
be right when the rule is wrong. The Jews judged of Christ and his
gospel by outward appearances, and, because he appeared so mean, thought
it impossible he should be the light of the world; as if the sun under a
cloud were no sun. (3.) Because they were unjust and unfair towards him,
intimated in this: "I judge no man; I neither make nor meddle with your
political affairs, nor does my doctrine or practice at all intrench
upon, or interfere with, your civil rights or secular powers." He thus
judged no man. Now, if he did not war after the flesh, it was very
unreasonable for them to judge him after the flesh, and to treat him as
an offender against the civil government. Or, "I judge no man," that is,
"not now in my first coming, that is deferred till I come again," [Joh
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017). Prima dispensatio Christi
medicinalis est, non judicialis - The first coming of Christ was for the
purpose of administering, not justice, but medicine.

3\. That his testimony of himself was sufficiently supported and
corroborated by the testimony of his Father with him and for him ([Joh
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#016)): And yet, if I judge, my
judgment is true. He did in his doctrine judge ([Joh
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039)), though not politically.
Consider him then,

(1.) As a judge, and his own judgment was valid: "If I judge, I who have
authority to execute judgments, I to whom all things are delivered, I
who am the Son of God, and have the Spirit of God, if I judge, my
judgment is true, of incontestable rectitude and uncontrollable
authority, [Rom 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#002). If I should
judge, my judgment must be true, and then you would be condemned; but
the judgment-day is not yet come, you are not yet to be condemned, but
spared, and therefore now I judge no man;" so Chrysostom. Now that which
makes his judgment unexceptionable is, \[1.\] His Father's concurrence
with him: I am not alone, but I and the Father. He has the Father's
concurring counsels to direct; as he was with the Father before the
world in forming the counsels, so the Father was with him in the world
in prosecuting and executing those counsels, and never left him inops
consilii - without advice, [Isa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002).
All the counsels of peace ( and of war too) were between them both, [Zac
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013). He had also the Father's
concurring power to authorize and confirm what he did; see [Psa
89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021), etc.; [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001). He did not act separately, but
in his own name and his Father's, and by the authority aforesaid, [Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017), and [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009), [Joh
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010). \[2.\] His Father's commission
to him: "It is the Father that sent me." Note, God will go along with
those that he sends; see [Exo 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#010),
[Exo 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012) : Come, and I will send
thee, and certainly I will be with thee. Now, if Christ had a commission
from the Father, and the Father's presence with him in all his
administrations, no doubt his judgment was true and valid; no exception
lay against it, no appeal lay from it.

(2.) Look upon him as a witness, and now he appeared no otherwise
(having not as yet taken the throne of judgment), and as such his
testimony was true and unexceptionable; this he shows, [Joh
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#017), [Joh
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#018), where,

\[1.\] He quotes a maxim of the Jewish law, [Joh
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#017). That the testimony of two men is
true. Not as if it were always true in itself, for many a time hand has
been joined in hand to bear a false testimony, [Kg1
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#010). But it is allowed as sufficient
evidence upon which to ground a verdict (verum dictum), and if nothing
appear to the contrary it is taken for granted to be true. Reference is
here had to that law ([Deu 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006)), At
the mouth of two witnesses shall he that is worthy of death be put to
death. And see [Deu 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#015); [Num
35:30](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#030). It was in favour of life that
in capital cases two witnesses wee required, as with us in case of
treason. See [Heb 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018).

\[2.\] He applies this to the case in hand ([Joh
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#018)): I am one that bear witness of
myself, and the Father that sent me bears witness of me. Behold two
witnesses! Though in human courts, where two witnesses are required, the
criminal or candidate is not admitted to be a witness for himself; yet
in a matter purely divine, which can be proved only by a divine
testimony, and God himself must be the witness, if the formality of two
or three witnesses be insisted on, there can be no other than the
eternal Father, the eternal Son of the Father, and the eternal Spirit.
Now if the testimony of two distinct persons, that are men, and
therefore may deceive or be deceived, is conclusive, much more ought the
testimony of the Son of God concerning himself, backed with the
testimony of his Father concerning him, to command assent; see [Jo1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007), [Jo1
5:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#009). Now this proves not only that
the Father and the Son are two distinct persons (for their respective
testimonies are here spoken of as the testimonies of two several
persons), but that these two are one, not only one in their testimony,
but equal in power and glory, and therefore the same in substance. St.
Austin here takes occasion to caution his hearers against Sabellianism
on the one hand, which confounded the persons in the Godhead, and
Arianism on the other, which denied the Godhead of the Son and Spirit.
Alius est filius, et alius pater, non tamed aliud, sed hoc ipsum est et
pater, et filius, scilicet unus Deus est - The Son is one Person, and
the Father is another; they do not, however, constitute two Beings, but
the Father is the same Being that the Son is, that is, the only true
God. Tract. 36, in Joann. Christ here speaks of himself and the Father
as witnesses to the world, giving in evidence to the reason and
conscience of the children of men, whom he deals with as men. And these
witnesses to the world now will in the great day be witnesses against
those that persist in unbelief, and their word will judge men.

This was the sum of the first conference between Christ and these carnal
Jews, in the conclusion of which we are told how their tongues were let
loose, and their hands tied.

First, How their tongues were let loose (such was the malice of hell) to
cavil at his discourse, [Joh 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019).
Though in what he said there appeared nothing of human policy or
artifice, but a divine security, yet they set themselves to cross
questions with him. None so incurably blind as those that resolve they
will not see. Observe,

a\. How they evaded the conviction with a cavil: Then said they unto
him, Where is thy Father? They might easily have understood, by the
tenour of this and his other discourses, that when he spoke of his
Father he meant no other than God himself; yet they pretend to
understand him of a common person, and, since he appeals to his
testimony, they bid him call his witness, and challenge him, if he can,
to produce him: Where is thy Father? Thus, as Christ said of them ([Joh
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#015)), they judge after the flesh.
Perhaps they hereby intend a reflection upon the meanness and obscurity
of his family: Where is thy Father, that he should be fit to give
evidence in such a case as this? Thus they turned it off with a taunt,
when they could not resist the wisdom and spirit with which he spoke.

b\. How he evaded the cavil with a further conviction; he did not tell
them where his Father was, but charged them with wilful ignorance: "You
neither know me nor my Father. It is to no purpose to discourse to you
about divine things, who talk of them as blind men do of colours. Poor
creatures! you know nothing of the matter." (a.) He charges them with
ignorance of God: "You know not my Father." In Judah was God known ([Psa
76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)); they had some knowledge of him
as the God that made the world, but their eyes were darkened that they
could not see the light of his glory shining in the face of Jesus
Christ. The little children of the Christian church know the Father,
know him as a Father ([Jo1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013)); but
these rulers of the Jews did not, because they would not so know him.
(b.) He shows them the true cause of their ignorance of God: If you had
known me, you would have known my Father also. The reason why men are
ignorant of God is because they are unacquainted with Jesus Christ. Did
we know Christ, \[a.\] In knowing him we should know the Father, of
whose person he is the express image, [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009). Chrysostom proves hence the
Godhead of Christ, and his equality with his Father. We cannot say, "He
that knows a man knows an angel," or, "He that knows a creature knows
the Creator;" but he that knows Christ knows the Father. \[b.\] By him
we should be instructed in the knowledge of God, and introduced into an
acquaintance with him. If we knew Christ better, we should know the
Father better; but, where the Christian religion is slighted and
opposed, natural religion will soon be lost and laid aside. Deism makes
way for atheism. Those become vain in their imaginations concerning God
that will not learn of Christ.

Secondly, See how their hands were tied, though their tongues were thus
let loose; such was the power of Heaven to restrain the malice of hell.
These words spoke Jesus, these bold words, these words of conviction and
reproof, in the treasury, an apartment of the temple, where, to be sure,
the chief priests, whose gain was their godliness, were mostly resident,
attending the business of the revenue. Christ taught in the temple,
sometimes in one part, sometimes in another, as he saw occasion. Now the
priests who had so great a concern in the temple, and looked upon it as
their demesne, might easily, with the assistance of the janizaries that
were at their beck, either have seized him and exposed him to the rage
of the mob, and that punishment which they called the beating of the
rebels; or, at least, have silenced him, and stopped his mouth there, as
Amos, though tolerated in the land of Judah, was forbidden to prophesy
in the king's chapel, [Amo 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#012), [Amo
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#013). Yet even in the temple, where
they had him in their reach, no man laid hands on him, for his hour was
not yet come. See here, 1. The restraint laid upon his persecutors by an
invisible power; none of them durst meddle with him. God can set bounds
to the wrath of men, as he does to the waves of the sea. Let us not
therefore fear danger in the way of duty; for God hath Satan and all his
instruments in a chain. 2. The reason of this restraint: His hour was
not yet come. The frequent mention of this intimates how much the time
of our departure out of the world depends upon the fixed counsel and
decree of God. It will come, it is coming; not yet come, but it is at
hand. Our enemies cannot hasten it any sooner, nor our friends delay it
any longer, than the time appointed of the Father, which is very
comfortable to every good man, who can look up and say with pleasure, My
times are in thy hands; and better there than in our own. His hour was
not yet come, because his work was not done, nor his testimony finished.
To all God's purposes there is a time.

[John 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 8:21</span></span>

Christ here gives fair warning to the careless unbelieving Jews to
consider what would be the consequence of their infidelity, that they
might prevent it before it was too late; for he spoke words of terror as
well as words of grace. Observe here,

I. The wrath threatened ([Joh 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021)):
Jesus said again unto them that which might be likely to do them good.
He continued to teach, in kindness to those few who received his
doctrine, though there were many that resisted it, which is an example
to ministers to go on with their work, notwithstanding opposition,
because a remnant shall be saved. Here Christ changes his voice; he had
piped to them in the offers of his grace, and they had not danced; now
he mourns to them in the denunciations of his wrath, to try if they
would lament. He said, I go my way, and you shall seek me, and shall die
in your sins. Whither I go you cannot come. Every word is terrible, and
bespeaks spiritual judgments, which are the sorest of all judgments;
worse than war, pestilence, and captivity, which the Old Testament
prophets denounced. Four things are here threatened against the Jews.

1\. Christ's departure from them: I go my way, that is, "It shall not be
long before I go; you need not take so much pains to drive me from you,
I shall go of myself." They said to him, Depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways; and he takes them at their word; but woe to
those from whom Christ departs. Ichabod, the glory is gone, our defence
is departed, when Christ goes. Christ frequently warned them of his
departure before he left them: he bade often farewell, as one loth to
depart, and willing to be invited, and that would have them stir up
themselves to take hold on him.

2\. Their enmity to the true Messiah, and their fruitless and infatuated
enquiries after another Messiah when he was gone away, which were both
their sin and their punishment: You shall seek me, which intimates
either, (1.) Their enmity to the true Christ: "You shall seek to ruin my
interest, by persecuting my doctrine and followers, with a fruitless
design to root them out." This was a continual vexation and torment to
themselves, made them incurably ill-natured, and brought wrath upon them
(God's and their own) to the uttermost. Or, (2.) Their enquiries after
false Christs: "You shall continue your expectations of the Messiah, and
be the self-perplexing seekers of a Christ to come, when he is already
come;" like the Sodomites, who, being struck with blindness, wearied
themselves to find the door. See [Rom
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031), [Rom
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032).

3\. Their final impenitency: You shall die in your sins. Here is an
error in all our English Bibles, even the old bishops' translation, and
that of Geneva (the Rhemists only excepted), for all the Greek copies
have it in the singular number, en tē hamartia humōn - in your sin, so
all the Latin versions; and Calvin has a note upon the difference
between this and [Joh 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#024), where it
is plural, tais hamartiais, that here it is meant especially of the sin
of unbelief, in hoc peccato vestro - in this sin of yours. Note, Those
that live in unbelief are for ever undone if they die in unbelief. Or,
it may be understood in general, You shall die in your iniquity, as [Eze
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#019), and [Eze
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#009). Many that have long lived in sin
are, through grace, saved by a timely repentance from dying in sin; but
for those who go out of this world of probation into that of retribution
under the guilt of sin unpardoned, and the power of sin unbroken, there
remaineth no relief: salvation itself cannot save them, [Job
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011); [Eze
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#027).

4\. Their eternal separation from Christ and all happiness in him:
Whither I go you cannot come. When Christ left the world, he went to a
state of perfect happiness; he went to paradise. Thither he took the
penitent thief with him, that did not die in his sins; but the
impenitent not only shall not come to him, but they cannot; it is
morally impossible, for heaven would not be heaven to those that die
unsanctified and unmeet for it. You cannot come, because you have no
right to enter into that Jerusalem, [Rev
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014). Whither I go you cannot come,
to fetch me thence, so Dr. Whitby; and the same is the comfort of all
good Christians, that, when they get to heaven, they will be out of the
reach of their enemies' malice.

II\. The jest they made of this threatening. Instead of trembling at
this word, they bantered it, and turned it into ridicule ([Joh
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#022)): Will he kill himself? See here,
1. What slight thoughts they had of Christ's threatenings; they could
make themselves and one another merry with them, as those that mocked
the messengers of the Lord, and turned the burden of the word of the
Lord into a by-word, and precept upon precept, line upon line, into a
merry song, [Isa 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#013). But be ye not
mockers, lest your bands be made strong. 2. What ill thoughts they had
of Christ's meaning, as if he had an inhuman design upon his own life,
to avoid the indignities done him, like Saul. This is indeed (say they)
to go whither we cannot follow him, for we will never kill ourselves.
Thus they make him not only such a one as themselves, but worse; yet in
the calamities brought by the Romans upon the Jews many of them in
discontent and despair did kill themselves. They had put a much more
favourable construction upon this word of his ([Joh
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034), [Joh
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035)): Will he go to the dispersed
among the Gentiles? But see how indulged malice grows more and more
malicious.

III\. The confirmation of what he had said.

1\. He had said, Whither I go you cannot come, and here he gives the
reason for this ([Joh 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023)): You are
from beneath, I am from above; you are of this world, I am not of this
world. You are ek tōn katō - of those things which are beneath; noting,
not so much their rise from beneath as their affection to these lower
things: "You are in with these things, as those that belong to them; how
can you come where I go, when your spirit and disposition are so
directly contrary to mine?" See here, (1.) What the spirit of the Lord
Jesus was - not of this world, but from above. He was perfectly dead to
the wealth of the world, the ease of the body, and the praise of men,
and was wholly taken up with divine and heavenly things; and none shall
be with him but those who are born from above and have their
conversation in heaven. (2.) How contrary to this their spirit was: "You
are from beneath, and of this world." The Pharisees were of a carnal
worldly spirit; and what communion could Christ have with them?

2\. He had said, You shall die in your sins, and here he stand to it:
"Therefore I said, You shall die in your sins, because you are from
beneath;" and he gives this further reason for it, If you believe not
that I am he, you shall die in your sins, [Joh
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#024). See here, (1.) What we are
required to believe: that I am he, hoti egō eimi - that I am, which is
one of God's names, [Exo 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014). It was
the Son of God that there said, Ehejeh asher Ehejeh - I will be what I
will be; for the deliverance of Israel was but a figure of good things
to come, but now he saith, "I am he; he that should come, he that you
expect the Messias to be, that you would have me to be to you. I am more
than the bare name of the Messiah; I do not only call myself so, but I
am he." True faith does not amuse the soul with an empty sound of words,
but affects it with the doctrine of Christ's mediation, as a real thing
that has real effects. (2.) How necessary it is that we believe this. If
we have not this faith, we shall die in our sins; for the matter is so
settled that without this faith, \[1.\] We cannot be saved from the
power of sin while we live, and therefore shall certainly continue in it
to the last. Nothing but the doctrine of Christ's grace will be an
argument powerful enough, and none but the Spirit of Christ's grace will
be an agent powerful enough, to turn us from sin to God; and that Spirit
is given, and that doctrine given, to be effectual to those only who
believe in Christ: so that, if Satan be not by faith dispossessed, he
has a lease of the soul for its life; if Christ do not cure us, our case
is desperate, and we shall die in our sins. \[2.\] Without faith we
cannot be saved from the punishment of sin when we die, for the wrath of
God remains upon them that believe not, [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016). Unbelief is the damning sin; it
is a sin against the remedy. Now this implies the great gospel promise:
If we believe that Christ is he, and receive him accordingly, we shall
not die in our sins. The law saith absolutely to all, as Christ said
([Joh 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021)), You shall die in your
sins, for we are all guilty before God; but the gospel is a defeasance
of the obligation upon condition of believing. The curse of the law is
vacated and annulled to all that submit to the grace of the gospel.
Believers die in Christ, in his love, in his arms, and so are saved from
dying in their sins.

IV\. Here is a further discourse concerning himself, occasioned by his
requiring faith in himself as the condition of salvation, [Joh
8:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025). Observe,

1\. The question which the Jews put to him ([Joh
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025)): Who art thou? This they asked
tauntingly, and not with any desire to be instructed. he had said, You
must believe that I am he. By his not saying expressly who he was, he
plainly intimated that in his person he was such a one as could not be
described by any, and in his office such a one as was expected by all
that looked for redemption in Israel; yet this awful manner of speaking,
which had so much significancy in it, they turned to his reproach, as if
he knew not what to say of himself: "Who art thou, that we must with an
implicit faith believe in thee, that thou art some mighty HE, we know
not who or what, nor are worthy to know?"

2\. His answer to this question, wherein he directs them three ways for
information: -

(1.) He refers them to what he had said all along: "Do you ask who I am?
Even the same that I said unto you from the beginning." The original
here is a little intricate, tēn archēn ho ti kai lalō humin which some
read thus: I am the beginning, which also I speak unto you. So Austin
takes it. Christ is called Archē - the beginning ([Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018); [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008); [Rev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006); [Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)), and so it agrees with [Joh
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#024), I am he. Compare [Isa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004) : I am the first, I am he. Those
who object that it is the accusative case, and therefore not properly
answering to tis ei, must undertake to construe by grammar rules that
parallel expression, [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008), ho ēn.
But most interpreters agree with our version, Do you ask who I am?
\[1.\] I am the same that I said to you from the beginning of time in
the scriptures of the Old Testament, the same that from the beginning
was said to be the Seed of the woman, that should break the serpent's
head, the same that in all the ages of the church was the Mediator of
the covenant, and the faith of the patriarchs. \[2.\] From the beginning
of my public ministry. The account he had already given of himself he
resolved to abide by; he had declared himself to be the Son of God ([Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)), to be the Christ ([Joh
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#026)), and the bread of life, and had
proposed himself as the object of that faith which is necessary to
salvation, and to this he refers them for an answer to their question.
Christ is one with himself; what he had said from the beginning, he
saith still. His is an everlasting gospel.

(2.) He refers them to his Father's judgment, and the instructions he
had from him ([Joh 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#026)): "I have many
things, more than you think of, to say, and in them to judge of you. But
why should I trouble myself any further with you? I know very well that
he who sent me is true, and will stand by me, and bear me out, for I
speak to the world (to which I am sent as an ambassador) those things,
all those and those only, which I have heard of him." Here,

\[1.\] He suppresses his accusation of them. He had many things to
charge them with, and many evidences to produce against them; but for
the present he had said enough. Note, Whatever discoveries of sin are
made to us, he that searches the heart has still more to judge of us,
[Jo1 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#020). How much soever God reckons
with sinners in this world there is still a further reckoning yet
behind, [Deu 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034). Let us learn hence
not to be forward to say all we can say, even against the worst of men;
we may have many things to say, by way of censure, which yet it is
better to leave unsaid, for what is it to us?

\[2.\] He enters his appeal against them to his Father: He that sent me.
Here two things comfort him: - First, That he had been true to his
Father, and to the trust reposed in him: I speak to the world (for his
gospel was to be preached to every creature) those things which I have
heard of him. Being given for a witness to the people ([Isa
55:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004)), he was Amen, a faithful
witness, [Rev 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014). He did not conceal
his doctrine, but spoke it to the world (being of common concern, it was
to be of common notice); nor did he change or alter it, nor vary from
the instructions he received from him that sent him. Secondly, That his
Father would be true to him; true to the promise that he would make his
mouth like a sharp sword; true to his purpose concerning him, which was
a decree ([Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)); true to the
threatenings of his wrath against those that should reject him. Though
he should not accuse them to his Father, yet the Father, who sent him,
would undoubtedly reckon with them, and would be true to what he had
said ([Deu 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019)), that whosoever
would not hearken to that prophet whom God would raise up he would
require it of him. Christ would not accuse them; "for," saith he, "he
that sent me is true, and will pass judgment on them, though I should
not demand judgment against them." Thus, when he lets fall the present
prosecution, he binds them over to the judgment-day, when it will be too
late to dispute what they will not now be persuaded to believe. I, as a
deaf man, heard not; for thou wilt hear, [Psa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013), [Psa
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015). Upon this part of our Saviour's
discourse the evangelist has a melancholy remark ([Joh
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#027)): They understood not that he
spoke to them of the Father. See here, 1. The power of Satan to blind
the minds of those who believe not. Though Christ spoke so plainly of
God as his Father in heaven, yet they did not understand whom he meant,
but thought he spoke of some father he had in Galilee. Thus the plainest
things are riddles and parables to those who are resolved to hold fast
their prejudices; day and night are alike to the blind. 2. The reason
why the threatenings of the word make so little impression upon the
minds of sinners; it is because they understand not whose the wrath is
that is revealed in them. When Christ told them of the truth of him that
sent him, as a warning to them to prepare for his judgment, which is
according to truth, they slighted the warning, because they understood
not to whose judgment it was that they made themselves obnoxious.

(3.) He refers them to their own convictions hereafter, [Joh
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028), [Joh
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029). He finds they will not
understand him, and therefore adjourns the trial till further evidence
should come in; they that will not see shall see, [Isa
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#011). Now observe here,

\[1.\] What they should ere long be convinced of: "You shall know that I
am he, that Jesus is the true Messiah. Whether you will own it or no
before men, you shall be made to know it in your own consciences, the
convictions of which, though you may stifle, yet you cannot baffle: that
I am he, not that you represent me to be, but he that I preach myself to
be, he that should come!" Two things they should be convinced of, in
order to this: - First, That he did nothing of himself, not of himself
as man, of himself alone, of himself without the Father, with whom he
was one. He does not hereby derogate from his own inherent power, but
only denies their charge against him as a false prophet; for of false
prophets it is said that they prophesied out of their own hearts, and
followed their own spirits. Secondly, That as his Father taught him so
he spoke these things, that he was not autodidaktos - selftaught, but
Theodidaktos - taught of God. The doctrine he preached was the
counterpart of the counsels of God, with which he was intimately
acquainted; kathōs edidaxe, tauta lalō - I speak those things, not only
which he taught me, but as he taught me, with the same divine power and
authority.

\[2.\] When they should be convinced of this: When you have lifted up
the Son of man, lifted him up upon the cross, as the brazen serpent upon
the pole ([Joh 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)), as the
sacrifices under the law (for Christ is the great sacrifice), which,
when they were offered, were said to be elevated, or lifted up; hence
the burnt-offerings, the most ancient and honourable of all, were called
elevations (Gnoloth from Gnolah, asendit - he ascended), and in many
other offerings they used the significant ceremony of heaving the
sacrifice up, and moving it before the Lord; thus was Christ lifted up.
Or the expression denotes that his death was his exaltation. They that
put him to death thought thereby for ever to have sunk him and his
interest, but it proved to be the advancement of both, [Joh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024). When the Son of man was
crucified, the Son of man was glorified. Christ had called his dying his
going away; here he calls it his being lifted up; thus the death of the
saints, as it is their departure out of this world, so it is their
advancement to a better. Observe, He speaks of those he is now talking
with as the instruments of his death: when you have lifted up the Son of
man; not that they were to be the priests to offer him up (no, that was
his own act, he offered up himself), but they would be his betrayers and
murderers; see [Act 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023). They lifted
him up to the cross, but then he lifted up himself to his Father.
Observe with what tenderness and mildness Christ here speaks to those
who he certainly knew would put him to death, to teach us not to hate or
seek the hurt of any, though we may have reason to think they hate us
and seek our hurt. Now, Christ speaks of his death as that which would
be a powerful conviction of the infidelity of the Jews. When you have
lifted up the Son of man, then shall you know this. And why then? First,
Because careless and unthinking people are often taught the worth of
mercies by the want of them, [Luk
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#022). Secondly, The guilt of their
sin in putting Christ to death would so awaken their consciences that
they would be put upon serious enquiries after a Saviour, and then would
know that Jesus was he who alone could save them. And so it proved,
when, being told that with wicked hands they had crucified and slain the
Son of God, they cried out, What shall we do? and were made to know
assuredly that this Jesus was Lord and Christ, [Act
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036). Thirdly, There would be such
signs and wonders attending his death, and the lifting of him up from
death in his resurrection, as would give a stronger proof of his being
the Messiah than any that had been yet given: and multitudes were hereby
brought to believe that Jesus is the Christ, who had before contradicted
and opposed him. Fourthly, By the death of Christ the pouring out of the
Spirit was purchased, who would convince the world that Jesus is he,
[Joh 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007), [Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008). Fifthly, The judgments which the
Jews brought upon themselves, by putting Christ to death, which filled
up the measure of their iniquity, were a sensible conviction to the most
hardened among them that Jesus was he. Christ had often foretold that
desolation as the just punishment of their invincible unbelief, and when
it came to pass (lo, it did come) they could not but know that the great
prophet had been among them, [Eze
33:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#033).

\[3.\] What supported our Lord Jesus in the mean time ([Joh
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029)): He that sent me is with me, in
my whole undertaking; for the Father (the fountain and first spring of
this affair, from whom as its great cause and author it is derived) hath
not left me alone, to manage it myself, hath not deserted the business
nor me in the prosecution of it, for do I always those things that
please him. Here is,

First, The assurance which Christ had of his Father's presence with him,
which includes both a divine power going along with him to enable him
for his work, and a divine favour manifested to him to encourage him in
it. He that sent me is with me, [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001); [Psa
89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021). This greatly emboldens our
faith in Christ and our reliance upon his word that he had, and knew he
had, his Father with him, to confirm the word of his servant, [Isa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026). The King of kings accompanied
his own ambassador, to attest his mission and assist his management, and
never left him alone, either solitary or weak; it also aggravated the
wickedness of those that opposed him, and was an intimation to them of
the premunire they ran themselves into by resisting him, for thereby
they were found fighters against God. How easily soever they might think
to crush him and run him down, let them know he had one to back him with
whom it is the greatest madness that can be to contend.

Secondly, The ground of this assurance: For I do always those things
that please him. That is, 1. That great affair in which our Lord Jesus
was continually engaged was an affair which the Father that sent him was
highly well pleased with. His whole undertaking is called the pleasure
of the Lord ([Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010)), because of
the counsels of the eternal mind about it, and the complacency of the
eternal mind in it. 2. His management of that affair was in nothing
displeasing to his Father; in executing his commission he punctually
observed all his instructions, and did in nothing vary from them. No
mere man since the fall could say such a word as this (for in many
things we offend all) but our Lord Jesus never offended his Father in
any thing, but, as became him, he fulfilled all righteousness. This was
necessary to the validity and value of the sacrifice he was to offer up;
for if he had in any thing displeased the Father himself, and so had had
any sin of his own to answer for, the Father could not have been pleased
with him as a propitiation for our sins; but such a priest and such a
sacrifice became us as was perfectly pure and spotless. We may likewise
learn hence that God's servants may then expect God's presence with them
when they choose and do those things that please him, [Isa
66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004), [Isa
66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005).

V. Here is the good effect which this discourse of Christ's had upon
some of his hearers ([Joh 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#030)): As he
spoke these words many believed on him. Note, 1. Though multitudes
perish in their unbelief, yet there is a remnant according to the
election of grace, who believe to the saving of the soul. If Israel, the
whole body of the people, be not gathered, yet there are those of them
in whom Christ will be glorious, [Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005). This the apostle insists upon,
to reconcile the Jews' rejection with the promises made unto their
fathers. There is a remnant, [Rom
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005). 2. The words of Christ, and
particularly his threatening words, are made effectual by the grace of
God to bring in poor souls to believe in him. When Christ told them that
if they believed not they should die in their sins, and never get to
heaven, they thought it was time to look about them, [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016), [Rom
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018). 3. Sometimes there is a wide
door opened, and an effectual one, even where they are many adversaries.
Christ will carry on his work, though the heathen rage. The gospel
sometimes gains great victories where it meets with great opposition.
Let this encourage God's ministers to preach the gospel, though it be
with much contention, for they shall not labour in vain. Many may be
secretly brought home to God by those endeavours which are openly
contradicted and cavilled at by men of corrupt minds. Austin has an
affectionate ejaculation in his lecture upon these words: Utinam et, me
loquenti, multi credant; non in me, sed mecum in eo - I wish that when I
speak, many may believe, not on me, but with me on him.

[John 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 8:31</span></span>

We have in these verses,

I. A comfortable doctrine laid down concerning the spiritual liberty of
Christ's disciples, intended for the encouragement of those Jews that
believed. Christ, knowing that his doctrine began to work upon some of
his hearers, and perceiving that virtue had gone out of him, turned his
discourse from the proud Pharisees, and addressed himself to those weak
believers. When he had denounced wrath against those that were hardened
in unbelief, then he spoke comfort to those few feeble Jews that
believed in him. See here,

1\. How graciously the Lord Jesus looks to those that tremble at his
word, and are ready to receive it; he has something to say to those who
have hearing ears, and will not pass by those who set themselves in his
way, without speaking to them.

2\. How carefully he cherishes the beginnings of grace, and meets those
that are coming towards him. These Jews that believed were yet but weak;
but Christ did not therefore cast them off, for he gathers the lambs in
his arms. When faith is in its infancy, he has knees to prevent it,
breasts for it to suck, that it may not die from the womb. In what he
said to them, we have two things, which he saith to all that should at
any time believe: -

(1.) The character of a true disciple of Christ: If you continue in my
word, then are you my disciples indeed. When they believed on him, as
the great prophet, they gave up themselves to be his disciples. Now, at
their entrance into his school, he lays down this for a settled rule,
that he would own none for his disciples but those that continued in his
word. \[1.\] It is implied that there are many who profess themselves
Christ's disciples who are not his disciples indeed, but only in show
and name. \[2.\] It highly concerns those that are not strong in faith
to see to it that they be sound in the faith, that, though not disciples
of the highest form, they are nevertheless disciples indeed. \[3.\]
Those who seem willing to be Christ's disciples ought to be told that
they had as good never come to him, unless they come with a resolution
by his grace to abide by him. Let those who have thoughts of covenanting
with Christ have no thoughts of reserving a power of revocation.
Children are sent to school, and bound apprentices, only for a few
years; but those only are Christ's who are willing to be bound to him
for the term of life. \[4.\] Those only that continue in Christ's word
shall be accepted as his disciples indeed, that adhere to his word in
every instance without partiality, and abide by it to the end without
apostasy. It is menein - to dwell in Christ's word, as a man does at
home, which is his centre, and rest, and refuge. Our converse with the
word and conformity to it must be constant. If we continue disciples to
the last, then, and not otherwise, we approve ourselves disciples
indeed.

(2.) The privilege of a true disciple of Christ. Here are two precious
promises made to those who thus approve themselves disciples indeed,
[Joh 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032).

\[1.\] "You shall know the truth, shall know all that truth which it is
needful and profitable for you to know, and shall be more confirmed in
the belief of it, shall know the certainty of it." Note, First, Even
those who are true believers, and disciples indeed, yet may be, and are,
much in the dark concerning many things which they should know. God's
children are but children, and understand and speak as children. Did we
not need to be taught, we should not need to be disciples. Secondly, It
is a very great privilege to know the truth, to know the particular
truths which we are to believe, in their mutual dependences and
connections, and the grounds and reasons of our belief, - to know what
is truth and what proves it to be so. Thirdly, It is a gracious promise
of Christ, to all who continue in his word, that they shall know the
truth as far as is needful and profitable for them. Christ's scholars
are sure to be well taught.

\[2.\] The truth shall make you free; that is, First, The truth which
Christ teaches tends to make men free, [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001). Justification makes us free from
the guilt of sin, by which we were bound over to the judgment of God,
and bound under amazing fears; sanctification makes us free from the
bondage of corruption, by which we were restrained from that service
which is perfect freedom, and constrained to that which is perfect
slavery. Gospel truth frees us from the yoke of the ceremonial law, and
the more grievous burdens of the traditions of the elders. It makes us
free from our spiritual enemies, free in the service of God, free to the
privileges of sons, and free of the Jerusalem which is from above, which
is free. Secondly, The knowing, entertaining, and believing, of this
truth does actually make us free, free from prejudices, mistakes, and
false notions, than which nothing more enslaves and entangles the soul,
free from the dominion of lust and passion; and restores the soul to the
government of itself, by reducing it into obedience to its Creator. The
mind, by admitting the truth of Christ in the light and power, is vastly
enlarged, and has scope and compass given it, is greatly elevated and
raised above things of sense, and never acts with so true a liberty as
when it acts under a divine command, [Co2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017). The enemies of Christianity
pretend to free thinking, whereas really those are the freest reasonings
that are guided by faith, and those are men of free thought whose
thoughts are captivated and brought into obedience to Christ.

II\. The offence which the carnal Jews took at this doctrine, and their
objection against it. Though it was a doctrine that brought glad tidings
of liberty to the captives, yet they cavilled at it, [Joh
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033). The Pharisees grudged this
comfortable word to those that believed, the standers by, who had no
part nor lot in this matter; they thought themselves reflected upon and
affronted by the gracious charter of liberty granted to those that
believed, and therefore with a great deal of pride and envy they
answered him, "We Jews are Abraham's seed, and therefore are free-born,
and have not lost our birthright - freedom; we were never in bondage to
any man; how sayest thou then, to us Jews, You shall be made free?" See
here,

1\. What it was that they were grieved at; it was an innuendo in those
words, You shall be made free, as if the Jewish church and nation were
in some sort of bondage, which reflected on the Jews in general, and as
if all that did not believe in Christ continued in that bondage, which
reflected on the Pharisees in particular. Note, The privileges of the
faithful are the envy and vexation of unbelievers, [Psa
112:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#010).

2\. What it was that they alleged against it; whereas Christ intimated
that they needed to be made free, they urge, (1.) "We are Abraham's
seed, and Abraham was a prince and a great man; though we live in
Canaan, we are not descended from Canaan, nor under his doom, a servant
of servants shall he be; we hold in frank-almoign - free alms, and not
in villenage - by a servile tenure." It is common for a sinking decaying
family to boast of the glory and dignity of its ancestors, and to borrow
honour from that name to which they repay disgrace; so the Jews here
did. But this was not all. Abraham was in covenant with God, and his
children by his right, [Rom 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028). Now
that covenant, no doubt, was a free charter, and invested them with
privileges not consistent with a state of slavery, [Rom
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004). And therefore they thought they
had no occasion with so great a sum as they reckoned faith in Christ to
be to obtain this freedom, when they were thus free-born. Note, It is
the common fault and folly of those that have pious parentage and
education to trust to their privilege and boast of it, as if it would
atone for the want of real holiness. They were Abraham's seed, but what
would this avail them, when we find one in hell that could call Abraham
father? Saving benefits are not, like common privileges, conveyed by
entail to us and our issue, nor can a title to heaven be made by
descent, nor may we claim as heirs at law, by making out our pedigree;
our title is purely by purchase, not our own but our Redeemer's for us,
under certain provisos and limitations, which if we do not observe it
will not avail us to be Abraham's seed. Thus many, when they are pressed
with the necessity of regeneration, turn it off with this, We are the
church's children; but they are not all Israel that are of Israel. (2.)
We were never in bondage to any man. Now observe, \[1.\] How false this
allegation was. I wonder how they could have the assurance to say a
thing in the face of a congregation which was so notoriously untrue.
Were not the seed of Abraham in bondage to the Egyptians? Were they not
often in bondage to the neighbouring nations in the time of the judges?
Were they not seventy years captives in Babylon? Nay, were they not at
this time tributaries to the Romans, and, though not in a personal, yet
in a national bondage to them, and groaning to be made free? And yet, to
confront Christ, they have the impudence to say, We were never in
bondage. Thus they would expose Christ to the ill-will both of the Jews,
who were very jealous for the honour of their liberty, and of the
Romans, who would not be thought to enslave the nations they conquered.
\[2.\] How foolish the application was. Christ had spoken of a liberty
wherewith the truth would make them free, which must be meant of a
spiritual liberty, for truth as it is the enriching, so it is the
enfranchising of the mind, and the enlarging of that from the captivity
of error and prejudice; and yet they plead against the offer of
spiritual liberty that they were never in corporal thraldom, as if,
because they were never in bondage to any man, they were never in
bondage to any lust. Note, Carnal hearts are sensible of no other
grievances than those that molest the body and injure their secular
affairs. Talk to them of encroachments upon their civil liberty and
property, - tell them of waste committed upon their lands, or damage
done to their houses, - and they understand you very well, and can give
you a sensible answer; the thing touches them and affects them. But
discourse to them of the bondage of sin, a captivity to Satan, and a
liberty by Christ, - tell them of wrong done to their precious souls,
and the hazard of their eternal welfare, - and you bring certain strange
things to their ears; they say of it (as those did, [Eze
20:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#049)), Doth he not speak parables?
This was much like the blunder Nicodemus made about being born again.

III\. Our Saviour's vindication of his doctrine from these objections,
and the further explication of it, [Joh
8:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034), where he does these four
things: -

1\. He shows that, notwithstanding their civil liberties and their
visible church-membership, yet it was possible that they might be in a
state of bondage ([Joh 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034)):
Whosoever commits sin, though he be of Abraham's seed, and was never in
bondage to any man, is the servant of sin. Observe, Christ does not
upbraid them with the falsehood of their plea, or their present bondage,
but further explains what he had said for their edification. Thus
ministers should with meekness instruct those that oppose them, that
they may recover themselves, not with passion provoke them to entangle
themselves yet more. Now here,

(1.) The preface is very solemn: Verily, verily, I say unto you; an
awful asseveration, which our Saviour often used, to command a reverent
attention and a ready assent. The style of the prophets was, Thus saith
the Lord, for they were faithful as servants; but Christ, being a Son,
speaks in his own name: I say unto you, I the Amen, the faithful
witness; he pawns his veracity upon it. "I say it to you, who boast of
your relation to Abraham, as if that would save you."

(2.) The truth is of universal concern, though here delivered upon a
particular occasion: Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin, and
sadly needs to be made free. A state of sin is a state of bondage.
\[1.\] See who it is on whom this brand is fastened - on him that
commits sin, pas ho poiōn hamartian - every one that makes sin. There is
not a just man upon earth, that lives, and sins not; yet every one that
sins is not a servant of sin, for then God would have no servants; but
he that makes sin, that makes choice of sin, prefers the way of
wickedness before the way of holiness ([Jer
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#016), [Jer
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017)), - that makes a covenant with
sin, enters into league with it, and makes a marriage with it, - that
makes contrivances of sin, makes provision for the flesh, and devises
iniquity, - and that makes a custom of sin, who walks after the flesh,
and makes a trade of sin. \[2.\] See what the brand is which Christ
fastens upon those that thus commit sin. He stigmatizes them, gives them
a mark of servitude. They are servants of sin, imprisoned under the
guilt of sin, under an arrest, in hold for it, concluded under sin, and
they are subject to the power of sin. He is a servant of sin, that is,
he makes himself so, and is so accounted; he has sold himself to work
wickedness; his lusts give law to him, he is at their beck, and is not
his own master. He does the work of sin, supports its interest, and
accepts its wages, [Rom 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016).

2\. He shows them that, being in a state of bondage, their having a
place in the house of God would not entitle them to the inheritance of
sons; for ([Joh 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#035)) the servant,
though he be in the house for awhile, yet, being but a servant, abideth
not in the house for ever. Services (we say) are no inheritances, they
are but temporary, and not for a perpetuity; but the son of the family
abideth ever. Now, (1.) This points primarily at the rejection of the
Jewish church and nation. Israel had been God's son, his first-born; but
they wretchedly degenerated into a servile disposition, were enslaved to
the world and the flesh, and therefore, though by virtue of their
birthright they thought themselves secure of their church membership,
Christ tells them that having thus made themselves servants they should
not abide in the house for ever. Jerusalem, by opposing the gospel of
Christ, which proclaimed liberty, and adhering to the Sinai-covenant,
which gendered to bondage, after its term was expired came to be in
bondage with her children ([Gal 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024),
[Gal 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025)), and therefore was
unchurched and disfranchised, her charter seized and taken away, and she
was cast out as the son of the bond-woman, [Gen
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#014). Chrysostom gives this sense of
this place: "Think not to be made free from sin by the rites and
ceremonies of the law of Moses, for Moses was but a servant, and had not
that perpetual authority in the church which the Son had; but, if the
Son make you free, it is well," [Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036). But, (2.) It looks further, to
the rejection of all that are the servants of sin, and receive not the
adoption of the sons of God; though those unprofitable servants may be
in God's house awhile, as retainers to his family, yet there is a day
coming when the children of the bond-woman and of the free shall be
distinguished. True believers only, who are the children of the promise
and of the covenant, are accounted free, and shall abide for ever in the
house, as Isaac: they shall have a nail in the holy place on earth ([Ezr
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#008)) and mansions in the holy place in
heaven, [Joh 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002).

3\. He shows them the way of deliverance out of the state of bondage
into the glorious liberty of the children of God, [Rom
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021). The case of those that are the
servants of sin is sad, but thanks be to God it is not helpless, it is
not hopeless. As it is the privilege of all the sons of the family, and
their dignity above the servants, that they abide in the house for ever;
so he who is the Son, the first-born among many brethren, and the heir
of all things, has a power both of manumission and of adoption ([Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)): If the Son shall make you free,
you shall be free indeed. Note,

(1.) Jesus Christ in the gospel offers us our freedom; he has authority
and power to make free. \[1.\] To discharge prisoners; this he does in
justification, by making satisfaction for our guilt (on which the gospel
offer is grounded, which is to all a conditional act of indemnity, and
to all true believers, upon their believing, an absolute charter of
pardon), and for our debts, for which we were by the law arrested and in
execution. Christ, as our surety, or rather our bail (for he was not
originally bound with us, but upon our insolvency bound for us),
compounds with the creditor, answers the demands of injured justice with
more than an equivalent, takes the bond and judgment into his own hands,
and gives them up cancelled to all that by faith and repentance give him
(if I may so say) a counter-security to save his honour harmless, and so
they are made free; and from the debt, and every part thereof, they are
for ever acquitted, exonerated, and discharged, and a general release is
sealed of all actions and claims; while against those who refuse to come
up to these terms the securities lie still in the Redeemer's hands, in
full force. \[2.\] He has a power to rescue bond-slaves, and this he
does in sanctification; by the powerful arguments of his gospel, and the
powerful operations of his Spirit, he breaks the power of corruption in
the soul, rallies the scattered forces of reason and virtue, and
fortifies God's interest against sin and Satan, and so the soul is made
free. \[3.\] He has a power to naturalize strangers and foreigners, and
this he does in adoption. This is a further act of grace; we are not
only forgiven and healed, but preferred; there is a charter of
privileges as well as pardon; and thus the Son makes us free denizens of
the kingdom of priests, the holy nation, the new Jerusalem.

(2.) Those whom Christ makes free are free indeed. It is not alēthōs,
the word used ([Joh 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031)) for
disciples indeed, but ontōs - really. It denotes, \[1.\] The truth and
certainty of the promise, the liberty which the Jews boasted of was an
imaginary liberty; they boasted of a false gift; but the liberty which
Christ gives is a certain thing, it is real, and has real effects. The
servants of sin promise themselves liberty, and fancy themselves free,
when they have broken religion's bands asunder; but they cheat
themselves. None are free indeed but those whom Christ makes free.
\[2.\] It denotes the singular excellency of the freedom promised; it is
a freedom that deserves the name, in comparison with which all other
liberties are no better than slaveries, so much does it turn to the
honour and advantage of those that are made free by it. It is a glorious
liberty. It is that which is (so ontōs signifies); it is substance ([Pro
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#021)); while the things of the world
are shadows, things that are not.

4\. He applies this to these unbelieving cavilling Jews, in answer to
their boasts of relation to Abraham ([Joh
8:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#037)): "I know very well that you are
Abraham's seed, but now you seek to kill me, and therefore have
forfeited the honour of your relation to Abraham, because my word hath
no place in you." Observe here,

(1.) The dignity of their extraction admitted: "I know that you are
Abraham's seed, every one knows it, and it is your honour." He grants
them what was true, and in what they said that was false (that they were
never in bondage to any) he does not contradict them, for he studied to
profit them, and not to provoke them, and therefore said that which
would please them: I know that you are Abraham's seed. They boasted of
their descent from Abraham, as that which aggrandized their names, and
made them exceedingly honourable; whereas really it did but aggravate
their crimes, and make them exceedingly sinful. Out of their own mouths
will he judge vain-glorious hypocrites, who boast of their parentage and
education: "Are you Abraham's seed? Why then did you not tread in the
steps of his faith and obedience?"

(2.) The inconsistency of their practice with this dignity: But you seek
to kill me. They had attempted it several times, and were now designing
it, which quickly appeared ([Joh
8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059)), when they took up stones to
cast at him. Christ knows all the wickedness, not only which men do, but
which they seek, and design, and endeavour to do. To seek to kill any
innocent man is a crime black enough, but to compass and imagine the
death of him that was King of kings was a crime the heinousness of which
we want words to express.

(3.) The reason of this inconsistency. Why were they that were Abraham's
seed so very inveterate against Abraham's promised seed, in whom they
and all the families of the earth should be blessed? Our Saviour here
tells them, It is because my word hath no place in you, ou chōrei en
humin, Non capit in vobis, so the Vulgate. "My word does not take with
you, you have no inclination to it, no relish of it, other things are
more taking, more pleasing." Or, "It does not take hold of you, it has
no power over you, makes no impression upon you." Some of the critics
read it, My word does not penetrate into you; it descended as the rain,
but it came upon them as the rain upon the rock, which it runs off, and
did not soak into their hearts, as the rain upon the ploughed ground.
The Syriac reads it, "Because you do not acquiesce in my word; you are
not persuaded of the truth of it, nor pleased with the goodness of it."
Our translation is very significant: It has no place in you. They sought
to kill him, and so effectually to silence him, not because he had done
they any harm, but because they could not bear the convincing,
commanding power of his word. Note, \[1.\] The words of Christ ought to
have a place in us, the innermost and uppermost place, - a dwelling
place, as a man at home, and not as a stranger or sojourner, - a working
place; it must have room to operate, to work sin out of us, and to work
grace in us; it must have a ruling place, its place must be upon the
throne, it must dwell in us richly. \[2.\] There are many that make a
profession of religion in whom the word of Christ has no place; they
will not allow it a place, for they do not like it; Satan does all he
can to displace it; and other things possess the place it should have in
us. \[3.\] Where the word of God has no place no good is to be expected,
for room is left there for all wickedness. If the unclean spirit find
the heart empty of Christ's word, he enters in, and dwells there.

[John 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 8:38</span></span>

Here Christ and the Jews are still at issue; he sets himself to convince
and convert them, while they still set themselves to contradict and
oppose him.

I. He here traces the difference between his sentiments and theirs to a
different rise and origin ([Joh 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038)):
I speak that which I have seen with my Father, and you do what you have
seen with your father. Here are two fathers spoken of, according to the
two families into which the sons of men are divided - God and the devil,
and without controversy these are contrary the one to the other.

1\. Christ's doctrine was from heaven; it was copied out of the counsels
of infinite wisdom, and the kind intentions of eternal love. (1.) I
speak that which I have seen. The discoveries Christ has made to us of
God and another world are not grounded upon guess and hearsay, but upon
ocular inspection; so that he was thoroughly apprized of the nature, and
assured of the truth, of all he said. He that is given to be a witness
to the people is an eye-witness, and therefore unexceptionable. (2.) It
is what I have seen with my Father. The doctrine of Christ is not a
plausible hypothesis, supported by probable arguments, but it is an
exact counterpart of the incontestable truths lodged in the eternal
mind. It was not only what he had heard from his Father, but what he had
seen with him when the counsel of peace was between them both. Moses
spoke what he heard from God, but he might not see the face of God; Paul
had been in the third heaven, but what he had seen there he could not,
he must not, utter; for it was Christ's prerogative to have seen what he
spoke, and to speak what he had seen.

2\. Their doings were from hell: "You do that which you have seen with
your father. You do, by your own works, father yourselves, for it is
evident whom you resemble, and therefore easy to find out your origin."
As a child that is trained up with his father learns his father's words
and fashions, and grows like him by an affected imitation as well as by
a natural image, so these Jews, by their malicious opposition to Christ
and the gospel, made themselves as like the devil as if they had
industriously set him before them for their pattern.

II\. He takes off and answers their vain-glorious boasts of relation to
Abraham and to God as their fathers, and shows the vanity and falsehood
of their pretensions.

1\. They pleaded relation to Abraham, and he replies to this plea. They
said, Abraham is our father, [Joh
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039). In this they intended, (1.) To
do honour to themselves, and to make themselves look great. They had
forgotten the mortification given them by that acknowledgement
prescribed them ([Deu 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#005)), A Syrian
ready to perish was my father; and the charge exhibited against their
degenerate ancestors (whose steps they trod in, and not those of the
first founder of the family), Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother
a Hittite, [Eze 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003). As it is common
for those families that are sinking and going to decay to boast most of
their pedigree, so it is common for those churches that are corrupt and
depraved to value themselves upon their antiquity and the eminence of
their first planters. Fuimus Troes, fuit Ilium - We have been Trojans,
and there once was Troy. (2.) They designed to cast an odium upon Christ
as if he reflected upon the patriarch Abraham, in speaking of their
father as one they had learned evil from. See how they sought an
occasion to quarrel with him. Now Christ overthrows this plea, and
exposes the vanity of it by a plain and cogent argument: "Abraham's
children will do the works of Abraham, but you do not do Abraham's
works, therefore you are not Abraham's children."

\[1.\] The proposition is plain: "If you were Abraham's children, such
children of Abraham as could claim an interest in the covenant made with
him and his seed, which would indeed put an honour upon you, then you
would do the works of Abraham, for to those only of Abraham's house who
kept the way of the Lord, as Abraham did, would God perform what he had
spoken," [Gen 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019). Those only are
reckoned the seed of Abraham, to whom the promise belongs, who tread in
the steps of his faith and obedience, [Rom
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#012). Though the Jews had their
genealogies, and kept them exact, yet they could not by them make out
their relation to Abraham, so as to take the benefit of the old entail
(performam doni - according to the form of the gift), unless they walked
in the same spirit; good women's relation to Sarah is proved only by
this - whose daughters you are as long as you do well, and no longer,
[Pe1 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#006). Note, Those who would
approve themselves Abraham's seed must not only be of Abraham's faith,
but do Abraham's works ([Jam 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021),
[Jam 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022)), - must come at God's call,
as he did, - must resign their dearest comforts to him, - must be
strangers and sojourners in this world, - must keep up the worship of
God in their families, and always walk before God in their uprightness;
for these were the works of Abraham.

\[2.\] The assumption is evident likewise: But you do not do the works
of Abraham, for you seek to kill me, a man that has told you the truth,
which I have heard of God; this did not Abraham, [Joh
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040).

First, He shows them what their work was, their present work, which they
were now about; they sought to kill him; and three things are intimated
as an aggravation of their intention: - 1. They were so unnatural as to
seek the life of a man, a man like themselves, bone of their bone, and
flesh of their flesh, who had done them no harm, nor given them any
provocation. You imagine mischief against a man, [Psa
62:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003). 2. They were so ungrateful as to
seek the life of one who had told them the truth, had not only done them
no injury, but had done them the greatest kindness that could be; had
not only not imposed upon them with a lie, but had instructed them in
the most necessary and important truths; was he therefore become their
enemy? 3. They were so ungodly as to seek the life of one who told them
the truth which he had heard from God, who was a messenger sent from God
to them, so that their attempt against him was quasi deicidium - an act
of malice against God. This was their work, and they persisted in it.

Secondly, He shows them that this did not become the children of
Abraham; for this did not Abraham. 1. "He did nothing like this." He was
famous for his humanity, witness his rescue of the captives; and for his
piety, witness his obedience to the heavenly vision in many instances,
and some tender ones. Abraham believed God; they were obstinate in
unbelief: Abraham followed God; they fought against him; so that he
would be ignorant of them, and would not acknowledge them, they were so
unlike him, [Isa 63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016). See [Jer
22:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#015). 2. "He would not have done
thus if he had lived now, or I had lived then." Hoc Abraham non fecisset
- He would not have done this; so some read it. We should thus reason
ourselves out of any way of wickedness; would Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob have done so? We cannot expect to be ever with them, if we be
never like them.

\[3.\] The conclusion follows of course ([Joh
8:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#041)): "Whatever your boasts and
pretensions be, you are not Abraham's children, but father yourselves
upon another family ([Joh 8:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#041)); there
is a father whose deeds you do, whose spirit you are of, and whom you
resemble." He does not yet say plainly that he means the devil, till
they by their continued cavils forced him so to explain himself, which
teaches us to treat even bad men with civility and respect, and not to
be forward to say that of them, or to them, which, though true, sounds
harsh. He tried whether they would suffer their own consciences to infer
from what he said that they were the devil's children; and it is better
to hear it from them now that we are called to repent, that is, to
change our father and change our family, by changing our spirit and way,
than to hear it from Christ in the great day.

2\. So far were they from owning their unworthiness of relation to
Abraham that they pleaded relation to God himself as their Father: "We
are not born of fornication, we are not bastards, but legitimate sons;
we have one Father, even God."

(1.) Some understand this literally. They were not the sons of the
bondwoman, as the Ishmaelites were; nor begotten in incest, as the
Moabites and Ammonites were ([Deu
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003)); nor were they a spurious brood
in Abraham's family, but Hebrews of the Hebrews; and, being born in
lawful wedlock, they might call God Father, who instituted that
honourable estate in innocency; for a legitimate seed, not tainted with
divorces nor the plurality of wives, is called a seed of God, [Mal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015).

(2.) Others take it figuratively. They begin to be aware now that Christ
spoke of a spiritual not a carnal father, of the father of their
religion; and so,

\[1.\] They deny themselves to be a generation of idolaters: "We are not
born of fornication, are not the children of idolatrous parents, nor
have been bred up in idolatrous worships." Idolatry is often spoken of
as spiritual whoredom, and idolaters as children of whoredoms, [Hos
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#004); [Isa
57:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#003). Now, if they meant that they
were not the posterity of idolaters, the allegation was false, for no
nation was more addicted to idolatry than the Jews before the captivity;
if they meant no more than that they themselves were not idolaters, what
then? A man may be free from idolatry, and yet perish in another
iniquity, and be shut out of Abraham's covenant. If thou commit no
idolatry (apply it to this spiritual fornication), yet if thou kill thou
art become a transgressor of the covenant. A rebellious prodigal son
will be disinherited, though he be not born of fornication.

\[2.\] They boast themselves to be true worshippers of the true God. We
have not many fathers, as the heathens had, gods many and lords many,
and yet were without God, as filius populi - a son of the people, has
many fathers and yet none certain; no, the Lord our God is one Lord and
one Father, and therefore it is well with us. Note, Those flatter
themselves, and put a damning cheat upon their own souls, who imagine
that their professing the true religion and worshipping the true God
will save them, though they worship not God in spirit and in truth, nor
are true to their profession. Now our Saviour gives a full answer to
this fallacious plea ([Joh 8:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#042), [Joh
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#043)), and proves, by two arguments,
that they had no right to call God Father.

First, They did not love Christ: If God were your Father, you would love
me. He had disproved their relation to Abraham by their going about to
kill him ([Joh 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040)), but here he
disproves their relation to God by their not loving and owning him. A
man may pass for a child of Abraham if he do not appear an enemy to
Christ by gross sin; but he cannot approve himself a child of God unless
he be a faithful friend and follower of Christ. Note, All that have God
for their Father have a true love to Jesus Christ, and esteem of his
person, a grateful sense of his love, a sincere affection to his cause
and kingdom, a complacency in the salvation wrought out by him and in
the method and terms of it, and a care to keep his commandments, which
is the surest evidence of our love to him. We are here in a state of
probation, upon our trial how we will conduct ourselves towards our
Maker, and accordingly it will be with us in the state of retribution.
God has taken various methods to prove us, and this was one: he sent his
Son into the world, with sufficient proofs of his sonship and mission,
concluding that all that called him Father would kiss his Son, and bid
him welcome who was the first-born among many brethren; see [Jo1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001). By this our adoption will be
proved or disproved - Did we love Christ, or no? If any man do not, he
is so far from being a child of God that he is anathema, accursed, [Co1
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022). Now our Saviour proves that if
they were God's children they would love him; for, saith he, I proceeded
forth and came from God. They will love him; for, 1. He was the Son of
God: I proceeded forth from God. Exēlthon this means his divine
exeleusis, or origin from the Father, by the communication of the divine
essence, and also the union of the divine logos to his human nature; so
Dr. Whitby. Now this could not but recommend him to the affections of
all that were born of God. Christ is called the beloved, because, being
the beloved of the Father, he is certainly the beloved of all the
saints, [Eph 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006). 2. He was sent of
God, came from him as an ambassador to the world of mankind. He did not
come of himself, as the false prophets, who had not either their mission
or their message from God, [Jer 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#021).
Observe the emphasis he lays upon this: I came from God; neither came I
of myself, but he sent me. He had both his credentials and his
instructions from God; he came to gather together in one the children of
God ([Joh 11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051)), to bring many sons
to glory, [Heb 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010). And would not all
God's children embrace with both arms a messenger sent from their Father
on such errands? But these Jews made it appear that they were nothing
akin to God, by their want of affection to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, They did not understand him. It was a sign they did not belong
to God's family that they did not understand the language and dialect of
the family: You do not understand my speech ([Joh
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#043)), tēn lalian tēn emēn. Christ's
speech was divine and heavenly, but intelligible enough to those that
were acquainted with the voice of Christ in the Old Testament. Those
that had made the word of the Creator familiar to them needed no other
key to the dialect of the Redeemer; and yet these Jews make strange of
the doctrine of Christ, and find knots in it, and I know not what
stumbling stones. Could a Galilean be known by his speech? An Ephraimite
by his sibboleth? And would any have the confidence to call God Father
to whom the Son of God was a barbarian, even when he spoke the will of
God in the words of the Spirit of God? Note, Those who are not
acquainted with the divine speech have reason to fear that they are
strangers to the divine nature. Christ spoke the words of God ([Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)) in the dialect of the kingdom of
God; and yet they, who pretended to belong to the kingdom, understood
not the idioms and properties of it, but like strangers, and rude ones
too, ridiculed it. And the reason why they did not understand Christ's
speech made the matter much worse: Even because you cannot hear my word,
that is, "You cannot persuade yourselves to hear it attentively,
impartially, and without prejudice, as it should be heard." The meaning
of this cannot is an obstinate will not; as the Jews could not hear
Stephen ([Act 7:57](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#057)) nor Paul, [Act
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#022). Note, The rooted antipathy of
men's corrupt hearts to the doctrine of Christ is the true reason of
their ignorance of it, and of their errors and mistakes about it. They
do not like it nor love it, and therefore they will not understand it;
like Peter, who pretended he knew not what the damsel said ([Mat
26:70](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#070)), when in truth he knew not what
to say to it. You cannot hear my words, for you have stopped your ears
([Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004), [Psa
58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)), and God, in a way of righteous
judgment, has made your ears heavy, [Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010).

III\. Having thus disproved their relation both to Abraham and to God,
he comes next to tell them plainly whose children they were: You are of
your father the devil, [Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044). If
they were not God's children, they were the devil's, for God and Satan
divide the world of mankind; the devil is therefore said to work in the
children of disobedience, [Eph 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002).
All wicked people are the devil's children, children of Belial ([Co2
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)), the serpent's seed ([Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)), children of the wicked one,
[Mat 13:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038). They partake of his
nature, bear his image, obey his commands, and follow his example.
Idolaters said to a stock, Thou art our father, [Jer
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027).

This is a high charge, and sounds very harsh and horrid, that any of the
children of men, especially the church's children, should be called
children of the devil, and therefore our Saviour fully proves it.

1\. By a general argument: The lusts of your father you will do, thelete
poiein. (1.) "You do the devil's lusts, the lusts which he would have
you to fulfil; you gratify and please him, and comply with his
temptation, and are led captive by him at his will: nay, you do those
lusts which the devil himself fulfils." Fleshly lusts and worldly lusts
the devil tempts men to; but, being a spirit, he cannot fulfil them
himself. The peculiar lusts of the devil are spiritual wickedness; the
lusts of the intellectual powers, and their corrupt reasonings; pride
and envy, and wrath and malice; enmity to that which is good, and
enticing others to that which is evil; these are lusts which the devil
fulfils, and those who are under the dominion of these lusts resemble
the devil, as the child does the parent. The more there is of
contemplation, and contrivance, and secret complacency, in sin, the more
it resembles the lusts of the devil. (2.) You will do the devil's lusts.
The more there is of the will in these lusts, the more there is of the
devil in them. When sin is committed of choice and not by surprise, with
pleasure and not with reluctancy, when it is persisted in with a daring
presumption and a desperate resolution, like theirs that said, We have
loved strangers and after them we will go, then the sinner will do the
devil's lusts. "The lusts of your father you delight to do;" so Dr.
Hammond; they are rolled under the tongue as a sweet morsel.

2\. By two particular instances, wherein they manifestly resembled the
devil - murder and lying. The devil is an enemy to life, because God is
the God of life and life is the happiness of man; and an enemy to truth,
because God is the God of truth and truth is the bond of human society.

(1.) He was a murderer from the beginning, not from his own beginning,
for he was created an angel of light, and had a first estate which was
pure and good, but from the beginning of his apostasy, which was soon
after the creation of man. He was anthrōpoktonos - homicida, a
man-slayer. \[1.\] He was a hater of man, and so in affection an
disposition a murderer of him. He has his name, Satan, from sitnah -
hatred. He maligned God's image upon man, envied his happiness, and
earnestly desired his ruin, was an avowed enemy to the whole race.
\[2.\] He was man's tempter to that sin which brought death into the
world, and so he was effectually the murderer of all mankind, which in
Adam had but one neck. He was a murderer of souls, deceived them into
sin, and by it slew them ([Rom 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#011)),
poisoned man with the forbidden fruit, and, to aggravate the matter,
made him his own murderer. Thus he was not only at the beginning, but
from the beginning, which intimates that thus he has been ever since; as
he began, so he continues, the murderer of men by his temptations. The
great tempter is the great destroyer. The Jews called the devil the
angel of death. \[3.\] He was the first wheel in the first murder that
ever was committed by Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his
brother, [Jo1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012). If the devil had
not been very strong in Cain, he could not have done such an unnatural
thing as to kill his own brother. Cain killing his brother by the
instigation of the devil, the devil is called the murderer, which does
not speak Cain's personal guilt the less, but the devil's the more,
whose torments, we have reason to think, will be the greater, when the
time comes, for all that wickedness into which he has drawn men. See
what reason we have to stand upon our guard against the wiles of the
devil, and never to hearken to him (for he is a murderer, and certainly
aims to do us mischief, even when he speaks fair), and to wonder that he
who is the murderer of the children of men should yet be, by their own
consent, so much their master. Now herein these Jews were followers of
him, and were murderers, like him; murderers of souls, which they led
blindfold into the ditch, and made the children of hell; sworn enemies
of Christ, and now ready to be his betrayers and murderers, for the same
reason that Cain killed Abel. These Jews were that seed of the serpent
that were to bruise the heel of the seed of the woman; Now you seek to
kill me.

(2.) He was a liar. A lie is opposed to truth ([Jo1
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#021)), and accordingly the devil is
here described to be,

\[1.\] An enemy to truth, and therefore to Christ. First, He is a
deserter, from the truth; he abode not in the truth, did not continue in
the purity and rectitude of his nature wherein he was created, but left
his first state; when he degenerated from goodness, he departed from
truth, for his apostasy was founded in a lie. The angels were the hosts
of the Lord; those that fell were not true to their commander and
sovereign, they were not to be trusted, being charged with folly and
defection, [Job 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018). By the truth
here we may understand the revealed will of God concerning the salvation
of man by Jesus Christ, the truth which Christ was now preaching, and
which the Jews opposed; herein they did like their father the devil,
who, seeing the honour put upon the human nature in the first Adam, and
foreseeing the much greater honour intended in the second Adam, would
not be reconciled to that counsel of God, nor stand in the truth
concerning it, but, from a spirit of pride and envy, set himself to
resist it, and to thwart the designs of it; and so did these Jews here,
as his children and agents. Secondly, He is destitute of the truth:
There is no truth in him. His interest in the world is supported by lies
and falsehoods, and there is no truth, nothing you can confide in, in
him, nor in any thing he says or does. The notions he propagates
concerning good and evil are false and erroneous, his proofs are lying
wonders, his temptations are all cheats; he has great knowledge of the
truth, but having no affection to it, but on the contrary being a sworn
enemy to it, he is said to have no truth in him.

\[2.\] He is a friend and patron of lying: When he speaketh a lie he
speaketh of his own. Three things are here said of the devil with
reference to the sin of lying: - First, That he is a liar; his oracles
were lying oracles, his prophets lying prophets, and the images in which
he was worshipped teachers of lies. He tempted our first parents with a
downright lie. All his temptations are carried on by lies, calling evil
good and good evil, and promising impunity in sin; he knows them to be
lies, and suggests them with an intention to deceive, and so to destroy.
When he now contradicted the gospel, in the scribes and Pharisees, it
was by lies; and when afterwards he corrupted it, in the man of sin, it
was by strong delusions, and a great complicated lie. Secondly, That
when he speaks a lie he speaks of his own, ek tōn idiōn. It is the
proper idiom of his language; of his own, not of God; his Creator never
put it into him. When men speak a lie they borrow it from the devil,
Satan fills their hearts to lie ([Act
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003)); but when the devil speaks a lie
the model of it is of his own framing, the motives to it are from
himself, which bespeaks the desperate depth of wickedness into which
those apostate spirits are sunk; as in their first defection they had no
tempter, so their sinfulness is still their own. Thirdly, That he is the
father of it, autou. 1. He is the father of every lie; not only of the
lies which he himself suggests, but of those which others speak; he is
the author and founder of all lies. When men speak lies, they speak from
him, and as his mouth; they come originally from him, and bear his
image. 2. He is the father of every liar; so it may be understood. God
made men with a disposition to truth. It is congruous to reason and
natural light, to the order of our faculties and the laws of society,
that we should speak truth; but the devil, the author of sin, the spirit
that works in the children of disobedience, has so corrupted the nature
of man that the wicked are said to be estranged from the womb, speaking
lies ([Psa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003)); he has taught them
with their tongues to use deceit, [Rom
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013). He is the father of liars, who
begat them, who trained them up in the way of lying, whom they resemble
and obey, and with whom all liars shall have their portion for ever.

IV\. Christ, having thus proved all murderers and all liars to be the
devil's children, leaves it to the consciences of his hearers to say,
Thou art the man. But he comes in the following verses to assist them in
the application of it to themselves; he does not call them liars, but
shows them that they were no friends to truth, and therein resembled him
who abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. Two things
he charges upon them: -

1\. That they would not believe the word of truth ([Joh
8:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#045)), hoti tēn alētheian legō, ou
pisteuete moi.

(1.) Two ways it may be taken; - \[1.\] "Though I tell you the truth,
yet you will not believe me (hoti), that I do so." Though he gave
abundant proof of his commission from God, and his affection to the
children of men, yet they would not believe that he told them the truth.
Now was truth fallen in the street, [Isa
59:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#014), [Isa
59:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#015). The greatest truths with some
gained not the least credit; for they rebelled against the light, [Job
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013). Or, \[2.\] Because I tell you
the truth (so we read it) therefore you believe me not. They would not
receive him, nor entertain him as a prophet, because he told them some
unpleasing truths which they did not care to hear, told them the truth
concerning themselves and their own case, showed them their faces in a
glass that would not flatter them; therefore they would not believe a
word he said. Miserable is the case of those to whom the light of divine
truth is become a torment.

(2.) Now, to show them the unreasonableness of their infidelity, he
condescends to put the matter to this fair issue, [Joh
8:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#046). He and they being contrary,
either he was in an error or they were. Now take it either way.

\[1.\] If he were in an error, why did they not convince him? The
falsehood of pretended prophets was discovered either by the ill
tendency of their doctrines ([Deu
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#002)), or by the ill tenour of their
conversation: You shall know them by their fruits; but (saith Christ)
which of you, you of the sanhedrim, that take upon you to judge of
prophets, which of you convinceth me of sin? They accused him of some of
the worst of crimes - gluttony, drunkenness, blasphemy,
sabbath-breaking, confederacy with Satan, and what not. But their
accusations were malicious groundless calumnies, and such as every one
that knew him knew to be utterly false. When they had done their utmost
by trick and artifice, subornation and perjury, to prove some crime upon
him, the very judge that condemned him owned he found no fault in him.
The sin he here challenges them to convict him of is, First, An
inconsistent doctrine. They had heard his testimony; could they show any
thing in it absurd or unworthy to be believed, any contradiction either
of himself or of the scriptures, or any corruption of truth or manners
insinuated by his doctrine? [Joh
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#020). Or, Secondly, An incongruous
conversation: "Which of you can justly charge me with any thing, in word
or deed, unbecoming a prophet?" See the wonderful condescension of our
Lord Jesus, that he demanded not credit any further than the allowed
motives of credibility supported his demands. See [Jer
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005), [Jer
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#031); [Mic
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003). Ministers may hence learn, 1. To
walk so circumspectly as that it may not be in the power of their most
strict observers to convince them of sin, that the ministry be not
blamed. The only way not to be convicted of sin is not to sin. 2. To be
willing to admit a scrutiny; though we are confident in many things that
we are in the right, yet we should be willing to have it tried whether
we be not in the wrong. See [Job 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#024).

\[2.\] If they were in an error, why were they not convinced by him? "If
I say the truth, why do you not believe me? If you cannot convince me of
error, you must own that I say the truth, and why do you not then give
me credit? Why will you not deal with me upon trust?" Note, If men would
but enquire into the reason of their infidelity, and examine why they do
not believe that which they cannot gainsay, they would find themselves
reduced to such absurdities as they could not but be ashamed of; for it
will be found that the reason why we believe not in Jesus Christ is
because we are not willing to part with our sins, and deny ourselves,
and serve God faithfully; that we are not of the Christian religion,
because we would not indeed be of any, and unbelief of our Redeemer
resolves itself into a downright rebellion against our Creator.

2\. Another thing charged upon them is that they would not hear the
words of God ([Joh 8:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#047)), which
further shows how groundless their claim of relation to God was. Here
is,

(1.) A doctrine laid down: He that is of God heareth God's words; that
is, \[1.\] He is willing and ready to hear them, is sincerely desirous
to know what the mind of God is, and cheerfully embraces whatever he
knows to be so. God's words have such an authority over, and such an
agreeableness with all that are born of God, that they meet them, as the
child Samuel did, with, Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth. Let the
word of the Lord come. \[2.\] He apprehends and discerns them, he so
hears them as to perceive the voice of God in them, which the natural
man does not, [Co1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014). He that is of
God is soon aware of the discoveries he makes of himself of the nearness
of his name ([Psa 75:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001)), as they of
the family know the master's tread, and the master's knock, and open to
him immediately ([Luk 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#036)), as the
sheep know the voice of their shepherd from that of a stranger, [Joh
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004), [Joh
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005); [Sol
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008).

(2.) The application of this doctrine, for the conviction of these
unbelieving Jews: You therefore hear them not; that is, "You heed not,
you understand not, you believe not, the words of God, nor care to hear
them, because you are not of God. Your being thus deaf and dead to the
words of God is a plain evidence that you are not of God." It is in his
word that God manifests himself and is present among us; we are
therefore reckoned to be well or ill affected to his word; see [Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004); [Jo1
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#006). Or, their not being of God was
the reason why they did not profitably hear the words of God, which
Christ spoke; they did not understand and believe him, not because the
things themselves were obscure or wanted evidence, but because the
hearers were not of God, were not born again. If the word of the kingdom
do not bring forth fruit, the blame is to be laid upon the soil, not
upon the seed, as appears by the parable of the sower, [Mat
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003).

[John 8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 8:48</span></span>

Here is, I. The malice of hell breaking out in the base language which
the unbelieving Jews gave to our Lord Jesus. Hitherto they had cavilled
at his doctrine, and had made invidious remarks upon it; but, having
shown themselves uneasy when he complained ([Joh
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#043), [Joh
8:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#047)) that they would not hear him,
now at length they fall to downright railing, [Joh
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048). They were not the common people,
but, as it should seem, the scribes and Pharisees, the men of
consequence, who, when they saw themselves convicted of an obstinate
infidelity, scornfully turned off the conviction with this: Say we not
well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil? See here, see it and
wonder, see it and tremble,

1\. What was the blasphemous character commonly given of our Lord Jesus
among the wicked Jews, to which they refer. (1.) That he was a
Samaritan, that is, that he was an enemy to their church and nation, one
that they hated and could not endure. Thus they exposed him to the ill
will of the people, with whom you could not put a man into a worse name
than to call him a Samaritan. If he had been a Samaritan, he had been
punishable, by the beating of the rebels (as they called it), for coming
into the temple. They had often enough called him a Galilean - a mean
man; but as if that were not enough, though it contradicted the other,
they will have him a Samaritan - a bad man. The Jews to this day call
the Christians, in reproach, Cuthaei-Samaritans. Note, Great endeavours
have in all ages been used to make good people odious by putting them
under black characters, and it is easy to run that down with a crowd and
a cry which is once put into an ill name. Perhaps because Christ justly
inveighed against the pride and tyranny of the priests and elders, they
hereby suggest that he aimed at the ruin of their church, in aiming at
its reformation, and was falling away to the Samaritans. (2.) That he
had a devil. Either, \[1.\] That he was in league with the devil. Having
reproached his doctrine as tending to Samaritanism, here they reflect
upon his miracles as done in combination with Beelzebub. Or, rather
\[2.\] That he was possessed with a devil, that he was a melancholy man,
whose brain was clouded, or a mad man, whose brain was heated, and that
which he said was no more to be believed than the extravagant rambles of
a distracted man, or one in a delirium. Thus the divine revelation of
those things which are above the discovery of reason have been often
branded with the charge of enthusiasm, and the prophet was called a mad
fellow, [Kg2 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#011); [Hos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007). The inspiration of the Pagan
oracles and prophets was indeed a frenzy, and those that had it were for
the time beside themselves; but that which was truly divine was not so.
Wisdom is justified of her children, as wisdom indeed.

2\. How they undertook to justify this character, and applied it to the
present occasion: Say we not well that thou art so? One would think that
his excellent discourses should have altered their opinion of him, and
have made them recant; but, instead of this, their hearts were more
hardened and their prejudices confirmed. They value themselves on their
enmity to Christ, as if they had never spoken better than when they
spoke the worst they could of Jesus Christ. Those have arrived at the
highest pitch of wickedness who avow their impiety, repeat what they
should retract, and justify themselves in that for which they ought to
condemn themselves. It is bad to say and do ill, but it is worse to
stand to it; I do well to be angry. When Christ spoke with so much
boldness against the sins of the great men, and thereby incensed them
against him, those who were sensible of no interest but what is secular
and sensual concluded him beside himself, for they thought none but a
madman would lose his preferment, and hazard his life, for his religion
and conscience.

II\. The meekness and mercifulness of Heaven shining in Christ's reply
to this vile calumny, [Joh 8:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#049), [Joh
8:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#050).

1\. He denies their charge against him: I have not a devil; as Paul
([Act 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#025)), I am not mad. The
imputation is unjust; "I am neither actuated by a devil, nor in compact
with one;" and this he evidenced by what he did against the devil's
kingdom. He takes no notice of their calling him a Samaritan, because it
was a calumny that disproved itself, it was a personal reflection, and
not worth taking notice of: but saying he had a devil reflected on his
commission, and therefore he answered that. St. Augustine gives this
gloss upon his not saying any thing to their calling him a Samaritan -
that he was indeed that good Samaritan spoken of in the parable, [Luk
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#033).

2\. He asserts the sincerity of his own intentions: But I honour my
Father. They suggested that he took undue honours to himself, and
derogated from the honour due to God only, both which he denies here, in
saying that he made it his business to honour his Father, and him only.
It also proves that he had not a devil; for, if he had, he would not
honour God. Note, Those who can truly way that they make it their
constant care to honour God are sufficiently armed against the censures
and reproaches of men.

3\. He complains of the wrong they did him by their calumnies: You do
dishonour me. By this it appears that, as man, he had a tender sense of
the disgrace and indignity done him; reproach was a sword in his bones,
and yet he underwent it for our salvation. It is the will of God that
all men should honour the Son, yet there are many that dishonour him;
such a contradiction is there in the carnal mind to the will of God.
Christ honoured his Father so as never man did, and yet was himself
dishonoured so as never man was; for, though God has promised that those
who honour him he will honour, he never promised that men should honour
them.

4\. He clears himself from the imputation of vain glory, in saying this
concerning himself, [Joh 8:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#050). See
here, (1.) His contempt of worldly honour: I seek not mine own glory. He
did not aim at this in what he had said of himself or against his
persecutors; he did not court the applause of men, nor covet preferment
in the world, but industriously declined both. He did not seek his own
glory distinct from his Father's, nor had any separate interest of his
own. For men to search their own glory is not glory indeed ([Pro
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#027)), but rather their shame to be
so much out in their aim. This comes in here as a reason why Christ made
so light of their reproaches: "You do dishonour me, but cannot disturb
me, shall not disquiet me, for I seek not my own glory." Note, Those who
are dead to men's praise can safely bear their contempt. (2.) His
comfort under worldly dishonour: There is one that seeketh and judgeth.
In two things Christ made it appear that he sought not his own glory;
and here he tells us what satisfied him as to both. \[1.\] He did not
court men's respect, but was indifferent to it, and in reference to this
he saith, "There is one that seeketh, that will secure and advance, my
interest in the esteem and affections of the people, while I am in no
care about it." Note, God will seek their honour that do not seek their
own; for before honour is humility. \[2.\] He did not revenge men's
affronts, but was unconcerned at them, and in reference to this he
saith, "There is one that judgeth, that will vindicate my honour, and
severely reckon with those that trample upon it." Probably he refers
here to the judgments that were coming upon the nation of the Jews for
the indignities they did to the Lord Jesus. See [Psa
37:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013). I heard not, for thou wilt
hear. If we undertake to judge for ourselves, whatever damage we
sustain, our recompence is in our own hands; but if we be, as we ought
to be, humble appellants and patient expectants, we shall find, to our
comfort, there is one that judgeth.

[John 8:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">joh 8:51</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. The doctrine of the immortality of believers laid down, [Joh
8:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051). It is ushered in with the usual
solemn preface, Verily, verily, I say unto you, which commands both
attention and assent, and this is what he says, If a man keep my
sayings, he shall never see death. Here we have, 1. The character of a
believer: he is one that keeps the sayings of the Lord Jesus, ton logon
ton emon - my word; that word of mine which I have delivered to you;
this we must not only receive, but keep; not only have, but hold. We
must keep it in mind and memory, keep it in love and affection, so keep
it as in nothing to violate it or go contrary to it, keep it without
spot ([Ti1 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#014)), keep it as a trust
committed to us, keep in it as our way, keep to it as our rule. 2. The
privilege of a believer: He shall by no means see death for ever; so it
is in the original. Not as if the bodies of believers were secured from
the stroke of death. No, even the children of the Most High must die
like men, and the followers of Christ have been, more than other men, in
deaths often, and killed all the day long; how then is this promise made
good that they shall not see death? Answer, (1.) The property of death
is so altered to them that they do not see it as death, they do not see
the terror of death, it is quite taken off; their sight does not
terminate in death, as theirs does who live by sense; no, they look so
clearly, so comfortably, through death, and beyond death, and are so
taken up with their state on the other side death, that they overlook
death, and see it not. (2.) The power of death is so broken that though
there is no remedy, but they must see death, yet they shall not see
death for ever, shall not be always shut up under its arrests, the day
will come when death shall be swallowed up in victory. (3.) They are
perfectly delivered from eternal death, shall not be hurt of the second
death. That is the death especially meant here, that death which is for
ever, which is opposed to everlasting life; this they shall never see,
for they shall never come into condemnation; they shall have their
everlasting lot where there will be no more death, where they cannot die
any more, [Luk 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036). Though now they
cannot avoid seeing death, and tasting it too, yet they shall shortly be
there where it will be seen no more for ever, [Exo
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013).

II\. The Jews cavil at this doctrine. Instead of laying hold of this
precious promise of immortality, which the nature of man has an ambition
of (who is there that does not love life, and dread the sight of death?)
they lay hold of this occasion to reproach him that makes them so kind
an offer: Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead. Observe
here,

1\. Their railing: "Now we know that thou hast a devil, that thou art a
madman; thou ravest, and sayest thou knowest not what." See how these
swine trample underfoot the precious pearls of gospel promises. If now
at last they had evidence to prove him mad, why did they say ([Joh
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048)), before they had that proof,
Thou hast a devil? But this is the method of malice, first to fasten an
invidious charge, and then to fish for evidence of it: Now we know that
thou hast a devil. If he had not abundantly proved himself a teacher
come from God, his promises of immortality to his credulous followers
might justly have been ridiculed, and charity itself would have imputed
them to a crazed fancy; but his doctrine was evidently divine, his
miracles confirmed it, and the Jews' religion taught them to expect such
a prophet, and to believe in him; for them therefore thus to reject him
was to abandon that promise to which their twelve tribes hoped to come,
[Act 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007).

2\. Their reasoning, and the colour they had to run him down thus. In
short, they look upon him as guilty of an insufferable piece of
arrogance, in making himself greater than Abraham and the prophets:
Abraham is dead, and the prophets, they are dead too; very true, by the
same token that these Jews were the genuine offspring of those that
killed them. Now, (1.) It is true that Abraham and the prophets were
great men, great in the favour of God, and great in the esteem of all
good men. (2.) It is true that they kept God's sayings, and were
obedient to them; and yet, (3.) It is true that they died; they never
pretended to have, much less to give, immortality, but every one in his
own order was gathered to his people. It was their honour that they died
in faith, but die they must. Why should a good man be afraid to die,
when Abraham is dead, and the prophets are dead? They have tracked the
way through that darksome valley, which should reconcile us to death and
help to take off the terror of it. Now they think Christ talks madly,
when he saith, If a man keep my sayings, he shall never taste death.
Tasting death means the same thing with seeing it; and well may death be
represented as grievous to several of the senses, which is the
destruction of them all. Now their arguing goes upon two mistakes: -
\[1.\] They understood Christ of an immortality in this world, and this
was a mistake. In the sense that Christ spoke, it was not true that
Abraham and the prophets were dead, for God is still the God of Abraham
and the God of the holy prophets ([Rev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006)); now God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living; therefore Abraham and the prophets are still
alive, and, as Christ meant it, they had not seen nor tasted death.
\[2.\] They thought none could be greater than Abraham and the prophets,
whereas they could not but know that the Messiah would be greater than
Abraham or any of the prophets; they did virtuously, but he excelled
them all; nay, they borrowed their greatness from him. It was the honour
of Abraham that he was the Father of the Messiah, and the honour of the
prophets that they testified beforehand concerning him: so that he
certainly obtained a far more excellent name than they. Therefore,
instead of inferring from Christ's making himself greater than Abraham
that he had a devil, they should have inferred from his proving himself
so (by doing the works which neither Abraham nor the prophets ever did)
that he was the Christ; but their eyes were blinded. They scornfully
asked, Whom makest thou thyself? As if he had been guilty of pride and
vain-glory; whereas he was so far from making himself greater than he
was that he now drew a veil over his own glory, emptied himself, and
made himself less than he was, and was the greatest example of humility
that ever was.

III\. Christ's reply to this cavil; still he vouchsafes to reason with
them, that every mouth may be stopped. No doubt he could have struck
them dumb or dead upon the spot, but this was the day of his patience.

1\. In his answer he insists not upon his own testimony concerning
himself, but waives it as not sufficient nor conclusive ([Joh
8:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#054)): If I honour myself, my honour
is nothing, ean egō doxazō - if I glorify myself. Note, Self-honour is
no honour; and the affectation of glory is both the forfeiture and the
defeasance of it: it is not glory ([Pro
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#027)), but so great a reproach that
there is no sin which men are more industrious to hide than this; even
he that most affects praise would not be thought to do it. Honour of our
own creating is a mere chimera, has nothing in it, and therefore is
called vain-glory. Self-admirers are self-deceivers. Our Lord Jesus was
not one that honoured himself, as they represented him; he was crowned
by him who is the fountain of honour, and glorified not himself to be
made a high priest, [Heb 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004), [Heb
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005).

2\. He refers himself to his Father, God; and to their father, Abraham.

(1.) To his Father, God: It is my Father that honoureth me. By this he
means, \[1.\] That he derived from his Father all the honour he now
claimed; he had commanded them to believe in him, to follow him, and to
keep his word, all which put an honour upon him; but it was the Father
that laid help upon him, that lodged all fulness in him, that sanctified
him, and sealed him, and sent him into the world to receive all the
honours due to the Messiah, and this justified him in all these demands
of respect. \[2.\] That he depended upon his Father for all the honour
he further looked for. He courted not the applauses of the age, but
despised them; for his eye and heart were upon the glory which the
Father had promised him, and which he had with the Father before the
world was. He aimed at an advancement with which the Father was to exalt
him, a name he was to give him, [Phi
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008), [Phi
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009). Note, Christ and all that are his
depend upon God for their honour; and he that is sure of honour where he
is known cares not though he be slighted where he is in disguise.
Appealing thus often to his Father, and his Father's testimony of him,
which yet the Jews did not admit nor give credit to,

First, He here takes occasion to show the reason of their incredulity,
notwithstanding this testimony - and this was their unacquaintedness
with God; as if he had said, "But why should I talk to you of my
Father's honouring me, when he is one you know nothing of? You say of
him that he is your God, yet you have not known him." Here observe,

a\. The profession they made of relation to God: "You say that he is
your God, the God you have chosen, and are in covenant with; you say
that you are Israel; but all are not so indeed that are of Israel," [Rom
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006). Note, Many pretend to have an
interest in God, and say that he is theirs, who yet have no just cause
to say so. Those who called themselves the temple of the Lord, having
profaned the excellency of Jacob, did but trust in lying words. What
will it avail us to say, He is our God, if we be not in sincerity his
people, nor such as he will own? Christ mentions here their profession
of relation to God, as that which was an aggravation of their unbelief.
All people will honour those whom their God honours; but these Jews, who
said that the Lord was their God, studied how to put the utmost disgrace
upon one upon whom their God put honour. Note, The Profession we make of
a covenant relation to God, and an interest in him, if it be not
improved by us will be improved against us.

b\. Their ignorance of him, and estrangement from him, notwithstanding
this profession: Yet you have not known him. (a.) You know him not at
all. These Pharisees were so taken up with the study of their traditions
concerning things foreign and trifling that they never minded the most
needful and useful knowledge; like the false prophets of old, who caused
people to forget God's name by their dreams, [Jer
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#027). Or, (b.) You know him not
aright, but mistake concerning him; and this is as bad as not knowing
him at all, or worse. Men may be able to dispute subtly concerning God,
and yet may think him such a one as themselves, and not know him. You
say that he is yours, and it is natural to us to desire to know our own,
yet you know him not. Note, There are many who claim-kindred to God who
yet have no acquaintance with him. It is only the name of God which they
have learned to talk of, and to hector with; but for the nature of God,
his attributes and perfections, and relations to his creatures, they
know nothing of the matter; we speak this to their shame, [Co1
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#034). Multitudes satisfy themselves,
but deceive themselves, with a titular relation to an unknown God. This
Christ charges upon the Jews here, \[a.\] To show how vain and
groundless their pretensions of relation to God were. "You say that he
is yours, but you give yourselves the lie, for it is plain that you do
not know him;" and we reckon that a cheat is effectually convicted if it
be found that he is ignorant of the persons he pretends alliance to.
\[b.\] To show the true reason why they were not wrought upon by
Christ's doctrine and miracles. They knew not God; and therefore
perceived not the image of God, nor the voice of God in Christ. Note,
The reason why men receive not the gospel of Christ is because they have
not the knowledge of God. Men submit not to the righteousness of Christ
because they are ignorant of God's righteousness, [Rom
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003). They that know not God, and obey
not the gospel of Christ, are put together, [Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008).

Secondly, He gives them the reason of his assurance that his Father
would honour him and own him: But I know him; and again, I know him;
which bespeaks, not only his acquaintance with him, having lain in his
bosom, but his confidence in him, to stand by him, and bear him out in
his whole undertaking; as was prophesied concerning him ([Isa
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007), [Isa
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#008)), I know that I shall not be
ashamed, for he is near that justifies; and as Paul, "I know whom I have
believed ([Ti2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)), I know him to be
faithful, and powerful, and heartily engaged in the cause which I know
to be his own." Observe, 1. How he professes his knowledge of his
Father, with the greatest certainty, as one that was neither afraid nor
ashamed to own it: If I should say I know him not, I should be a liar
like unto you. He would not deny his relation to God, to humour the
Jews, and to avoid their reproaches, and prevent further trouble; nor
would he retract what he had said, nor confess himself either deceived
or a deceiver; if he should, he would be found a false witness against
God and himself. Note, Those who disown their religion and relation to
God, as Peter, are liars, as much as hypocrites are, who pretend to know
him, when they do not. See [Ti1 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013),
[Ti1 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#014). Mr Clark observes well,
upon this, that it is a great sin to deny God's grace in us. 2. How he
proves his knowledge of his Father: I know him and keep his sayings, or
his word. Christ, as man, was obedient to the moral law, and, as
Redeemer, to the mediatorial law; and in both he kept his Father's word,
and his own word with the Father. Christ requires of us ([Joh
8:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051)) that we keep his sayings; and he
has set before us a copy of obedience, a copy without a blot: he kept
his Father's sayings; well might he who learned obedience teach it; see
[Heb 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008), [Heb
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009). Christ by this evinced that he
knew the Father. Note, The best proof of our acquaintance with God is
our obedience to him. Those only know God aright that keep his word; it
is a ruled case, [Jo1 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#003). Hereby we
know that we know him (and do not only fancy it), if we keep his
commandments.

(2.) Christ refers them to their father, whom they boasted so much of a
relation to, and that was Abraham, and this closes the discourse.

\[1.\] Christ asserts Abraham's prospect of him, and respect to him:
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad,
[Joh 8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056). And by this he proves that
he was not at all out of the way when he made himself greater than
Abraham. Two things he here speaks of as instances of that patriarch's
respect to the promised Messiah: -

First, The ambition he had to see his day: He rejoiced, ēgalliasto - he
leaped at it. The word, though it commonly signifies rejoicing, must
here signify a transport of desire rather than of joy, for otherwise the
latter part of the verse would be a tautology; he saw it, and was glad.
He reached out, or stretched himself forth, that he might see my day; as
Zaccheus, that ran before, and climbed the tree, to see Jesus. The
notices he had received of the Messiah to come had raised in him an
expectation of something great, which he earnestly longed to know more
of. The dark intimation of that which is considerable puts men upon
enquiry, and makes them earnestly ask Who? and What? and Where? and
When? and How? And thus the prophets of the Old Testament, having a
general idea of a grace that should come, searched diligently ([Pe1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)), and Abraham was as industrious
herein as any of them. God told him of a land that he would give his
posterity, and of the wealth and honour he designed them ([Gen
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#014)); but he never leaped thus to
see that day, as he did to see the day of the Son of man. He could not
look with so much indifferency upon the promised seed as he did upon the
promised land; in that he was, but to the other he could not be,
contentedly a stranger. Note, Those who rightly know any thing of Christ
cannot but be earnestly desirous to know more of him. Those who discern
the dawning of the light of the Sun of righteousness cannot but wish to
see his rising. The mystery of redemption is that which angels desire to
look into, much more should we, who are more immediately concerned in
it. Abraham desired to see Christ's day, though it was at a great
distance; but this degenerate seed of his discerned not his day, nor
bade it welcome when it came. The appearing of Christ, which gracious
souls love and long for, carnal hearts dread and loathe.

Secondly, The satisfaction he had in what he did see of it: He saw it,
and was glad. Observe here,

a\. How God gratified the pious desire of Abraham; he longed to see
Christ's day, and he saw it. Though he saw it not so plainly, and fully,
and distinctly as we now see it under the gospel, yet he saw something
of it, more afterwards than he did at first. Note, To him that has, and
to him that asks, shall be given; to him that uses and improves what he
has, and that desires and prays for more of the knowledge of Christ, God
will give more. But how did Abraham see Christ's day? (a.) Some
understand it of the sight he had of it in the other world. The separate
soul of Abraham, when the veil of flesh was rent, saw the mysteries of
the kingdom of God in heaven. Calvin mentions this sense of it, and does
not much disallow it. Note, The longings of gracious souls after Jesus
Christ will be fully satisfied when they come to heaven, and not till
then. But, (b.) It is more commonly understood of some sight he had of
Christ's day in this world. They that received not the promises, yet saw
them afar off, [Heb 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013). Balaam saw
Christ, but not now, not nigh. There is room to conjecture that Abraham
had some vision of Christ and his day, for his own private satisfaction,
which is not, nor must be, recorded in his story, like that of Daniel's,
which must be shut up, and sealed unto the time of the end, [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004). Christ knew what Abraham saw
better than Moses did. But there are divers things recorded in which
Abraham saw more of that which he longed to see than he did when the
promise was first made to him. He saw in Melchizedek one made like unto
the Son of God, and a priest for ever; he saw an appearance of Jehovah,
attended with two angels, in the plains of Mamre. In the prevalency of
his intercession for Sodom he saw a specimen of Christ's intercession;
in the casting out of Ishmael, and the establishment of the covenant
with Isaac, he saw a figure of the gospel day, which is Christ's day;
for these things were an allegory. In offering Isaac, and the ram
instead of Isaac, he saw a double type of the great sacrifice; and his
calling the place Jehovah-jireh - It shall be seen, intimates that he
saw something more in it than others did, which time would produce; and
in making his servant put his hand under his thigh, when he swore, he
had a regard to the Messiah.

b\. How Abraham entertained these discoveries of Christ's day, and bade
them welcome: He saw, and was glad. He was glad of what he saw of God's
favour to himself, and glad of what he foresaw of the mercy God had in
store for the world. Perhaps this refers to Abraham's laughing when God
assured him of a son by Sarah ([Gen
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#016), [Gen
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017)), for that was not a laughter of
distrust as Sarah's but of joy; in that promise he saw Christ's day, and
it filled him with joy unspeakable. Thus he embraced the promises. Note,
A believing sight of Christ and his day will put gladness into the
heart. No joy like the joy of faith; we are never acquainted with true
pleasure till we are acquainted with Christ.

\[2.\] The Jews cavil at this, and reproach him for it ([Joh
8:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#057)): Thou art not yet fifty years
old, and hast thou seen Abraham? Here, First, They suppose that if
Abraham saw him and his day he also had seen Abraham, which yet was not
a necessary innuendo, but this turn of his words would best serve to
expose him; yet it was true that Christ had seen Abraham, and had talked
with him as a man talks with his friend. Secondly, They suppose it a
very absurd thing for him to pretend to have seen Abraham, who was dead
so many ages before he was born. The state of the dead is an invisible
state; but here they ran upon the old mistake, understanding that
corporally which Christ spoke spiritually. Now this gave them occasion
to despise his youth, and to upbraid him with it, as if he were but of
yesterday, and knew nothing: Thou art not yet fifty years old. They
might as well have said, Thou art not forty; for he was now but
thirty-two or thirty-three years old. As to this, Irenaeus, one of the
first fathers, with this passage supports the tradition which he says he
had from some that had conversed with St. John, that our Saviour lived
to be fifty years old, which he contends for, Advers. Haeres. lib. 2,
cap. 39, 40. See what little credit is to be given to tradition; and, as
to this here, the Jews spoke at random; some year they would mention,
and therefore pitched upon one that they thought he was far enough short
of; he did not look to be forty, but they were sure he could not be
fifty, much less contemporary with Abraham. Old age is reckoned to begin
at fifty ([Num 4:47](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#047)), so that they
meant no more than this, "Thou art not to be reckoned an old man; many
of us are much thy seniors, and yet pretend not to have seen Abraham."
Some think that his countenance was so altered, with grief and watching,
that, together with the gravity of his aspect, it made him look like a
man of fifty years old: his visage was so marred, [Isa
52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014).

\[3.\] Our Saviour gives an effectual answer to this cavil, by a solemn
assertion of his own seniority even to Abraham himself ([Joh
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)): "Verily, verily, I say unto
you; I do not only say it in private to my own disciples, who will be
sure to say as I say, but to you my enemies and persecutors; I say it to
your faces, take it how you will: Before Abraham was, I am;" prin Abraam
genesthaî egō eimi, Before Abraham was made or born, I am. The change of
the word is observable, and bespeaks Abraham a creature, and himself the
Creator; well therefore might he make himself greater than Abraham.
Before Abraham he was, First, As God. I am, is the name of God ([Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)); it denotes his self-existence;
he does not say, I was, but I am, for he is the first and the last,
immutably the same ([Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008)); thus he
was not only before Abraham, but before all worlds, [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001); [Pro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#023). Secondly, As Mediator. He was
the appointed Messiah, long before Abraham; the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world ([Rev 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008)),
the channel of conveyance of light, life, and love from God to man. This
supposes his divine nature, that he is the same in himself from eternity
([Heb 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)), and that he is the same
to man ever since the fall; he was made of God wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, to Adam, and Abel, and Enoch, and Noah,
and Shem, and all the patriarchs that lived and died by faith in him
before Abraham was born. Abraham was the root of the Jewish nation, the
rock out of which they were hewn. If Christ was before Abraham, his
doctrine and religion were no novelty, but were, in the substance of
them, prior to Judaism, and ought to take place of it.

\[4.\] This great word ended the dispute abruptly, and put a period to
it: they could bear to hear no more from him, and he needed to say no
more to them, having witnessed this good confession, which was
sufficient to support all his claims. One would think that Christ's
discourse, in which shone so much both of grace and glory, should have
captivated them all; but their inveterate prejudice against the holy
spiritual doctrine and law of Christ, which were so contrary to their
pride and worldliness, baffled all the methods of conviction. Now was
fulfilled that prophecy ([Mal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001),
[Mal 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002)), that when the messenger of
the covenant should come to his temple they would not abide the day of
his coming, because he would be like a refiner's fire. Observe here,

First, How they were enraged at Christ for what he said: They took up
stones to cast at him, [Joh 8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059).
Perhaps they looked upon him as a blasphemer, and such were indeed to be
stoned ([Lev 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016)); but they must be
first legally tried and convicted. Farewell justice and order if every
man pretend to execute a law at his pleasure. Besides, they had said but
just now that he was a distracted crack-brained man, and if so it was
against all reason and equity to punish him as a malefactor for what he
said. They took up stones. Dr. Lightfoot will tell you how they came to
have stones so ready in the temple; they had workmen at this time
repairing the temple, or making some additions, and the pieces of stone
which they hewed off served for this purpose. See here the desperate
power of sin and Satan in and over the children of disobedience. Who
would think that ever there should be such wickedness as this in men,
such an open and daring rebellion against one that undeniably proved
himself to be the Son of God? Thus every one has a stone to throw at his
holy religion, [Act 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#022).

Secondly, How he made his escape out of their hands. 1. He absconded;
Jesus hid himself; ekrubē - he was hid, either by the crowd of those
that wished well to him, to shelter him (he that ought to have been upon
a throne, high and lifted up, is content to be lost in a crowd); or
perhaps he concealed himself behind some of the walls or pillars of the
temple (in the secret of his tabernacle he shall hide me, [Psa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005)); or by a divine power, casting a
mist before their eyes, he made himself invisible to them. When the
wicked rise a man is hidden, a wise and good man, [Pro
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012), [Pro
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#028). Not that Christ was afraid or
ashamed to stand by what he had said, but his hour was not yet come, and
he would countenance the flight of his ministers and people in times of
persecution, when they are called to it. The Lord hid Jeremiah and
Baruch, [Jer 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#026). 2. He departed, he
went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, undiscovered,
and so passed by. This was not a cowardly inglorious flight, nor such as
argued either guilt or fear. It was foretold concerning him that he
should not fail nor be discouraged, [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004). But, (1.) It was an instance of
his power over his enemies, and that they could do no more against him
than he gave them leave to do; by which it appears that when afterwards
he was taken in their pits he offered himself, [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018). They now thought they had made
sure of him and yet he passed through the midst of them, either their
eyes being blinded or their hands tied, and thus he left them to fume,
like a lion disappointed of his prey. (2.) It was an instance of his
prudent provision for his own safety, when he knew that his work was not
done, nor his testimony finished; thus he gave an example to his own
rule, When they persecute you in one city flee to another; nay, if
occasion be, to a wilderness, for so Elijah did ([Kg1
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#003), [Kg1
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004)), and the woman, the church, [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006). When they took up loose stones
to throw at Christ, he could have commanded the fixed stones, which did
cry out of the wall against them, to avenge his cause, or the earth to
open and swallow them up; but he chose to accommodate himself to the
state he was in, to make the example imitable by the prudence of his
followers, without a miracle. (3.) It was a righteous deserting of those
who (worse than the Gadarenes, who prayed him to depart) stoned him from
among them. Christ will not long stay with those who bid him be gone.
Christ did again visit the temple after this; as one loth to depart, he
bade oft farewell; but at last he abandoned it for ever, and left it
desolate. Christ now went through the midst of the Jews, and none of
them courted his stay, nor stirred up himself to take hold of him, but
were even content to let him go. Note, God never forsakes any till they
have first provoked him to withdraw, and will have none of him. Calvin
observes that these chief priests, when they had driven Christ out of
the temple, valued themselves on the possession they kept of it: "But,"
says he, "those deceive themselves who are proud of a church or temple
which Christ has forsaken." Longe falluntur, cum templum se habere
putant Deo vacuum. When Christ left them it is said that he passed by
silently and unobserved; parēgen houtōs, so that they were not aware of
him. Note, Christ's departures from a church, or a particular soul, are
often secret, and not soon taken notice of. As the kingdom of God comes
not, so it goes not, with observation. See [Jdg
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#020). Samson wist not that the Lord
was departed from him. Thus it was with these forsaken Jews, God left
them, and they never missed him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 9](joh009)

</div>
